A DEFENSE OF THE DOCTRINE PROPOVNDED BY THE SYNOD AT DORT: AGAINST JOHN
MVRTON AND HIS ASSOCIATES, IN A Treatise intuled; A Description what God, etc.
WITH THE REFVTATION OF their Answer to a Writing touching BAPTISM. By JOHN
ROBINSON.

Printed in the year, 1624.

THE PREFACE.
THE record which the Apostle bare the Jews Romans 10. 2.
in his time; such as either read these men's writings, or know their persons
may bear them; which is, that they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge, I add touching them, nor in modesty neither. Which if it held any
place in their hearts, as were meet, would moderate and restrain both their
causlesse presumption in themselves, and graceless licentiousness which they
fear not to use, both toward God, and other men.

They would seem very zealous for the Scriptures purity and perfection:
warning all to take heed they presume not above Epistle to the Reader*
what is written; nor to add to, or diminish from the perfect law of the Lord
contained therein: And yet they themselves presume so frequently, and notoriously
in this their book, to corrupt the very words of the Texts which they cite, by
adding to, and taking away, and altering, for their advantage; as I suppose,
the like has not been seen before in any, of any sect whatsoever: and as if,
in truth, they meant not to use a gift to interpret the holy Scriptures, but a
privilege to correct them. A taste of this they give us in their very Epistle,
where answering an objection taken from the learning of the Synod at Dort, by
Es. 29. 14, and Math. 11. 25. 26, they, instead of wise and prudent, which are
Christ's words, put learned, and that in small letters as part of the Text, both
wronging therein that lawful and helpful learning in others, which themselves
want, and corrupting the Lords words, which they ought religiously to keep; and
obtruding another meaning then ever came into his mind: which they do usually
in this Treatise, by neglecting the main scope of the place cited, and catching
at a word or phrase in it* which is the highest way, that can be, to all
heresy.

And for men, how uncharitable are they toward them in their persons, judging
them as perishing without remedy, if they receiv not their new Gospel of
Anabatistry and Free Will? How injurious in relating their own mis-formed
collections, for their opinions? And lastly, how contemptuous of their gifts
and graces, how eminent soever? As if the word of God came out from them, or to
them 1 Cor. 14. 38.
alone. It is true, we ought not to pin our faith on the sleeves of any, nor to
call any Master, as Christ speaks and means, but him alone: and no less true,
that Christ has given gifts to some men, for the edifying of others; and that
we ought not to look on our Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
things alone, as if we alone had knowledge and conscience, and zeal, and souls
to save: but every man also of the things of others (though in some things
differing from them) as having these Phil. 4. 4.
things, as well as we: and therewith considering, that many eyes see more then
one, and that specially having, as so many spectacles, the advantages of
knowledge of Tongues, and Arts, with daily travail in the Scripture, which in
us are wanting. And thus serving God, in all modesty of mind, and being
sincere in the truth Act. 20. 19 Ephesians. 4. 15.
in love, we shall be much sitter, both to help others, and to be helped by
them in the things agreeable thereunto.

A DEFENSE OF THE DOCTRINE PROPOVNDED BY THE SYNOD AT DORT.
CHAP. I.
Of Predestination.

ADVERSARIES.
WE hold, that before the foundation of the Page 3.
world, the most holy God predestined to make the world, and man. etc.

DEFENSE.
NEither the Scriptures so speak; neither is it sensibly said, that God
predestined to make the world and man etc. To predestinate, is to
predetermine, or to destinate, or ordain before hand, a person, or thing to its
end. God indeed purposed from eternity to make the world, and man; but
destinated it, and him, considered as (to be) made, to their ends. Christ as
God was preordained or predestined before the foundation 1 Pet. 1. 1^* 20.
of the world, and manifested in the last times for our redemption; yet is he
not of the number of persons or things made or created. Again, the glory of the
grace of God, shineing in man's salvation, is a created thing, and yet not
predestined of God, nor preordained to any end, being it self the utmost end
of all things. We see then something predestined, and yet not made; and
something again made, and ^ot predestined. With like incongruity they add,
that God predestined to make man a reasonable soul, to give him a righteous
Law, and lastly, to send his son to purchase the very wicked, etc. which last
words have neither truth in them (in their meaning;) nor sense, as they lay
them down.

Secondly, the Synod at Dort, against which these Adversaries deal, and all
others, speaking distinctly of things, apply the decree of predestination, to
reasonable creatures: and that Synod specially to men, and the same
considered, as fallen its Synod Dor. Art. 6. 15, of divine providence.
Adam, and thereby made guilty of eternal death; referring the decree of
creation, and permission of the fall, to a more general work of divine
providence.

Their description of the elect, and reprobate may be admitmitted, in a good
sense: namely, that the receiving of grace by some, argues Gods eternal
election of them, as the effect does the cause. The not receiving of this grace
by others, to whom it is offered, his eternal reprobation; that is, his
not-electing, but refusing or passing by of others, as the consequent, the
antecedent. Of which, more hereafter.

In setting down the difference between them and us, they Page 4. 5.
insinuate, as if we made God the Author, yea, the principal Author of all
the evil of sin in the world. But as the Synod disclaims that profane
error, so does it justly complain of this ungodly slander: which in these men
arises from their want of skill, to put difference between Gods working of the
sin, as author thereof; and his appointing, and ordering both of sin, and
sinner, to his own holy ends.

ADVERSARIES.
THe first particular against which they deal, is our affirmation, that God
decreed the sin of Adam, and that of necessity to come to pass, and
consequently, all other sins, in their time, taking upon them with all to
manifest, that herein we not only contradict the truth, but our own
affirmation elsewhere, quoting for example, Theses Genevenses, page 26, where
it is affirmed, that Adam in innocence, had free will or power, from the
creation of God, not to have sinned: which matter they also prosecute in many
words, with great disorder, making the head of their discourse, Predestination;
and the body sin.

DEFENSE.
AS the contradiction is not in our Assertions, but in their misunderstanding:
So might I, by good right, forbear to meddle about Adams sin, in the case of
predestination; considering the determination of the Synod at Dort hereabout,
which I take upon me to defend: which considers man as fallen in Gods account,
as the object of the Predestination in question. But I will not use all my
lawful liberty; but as he that will overtake and hold a malefactor, must
follow him, not only in the high and beaten way, whilst he keeps it, but in
all the out-leaps also, and turnings, which he makes: So, God assisting me,
purpose I (though it be troublesome) to follow and prosecute these Adversaries
in this, and other their particular straglings, if any way pertinent to the
general controversy.

I affirm then, that Gods decree, and ordination about Adams fall was such, as
that the same could not but follow thereupon; not as an effect, upon a cause
working it (God forbid); but as a consequent upon an antecedent; or as an event
necessarily following upon a most holy, wise and powerful providence; so
ordering and disposing, that the same should so come to pass infallibly,
though performed by Adams free, and freely working will. If any demand how this
can be, that God who forbids and hates sin, yet should so order persons
and things, by his providence, and so from eternity purpose to order them, as
that the same cannot but be? I answer, by free acknowledgment, that the manner
of Gods working herein is to me, and to all men, unconceiueable; and withal
avouch, that he, who will not confess, that God can (and could in Adams sin)
by his infinite wisdom and power, most effectually, and infallibly, in regard
of such event, order and dispose of things, without violation to his holiness,
or violence to the creatures will, as no mortal man is able to conceive the
manner thereof, is himself in a high degree, guilty of that pride, which was
Adams ^uine, by which he desired to be as God in knowledge. Genesis 3.
Who is able to understand the manner of Gods working, in giving the Holy Ghost
to men, and in directing the tongues and pens of the Prophets infallibly, and
so as they could not err? Much less discernable is Gods manner of working in,
and about the creatures sinful actions. And because many take great offense at
this doctrine of truth, and work of God, I will (the Lord assisting me)
plainly, and briefly, as I can, prove, that all events, even those most sinful
(in regard of the creatures work in, and of them) come to pass necessarily,
after a sort, in respect of Gods providence, as being a hand steady, and which
swarveth not in ordering the creature in, and unto the same.

My first proof is from Act. 2. 22. 23, and chapter 4. 27. 28. Him Act. 2. 22. 23,
and chapter 4. 27. 28.
(to wit Christ) being delivered by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge
of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified, and slain. And
again, Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel, were
gathered together to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy counsel determined
before to be done. What words could the Holy Ghost make choice of more liuelily
to express Gods effectual work, according to his eternal purpose? Here is
expressly mentioned, not only his foreknowledge (upon which the event
necessarily follows, except God go by guess only) but his determinate
counsel, yea his hand, as the effectual instrument of working: as if the Holy
Ghost should have said, That which the heart of God unchangeably purposed
should be done, touching the killing of h^s Son by wicked men, that his hand
powerfully ordered to be done accordingly.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir evasions elsewhere are, that God decreed to suffer Page, 28. 29*
them to do that which they did, but decreed not that they should so do, and
that God might have appointed some to sacrifice his son Christ, as he did
Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac. And again, that although God determined
certainly that his son should be slain, yet he might have been slain without
sin*

DEFENSE.
THat God suffered, and so decreed to suffer the wicked to kill his son, is
plain. If he had not decreed to suffer them, he had not suffered them; if he
had not suffered them, they could not have done it: but that he only suffered
them, is against the express words and meaning of the text, which says, the
wicked took him, being delivered by Gods determinato counsel. Is to deliver by
determinate counsel, to suffer only? So where it is said, that Gods hand
determined that which was done, it shows that God was a doer in the business,
and not a sufferer only. If God only suffered them, (that is, hindered them
not) he had no hand in it at all, but withheld his hand from meddling in it.
How then could his hand and counseli determine before whatsoever was done?
Besides, if God only suffered the death of his son, all the worth of our
redemption by his death, vanishes away: seeing that which God suffers only,
is only evil, and not good. Also by this perverse exposition, neither the
Father gave his son, nor the son himself for us to the death, which the
Scriptures every where affirm. Lastly, he that considers the end of the Ioh.
3. 16. Gal. 2. 20. 1. Ioh. 4. 9. Rom 5. verse 25. 29.
Churches prayer, Act. 4. will plainly see how they meant therein to ascribe
unto God more then the sole suffering of those things. The end was to comfort
themselves and other Gods servants against the threatenings and rage of the
wicked in all their persecutions. But what comfort (I marvail) can the servants
of God draw from this consideration, that God suffers the wicked in rage to
persecute them, and hinders them not. This were indeed rather matter of
discouragement and despair, then of comfort unto them. But herein stands their
comfort firm, that God by the hand of his providence orders all these things
according to the fore-determination of the counsel of his will. Neither will
their vain imagination help them, that Christ might have been slain, and
become our sacrifice, yet without sin. For howsoeevr it be not for them, nor
me, to determine what was possible to Gods absolute power; yet we know,
considering the declaration thereof both by the Scriptures and event, that in
regard of Gods decree, it was necessary that Christ should dye, as he did, by
the conspiracy and rage of wicked men; as both the express words, and plain
drift of the places prove. Lastly, it is an erroneous presumption, that God
might have appointed some to have sacrificed his son Christ, as he did
Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac, to wit, in obedience to Gods
commandment, considering how expressly the Scriptures did even before his
death, teach the contrary: and that the son of man must suffer many things,
and be killed by the Elders and chief Priest. Also that Mark. 3. 31. Luke 24.
20.* 26. Ioh. 12. 32. 33. Gal. 3. 13.
Christ ought to suffer, to wit, what he had suffered, by the Priests and
Rulers which had delivered him to be condemned to death, and had crucified
him: which manner of death, by being hanged upon the tree, so becoming a curse
for us, that he might free us from the curse of the Law, was as well foretold
by the scriptures, as his death it self. If that cannot but be, which the
Scriptures foretell, and that the Scriptures foretold that Christ must thus
be killed and crucified by the hands of wicked men, then was it necessary (and
could not otherwise be) in regard of Gods decree, that Christ should die as he
did, and not without sin in them that killed him.

To conclude this place: These men granting, that God decreed the death of his
son, but denying that he decreed the means and manner thereof, make the most
wise God like weak man, who often resolves of a thing to be done, but takes
time to consider of the manner of doing it.

Neither yet do we, by all this, make God the appointer of evil in their
meaning, that is, either the commander, or worker, or approver thereof; but
only the supreme governor of the whole world, and of all persons and actions
therein, how sinful soever; using and ordering the covetousness of Judas, the
envy of the Priests, and injustice of Pilate to this event of Christ's death; in
regard of them most wicked, but of God, most gracious; and to us, most
profitable.

Take we one other instance, for this purpose, from God^ threatening of David by
the Prophet, for his sin against Vriah. Now therefore the sword shall never
depart from thy house, 2. Sam. 12. 10. 11. 12.
etc. Behold I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I
will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he
shall ly with thy wives in the sight of the Sun, etc. Whence it appears,
that Absoloms practices against his father, as necessarily followed, by the
work of Gods providence, as Gods threatenings going before, were necessarily
true. Will they say, that God only suffered this, and so gainsay God himself,
saying, I will do this, v. 12. Is to do to suffer with these men? Tell me, you
poor seduced souls, does not the Lord here threaten a judgment from him to
come upon 2 King. 29* 19. Psalm. 119. 160, 164*
David for his sin? Are not all Gods judgments good and righteous? Does the
Judge only suffer the punishment of the malefactors, and not inflict or
procure it? The scriptures teach, and these men acknowledge, that whatsoever is
good, comes from the father of lights: Are not Gods judgments (whereof this
is one) good in truth, though both evil to man's sense, as this was to David's;
and worse sometimes in the instruments both intention and action, as it was in
Absoloms? It is therefore evident, that the same thing, in diverse respects, was
both the horrible sin of Absalom, and the severe punishment of David, and the
just judgment of God. Take a familiar similitude for the explaining of this
matter. The water is of it self apt and prone to flow to and fro. The
husbandman by h^s artificial ditches and trenches, brings it to this or that
place, in this or that measure, at this or that time, and so for other
circumstances: yet does not he at all work the disposition of flowing in the
water, but finding it there, makes use of it for his purpose, and by his skill
leads the water whither seems good unto him. So neither did the Lord infuse at
all corrupt on into Absalom, but finding it there by the Devils and his own
work, ordered it to that his holy end, the glory of his justice in punishing
the heinous sins of David: of which punishment he was the author.

These men grant, that God foreseeth all evil to come. This foresight of God
they will not deny to be certain, and that wherein God cannot be deceived.
Whereupon it follows, that such evils so foreseen, necessarily and unavoydably
come to pass. If any object, that Gods foresight is not the cause of the
evil. I answer, no more is his decree or work of provividence about it. It
suffices for the purpose in hand, if it follow by way of event or consequence
upon the antecedent, though not of effect upon the cause. Let us yet a little
further open this point. This knowledge, or foreknowledge of God, is twofold:
natural and indefinite, by which God knows all possible things, and
whatsoever in any respect, or upon any supposition, can possibly be: or
definit^, and determinate, by which of things possible he knows what shall and
what shall not be. Now howsoever this foreknowledge (as all other things in
God) be one, and that infinite and eternal; yet in our conception, the former
of those acts of Gods foreknowledge, goes before the decree, the latter
presupposes it. For therefore God certainly and infallibly forsees a thing
shall be, because he unchangeably decrees it shall be in and according to its
kind: if good, by his working it: if evil, by his suffering it, and governing
the creature in working it.

But you will answer, that God from eternity certainly and infallibly foresaw
Absoloms incest, because Absalom would certainly and undoubtedly practice it in
time. But I would further know, whence this certainty and undoubtednesse of
Absoloms such practice should arise, so as it could not possibly but be, nor
God be deceived in that his prescience or foreknowledge? It was not of any
absolute necessity of it self, that Absalom should be born: or being born,
that he should be preserved, and surviue to that time: or being till then
preserved, that he should have natural ability, and opportunity therewith to
practice that sin: seeing it was not impossible, but that David might have
taken his wives with him, or they have fled else whither, and have hid
themselves. In all these things God was not a mere sufferer, but a powerful
worker by his providence. But suppose the being of all these things as they
were; and withal, Absoloms heart by the Devils work, and his own, fraught
with lust, and impiety this way; yet was Absalom a changeable creature, having
in himself freedom, or liberty of will to have forborne that act at that time,
or to have exercised his lust upon some other object. How then could that
particular event follow unchangeably from his changeable will? How necessarily
and inavoydably, from his choice of will which was free in it self either to
that act, or to another of that kind, or to neither? Either therefore Gods
decree from eternity (and so his work in time) must be acknowledged for the
disposing and ordering of all events unavoydably, or his knowledge be denied in
foreseeing them infallibly.

Lastly, to affirm that any thing, great or small, good or evil, comes to
pass in the world, without Gods providence ordering and governing it and them
that do it, is to set the creature from under the Creators rule and dominion
therein; and to shut God out of the earth, whilst men do what they list in it,
he letting them alone, and not meddling with them.

How Adam had power from the creation of God not to sin which Page 5.
they urge in the nextplace, we shall show hereafter. In the mean while, their
addition, that Gods commanding him not to sin, and yet his decreeing that he
should sin, are contrary, as light and darkness, is faulty both in regard of our
assertion, and their own. For us, we do not hold, that God decreed Adams sin,
as they conceive, that is, either to approve it, or command it, or compel unto
it, nothing less: but this we affirm, that God decreed to leave Adam to
himself in the temptation, and not to assist him with that strength of grace,
by which he could (if he would) have upheld him; and so to order both him, and
all things about him, in that his temptation, as that, he, by the motion and
sway of his own free will, following his natural appetite to the pleasant, but
forbidden fruit, and that false persuasion wherewith his understanding was by
Satan overclouded, should both choose and eat the forbidden fruit. Neither are
these two things contrary, that God should forbid a thing, and yet decree that
it should come to pass in the Genesis 22.
manner forementioned. God commanded Abraham to kill his son, as it was a
trial of his obedience: and yet decreed that the event of killing should not
follow, as we know. God commanded Pharaoh, by Moses, to let Is^^^l go; and yet
said Exodus 4. 21. 22. Luke 12. 50. and. 22. 42.
before, I will harden Pharaohs heart, that he shall not let the people go.
That which he said, he decreed and pu^pos^d. Christ our Lord desired to drink
of that bitter cup appointed him, and to be baptized with that bapt^sme, and
was pained till it were accomplished: and yet desired in an other respect, that
the same cup might pass from him, and he not drink of it, if it were possible.
These things may well stand together in their several respects, and are not as
light and darkness to any, but to them, whose light is darkness.

Next, they take upon them to impugn the received distinction Page 5.
of Gods revealed and secret will; and demand, If it be Gods secret will, how
we come to know it? I answer, by his revealing it afterward, either by his
word, or by his work. When a thing comes to pass in this or that manner
(though before not so much as insinuated in his Word, and therefore secret) we
then know that it was the will of God it should so come to pass, either by his
working it according to its kind, if it be good; or by his suffering and
ordering it, and the worker thereof, if evil.

It is true which they add, that Gods revealed will, was not revealed but
hidden, before it was revealed. But what then? There was then, say they, two
hidden wills in God contrary to each other: whereof the one willed; yea, decreed
Adam to sin, and the other willed him not to sin, and so by consequence, a
good will, and an evil will.

I answer, that the will of God in him, and its self, is but one, and the same
most simple; but by us conceived of, as diverse, according to the diversity of
objects upon which it is set. Secondly, we do not say, that God willed Adams
sin immediately, but that he willed the suffering and ordering of both the
sin and sinner in sinning. Thirdly, the willing and nilling of the same thing
in diverse respects, makes not two contrary wills, as the Scriptures last cited
manifest; but the willing and nilling of the same thing i^ the same respect,
makes the contrariety.

ADVERSARIES.
THey make us further to say, that God wills justice for its Page 6.
self, and sin, not for sin, but that he might either have praise in pardoning
or punishing sin: and thereunto frame answer, that to pardon or punish sin,
is not to will sin; and that if God wills sin in any respect, why does he
punish it in Adam, and all his posterity?

DEFENSE.
BUT who has said, that God wills sin, though not for sin? We know that the
object of man's will is only good in appearance, and of Gods in truth. We do
not then say, that God wills sin properly, though he will the thing which in
regard of the creature is sin: but in regard of him either a most holy and wise
trial of the creature, or just punishment of former sins, either their own
that practice it, or others: so Absoloms 2 Samuel 12, and 15, and 16. Romans 1.
wicked sin, was Gods just punishment upon David. So the reprobate mind, vile
affections, and all unrighteousness of the Gentiles, was a meet recompense
from God of their error, in not glorifying him as God in the things which they
clearly saw in the creation of the world. They cannot here hide themselves in
their burrow of Gods bare suffering, considering how expressly it is said, that
God gave them up to vile affections, and as a just Judge recompensed thereby
their former sins, to wit, as otherwise, so by ordering that corruption which
was in, and of themselves, to this fearful event of a reprobate mind.

The things which they ad about men's, how much more Gods Page 6. 7.
speaking the truth from his heart; and their bold charge of others with
blasphemy, in making God (to be blessed for ever) an hypoorite, I pass by as
a fruit of that spirit which makes men presumptuous, self-willed, and not
afraid to speak evil of the things which they know not themselves, nor will
learn of others. 2. Pet. 2. 10. Jude 10.
The Lord, who taught Paul, that he, who being a Pharisee, and in his ignorance
had accounted Christ's doctrine blasphemy, had himself blasphemed; show these
men the like mercy: for they know not what they speak.

ADVERSARIES.
IN the next place, to show how free Adam was from all necessity of sinning,
they at large relate how God furnished him with all things that might support
him in the estate in which he created him.

DEFENSE.
THE particular helps mentioned, I acknowledge with them, but with limitation
of some of them, which they set down at a large adventure. Whereas in the third
they affirm, that Adam had a meet help and comfort for him, his wife Hevah.
This is true of her created state, but not of that which followed, she (being
first seduced by the serpent, taking advantage upon her womanly weakness, and
the absence of her husband) becoming the only imediate instigator of him to
sin. So for the 7th. and last, which is, that God gave Adam will and power not
to have eaten, we confess it, but not as they mean it, in their more overly
considerations, and peremptoric determinations, then is meet, in this deep
mystery. Let us therefore a little more distinctly consider, how it may and
ought to be granted, that God furnished Adam with all necessary and sufficient
grace and helps, against sin, and for perseverance in holiness.

First then, we confess, that God making him a reasonable creature, bestowed
upon him withal whatsoever grace was sufficient and necessary, on his part;
that is, as much (and more) then he was bound to give him. Secondly, that God
gave him whatsoever was sufficient for his preservation in that state of
holiness and integrity in which he was created, out of the case of
temptation. Thirdly, I grant, that whatsoever grace he wanted for the resisting
of the temptation, when it came, it was by his own default, and that if he had
not failed himself, the grace of God would and should have sustained him
therein also. Notwithstanding all this, the event manifested, that Adam had not
the grace to withstand the temptation of the serpent by the woman, but was
seduced thereby. It was nothing but want of grace in him not to withstand it:
and this grace he could not have but by his gift, from whom every good gift,
and every perfect giving comes Iam. 1. 17.
down, even the father of lights. God gave him will actually only to good, but
changeably; and power to understand and do whatsoever concerned him if he
would: But now that constancy of will upon clear understanding and unchanged
purpose of heart, which was requisite in so great a temptation (by so subtle
an adversary in an object so pleasing to nature, and good in it self,
together with the persuasion of his wife, so near unto him) this grace, I say,
Adam received not of God, as the event in the changing of his will upon
deceitful information of his understanding, blinded by an appearing good, made
it too manifest; though as before I said, through his own default, in not
depending upon God as he ought.

The things which they annex, that God gave not Adam a Page 7. 3. 9. 10.
Law to ensnare him; but that that law was holy and good; that Adam was the son
of God by creation; that if men, who are evil, do good unto their children,
and would not beget them to misery; how much less has the good God created
his Son to sin and misery? As also, that sin is the defacing of Gods
image in man, we willingly acknowledge; and withal whatsoever can be rightly
gathered therefrom.

We believe that the end of Adams creation in regard of himself was holiness,
and happiness; in regard of God, the glorious manifestation of his power,
wisdom, holiness and goodness; and that sin came in by accident, and
misery by sin; man by his free, but corrupted will, willing the sin; and God by
his just and holy will, the punishment; and that sin was in no sense the
destinated end of Gods creation; nor misery, but by accident, as to come for
sin. Yet must the difference here be held (howsoever these men tumble all
together) between God ( Adams, and all men's father by creation and his
children) and between natural parents, and their children. God was Adams
absolute father, and Lord* though not for the use of any unjust power; men are
but fathers as it were by borrowing, and with a power limited by Gods will. 2
God works, and orders all things for himself, yea, even the wicked for the
evil day, and of him, and through Prove. 16. 4. Romans 11. 36
him, and to him are all things. So do not earthly parents beget and order
their children for themselves, as their utmost, and highest end. 3 Earthly
parents are bound not to suffer their children to sin, if they can hinder it;
but to do whatsoever they possibly can, being lawful, to keep them from sin
and misery. Will these free Burgesses, of their own choosing, make a
Parliament-law to bind God to do whatsoever he possibly can to keep from
sinning men and Angels? Lastly, earthly parents would rather (had they before
known it) never have begotten their children, then that they should (though
merely by their own default) have come to sin and misery thereby without remedy.
But God (even our Adversaries being Judges) foreknew these things of men, and
yet created them notwithstanding.

ADVERSARIES.
HEre, upon question moved, whether God could not have Page 10.
made Adam so as he could not have been deprived of his state of
righteousness; and whether any thing can be done against Gods will: they
undertake to manifest two things; 1 in what state God made Adam; 2 that many
things are done against the will of God. For the first, they in their bold
ignorance, hold it an ignorant conceit, that God could have made Adam
unchangeable: that is, so have made, and kept him as he should not, nor could
have been deprived of his state of righteousness, in which he was made. For
this, say they, had been to have made him God like himself: and so conclude,
that God could not have made man otherwise then he made him, a reasonable
creature, yet changeable: 2 that then it had been to no purpose, to have set a
penalty to the Law: 3 that then the most holy attributes of God, his justice to
punish sin, and mercy to forgive it, had been void.

DEFENSE.
THey, who here desire, that what they say may be well observed, should
themselves better have observed what they say, then thus, as they do, to
deceive both themselves, and others, by an equivocation of words.

Here then in the first place, a distinction must be put, which is, that a
thing is unchangeably good, either in, and by it self, and so God only is
unchangeable (and so only has immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16 1 Timothy 1. 17*
and is only wise, etc.) or a thing unchangeable by the grace and power of God
communicated with the creature; and so God could, if he would, have made Adam
unchangeable, or kept him unchanged, which is the same, in the present
consideration: as he has made the Angels and souls of men immortal, and both
Angels and men wise in their kind, by communication of the effects of his
being, and wisdom with them. God then is only unchangeably good by nature,
and of himself; yet by his grace and power, it was possible for Adam to have
been kept unchangeably good, so as he should not have sinned, which is the
unchangeablenesse in question.

And this answers their first reason. To the second also, I answer, that God
making Adam changeably good by created nature, might (had it seemed so good to
his infinite wisdom) have kept him by grace from possibility of breaking his
righteous Law, in our meaning, notwithstanding tho annexing of the penalty, and
that to great good purpose; viz. both to show how God hates all transgressing
of his Law, against the breach whereof he denounces such judgment; and also,
as a means (by his blessing and grace) effectually for the keeping of Adam
from breaking it: which use also it should have had, if Adam had done his duty
in constant obedience, and that God, by his most powerful grace had so
preserved him, that he had not sinned.

For the third Reason: First I demand, what necessity there was that God should
have use (as they speak) toward men of the attributes of his justice to punish
sin, and of his mercy to pardon it upon repentance? Would it have been any
diminution of his perfection, and happiness if he had not so done? Does not
the glory of God also even most brightly shine in the elect Angels, which have
been and shall be kept unchangeably holy and without sin for ever? and in
regard of whom those holy Attributes, of justice in punishing, and mercy in
pardoning have no use. But observe (good Reader) how these men are taken
inavoydably in their own snare. It is not man's being made changeable, and such
as might sin, by which their could come to be use of Gods attributes of justice
for the punishing of sin; and mercy for the pardoning of it; except withal man
become actually changed, and sinful. Can there be use of justice for
punishing, or of mercy for foregiuenesse of sin, but where sin is? Their reason
therefore (if it bear weight) proves not only that man might possibly, but that
he must sin necessarily. Which I lay down and apply formally thus. That without
which the Attributes of Gods justice to punish sin, and of his mercy to
pardon it, had been utterly without use toward men, that must necessarily be:
but without man's sinning, the attributes of Gods justice to punish, and of his
mercy to pardon, had been utterly without use toward men: ergo, man must
necessarily sin, by just consequence upon their antecedent.

Their reasons thus answered, I will plainly prove that God could, if it had so
pleased him, have kept Adam unchangeably good; as the Angels, and souls of men
are, and bodies shall be (at the resurrection) unchangeably immortal.

And first, the Scriptures teach us to give this honor to the power of God, as
to believe, that our God in the heaven Psalm. 115. 4.
does (and therefore can do) whatsoever pleases him: and so could (had it
pleased him, and been his will) have preserved Adam from sinning against him.
Of their distinction of Gods will we shall speak by and by. If in the mean
while they except, that God could not so will; I would know the reason of their
such presumption. If they say, there are some things which God cannot do, as
to lie, to deny himself, to make the same thing to be, and not to be, at the
same time, and the like, inferring either impotence in the Creator, or
contradiction in the creature. I demand, what had there been herein against the
nature either of the Creator, or creature, if God by his grace, had kept the
understanding of Adam from being overclowded with error, or false opinion, and
therewith his will and affections in the integrity of obedience? This had not
been (as some imagine) to destroy; but to perfect his nature. Has not God so
kept the elect Angels without all change from their primitive purity? Was not
the Lord Jesus in his Manhood so kept upon earth? And shall not all the elect
be so kept for ever in heaven? These are, were, and shall be unchangeably
righteous; and yet were not, nor are, nor shall be made Gods.

They themselves confess, that the devils are unchangeable Page 11.
in evil; And why then might not both Angels and men be unchangeable in good?
that is, so kept by the power of God as they never turn from their goodness. Or
what bar would these men have put against the power of God, if his will had
been so to have preserved and kept Adam? I demand, whether the Apostles, in
their time, could possibly preach any thing but the truth, being immediately
and infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost? All these instances serve to prove,
that it is possible to God, if it please him, so to assist and confirm by his
Spirit, a reasonable creature (though of a changeable nature in its self) as
that in regard of the same divine assistance, it is not possible it should be
changed from good to evil, or sin against God. Lastly, if God could not have
so made and ordered Adam, as that he could not have sinned, then God did not so
much as suffer him to sin, seeing none can be said properly to suffer a thing
to be done, save he that could hinder it, if he would. It were absurdly said,
that I suffer the wind to blow, or sea to swell, though I hinder them not,
seeing it is not in my power to hinder them.

ADVERSARIES.
THey add from Ezech. 18, and 33, Gods asseveration, that Page 11. 12
as he lives, he would have no man transgress, and so come under the
exequution of his justice: making withal, a short description of the will of
God, as they call it: and ever confounding these two things; necessity and
compulsion: and Gods not decreeing, with his forcing men to sin,

DEFENSE.
FOr better answering, and understanding of the answer unto these things, it
must be considered; first, that the will of God, though simple, and one in its
nature, yet exercises it self diversely, in regard of diverse objects. The
first and weakest degree of Gods willing (to speak of God as man is able to
conceiu of him) is that by which he wills the permission or suffering of sin,
as sin. For if God suffer it, he suffers it willingly, seeing he both takes
knowledge of it, and could hinder it by his omnipotent power, if he pleased.
The second degree of Gods willing, is that by which he commands a thing to be
done, and approues of it, if it be done. The third and last degree is, that
according to which he works all things by his omnipotent power. And if a man
whose will is finite, yet can will things according to those degrees; how much
more both possible and easy is it to Gods infinite will, to exercise it self
more intensly or remisly, according to those degrees? I may be willing, in
cases, to suffer that in another which I approve not of: so may I command my
servant or child to do a thing, and approu of it, if it be done, and yet not
so will it, as to use all the power that possibly I can, to have it done. Some
things, again, there are that I so will, as that I do, or am bound to use all
my possible skill and power to have them effected. These things are much more
rightly said of God, considering the infinite largeness of his will, compared
with my straitness. The same may be said of the Spirit of God which is one
(for there is one Spirit) whose 1 Cor. 12. 4.
operation yet is diverse, and the same sometimes more, and sometimes less
forcible: as we see in the knowledge of an Apostle, compared with the knowledge
of an ordinary Minister or Christ^an; and many other ways.

And these differences of the will of God in the exercising of itself toward
the creature, I desire the Reader here carefully Page 12.
to obseru for after use. Their short definition, as they unskilfully call it,
of Gods will, by which he either wills what man is to do, or what he will do
in himself, is short indeed, as cutting off all that God will do and does out
of himself, and in the creature, as are all his works ad extra, as they are
called.

It remains, that in the next place, we show the difference between necessity
and compulsion; and Gods decreeing in our sense, and his forcing of things,
(which our Adversaries with great error confound as the same) and withal,
that things may, after a sort, be done necessarily, and freely too. Freely, yea
contingently also, in regard of men, and necessarily in regard of Gods work of
providence according to his decree. I mention Gods work according to his
decree; because to speak properly, Gods decree or will, works not things, but
his power according to his will. There is indeed a necessity which takes away
freedom and voluntarinesse from men; but then they rather suffer then do. For
example, the striking or thrusting of a man with such violence, as that he is
compelled thereby to stagger or fall: this necessity of compulsion depriues me
of all freedom to this bodily motion, so as I stagger or fall unwillingly; but
this comes from an external principle or beginning working violently, and from
without me. But this is nothing to that other necessity in regard of God,
causing and effecting the good, in and by the creature, according to its kind;
and suffering and ordering the evil person and thing, according to its kind;
with which man's freedom may well stand.

And first, whatsoever God does, he does it both most freely, and most
necessarily well. So the elect Angels do the ^ Tim. 5. 21 Esaias 6. 2.
will of God most voluntarily, and yet most necessarily. So did Christ, as man,
the will of his Father so freely, as none Mat. 16. 11. Ioh. 4. 34. Act. 20. 28.
can do any thing more; and yet as necessarily, as it was necessary for God
not to sin. On the contrary, the devils do evil, both most necessarily
(being by these men's own grant, unchangeably evil) and yet most willingly, as
carried thereunto withal their power. Christ says, it must needs be that Mat.
18. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 19
offenses come; and the Apostle, that there must be heresies in the Church. If
then freedom of will can stand with no manner of necessity, the authors of
these heresies and offenses sin not therein: for all sins specially of this
kind are voluntary. I add in the last place, that the better any man, or
Angel is, he does good the more, both necessarily and willingly: and the worse
any, evil, both ways.

Neither will it seem strange unto us, that one and the same action comes under
so diverse considerations, as in one regard, to be voluntary, contingent and
casual; and in another, necessary: if we consider, how diverse agents concur
and meet together in producing it. No work of man, is so man's alone, as that
God has not some hand in it, in sustaining and ordering the person and work,
yea in effecting that which is good in it, as all that is, which has in it any
created being or order. What hinders then, but that the same thing may in
regard of man as the particular and immediate cause, be voluntary and
contingent; and yet in regard of God the highest and general cause, necessary?
We daily see the truth of this in proportion amongst men; the meeting of Ahab
and Eliah was 1 King. 2 ^*
in respect of Ahab, casual; but in respect of Eliah, of destinate counsel.

These things thus cleared, we will come to the exposition of the words of
Ezechiel, so often and vehemently urged by these men, and others; which are, that
God takes not pleasure Chap. 12. 23 and 33. 11*
in the death of a sinner, but that he turn from his way and live.

I answer; first, that the Lord takes no delight in the death of a sinner, that
repents, and turns from his wicked way: but otherwise, if the sinner repent
not, the Lord takes delight in his death; not for the misery of the creature,
but for the glory of his justice shining therein. Of such the Lord testifies,
Prove. 1. 2^
that he will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes. And
considering, that the death, and destruction of the wicked is Gods own just and
holy work, for their sins, who will deny that God delights in it? Secondly, for
sin, who was ever so wicked as to imagine that God takes pleasure in it? It
pleases him for his holy ends, to suffer sin, and to order the creature
sinning by his own freewill, and election of evil, as has been formerly
proved. Thirdly, it must be noted that the Prophet speaks there of such sinners
only, as to whom the word comes; saying, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, Chap. 33. 1^*
for why will ye die, o house of Israel? Whence we do gather evidently these
two particulars. First, that the Prophet does not here speak of all men
universally, (as they conceiu) but only of the house of Israel, or of such, as
to whom he^ sends his Prophets to call them to repentance: secondly, that he
speaks not of that decree of the Lord willing, which is accompanied with the
powerful work of his grace, by which he will give repentance to wicked men,
instructed in the truth by 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. 26.
his servants: but only of that degree of his will which stands in commanding
that which is good, and in approving of it, if it be performed. And so we grant
it to be the Lords pleasure and will, that all repent to whom the Word is
preached.

It is true which they add: that Adam and others sinned against the will of
God, but not that any ever sinned against the secret will of God, as they
affirm. The will of God is no law to man till it be revealed; and where there
is no law, there is no transgression. It is also truly said, that the Jews
unwillingnesse to be gathered to Christ, was against Gods and Christ's will:
that is, his commanding will: for he would, that is, commanded, and they would
not, but disobeyed: but that it was against that decree of Gods willing, which
sets his almighty power awor^, that I deny. For God could, if thus he would,
have given them repentance, and drawn them to his son. Whatsoever he thus Ioh.
6. 44.
wills, he can do.

That which they add (as an eye-salue to cure our blindness) namely, that we
have nothing to do with Gods secret will, not revealed in his word, is true in
regard of our obedience to God, and expectation Psalm. 135. 6.
from him* but not absolutely, as they conceive. The particular events of
things in the world, though not so much as insinuated in the scriptures,
concern us when they come to pass, so as we may and ought to say, it was the
will of God they should so be: either his will to work them, if good: or to
suffer and order them and their doers, if evil.

ADVERSARIES.
NExt comes into consideration a special distinction of Page 12, 13. 14.
ours, which is, that God is the author of the action, or fact, but not of the
sin of the fact or crime. Over which they insult, and in it over all learned
men, though they mention Calvin only, with high contempt and great triumph
before the victory; calling it a merely fabulous ridle, and mavelous
sophistication; telling us that a spade is a spade, etc. but in truth showing
themselves sitter to meddle with a spade and a mattock, then with those high
mysteries. Let us see their reasons. In the first whereof they make us say;
that God is the author of the very fact and deed of Adams sin, yea of adultery,
theft, murder, etc.

DEFENSE.
WE deny their charge, and answer by distinction; that Adams taking and eating
the forbidden fruit, David's adultery, Ioahs murder, and the like, are to be
considered two ways: First, naturally, and as they are motions in nature,
performed by man's natural and created faculties and powers of soul and body:
secondly, morally, as those motions are misapplyed, and abused to wrong
objects, by man's blind mind and corrupt will. In the former respect, and
materially, as we speak, they are of God and created nature; in the latter and
formally, of man's proper corruption. Now the sin is not the natural action
of motion, but the pravity and abuse of the action. The subtilty of our riddle,
they, as if they had plowed with our heyfer, find out to be this, that in our
account sin is nothing, and that God, though the author of all things, is
not the author of sin, for sin is nothing; and so the thief, and other
malefactors, is punished for nothing by the Judge: and the wicked for nothing
in everlasting fire.

First, I demand of these men, whether, if God command something to be done,
and men do it not, they deseru not to be punished for their doing of nothing?
Is it not sin not to do that we should do; and to do nothing when we
should do something? These witty men could teach the goats ^t Christ's left
hand, at that day, to answer him Matthew. 25.
to the full, that be condemned them to hell fire for nothing; for not to do
is to do nothing. We then answer, first, that we call not sin nothing
negatiuely, but privatiuely, as a want of that which should be; secondly, that
sin is not nothing morally, that is not nothing against Gods Law, for sin only
is something against it, but nothing naturally; that is, nothing which has a
created being in nature.

So, for their next Argument, that by authority of Scripture, and our own
description, sin is a thought, word or deed, contrary to the will of God, and
therefore that the deed is sin; they should consider, that neither the
Scriptures nor writers meaning is, that the sin stands not in the natural deed
or motion, but in the contrariety which the same deed* or motion has in it to
the law of God. Darkness, or a shadow, are nothing positiuely, but only the
want of light. The voydnes, darkness, and unformednes on the earth and deep, in
the beginning, were nothing that had Genesis 1. 1. 2.
real being; but only the want of that form, furniture, and light, which God
afterward made, and furnished them withal. When the candle is put out, and it
becomes dark; shall we think that any real thing comes into the house, and
causes the darkness? or when I make a shadow by standing in the light, or
Sunshine; do I put any real thing in the place where the shadow is? or do I
not only keep the light and Sunshine from it? Likewise, when a man or beast
halts in going, shall we imagine that the halting is the very motion of going,
or the fault of the motion only? So is sin only the absence and want of that
conformity and agreeableness which ought to be in the thought* word, or work
of the reasonable creature to the Law of God; which as none of understanding
and sincerity will deny; so for further satisfaction of the doubting, and
conviction of the refractory, I will annex certain most plain and undoubted
proofs of Scripture to confirm the same.

First, the Apostle quoting and confirming the saying of the ^^^. 17. 28
heathen Poet, witnesses to the Athenians, that in God we live and move, and
have our being. Our being then, that is, our souls and bodies, and our life
arising from their union; and so our motions arising from our life we have of
God; yea which is more, after a sort, in him, who fills all things with his
presence. Where let it also be noted, that he speaks of the being, life, and
motions of the very profane and heathenish Idolaters, as well as of any others.

Secondly, God, as it is in the Psalm, made the heavens and ^^^. 146. 6*
earth, and sea, and all that in them is. If sin then be any thing, (viz. any
thing having being) God made it, and so it is his creature. And surely if it
have a being, it is either a created or uncreated being. Not the latter, for
that is only God; and therefore the former by their ground. If God created all
things that are, sin if it be in their sense, must be Gods creature.

Thirdly, the same natural motion of man in which great sin is committed, if
it were exercised upon another object, might be without sin, and lawful; and
therefore not the very action or motion, but the misapplying of it, is the sin;
from which the action has its moral, but not its natural being. For example;
the very same natural motion which Adam used in taking and eating the
forbidden fruit, upon any other fruit, had been no sin. The same natural act
in which David practiced adultery with Bethsaba, with his lawful wife, had
been no adultery: the very same natural act and motion whereby Ioab killed
Abner, and Amasa, if exercised upon a malefactor at the magistrates command,
had been no murder, but a work of just execution. The sin therefore is not
in the very act, but in the misapplying it, or other vicious adjunct.

Fourthly, considering that there is no sin in deed or action of body, which
was not first in the faculties of the soul, the understanding, will and
affections: (for only the things Mat. 15. 1^
which come from the heart, desile the man) the outward sin in fact and deed
can no more more make the outward action in itself not to be of God; then the
inward corruption can make the created faculties in which it is, not to be of
God. It is senseless to doubt but that when a wicked man sleeps, and so
practices no wickedness one way or other, he is notwithstanding a wicked man.
And where now rests his wickedness, but in his heart? And what is his heart
but the faculties of his understanding, will and affections, which sin
possesses and corrupts? And yet nevertheles these natural faculties remain
Gods good creatures; so do their motions natural, notwithstanding sins
possessing them. There is in our sinful nature, the faculty, and the sin or
disorder in it: and in our sinful works, the action from the faculty, and the
outward sin in it, from the inward sin in the other.

Lastly, I thus argue unresistably: That which God blesses is good, and of
himself: This none will deny. I assume. But God blesses the natural action,
or motion, in which horrible sin is practiced. This is most evident (amongst a
thousand daily instances) in the sinful commixture of Judas and Thamar, being
on his part whoredom, and on hers incest, Genesis 38.
though with a better mind: Yet this action (considered naturally) God blessed
with a child; yea, with two sons; yea, with him, on whom Christ came
according to the flesh, who is blessed for ever. Here is plainly the action
blessed, and therefore good (in our sense) and of God; and yet the sin in the
action, evil and accursed.

The meaning of Mr. Knox, in saying, that what Ethnicks Page 14, 15* 17.
ascribe to fortune, we acknowledge to come from God, as the appointer of the
things, they mistake and pervert, neither understanding the Ethnicks meaning,
nor his. The Heathens speaking of fortune did not conceiu that there was any
such divine power causing things to be, but the contrary, and that things come
to pass without any divine Providence ordering them, and merely by blind
chance or fortune: when they spoke of good fortune, or ill fortune, they meant
only the good or ill hap of persons, or things. His and our meaning then is,
that which Christ our Lord also teaches, that Not a sparrow Man. 11. 29
falls to the ground without Gods providence. And where he speaks of God as
the Author, by his counsel appointing all things to the one part, and to the
other; it is plain he intends it only of the ordering and governing of them,
which they that deny, do in effect, pluck God out of heaven, by denying his
Sovereignty, and power over all his creatures in ordering them, and all their
actions, to his own supernatural ends. The bitter curses which here they break
into in their ignorant zeal against him, and Calvin, and with them, all others,
the worthy instruments of restoring the Gospels light, after the darkness of
Popery (into which these men are slidden back in no small measure) are like
stones thrown upward by them, which without their answerable repentance will
fall down upon their own heads.

Their proof, that God is gracious and merciful, of whom Page 17.
all good things come, and none evil, are needless, seeing we grant as much;
only wishing them to consider these three things. First, that the most of
these Scriptures cited, mean only the mercy and love of God to his Church and
people. Secondly, with what mind they put once and again, moving for tempting,
Iam. 1. Thirdly, that 2 Pet. 3. 4, is not to be extended to all, as it is by
those prodigal Stewards of Gods grace, but to the elect only, whom the
Apostle opposes to the mockers mentioned v. 3, and therefore says, that the
Lord which has promised, is patient toward us, and so deferres that his
coming till the number of the elect be accomplished, by their effectual
calling.

Of Gods suffering, and doing things, and how they come Page 17.
to pass thereupon, I have spoken before, answering what they object
therabout. Only I may not pass by, without giving warning thereof, the
stumbling stone of most grievous error and impiety, which they (pur-blind
people) cast in their own way, making Gods purposes and promises no better, in
effect, then the vizzard of Stage Players, which they put on, and off again, at
every turn.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir affirmation, that God from the beginning of the world Page 18.
knows all things, yet that all things come not to pass therefore
necessarily; alleging for that purpose, Math. 26. 35, is dangerous, if they
speak to the matter in hand, and with respect to the Text, whose word, for the
most part, they bring: Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of
the world. Act. 15. 18.
Their instance in Christ's asking twelu Legions of Angels, Mat. 26, Ananias his
keeping his possession, and the saving of the ship in which Paul sailed: These
Scriptures, together with Saul's Page 19.
coming to Keilah, and the men of Keilahs delivering David into his hands, 1 Samuel 23, they bring to prove, that although God do foreknow things will come
to pass, and also foretell them, yet they may be prevented: adding hereunto*
that the Lord knows, and pronounces, that the wicked shall be damned, and
yet there lies no necessity upon their damnation, but that it may be prevented
by repentance.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, these examples of the Lords sending the twelve Legions of Angels, and
of Saul's coming to Keilah, and the like, are not to the purpose in hand. The
question is (as they themselves put it) of things coming not of fortune, but by
Gods providence, and of Gods willing things that come to pass, both good and
evil. To what end then mention they things that never did, nor shall come to
pass, either good or evil; And so to cover their craft the better alter the
words of the Text, All Gods works, into All things. And what are all these
things with them? Christ's obtaining 12 legions of Angels, Ananias retaining his
possession; the saving of the ship in which Paul sailed toward Rome: Saul's
coming to Keilah, and the destruction of the Ninivits within 40 days: which
were neither works of God, nor man; nor never were nor shall be. So then by all
Gods works, as the text says, and matter in hand requires; and by all things
as they say, they must mean plain nothing, and that which never was, nor shall
be.

Secondly, the Scriptures cited by them, rightly understood; are to them as
Goliahs sword to him; clearly cutting off the head of their error. Take for
instance one or two of them, upon which they most insist.

For Math. 26, it was a thing in itself possible, considering Gods love to his
Son, and his faith in him, that he should have obtained those Legions of
Angels to have reskued him: So was it also, not only possible in it self, for
Saul, but also in his mind to have come to Keilah etc. And whence then was it,
that these things came not so to pass, and had not their answerable events?
Even from the decree and providence of Gods ordering things the other way
inevitably. In the former instance we have Christ's own testimony, who, after
mention of his such praying, if he would, v. 53, adds v. 54, But then how shall
the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? As if he should have said,
it agrees well with the interest which I have in my Fathers love, that I should
obtain from him an invincible Army of heavenly Soldiers for the reskuing of me
out of mine enemies hands: but the Scriptures (manifesting the purpose and
decree of God) have foretold the contrary; and that I should thus be oppressed,
and afflicted, and made an Esaias 53. 7* 10.
offering for sin: which before he also professed to be the will of his Father,
v. 39. 42. So for Saul's coming to Keilah, it was a thing in it self possible,
and also Saul's purpose, and this the Lord saw, and foretold, but hindered by his
providence in sending away David, as he had fore-purposed in his counsel to
do, and thereby to hinder Saul's coming thither. These men should have said
thus, that God, always foreseeing, and sometimes foretelling, what in regard
of the nature of the things might be, and in respect of the disposition of the
persons would be, if they were not prevented; yet does prevent them effectually
by the work of his providence interposed, according to the decree of his will.
And this, so far as it looks toward the thing in hand, makes against them,
avowing a most powerful work of Gods providence, according to a most constant
will, overruling all dispositions of persons, and events of things. But for
them to say bluntly, as they do, that God fore-knows and fore-tels that things
will come to pass, and yet that those things may be prevented, is to accuse
the Lord himself, both of want of wisdom in discerning; and of truth in
speaking, and of power in working.

If any object, that God says, Saul will come to Keilah, I easily answer, that
God therein only fore-tels what was in Saul's will and purpose; which compared
with the event, shows that Saul's purpose of will was alterable, not Gods, in
whom there is neither change, nor shadow of changing; neither is Iam. 1. 17. ^
Sam. 14. 29.
he as man that he should repent. So the threatening of the Ninivits, as diverse
other particular, both threatenings and promises, are but upon condition,
sometimes expressed, and sometimes understood. It is ignorantly said, that a
thing will be which is promised or threatened conditionally, except it be
presupposed that the condition will be first. Alike impious (as accusing God,
both of being deceived and deceiving) is that which follows, that God knows,
and pronounces, that the wicked shall be damned, and yet that there is no
necessity of it, but that it may be prevented by repentance. This is to say,
that God knows, and says a thing shall be, when it may not be; yea, when he
knows it shall not be, as in them that do repent afterward.

If they say further, that wicked men may and shall be saved if they repent,
they say but as the truth is: but if thereupon they conclude of all simply,
that therefore they may either repent, or be saved, they err, not knowing the
nature of a conditional proposition: in which it is sufficient, if the
consequence or latter part follow truly upon the antecedent or former part;
though it may be, that neither consequent nor antecedent can possibly be. For
example, 1 Cor. 15. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 19, If there be no resurrection from
the dead, then is Christ not risen, and your faith is also in vain, etc. The
consequence is firm, If this, then that, and yet neither this nor that apart,
nor both together could possibly be.

ADVERSARIES.
THese men having, as they list, vilified Gods infallible Page 20.
knowledge, and unchangeable truth, come to his counsel, against which (say
they) things may be done, as Luke 7. 30, the Pharisees did against the counsel
of God: adding, that Christ knew those he admonished should perish, if they
repented not; yet there lay no necessity of their perishing because Christ knew
it, for as be testifies, repentance might help it.

DEFENSE.
IN the former place they commit the fallacy of equivocation, taking the word
counsel there for the internal and eternal decree of God in himself; When by
it, Act. 7. is meant only the outward instructions and exhortations ministered
by John Baptist.

Of salvation upon condition of repentance, I spoke even now that which is
sufficient, to which the Reader may look back.

Coming to answer certain scriptures, they begin with Page 20, 21* 22.
Prove. 16. 4. which they set down thus, God created all things for his own
sake, yea the wicked for the day of destruction, and so corupt the text whilst
they pretend the opening of ^t: for it is not said, that God created, but that
he made, that is, wrought, or did all things, as Psalm. 11. 3. and 15. 2. and
generally wheresoever the word is used. They therefore like unskilful workmen
make themselves labor, and loose it when they have done, in proving that God
created all men good, and none bad. Neither is it wholly true, much less the
whole truth, which they conclude as the meaning, that man becoming evil, God
made the day of destruction for him, or him for the day of destruction, as a
just recompense. For first, is it not all one (as they make it) to say, that
man is made for the day of destruction, and the day of destruction for man;
seeing the one imports the Lords work in or upon the person for the thing, and
the other in or upon the thing for the person. Secondly, they miss the meaning
of the place; which is, that all things in the world, yea wicked men* who seem
to live without all compass, yet come under the divine ordination; and that as
there is nothing so casual in regard of men, no not the casting of a lot, nor
falling of a Prove. 16. 23 Mat. 10. 29
sparrow upon the ground, but comes under the Lords disposition and providence:
so there is no person, nor thing in the world so evil, but he rules and
overrules it, as it may serve for the manifestation of his glory.

ADVERSARIES.
Unto the instances brought by us to prove Gods holy Page 23. etc
work, in and about men's sinful works, and Satan's with them: for example, Gods
bidding Shemei curse David; His stretching out his hand upon Job, and taking
away all that he had; His moving David to number Israel; sending a lying spirit
upon Ahabs Prophets, and the like: to all these they have their ready and round
answer, that God only suffered all these things, and that Satan and evil men
were the workers of them.

DEFENSE.
BUT first let the godly Reader, who will not oppose his own fleshly reason
against the wisdom of God, well weigh the most effectual and significatiue
terms that possibly can be used by the Holy Ghost every where, to show the
Lords powerful work in those matters, and not his bare sufferance; as if he
were only an idle looker on, letting men alone without meddling with them, in a
great part of the greatest, even all the evil works of their lives: For
example, that God sent Joseph into Egypt, and not his brethren; that he
hardened Pharaohs heart, Genesis 45. Exodus 4. and 9. Job. 1. 2. Sam. 16. 2. Sam.
24. 2. King. 22 Esaias 10. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and raised him up to show in him his power, etc. that the Lord gave, and that
the Lord took away from Job; that God bade Shimei curse David; that he moved
David against Israel, to say, Go number Israel and Judah: that he put a lying
spirit in the mouth of Ahabs prophets: that Asshur was a staff in the Lords
hand, and the rod of his anger: that he sent strong delusions upon them that
received not the love of the truth; and lastly, (to let pass infinite other
places) that God by his determinate counsel and foreknowledge, delivered
Christ into the hands of wicked men; and that they did what Gods hand and
counsel had determined before to be done.

Now, can we conceiu it to be for no more but a simple suffering, that the Holy
Ghost, who knew right well how to speak, should not once, nor twice, but I may
safely say, a thousand times in the Scriptures, use words and phrases importing
so effectual operation and working? Is to send men, to take away things, to
raise up, to use men as a staff in the hand, and bid them go, only to suffer
them, and let them be still, and alone? Surely the Art of Chimists is nothing
to these men's, in evaporeating; who can reduce those most just and powerful
works of God to a very nothing; for no more is a bare suffering then a not
doing.

But we will briefly, as may be, handle the particulars, following their
footsteps, who beginning with Shemei, allow Page 23.
God only the poor pittance of sufferance, for David's trial: 2 Samuel 16. 10.
But David himself will teach them better, in saying, the Lord has said to
him, Curse David: who shall then say, wherefore have thou done so? For first, if
God did only suffer, that is, not hinder Shemei, then God did not try David,
but only suffered Shemei to try him, which ^s false: Secondly, this was no^
only a trial, but specially a punishment, or correction of his former sins,
and therefore laid upon him by God: but whether it were trial, or correction,
or both, it was in that respect good, and of God as the Author. Gods suffering
of Shemei could not be his trial of David. It was Shemei who was suffered; but
David who was tried and punished, who therefore bore it with the perceings of a
tender and humble heart, as Gods just work in ordering the malice of Shemei to
become his rod of correction.

Of Jobs afflictions, it is also presumptuously said by them, that God only
suffered them. Job speaking of his nakedness, and misery, says expressly, that
as the Lord had given, so the Lord Job 1. 21.
had taken away. They may as well say, the Lord only suffered the giving, as
that he only suffered the taking away of Jobs substance. He ascribes both
alike to the Lord, in regard of his providence ordering things according to
their kinds. Neither is there sense to imagine, that Job so blesses God for
only letting the devil, and wicked men alone, to work their malice upon him,
and his; but as by the eye of faith he saw the hand of God (to be blessed for
ever) ordering and determining the same to his own holy ends. Can any man
bless God merely for suffering the devil to hurt him? So God in 2 Samuel 24. 1
moving David to number Israel, did not only suffer him and Satan to do their
work, but did his own also by them, though they thought not so, in ordering the
malice of the one, and pride of the other, to a just occasion of punishing
Israel, against whom his anger was kindled; and this agrees well with both the
proportion of faith, and generality of the Scriptures.

The same in effect is to be said of the lying spirits seducing Page 24. 1
King. 22.
Ahabs Prophets, in which God neither puts malice into the devil, nor flattery
into the hearts of false Prophets; but finding them there before, and that of
themselves, uses them by a most powerful and skillful hand to the furthering
of the deserved destruction of a wicked King. And where they say, the
controversy is, who was the first cause of this cursing, envy, pride, and
deceit, they miserably deceive themselves and others. We abhor from saying
that God is either first or last cause of any wicked thing; but of the trial
or punishment, or other good in the ordering of the wicked thing; as the just
Judge may use the malice or cruel disposition of the Exequutioner for the
exercising of just punishment upon the malefactor. Page 25.
Neither do we say (as they dream) that cursing, envy etc. are good in God,
and wicked in the devil, and man; This is impossible: but we say, that the
ordering of them, and of the persons in whom they are, is good in God, either
for trial, or punishment. For example, of such as go to war, and take means,
one is moved thereto, because he would not work; another in hope of booty and
prey; a third being weary of wife or friends; and so others, in the like
corrupt respects: And yet the King, or Captain may use and order them all, and
all their corrupt ends and intendments to his most just and lawful ends, and
intentions, either in offensive, or defensive wars. And if one frail man can
make this lawful use of the lawless and sinful lusts of other men, should
proud flesh quarrel at Gods most infinite power and wisdom in his just and
holy works? Or will they (vain men) conjure him herein within the narrow circle
of their understanding? Denying him at all to have any hand in working, where
they (blind molles) cannot discern how he works? O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and Romans 11. 3^
knowledge of God? how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? cried he, who yet could far better discern of them, then they,
or we. In opening Esa. 10. 5. 6, they speak the truth, and that which we
intend, though presently after they devour the hallowed thing. They say well,
that Page 26.
one wicked Nation was sent to punish another, which thing (say they) was good
from God; namely, to punish the wickedness of some by others as wicked, and
that this is Gods justice, though they thought not so. Very well said; God
justly punishes the Jews by the Assirians; and how does he that his just
work? By the Assirians invading and spoiling them; and no other way: This Esa.
10. 6. 7 12. 13. etc.
invading, spoiling, and murdering of Israel, was the Assirians horrible sin,
which therefore the Lord hated with great h^tred, and punished accordingly. Here
then we have plainly the sins of men (and therefore wicked, in regard of them
the doers) avowed for the judgments of God, and in that regard just and holy:
Their daring any tongue to say, that the delusion mentoned, 2 Thessalonians. 2, comes
from God otherwise, then by suffering the devil to delude, is but the fruit of
th^i^ bold ignorance, with which they abuse unstable minds. As the devil and
menss^lues, are the only authors of these delusions in themselves considered;
so are there diverse effectuali works of God in and about them. The first thing
indeed is, Gods permission or sufferance of the Devil to exercise his malice
to hurt, wherein (as they rightly say) he and his children takes delight; but
this is rather a not-work of God then a work; namely, a not restraining, or
hindering him. Gods next work is to order and direct Satan's malice upon the
persons so deluded, that so they may receive a punishment proportionable to
their sins, both for quality and quantity. A third work of God is in them, in
depriving them of the knowledge and discerning of the truth, which they
formerly had, without the love thereof, as the Scriptures testify. What should
I say more? These Adversaries elsewhere, being set upon the rack, by the
evidence of the place, thus speak, God will have them to be seduced, thereby to
punish them: confessing therein, their seduction to be a punishment, and therein
good and Gods work, and that which God wills also, as they expressly affirm. The
devil wills their Page 31.
seduction as a hurt to them; they will it, as a thing pleasing to them; God
wills it as a punishment of them: which last, to wit, a punishment, nothing is
in it self, but by way of relation put upon it, by the Judge.

ADVERSARIES.
AND here, to thrust God from the government of the Page 27.
world, they take upon them to prove, that in this, and the like cases, Gods
sending is nothing but suffering: their proof is, for that the holy
Evangelists making relation of the devils possessing and drowning the swine,
where one of them says that Christ sent them, another says, that he suffered
them to enter into them* Math. 8. 31. 32, Mat. 5. 12. 13, Luke 8. 32.

DEFENSE.
BUT first I would know how they can prove, that though in one place, where no
punishment is directly intended, suffering and sending be all one, therefore
they are all one in all other places, where the Lord properly and professedly
intends a punishment? Secondly, I deny, that sending and suffering are here all
one: but as we find in many other places, so in this, that which one Evangelist
relates, though truly, yet not so fully, that another sets down more thoroughly
with all the parts. Luke says, He suffered them, and this is true; Matthew
says, He sent them, and this is the same which Luke says, and more; namely,
together with the suffering of them, the directing and determining also of
their malice this way, for the Lords most holy, though unknown ends. And if the
Lord in this case only suffered them, and let them alone, then it should
follow, that the creature does some actions, wherein he is wholly left to
himself without Gods meddling with him, or ruling of him. But to come nearer
the matter, I would know of these men, when two Evangelists or Prophets set
down the same thing in diverse words, the one in more sparing and strait, and
the other in more large terms; whether we be not to expound the strayter by
the larger, and not the larger by the strayter, except there be some apparent
restraint; The Evangelist Matthew, relating the miracle done by Christ upon
Peter's mother says, He touched her hand, and Mat. 8. 15. Mark. 1. 31
the fever left her: Mark says, He took her by the hand and the fever left
her. Should we now say, that to take her by the hand, and lift her up, were
nothing but to touch her hand? Or say we not truly, that Mark said the same
thing which Matthew does, and more also: so is it in Christ's suffering and
sending the devils. More plainly yet. We read, how upon the death of Absalom,
Ahimaz the Priest being very desirous 2 Samuel 18* 22. 23.
to be the messenger thereof to David, importunes Ioab greatly to let him run,
and again to let him run. Ioab at the last condiscends, and says to him run,
and so v. 29, Ahimaz expressly affirms that Ioab sent him to David. He therefore
both suffered him to go, and sent him. He suffered him, as having a desire of
himself; and sent him also, as his messenger to the King. So Christ both
suffered the devils, as desiring to possess the swine rather then to be cast
into the deep; and also sent them, as ordering their malice to that object, and
none other, for the trial of the Gergesenes.

In the next place, follows to be considered of, the sending of Joseph into
Egypt, touching which, let these two things only be added to the things
spoken, for the opening of the former instances. First, that Joseph expressly
says, not only that God sent him into Aegipt, but that he sent him thither to
Genesis 45. 5. 7. 8.
preserve life, which was Gods end, and not his brethrens, and therefore depends
upon Gods work, not upon theirs: but withal, that it was not they that sent
him thither, but God. Joseph here makes God (in a respect) a greater doer then
his brethren: these men shut God quite out, and makes him only a sufferer, or
one that left others alone, and meddles not with them. His brethren sold him,
but God sent him; that is, used their envious injury to his own gracious work,
both toward him and them, and much other people, whom by his means he kept
alive. Secondly, and for conclusion, let this be observed, that Joseph speaks
of Gods sending him, to comfort his brethren in their sorrow and fear, for the
evil they had done to him. But I would know, what comfort it could be to their
perplexed hearts, to think, that God suffered them to do wickedly, that is,
hindered them not? Can any man having grace, yea common sense, take comfort in
this, that God leaves him to himself to do wickedly, and hinders him not? A
miserable comforter would this miserable exposition have made Joseph to have
been. Whereas by the other and true sense, though their sin were nothing the
less, yet Gods providence appears the greater, and more gracious, in ordering
their envy and malice to such an event as it had, whence no small comfort did
accrue unto them.

Of the death of Christ, and Gods work in giving him Page 30,
thereunto, even to the cursed death of the cross, by the hands of the wicked,
I have formerly spoken at large, and will not Page 4, 5. 6. 7. 8.
repeat the same things. Only, I cannot but tax their allegation of Vrsinus as
most vain, who in the place not^d by them opposes Gods permission, to his
willing, and working of sin, as sin, and so God indeed only permits, and
neither wills, nor works sin, as sin. Otherwise, all that have but once looked
unto Vrsinus know, how vehemently he impugneth that imagination of bare
permission, avowing the effectual work of Gods providence in and about sin: as
both working the actions themselves, which he calls the materials of sin, and
withdrawing ^ee Vrsinus of the divine Providence.
his grace; and withal, destinating, directing, and bringing to their ends,
the same actions.

That of Amos 3. 6, is misapplyed (if by any alleged) and so easily answered.

The last place which they take upon them to answer is Ioh. 12, 39. 40,
Therefore they* (to wit, the Jews, before whom Page 31. 32
Christ had done so many miracles) could not beleev, because that verse. 3^.
Esaias had said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts that
they should not see, etc.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir answer, after diverse incongruous forms of speech, and some truths among,
is, that this, and the like places affirm, that they winked with their eyes,
lest they should see, for which cause, God gave them up to this reprobate sense.

DEFENSE.
THat is, (they being interpreters) for winking with their eyes lest they
should see, God gave them up to wink with their eyes, lest they should see.
Thus, by this untoward construction, the same thing is the cause and effect of
it self; their winking with their eyes, of their winking with their eyes. It
is certain, that this reprobate mind in wilful ignorance, and obduration was
their proper sin; and as certain that it was Gods just judgment upon their
former sins, by his ordering thereunto their corruption; and therefore Christ
spoke to them in parables (which were dark without exposition) Mat. 4. 10. 11.
and expounded them when he was alone to them, which were about him: rendering
thereof this reason, because it was Mat. 13. 1^
given to them, namely to his Disciples, to know the mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, but unto them that were without, all things were done in parables, that
seeing they might see, and not perceiv, etc. and so Matthew says, this was
given to the one, and not chapter 11. 26*
given to the other: whereof also, elsewhere, he renders the highest reason,
because so it seems good in Gods sight: who has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will, he Romans 9. 8
hardens.

Their alleging of Austin against the heathenish desteny, which they held to
come from the stars, is frivolous, and impious against Gods infinitely wise
and powerful providence, in governing all things in heaven and earth. In
regard whereof, the same Father says, that the things which are done against
Gods will, are not done without his will: viz. ordering, and directing them to
their ends. And if the penners of this book were not void, either of all
knowledge of the Authors judgment, whom they cite, or modesty in themselves,
they would never alledg Austin and Ursinus as patrons of their errors about
the divine Predestination, and other points thereupon depending: then whom the
Synod at Dort has none (the one of former, and other of later times) more
clearly witnessing with it, and all the best Reformed Churches, in those
matters.

CHAP. II.
Of Election.

THeir first head of Predestination being ended, they Page 34. 35
come next to Election: which they consider, not as a part of the former with
the Scriptures, and all good Authors; but as clean another thing. But what,
may rather be guessed, then gathered from their words.

And first, in laying down the supposed errors of their Adversaries concerning
Election, they do us and the truth, manifold injuries, as the Reader may
evidently see, who pleases to compare with their calumnies, the Confession of
the Synod Of divine Predestination, Art. 7.
thereabout, which is, Electio autem est immutabile Dei ^rop^stium etc.
Election is the unchangeable purpose of God, by which, before the foundation of
the world were laid, out of all mankind, fallen from its primative integrity into
sin, and destruction, by i^s own fault, according to the most free good
pleasure of his will, he out of his mere grace, has chosen to salvation in
Christ, a certain multitude of such as were neither better, nor more worthy
then others, but lying in the common misery with others: whom (to wit Christ)
he has appointed from eternity for Mediator and Head of the elect: and
accordingly to give them to him to be saved* and to call and draw them
effectually to fellowship with, him by his word and Spirit: or has decreed to
bestow upon them true faith to justify, sanctify, and at the length being
powerfully kept in the fellowship of his Son, to glorify them, for the
declaration of his mercy* and praise of the riches of his glorious grace, as it
is written: He has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and without blame in his sight, with love; having
predestined us to the adoptien of children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will: to the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in that beloved one. Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. 6.
And elsewhere; Whom he has predestined, them also he has called; and whom
he has called, them also he has justified; and whom he has justified, them
also he has glorified, Romans 8. 30.

And by this joint Confession, all equal Readers will judge of the faith of
the Evangelicall Churches in this point, and not by the partial and perverse
relations of such Adversaries, as catch here and there a piece divided from the
rest* and ometimes altering the words, always perverting the meaning, thereby
cast stumbling stones in their own, and others way.

ADVERSARIES.
THese things premised, the particulars follow: the first whereof is a
similitude brought, as they say by us to exemplify Page 34. ^^ 36.
our opinion by, of a physician entering into the house of sick men and curing
some, and that for nothing; who are bound to thank him; and not cureing others
who have no cause to complain of him, because he ows them nothing. This
similitude they except against as that in which comparison is made between a
physician, who has little mercy in him in healing but a few, and ^^aving
infinite numbers unhealed and God and Christ, who are most merciful, saying
Come unto me (all) that are laden, and I Mat. 11. 28
will ease you. They therefore to correct this, will have Christ compared to a
Physician truly merciful, that going into the house of sick men, proclaims,
that he will heal all that will take a medicine; which some taking are cured,
others refusing, because it is bitter, as to Deny a man's self, Take up his
cross and follow Mat. 11. 24
Christ, remain uncured.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, the Scripture by them cited for their catholic cure, is violently
stretched above it reach. For, neither are all in the world, no nor a handful
(in comparison of the rest) laden, as Christ there speaks; that is, feeling and
groaning under the intolerable burden of sin, and of the wrath of God due
thereunto. This did very few of the other Jews, and fewer of the Pharisees, who
thought themselves righteous: neither does Christ so call (and therefore not
offer to cure) by the preaching of the Gospel, every particular person in the
world, from the beginning to the end thereof. This truthlesse, and shameless
assertion we shall have occasion hereafter to confute at large. In the mean
while, the place alleged proves only thus much, that Christ, the good
Physician offers to cure all that come to him, by the preaching of the Gospel,
with feeling of their sins, and faith in his death, and no more.

Secondly, even for them that come to Christ, and are effectually healed by
him; these men err (not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God for the
conversion of sinners) in affirming that he does no more but provide the
medicine of grace, and outwardly persuade to the receiving of it: or that there
is (which they take wrongfully for granted) the same natural power in a wicked
man to receiv grace offered by the Gospel, that there is in a sick man to take
the medicine offered him by the Physician. This capital error of theirs is in
this place to be refuted, and the contrary truth to be cleared; namely, that
for the effectual converting of men, God not only provides the medicine
(Christ and his benefits) and by the Gospel exhorts to the rece^t thereof; and
so leaves men to their own freewill indifferently without further doing: But
that w^thall, and above the former, he, by the inw^id work of h^s holy Sp^^it
given them, makes effectual the outward means, in opening the heart to attend
to the things spoken, with reverence; in inlightning the understanding to
discern and assent unto the same things, as true and good, and that with
particular applications; in bending the will efficaciously to consent to the
same; and all the affections of the soul to love and like them.

But before this be done by us, it is meet we answer an objection Page 3^*
or two, rather insinuated, then expressly made by them. Their words are, which
also, as appears by the mark in the margent, they would have accounted
remarkable, that Christ is willing and able to cure men by the means by which
they are curable, and not by the means by which they cannot be cured: for that
his power herein is subject to his will, and his will is, that they should take
the medicine.

The substance of their objection is, that God will not, and therefore cannot
cure men otherwise then by their receiving the med^cine offered, Christ and his
benefits. Very true, God w^ll not, nor can so do by his revealed will, which
to us is the rule of his power. But where they say; that Gods power is subject
to his will, this must be otherwise understood, then as they do; conceiving it
to be of that work of his will, by which he appoints others what they shall
do: whereas it is to be understood of that work of his will, by which he
appoints in himself what he will do, in or about others. As where it is said,
The Lord is in heaven, and does whatsoever Psalm. 15. ^^
pleases him; (that is, whatsoever he wills:) the meaning is not, that he does,
or that his power is ruled by what he commands others to do, but by his will
or purpose of doing himself what pleases him. God so wills the conversion of
all, to whom the Gospel comes, as to command the same, and to approve it where
it is: but he wills the conversion of some, namely the elect, with another and
further intention of will, setting a work the power of his Spirit in their
hearts effectually, and as they speak irresistably to convert them; by Ezech.
11. 19, and chap. 36. 26. 27.
taking away their stony heart, and giving them an heart of flesh, and by
putting his Spirit within them, and causing them to walk in his statutes. Gods
power then is not subject to his commanding will always to work alike, where
he commands alike: but it is subject to his purpose of will in himself,
according to the good pleasure thereof to work, or not to work by means of his
commanding will. The Arguments of proof Mat. 25. 26 Romans 8. 30 Ephesians. 1. 9.
distinctly follow.

1 Arg. To receiv Christ and his grace, is to beleev in him; this believing, or
faith by which we are saved, is the gift of God, Ioh. 1. 12. Ephesians. 2. 8.
and not of our selves: So as not only the medicine it self, and offer of it,
but also the hand to receiv it with (which is faith, and a believing heart) is
Gods gift. The Physician offers and gives to the receiver the medicine, but not
the heart and hand ^o receiv it: but God gives these also to them that do
receiv Christ's justification and sanctification and salvation by him. If it be
said, that God gives faith by preaching, and exhortation to receiv it, though
he add no further work: I answer, that then God gives this gift and grace of
faith, as well, and as much to them that receiv it not, but remain still
unbeleevers, as to them that beleev: yea more to many unbeleevers, as having
more, and more excellent outward means, then many that receiv it. It is
therefore absurd to say, that God gives faith, or to beleev, unto him that
never believes; specially faith being such a gift, as has no existence, but in
the heart of him that believes. 2 Arg. The Apostle elsewhere pronounces all
men, either ^ Cor. 2. 14 15.
spiritual or natural: Of the natural man he testifies; that he does not,
nor can discern of themselves the things of God, but that they are foolishness
unto him; but of the spiritual, that he discerns of such things and receivs
them. The natural man he neither does nor can, the spiritual he both can and
does. What is it then that of the natural makes the spiritual man, that can do
these great things; the bare publishing and proclaiming of this spiritual and
gracious medicine in and by Christ? Not so: for too many alas, remain natural
still, to whom the Gospel of grace is very plenteously preached. What then. Is
it his freewill to receiv it, to whom it is preached? Not so, neither: for his
will is but the will of a natural man, who neither does, nor can discern and
receiv the things of God, till he become spiritual. It is then Gods holy
Spirit, which he gives to one that hears the Gospel, and not to another; which
makes one hearer spiritual, and not another: thereby changing both the will,
and whole man of him to whom he gives it. 3 Arg. A third is taken from 1. Cor.
3. 6. 7. Paul plants, 1 Cor. 3. 6. 7
Apollo waters, but God gives the increase. And, Neither he that plan^eth is
any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase. The
Corinthians did too highly advance the Ministers by them factiously adhered
unto, as is evident; setting them in Christ's, and Gods place: the Apostle
thereupon pulls them down, and sets them in their own place, showing that
except God* and a further work then their preaching, how sound and excellent
soever, all ^s nothing. But by these men's device, there needs no further work
of grace from God, then the gracious proclamation made by preaching, to be
received by man's free will: and so Gods further work of giving the increase, is
quite shut out. 4. Arg. When the Jews, Ioh. 6. murmured at Christ's Ioh. 6 44.
words, he to stop their mouths, and to prevent his Disciples offence-taking,
says, that No man comes unto him, except the father, which sent him, draw
him. If any say, that God draws men to Christ by the preaching of the Gospel,
it is true, but not to the purpose of the place: for so the Jews were drawn
that came not, as well as they that came and believed. There is then requisite
that men may come to Christ, Verse. 47.
or believe on him, a further drawing, then that by the outward preaching
only. Not that God draws men, as horses draw a cart, or by any violence, or
compulsion against, or without their will; but that he makes them by the inward
work of his Spirit (joined with the outward word) of unwilling, willing,
effectually driveing away ignorance and rebellion; and so enlightening the
mind, as to as^^ns, and the will, to consent. 5 Arg. Lastly, these adversaries
suffering their merciful 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25.
Physician to go no further then the proclaiming and offering of the medicine
of grace to the sick of sin, do therein make many despisers of all grace and
goodness, (so living and dying* and perishing for ever) more bound and beholden
to God, and his grace, then many other the most faithful, holy, and happy
servants of Christ. The reason is plain; for that many liveing and dying
impenitent, have had the Gospel in a far more full and plenteous manner and
measure published and preached unto them, with all other outward motives and
provocations of grace; then many that truly beleev and repent. These
adversaries to the grace of God, would make the faithful servants of God more
Pharisaicall then the Pharisees themselves; with whom they consort in diverse
points of their faith. The Pharisee that went up with the Publican into the
Temple Luke 18. 10 ^1.
to pray, yet thanked God that he was not like other men as extortioners,
unjust, etc. nor as the Publican: But by these men's doctrine, we should thank
our selves, ^f we be not like the wicked and graceless men, and not God: for
God, by their saying, has not done so much for many of us, as for many of
them, who have enjoyed more excellent outward means of grace offered, then many
of the others. Oh you the followers of these guides; yea, you the guides your
selves, call to remembrance the days of your ignorance, and prophanenes,
(specially diverse of you) before your first conversion to the Lord and
consider whether you were not deeper rooted in sin, then many others, who yet
have not received the grace which you have done, to beleev, and repent; and
give the glory to Gods grace, and not to your own free will, that you beleev,
repent, and obey, rather then they. Be not unmindfull of this unspeakable
mercy of God toward you above others, equal and above you in the enjoying of
outward means, least it come to ^o appear in time, that you were never indeed
partakers thereof.
ADVERSARIES.
NExt, they come to show what Election is, laying down for Page 36. 37. 38. 39.
etc.
that end, at large, the Parable of the marriage of the Kings son, Math. 22. and
infisting specially upon the Lords conclusion, verse. 14. Many are called, but
few are chosen: inferring thereupon, that it was the Kings will and pleasure,
that all (the bidden guests) should come and bring their wedding garment.

DEFENSE.
THE Scripture we acknowledge, and their inference: but both affirm and have
proved, that, besides and above this will of God in bidding, and inviteing the
guests (common ^o those that came not, and that came; and to those that came
with, and without the wedding garment) there was a further work of Gods
pleasure, and will toward the Elect vessels of mercy, setting awork his
powerful spirit in their hearts, to make them willing to come, and that
furnished, as they ought. And so often as these men (as they do it very often)
do urge the will of God, that men should believe, repent, and be saved, so often
the Reader must call to mind this distinction. First, that this will of God
extends but to such persons, as to whom the Gospel (the only means of
inviting men) is preached. Secondly, that toward those that do effectually
believe and repent, there is also a further degree of Gods good will and
pleasure, according to which he reveals unto them effectually Mat. 11. 25 Act.
16. 14 Act. 13. 18 2. Tim. 2* 25.
heavenly things; opens their hearts to attend to the things spoken, and gives
them to beleev and repent upon their hearing; as the peculiar fruit of their
eternal election.

Their spiritual sense also of the parable I acknowledge. But whereas Ereunetes
sees, that Election consists in the wedding garment, and righteousness of
Christ, which is Christ himself, whom the faithful do put on by faith and
obedience: He sees that which is not to be seen, and sees not that which is
plain enough. Who having common sense, will say, that Christ and his
righteousness; and the choosing of a man, or his election, are all one? Christ
is not our election, but he in whom we are chosen, or elected. Neither is our
putting on of Christ by faith and obedience, Ephesians. 1. 4.
our election; as they unskilfully make it. Election is Gods work, not ours;
for it is God that clruseth us, and not we our selves: but the putting on of
Christ by faith and obedience, is our work by Gods grace, and not Gods. God
does not believe and obey, but we by his grace.

Now before we come to refute their opinion about Election, hereafter laid down
more plainly, but here more confusedly, with certain scriptures, rather heaped
together then orderly brought for their purpose; it is expedient we examine a
distinction brought by them of this divine Election, by occasion of an
objection from Ephesians. 1. 4. which is, that election is either in the decree or
purpose of God only; or else effectually Page 42. 43
and particularly made, as they speak. This distinct on in a good sense (but
not in theirs) is good and true. For God elects men before the world, or before
they be, in his decree and purpose only. But it must withal be considered,
that this election is also (in Gods purpose) actual and particular before the
world. Nothing in God is potentiall, b^t all actual. Otherwise there should be
imperfection in God, as all potentials are, being to be perfected by their
actualities. They should therefore say, that Gods election of some particulars,
was only in his decree before the world, and is by him in time brought into
actual execution. And here also it must be minded, that whereas all the
question (in effect) amongst all, is about election as before the world, and in
Gods eternal decree: they (in effect) pass that wholly by, and only treat of
it, as God in time puts that in decree in actual execution.

Now though their reasoning of election here be full of confusion and
contradiction, as any judicious Reader may see, ^^d such as out of which their
meaning can hardly be picke^^ yet this is plain, that they will have it to
depend upon the condition of faith and repentance going before, affirming
expressly, that those persons in whom God finds faith and obedience, them he
electeth to salvation in his son, of mere mercy, for the quality which he
finds in them. But now wherein this election properly stands, they neither
show us, nor understand themselves, as is plain by their cross and unconstant
assertions of and about it; wherein yet they are so peremptory and bold, as if
they carried all by plain demonstration of undoubted truth. What course then
are we to hold with them? Considering it is with them as Solomon speaks of the
harlot, who was loud and stubborn, whose feet abode not in the house, but she
was now without, Prove. 7.
now in the streets, and laying wayt in every corner. I have no other way but
to pursue them into, and hunt them out of every corner, where they lie in wayt
to deceive.

First then for Math. 22. Many are called, but few chosen, It must be noted,
that there are three degrees of men's calling to Christ. The first, when the
Gospel is preached, but the so called refuse wholly to answer and come: so were
the first guests Verse. 3.
called. The second is, when men are persuaded to come after a manner, and in
some show, but without truth of faith and repentance; and so he came who wanted
the wedding garment. Verse. 11.
The third is, when men come in true faith and obedience, as they ought; and so
the rest of the guests came. Of this third and last degree of calling the
Apostle speaks, saying, Whom Romans 8. ^ ^
he predestined them also he called; whom he called, them also he justified;
and whom he justified them also he glorified. This cannot be said of either of
the two former sorts of called, but of the latter only.

And for the Election here spoken of, it may well be understood of the eternal
election in Gods decree; the fruits and wholesome effects whereof this
unprepared guest shows himself not to be made partaker of, though he
participated of the outward calling, even to the making of some show of that
which in truth he wanted. And as the Apostle affirms of the Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. 5. 13.
Ephesians, that they were elect of God in Christ before the foundation of the
world, in regard of the faith and holiness appearing in them: so might the Lord
well say of this, and other (his like) hypocrites, and unsanctified ones; that
they are not of the number of the elect, or chosen in Gods eternal decree, so
far as their present state manifests. Neither is it the meaning of the Lord in
those words simply to reprove him for not having on a wedding garment; but for
coming thither and not having it on. Friend, how come thou hither, not having
on a Math. 22. ^. 12.
wedding garment? and so to warn others to make sure their election, and not to
content themselves with the show of obedience, without inward truth. And taking
the words thus, they make for our, and against their opinion.

Or take the words as meant of the actual execution of election, and that in
the largest sense, so as in the same be comprehended whatsoever God does in
time, for the effectual procuring of a man's salvation; as of the giving of
Christ for him, of the Gospel to him, and by it faith and holiness, and the
spirit of adoption; and so glory in the end: and we say, all this he does
according to his eternal purpose of election, effectual only in those who
are made partakers of the inward calling, and wedding garment thereby, and not
in all that are called outwardly. For known unto the Lord are all his works
from the beginning of the world. Whatsoever God does in time, that he Act. 15.
18
purposed to do from eternity, as he does it. But take election Page 39. 42
43. 44.
as these men do in most places, and which seems likewise to be their meaning
upon best advise; for that first work of mercy in God by which he actually and
particularly, as they speak, chooses persons to salvation; they err with great
error in holding that this election is for the quality which God finds in
persons, and upon the condition of faith and repentance going before, and that
God only chooses and electeth where he finds faith and obedience to his son.

For first, the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1. 4. that we are chosen Ephesians. 1. 4.
in Christ (to wit, as the mediator and means of communicating all spiritual
blessings with us) before the foundation of the world was laid, that we might
be holy and unblameable in love before him. This is meant (our adversaries
granting it) of the decree of election: the meaning therefore must needs be,
that God has from eternity decreed to elect or choose us in time actually, not
because we should or would be holy, as these men perversely imagine, but that we
might be holy. As God from eternity purposed to choose men, so he chooses them
actually in time: But he purposed from eternity to choose men that they might be
holy, and therefore actually in time chooses them, that they might be holy, and
unblameable before him; and therefore not because they are holy, or beleev and
obey. Gods actual choosing therefore goes before our actual faith, holiness,
repentance, and obedience, as the cause; and follows them not, as an effect, as
they mis-judge. The same is confirmed from v. 5, where we are said to be
predestined to Verse. 5.
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ: With which join that, Romans 8. 30,
Whom he predestined, them also he called, and whom he called, them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified. To be elected, to
wit, in decree, and to be predestined (in the good part, as here) are the
same in substance: only, we are said to be predestined in respect of the
supernatural ends, (and means leading thereunto) unto which God in time
brings us; and to be elect, or chosen in respect of others, from whom God
selecteth us. Now, if we be predestined of Christ to the adoption of
children, then not because we are children or beleev, which are the same, Ioh.
1. 12. To this purpose it is, that the Lord so often by Moses beats upon this,
that he chose the Israelits to be his people, out of his love to them, and love
and promise to their Deuteronomy. 4. 35. chapter 7. 7. 8, chapter 14. 2.
Fathers: excluding all other motives, and placing the cause of his choosing
them in himself alone, and his love, and the stability of his purpose and
promise. Moses testifyeth, that God chose them that they might be a holy and
peculiar people unto the Lord: But these men will make God begin at the other
end, and choose men because they are an holy and peculiar people, that is,
having faith, and repentance going before.

Ioyn we with this, that in the Psalm: Blessed be the man whom thou chusest,
and causest to approach unto thee, that he may Psalm. 65. 4.
dwell in thy courts; we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, of
thy holy Temple Faith then and holiness are not the fore found conditions for
which God chooses a man: but the actual conferring and giving of them,
according to an eternal purpose, is the very actual choosing of him: even that
by which God severs, elects, selects, and chooses him out of the mass of the
wicked. Every man's common sense will teach this. All are of themselves, and by
nature, sinners, and subject to wrath. Now what is it for God actually to choose
some from the rest, but to bestow that upon them actually and effectually, by
which they differ actually from the rest, which is faith and repentance. God
does not therefore (as these adversaries imagine) choose, upon condition of faith
and repentance going before: but does, by the very bestowing of these graces of
faith and repentance, which others want, choose, elect, select and sever
actually from others, the elected from eternity in his decree.

Lastly, by the cross doctrine of these men, we should choose God, before God
choose us; for by believing and obeying, we choose God to be our God; and for
this (by their crooked rule) God after chooses us to be his people. Thus proud
flesh will needs be before hand with God. But Christ our Lord leads us another
way, saying; You have not chosen Job. 15. 16.
me, but I have chosen you, to wit, first: which he speaks, not only of their
Apostolical, but of their Christian state also, as the words following make it
plain, that whatsoever ye shall Iam. 1. 6. ^ Job. 3. 22.
ask of the Father in my Name, he may give it you; Unto the state of faith
and obedience only does this promise appertain.

Their assertion thus disproved, we will come to their proofs, which are
partly impertinent, and partly against themselves. The first is, The Lord
chooses to himself a righteous man. The place, which is Psalm. 4. 3, they note
not, for what purpose they best know: but all may know it is grossly perverted,
a^ not being meant of David's election to salvation, but to the Kingdom of
Israel; whose glory that way his adversaries would have turned unto shame, but
all in vain, v. 3. But consider we this choice in proportion to the other, and
see what follows. Gods actual choosing of David to the Kingdom of Israel, was
that by which he had first actual right to that Kingdom, to which he had right
before, only in Gods decree, and of which afterward he had possession. So
Gods actual choosing of a man to the Kingdom of heaven, is that by which he
has first actual right to that Kingdom, to which he had no right before, save
in Gods decree. Gods choosing a man therefore actually (as they speak) to the
Kingdom of heaven, is the very giving of him faith and holiness; for by these
he has this actual right to eternal life and glory. If therefore Gods choosing
men actually (opposed to his choosing them in decree) be his giving them actual
faith and repentance, then their faith and repentance goes not before Gods
choice, but on the contrary, his choosing before their believing. The giving of
the grace by God, must needs go before the having of it by men.

With like success, they quote, Romans 9. 25, and ^ Pet. 2. 10* etc. which have
no show of ground, whereon to build their assertion, that God chooses men
actually and particularly because they beleev and repent: but most firm
foundation for the contrary truth; Men become Gods people, and beloved
actually, by actual faith and repentance: which before were his, and beloved
only, in the purpose of his will, according to election, Romans 9. 11. 13, and
elect, according to Gods foreknowledge, 1 Pet. 1. 2, God therefore actually
choosing men, and making them his people, and beloved (which are all one) by
Ephesians. 2. 8* 2 Timothy 2. 2^
giving them to beleev and repent: their believing and repenting cannot go
before his choosing them, but the contrary. The giving of the gift, is in nature
before the having and using of it by him to whom it is given; and therefore
^ods choosing them, which is his giving them faith and repentance, is before
their believing, and repenting.

The next place, being Romans 11. 5. 7, they set down craftily thus: v. 5, If
they seek righteousness by faith, and these are the the elect according to the
election of grace. The words of the Apostle are; So then at this time also,
there is a remnant, according to the election of grace: and v. 7, the election
has obtained it, and the rest were hardened. The thing obtained was, the
righteousness chap. 10. 3. 6
of God, and of faith; the wedding garment, the righteousness which Israel
obtained not, because they went about to stablish their own righteousness: but
the election obtained it by believing; ^. 4.
even that remnant whereof Paul was one, according to the election of grace.
What can be more plain against these men? Or how can any more directly cross
the Apostle, then they do? The Apostle says, we obtain the righteousness of
faith, which is the wedding garment, according to the election of grace: They
say, we obtain the election of grace according to the wedding garment, and
righteousness of faith and obedience. The Apostle says, the election obtains
the righteousness of Christ by faith: they say, the righteousness of Christ by
faith, obtains the election: turning Gods work upside down, that they may
establish their own. Besides this proud exaltation, and Babylonish building of
men's works against Gods grace (for if it be of obedience, as they say, then of
works, to wit, the works of obedience) the Apostle v. 6, clean overturns,
saying. If by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace: but if it be of works, then it is no more grace, otherwise works is no
more works.

In alleging from 2 Pet. 1. 10, that this election must be made sure, they, as
before, craftily conceal part of the Apostles words, which being laid down, as
the Text has them, overthrow plainly their error. The words are, Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure. He joins calling and election
together: they leav calling out. And herein I commend them, as the master did
the unrighteous steward, for doing wisely* ^ Pet. 1. 2. Iam. 2. 5. Ephesians. 1. 4. 1
Cor. 1. 2. ^ Pet. 1. 3.
though not honestly. For who knows not, that Gods calling us, goes before our
answering him by faith, and obedience, as the cause thereof? God calls (and also
elects) men to faith, and obedience, and not for them. The Apostles meaning is,
that the faithful should use all godly care for the establishing and
confirming of themselves in the grace of God, to which they were formerly called
and chosen.

The like profane boldness, they use toward, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4, where for the
Apostles text, Knowing beloved your election of God; or, Knowing, beloved of
God, your election, they put their own gloss, The household of faith, the
Church of God, are the elect of God. The Apostle, v. 4, mentions his knowledge
of their election, and v. 5. 6, the ground of that his knowledge* and
persuasion, which was their faith and obedience by receiving the Word by him
preached. They were not therefore made elect of God, by faith and obedience,
but thereby known for such by men.

Col. 3. 12, makes against them also; where their election is mentioned as a
reason to move them to put on bowels of mercy, and all goodness. As indeed the
gracious purpose of Gods election, with his effectual calling follows, and
manifest^th, is the only Evangelicall motive to all earnest study of obedience.

Their assertion following, that Election is not of particular Page 39.
persons, but of qualities, is monstrous, and most cross to the Scriptures,
which never mention election of qualities, but always of persons. Is the
meaning of Christ, Math. 22. Many are called, but few chosen, that many
qualities are called, and few chosen? What quality but of sin, and misery, sees
the Lord in them whom he calls? Or how can qualities be either called, or
chosen to grace or glory? Christ tells his Disciples, Ioh. 15. 19*
that he had chosen them out of the world. If they were chosen 1 Ioh. 3. 13*
and 5. 19.
out of the world, which lies in wickedness, and hates the good; for what
good qualities, trow we, were they chosen? If they were chosen out of the
world, and so were of the world before they were chosen out of it; how had they
faith and obedience, for which these men will appoint God to choose them, or else
not? That we are Gods generation, viz. by creation, is true, but impertinent.
Of ^ods working good qualities in men by his word, and spirit, and of their
resisting, or not resisting, we have spoken, and shall speak else where. Romans
8, 29, makes for them as the former places; showing plainly^, that our
predestination or election goes before our calling, our calling before our
justification, our justification before our glorification.

The note in the English Testament upon Ephesians. 1, is the same Page 40.
which the Synod at Dort, and all Evangelical Churches profess. Only these
men's error is, in their not putting a difference between Gods decree to save,
and his actual saving of them that beleev, whether by justifying or glorifying
them. Gods choosing a man, (whether in decree from eternity, or by actual and
effectual calling, and calling of him out of the state of sin, by giving him
the spirit of faith and grace) goes before his believing; for he cannot beleev
before he have faith, nor have it before God give him it: but his actual
saving by justification and glorification, follows after faith.

The discourse which here they fall into touching Gods deliberating, Page 40. 41
and decreeing to make man, etc, is impertinent, considering that our question
is only of that decree which is Evangelicall, and of mercy, and so
presupposes man fallen, and in misery by reason thereof: So is the deliberation
which they imagine in God, incompetent to his infinite wisdom and providence.
They make God like a weak man, contriving his purposes with ifs and ands; as
though he stood in a mammering, and unresolved, what to do, till he found by
experience, what men would do first.

And here I demand of these men, what if some of those so actually, really, and
particularly chosen to salvation (as they speak) upon their faith and
obedience, and to whom God has so fully purposed, without ifs or ands, to
impart the Kingdom of heaven, do afterward wholly fall away (as they hold any
may, and many do) then all this actual, real, and particular choosing, and
settled purpose of God, is void and frustrate; and God must unpurpose what he
had formerly purposed really, actually and particularly; and undecre^ what he
had formerly decreed. They should therefore have learnt in this place, from
their more learned Masters, to have added the condition of their persevering to
the end, without which it is certain, none shall be saved. But then they must
needs rush upon the same deperate rock, with the other; which is, that none are
thus actually and particularly elect or chosen, till they be dead, seeing they
deny all certainty of perseverance, to the living; not acknowledging any thus
elect, either before the world, or in it, but after the world, and in heaven.

The Scriptures here produced to prove that men are not Page 41. 42 43. 44.
actually, really, and particularly Gods people, and partakers of the grace of
Christ before the world, and they also be, and before they have learned Christ,
might well have been spared, as proving that only which no man doubts of.
Only they must learn, that it is one thing for a people to become actually
Gods people, and partakers of his grace, and another thing for God actually to
purpose in himself from eternity, in time to make them such. Nothing in God is
potent all, but all actual.

Their proofs of an universal calling in the means of salvation, we will
presently examine; not^ng only by the way, their apparent contradiction of
themselves, and unjust insinuation against us. They contradict themselves in
saying, that God chooses all men, good and bad upon condition of faith and
obedience, the partition wall being broken down. To choose, is to take some from
the rest, and not to take all. He that takes all alike, chooses none. Besides,
by this, the same persons are both elected and reprobated, chosen, and refused:
and every one alike either of both. Then which nothing is more absurd. The
insinuation is, that we make God an accepter of persons, in Page 43. 44
saying, that he chooses men that have not put on Christ. Nothing less. To
accept persons in the Scriptures, is to judge of, or do to a person, better or
worse, for some by thing in or about him: whereas God in choosing one before
another, whether in the decree, or actual application, of grace respects
nothing in the chosen, but only the good pleasure of his Ephe. 1 4. 5 Math.
11. 25. 26.
own will, in himself. This is the highest cause that God would have us take
knowledge of; though we also know in the general, that God is no way wilful
in his will, though he be most free, but always most wise and holy. To remove
a little further out of the way this stone, at which diverse stumble.

First, we know, that all by nature, and of themselves, are subject to sin, and
condemnation, and so might in justice have been left of God, without remedy of
redemption. If then it had been but just with God to have left all in that
state of sin and misery, into which they have cast themselves, it is then mere
mercy, that he has chosen any in his Son, or given him for any. Now if of all
men, indefinitely considered as fallen. God have purposed in himself from
eternity, to raise up some, by working effectually in them faith and obedience,
so to save them; and not to work the same in others, but to leav them to their
own affected and effected pravity, and sin, and so in justice to condemn them
for that their wickedness by them freely committed, and obstinately continued
in; I would know, in regard of whether of these two works we can be said to
make God, a respecter of persons? The one being a pure work of his mercy, and
the other of his justice. Why God should thus choose some, and pass by others,
in the general, we see reason, both by the light of nature, and the
Scriptures; namely, that the glory of his power, and justice might be seen Romans
^. 21. ^2. 23.
in the one, and of the riches of his mercy in the other. But why in
particular, the Lord God should rather choose this man, or woman, then that, we
leav unto himself to know, till the day of revelation of hidden things. Only,
let our care and diligence be in the mean while, first, to know assuredly, that
we are our selves of that blessed number, and by such marks, as cannot deceiv;
and so knowing, both to have in our hearts, and to express in word and deed
all thankfulness unto our good God, and most gracious Father, who has
vouchsafed unto us, above many others, such singular mercy.

ADVERSARIES.
IT now remains, we come to examine, whether (to use their Page 44.
own words) the wicked that come to damnation, had by this purpose of God
(spoken of before) means of salvation, if they had not refused it.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, if this of outward means were granted them, it would not help them to
prove the purpose of God to save all; except they could also prove, that there
needed nothing on Gods part, but the outward means. This, as they cannot do,
so have I formerly proved plainly the contrary: and that though God so
provide, that even Paul plant, and Apollos water, in the most full, and free
offer of the outward means that can be; yet except the same God, by the inward
and effectual work of his Spirit, give the increase also, all is nothing.
Secondly, I deny, that the wicked who perish, all, and every one of them, have
had, or have the outward means of salvation offered them.

ADVERSARIES.
BUT here, before they come to that which they promise, Page 44. 45 46, etc*
they offer, and enterprise the proving of another thing, which is, that Christ
dyed unfeynedly for all without exception; by whose death all might be saved,
if they did not reject it.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, I here acknowledge, that the death of Christ (being Act. 20. 2^. Romans
5. 10.
God) is in it self sufficient for all, and every person in the world; and so
might have been an effectual price for all, if it had pleased the Father, and
him so to have ordained. But that it was the Fathers purpose in giving his Son,
or his in giving himself to the death, to pay the price of the sins of the
whole world, and of every particular person therein, and to satisfy Gods justice
for the same, we deny, and they in vain go about to prove. That Christ dyed for
sinners, and the ungodly, and such as were dead, Romans 5. 6. 8, we grant, as
being the Apostles assertion; but that he dyed for all such, is their bold
addition; and (which is worse) plainly against the drift of the place. The
Apostle having before treated at large of justification by faith, shows in this
chapter the singular benefit acrewing thereby to the faithful, as peace with
God, access into grace, rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, and that also
in tribulation: that their tribulation working patience, their patience
experience of Gods power, and grace in sustaining them; that experience, hope
that they should never be confounded, as having such assurance of the love of
God in their hearts by the Holy Ghost given of God unto them. The ground of all
which he lays, v. 6. 8, for that Christ dyed for them being ungodly and
sinners: and thereby appropriates this dying of Christ unto these sinners, who
are in their time thus justified by faith, have peace with God, etc. which
limitation the Apostle most plainly makes, where he says; For when we were
yet without strength, Ver. 6. 8.
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
dyed for us. He speaks of them, and them alone in this plaee, as dyed for by
Christ, who were justified by him. And let me here turn into the very bowels of
these men's error, the sword of the spirit, which the Apostle, in this place,
puts into mine hand; and prove briefly, but evidently, that Christ dyed not for
all and every person, as is said; but only for them, and for all them who in
the end are saved, and obtain eternal life by him. These men (and rightly) in
this very place, make it all one, for Christ to die for sinners, and to Page 45.
be their reconciliation: as the Apostle makes them all one who are justified
by faith, and for whom Christ dyed. Shall we then make doubt to conclude with
the Apostle, that they which are justified by Christ blood (which are the
sinners for whom he dyed, v. 9,) shall be saved from wrath through him, v. 9,
or that they which are reconciled to God by the death of his Son (that is, say
they, for whom he dyed) shall much more be saved by his life? For which purpose
also he after enters into comparison of the first, and second Adam, showing,
that as by the offense of one all were dead: so by the righteousness of one,
the gift Ver. 15. 16. 17.
of grace should abound to many, or to all: by which gift afterward he shows
himself to mean both justification, and reigning in life. He puts the two
Adams as two common roots, the former as a natural root, and the latter as a
spiritual; and affirms, that all that were, and are, in the former, and
naturally growing of him dyed by his sin: and proportionably, that all in the
latter, live by his righteousness. I say, that were in the first Adam; for Eve,
though she were of mankind, yet dyed not by Adams sin, because she was not in
him, when he sinned; neither yet Christ, as man, not coming of him by natural
generation, but by miraculous operation of the Holy Ghost. So on the contrary,
they (and only they) who by faith are planted in Christ, and justified by his
blood, shall be saved Verse 9. Verse. 17.
from wrath through him, and receiving of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by him.

The Apostles meaning therefore is not, that Christ died for all particulars,
but that all for whom he dyed, shall be saved by him: which seeing all are not;
it follows that he dyed not for all, as they mean.

For the right interpretation of 2. Cor. 5. 14. 15. For the love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all
dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and r^se again: and of many
the like places, the common and true rule must have place; that note of
universalitie, as all whatsoever, and the like, must be restrained to the
matter Ioh. 14, 13. 1 Ioh. 5. 14 Math. 23. 3 Act. 2. 4^.
in hand: as, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I will do: that is,
whatsoever according to my will. So, whatsoever they (the Pharisees) bid you
do, that do: to wit, according to Moses. So, they that believed, had all
things common that is, all things lawful, and for nec^ssitie. Likewise, Luke
4. 1. All the world should be taxed, that is, a^l under Caesar: which a great
part of the world was not. So All things are lawful for me, and I become all to
all: that is, not all absolutely, but all things in themselves indifferent, and
of that kind, of which the Apostle speaks. I then answer, that by all in this
place, he means all of that sort, of whom he speaks: all, whom the love of
Christ constrained: all, that so judge of Christ's death: all, that were dead;
that is, were dead, but are alive by grace, and so should not henceforth live
to themselves, but unto him which died for them: Christ that one Mediator, died
for all them.

To 1. Tim. 2. 6. Christ gave himself a ransom for all. We answer, that by all
is not meant all particulars in the world, but all sorts of people, as well
Kings (which many Christians, considering their cruel hatred of Christ, and
other enormities, thought rather to be prayed against, then for) as others. The
Apostle here informs them better, and that Christ dyed for all, and would have
all, that is, men of all sorts saved, even Kings as well as others. It is not
possible for any Christian to pray for every particular person in the world:
nor Luke 13. 23. 24. 1. Ioh. 1. 15 Math. 7. 6. 2. Tim. 4. 14.
lawful to pray that God would save all in general: seeing we know by the
Scriptures, that all shall not be saved, and are also forbidden to pray for
some in particular.

The Apostle 1 Timothy 4. 10. speaks not of Christ's dying for all men, but of Gods
saving of all men, specially them that beleev, If he speak of salvation by
Christ's death, God should save unbeleevers so living and dying: for he says
not that God would be, but that God is the savior of all men. He speaks
apparently of Gods providence over all, preserving good and bad; yea saving man
and beast; specially them who suffer reproach, Psalm. 36. 7.
because they trust in the living God. To conclude, Those for whom Christ died,
he died alike for: and therefore not specially for any, above others, but alike
for all, for whom he dyed.

To 1. Ioh. 2. 2. I answer, that he speaks not only of Christ, as dying for
us, but also as he is our Advocate in heaven Verse. 1. 3.
with the Father, propitiating, or pacifying his anger toward us in procuring
actually the forgiveness of our sins, and acceptance with him. By the whole
world therefore he understands such as confess their sins, such as whose sins
God forgivs, Chap. 1. 9.
cleansing them from all unrighteousness, such as have Christ their Advocate
with the father, for whose sins he is a propitiation, etc. which are only the
faithful, and that not only of the Jews intended in these words, and not for
ours only, but of the Gentiles also, as the whole world, here and else where by
Christ and the Apostles opposed to the Jews. Mark. 16. 15. John 3. 16.
specially Romans 11. 12. where (as here) by the world, is meant the believing
Gentiles obtaining salvation, opposed to the Jews. And this our limitation in
just proportion, the very next place cited by our adversari^s, confirms: The
whole world lies in wickedness, 1. Ioh. 5. 19. that is, all such Jews and
Gentiles as are not born of God, v. 20. not John, or other believers, one or
other.

The Apostle Peter, 2. Epist. 3. 9. speaks not at all of Christ's death, but of
Gods patience, that none might perish, but all repent. By which all he means
all the elect which were in their time to repent, and so to be saved: for whose
sakes, and not in slackness, as the mockers accounted, he deferred his
judgments. Reve. 6. 11. we have this point notably exemplified. And it was said
unto them* that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow
servants also, and their brethren that should be killed, as they were should be
fu^filled. For which purpose it must be minded, that Peter says, The Lord is
long suffering toward us, not willing that any should perish, opposing us as
the elect, to the reprobate Scoffers at God, both in his word and works.

The last place being 2. Chron. 36. 16. is impertinent, as neither meant of
Christ's death (of which the question is) nor of man's salvation by it; but of a
bodily and visible judgment: in which kind of works God tieth himself to no
certain form of proceeding.

Against their error of universal redemption by Christ's death, I thus argue:
Them whom God and Christ love (to wit, Ioh. 13, 1.
with that special love of mercy) they love unto the end; and Ioh. 3. 16.
therefore never come to hate them as they do the wicked and damned. But, for
whomsoever Christ dyed, God in giving his Romans 5. 6.
Son, and he in giving himself to the death for them, love with the most
special love of mercy that can be: Therefore they for whom Christ died, never
perish, but in time have wrought in them faith and repentance, and are kept in
the same, by the power of God to life. Christ therefore dyed effectually, and
in his, and his fathers intention of love, for them only that are saved, and
perish not. This is also more manifest Ioh. 17. whence may be drawn many
arguments to prove that all for whom Christ died, are saved, seeing all that
are given to Christ of the Father, keep the word of God, and have eternal life
given them by him, Now it cannot be denied, but that all for whom Christ dyed,
are given him of the Father, that he might redeem and save them by his death.
Furthermore, the death and bloodshed of Christ is every where called the price
of our redemption, and a ransom for sinners. Upon this holy foundation most
clearly laid in the Scriptures, these men, and 1 Cor. 6. 20* 1 Timothy 2. 6. Mat.
20* 25* Ephesians. 1. 7.
others would build a more hateful Babell then that of old in the East: by
which they would, as it were, scale heaven, and deprive God of diverse his most
glorious Attributes; by name, his Wisdom, his Power, and his Justice. His
wisdom they ^mpeach in affirming, that he would buy with so rich and precious a
price as the blood and death of his only begotten Son, that, and them whom he
certainly knew before, he should never possess by it, for that end, for which
he bought them, their justification, sanctification, and salvation. Secondly it
impeacheth Gods power, and makes him unable, do he what he can, to save any
more then he does save, though he desire it never so much. For look, for whom
he would do the greatest thing that possibly he could, which was the giving of
his only begotten and beloved Son to the cursed death of the cross, for
them and their salvation (without all doubt) he he will do whatseever other
good (as less) that possibly he can. Whereupon it should follow that God
cannot possibly give the Gospel to more then he does, and by it convert and
confirm them to and in his grace, which are less things then the former; it
being the foundation, they, but the building upon it: it being the meritorious,
and deserving cause^ and they effects thereof. Thirdly, this conceit makes God
unjust, in taking a full price and ransom for men's sins, at the hands of their
surety Christ (as was his death and obedience) and yet not resting satisfied
with it, but exacting the debt of their sins at their hands, by eternal
punishment; which is the condition of many thousands in the world.

ADVERSARIES.
OTher things follow, tending to prove Gods purpose to save Page 45.
all, even such as slew Christ, blasphemed and resisted the spirit of God, to
their condemnation, etc. Act. 3. 25. 26. and 5. 30. 31. and 7. 51. and 13. 46.
and 15. 6.

DEFENSE.
I Answer, that the persons of whom those Scriptures speak, were the peculiar
people of God, and not yet wholly cast off by him. The argument therefore from
Gods will and work for the saving of them, is stretched beyond its reach, to
prove such purpose, will or work of God to save all which are not his people,
as they were. Secondly, I grant, that where the Gospel is preached, there the
Lord truly wills, that is, commands the conversion of sinners, and their
turning from iniquity, as the text has ^t; approving and rewarding the same
with salvation, in them, in whom it is found, as it is ordinarily in some of
them to whom the Gospel is preached; and so was in some of the persons to whom
the men of God spoke in those places; who before were elect of God, and
redeemed of Christ, and were in their time effectually called to that grace,
whatsoever before they had done, or been. Now the Apostles not knowing which in
particular were elect, and redeemed in the secret purpose of God, and Christ,
were to sow the seed of grace upon all grounds, and to preach to all
indifferently, as they had occasion; hoping in charity that this, and that, and
any one particular, might be of the elect vessels, and good ground in Gods
destination: by whose preaching such as were preordained to life, believed
actually. The Lord Act. 13. 48 Act. 18. 10
tells Paul, abiding in Corinth, that he had much people in that City, and that
therefore he should speak the word there, and not hold his peace. He says not,
as they would have him, that all in that City were his people in that sense,
but much, or many. Now Paul not knowing which were they, which not, preaches
1. Cor. 3. 6. 7. Chap. 6. 20.
indifferently to all; and the Lord by giving an increase to his preaching,
shows in time which of them were bought with the price of Christ's blood: they
becoming members of Christ* and joined to the Losd; which he notes as singular
privileges of the elect from eternity, above others. And in this I have been
something the longer, because being well noted and applied, it may serve for
answer to all the Scriptures brought by them for the establishing of their
universal grace ftom the preaching of the Gospel, though it were as
universal as they erroneously make it.

More particularly, to their first proof from the similitude of Page 46.
marriage, Math. 22. I answer, that it makes nothing for them either in drift,
or words. The drift of the parable is not to show that all and each person in
the world are called, but that few of them that are called, do rightly obey.
Neither says Christ, that all are called, but many. I add, that this place by
rebound utterly overthrowes them: as showing plainly, that the Gentiles (as the
latter guests) were not called, till the Jews (the first guests) refused to
come. Many thousands therefore of them in former ages, lived and died being
uncalled by the Gospel. The places, Math. 28. and Mark. 16. speak also of the
time after Christ's ascension, and not before, and so overthrow an universal
calling of all, at all times: God showed his word to Iakob; but dealt not so
with any other nation. Besides, their Psa. 147. 19 ^0.
meaning is not, that the Apostles should preach to every particular person in
the world: for that neither could they possibly do, neither can they be
imagined, without madness, to have done it, but to show, that as God had
formerly by the Prophets taught that one nation of the Jews; so now he would
have all other nations taught, as there was opportunity and occasion. By that
Romans 10. 18. the Apostle means not, that the Gospel was preached in all ages
to every person in the world. He quotes Psalm. 19. which speaks apparently of
the creatures preaching, specially the heavens and firmament, which the Holy
Ghost here applies to the Apostles preaching in their age, either by way of
argument, or allusion. And yet even this very Apostle in this Epistle, shows
that then there were places, where Christ was not named, nor spoken of, and
Romans 15. 20. 21.
wheremen had not heard of him.

To the other places brought, the former answers suffice. Where it is said, the
Gospel is now preached to all nations, and through the whole world, * and to
every creature, and the like, first, the note of distinction now, is to be
minded, intimating, that before now the Gospel was not preached to nations, but
to that one nation of the Jews only. Secondly we are not to imagine, that by
all nations, and the like, is meant every particular nation without exception,
much less, every particular person in every nation, but to take the words as
indefinitely spoken (as opposed to the preaching to that one nation) as there
was occasion for the Apostles or other reachers to come unto them. Where it is
said, Act. 2. 5. that there were dwelling in Jerusalem devout men out of every
nation under heaven, shall we imagine that there must needs be English and
Irish, and Iappanians there? The particular enumeration of many, v. 9. 10. 11.
shows what is meant by all. When the Jews of* Asia, Act. 21. 28. accused Paul
to teach all men every where against the people, and Law, and holy place, shall
we be so senseless as to think their meaning to have been, that he so taught
every particular person in the world? What is it, if this be not, for the
unlearned and unstable to pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction?

Lastly, their passionate outcry against our doctrine, as blasphemy, and as
making God to dissemble in all these his sayings, as having left the greatest
number in sin, without reconciliation, because Page 46. 47*
he would have them damned, is to be taken as a fit of their raving, by reason
of that spiritual burning fever which possesses and distempereth their
hearts, and brains, and whole man. We do not say that God does any thing at
all either tending to, or in the condemnation of men, because he would have
them damned, but that he performs all his most just, though fearful works
about Reprobates, to show his wrath, and make his power known against sin and
sinners to the glory Romans 9. 22.
of his Justice, in their deserved condemnation. Which his unsearchable
judgments and works, we do not furiously oppugn, as these their, and our
adversaries do, but admire with fear and trembling, as we are taught by the
Apostles exclamation, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, Romans 11. 33*
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding outs And what
if the holy and just God had left all men universally (as having defaced his
image in which they were at first created and made) without any means or hope
of remedy, as he did the 2. Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6.
Angels that sinned, had it been any more then justice in him so to have done?
And will these male-parts then sue him at the law, if he have held that course
of justice toward some, which was due to all? Will they make the grace of the
Gospel a debt from God to men, or a matter of mere grace, and mercy? Is it
not of mere mercy that he calls any to life? and but just if he leave all to
themselves, and their own affected ignorances and lusts? We do not then impute
either dissimulation or cruelty to God in any thing which he says or does* but
deny him to say or do as they dream.

Upon the objection here framed in our name, that there are many which never
heard of Christ, we do not demand as they fondly make us, how then the
Scriptures (cited by them) are verified? Page 47.
but do affirm that the same Scriptures are by them perverted against their
right meaning. But now, how do they satisfy this objection put into our hands
by the Apostle himself, Romans 15. 20. Do they set themselves, as is meet, to a
plain and direct answer? Nothing less. But as a crafty guide meaning to
deceive his inexpert passenger, leads him by many turnings, and the same
perplexed, and hard to find, in which he may easily loose his aim: so do these
deceivers here, and in many other places, in stead of giving a direct answer,
fetch compass about, by bringing in by-things, some true, some false, none
pertinent, in which the weaker sort of Readers cannot but loose themselves, and
forget the force of the Argument brought. And by this means they rather escape
Arguments Page 47. 48* 49. etc.
then answer them.

The discourse about the Law, into which they here wander, may be admitted;
only one particular greatly weighty in it self, and as greatly by them
mistaken, excepted.

ADVERSARIES.
Adams posterity, as they came to understanding, had a law. And again, the law
is given to a man when he comes to understanding, and when his conscience gives
him peace by keeping it, and war for breaking it, and not till then: which
qualities (say they) are not in babes: for they discern not earthly things, and
how then should they discern heavenly, etc. seeing there must be a conscience,
unto which the Law is given, which infants have not.

DEFENSE.
THis error in the latter part of their speech, must the more carefully be
observed, and clearly refuted by us, because it is laid down as the ground of
diverse other errors, and the same not small, as will appear hereafter. Neither
needs there in truth more, nor can there be any thing more clear against them,
then that which themselves bring from Romans 2, their words are; The law is
written in the hearts of men in nature, Page 4^.
who have a conscience to excuse them, if they do the things of the Law, etc.
This form of speech, used by the Apostle of the Law, as written in men's hearts,
is borrowed from Gods writing the Law in tables of stone, which had first, and
by creation, been written in men's hearts, out of which it was almost quite
blotted by sin. Now what is it for the Gentiles, to have had the Law written in
their hearts, in or by nature, as the Apostle speaks? This must needs be in
nature created: for in nature, as corrupted, there is no writing in, but
blotting out of the Law. If by nature created, then as infants have this
nature, so have they this natural manuscript, or writing of Gods hand. This
also the very word nature imports, signifying that which is born with a man, or
with which he is born; coming of a word in Greek that signifies to beget, or
produce, as parents do children, and each living creature its kind: And seeing
the Apostle here speaks of a Law by which men discern the differences between
right and wrong; good and evil; honest and dishonest, in moral and main
matters; whence, and with what hand, should all, and every man and woman living
in the world, even there where is no Law otherwise written or preached, have
this law and conscience thus written in their breasts, save by the finger of
God in creation? This knowledge and conscience being the remainders of that
image of God, in which all men, in Adam were made. By all which it appears
evidently, that infants bring into the world with them this law of nature, and
those footsteps of Gods image in their reasonable souls; who having in them
the faculties of understanding and will, cannot possible be devoyd of all law
for the ordering of the same; to which ^aw, they are necessarily either
disposed, or indispos^d* (...) it ^^^not be, that the reasonable faculties of
understanding and ^^ll, ^^ any of mankind, should be void of all virtuous, or
vicious ^^sposition, and inclination at least, to the things of the law of
nature, that is of God, the effects whereof they show forth actually in their
time. And this truth themselves, elsewhere Page 117.
confirm undenyably, though they think it not; where they say, that Adams
posterity (originally, for of that state they there speak) have weak natures,
by the which when the commandment comes, they cannot obey. This original
weakness then, is a contrary disposition to the Law of God, and to that which
they were created: else it could not hinder them from obeying God actually
afterward; at least, internally, and in their hearts. Surely nothing but the
Law of sin is contrary to the Law of God, warring against it, and against the
law of the mind Romans 7. 22. 23. 25.
agreeing with it, as the Apostle speaks.

Neither follows it, that Infants have no Law, because they have not peace or
war of conscience in them; nor can discern of earthly or heavenly things. The
showing the works of the Law, and doing the things contained in the Law, and
so the having a conscience excusing or accusing for the contrary, as the
Apostle speaks, are not simply requisite for the having of the Law, nor for
being conformable to it, but for the actual obedience thereunto, in particular
actions. Persons are in three respects conformable to the law of God; first, in
habit, and so a godly man is a godly man, and conformable to Gods law when he
sleeps; secondly, in disposition or inclination, and so infants considered,
either in state of creation, or regeneration, are conformable thereunto;
thirdly, in performance of particular acts of obedience, by men of discretion,
for which the conscience excuses and accuses for the contrary. As well may
these men deny, that infants are reasonable creatures, as that they are
lawless. They can perform the works of neither; but have the faculties and
dispositions of, and to both, which in time, and in their effects they manifest.

ADVERSARIES.
IN the next places follows their promised proofs, that Christ Page 50. 51* 52.
etc.
has been, and still is offered to all that have sinned, and that they have
put him away, and that the fault is their own, and condemnation from themselves;
and Good freed from partiality.

DEFENSE.
BElike then, if God show that mercy to one in calling him to his grace in
Christ, which he does not to another, it is partiality with them: from which,
to free him they take this pains, as if the Lord stood in need of their
patronage; whereas in truth, they but forge lies for God, as Jobs friends did,
and talk deceitfully for him. Let us consider of their proofs, admitting of
such as have in them either apparent truth, or probability, and reproving the
rest as there is cause.

And first they err, in saying, that the generation of Adam and Eve took
notice of Christ, as they took notice of their sin* seeing the notice of sin;
specially of that which is more gross, is natural, and the effect of the law
of nature written in all men's Romans 2. 14. 15.
hearts; whereas the notice of Christ, is by supernatural revelation.

The like vain presumption, and apparent falsifying, is in the words following,
that all the sonns of Noah could do no less, but take knowledge of Christ, to
convey it by tradition to all their generations. If it be meant, that indeed
they did so. How many 1000 thousands are there at this day, which never so much
as heard of Christ, at least, as God and man; and Redeemer of mankind by his
death?

For this their presumption of the ages before Christ's coming in the flesh,
they bring not any show of reason, or testimony, divine or human. Only they
alledg the sacrifices of the Gentiles, which (say they) they either had from
their ancestors, in their generations; or as being moved by a troubled
conscience, which must be quieted by sacrifice. And these sacrifices, they tell
us, were remembrances of Christ, and kinds of acknowledgings of him; though in
the end, they account them no better then remembrances of a false Christ in
stead of him.

As their opinion is not unprobable, touching the general beginnings of the
Gentiles sacrifices; so considering them in their particulars, their own words
will judge them guilty of gross error in instancing them, as they do. The
question is, of Gods offering of the means of salvation to all, even to the
very Heathens before Christ's coming in the flesh: Their proof for the
affirmative, is, the sacrifices which the Gentiles had; which yet they grant to
have been remembrances, and acknowledgments of a false Christ. And are
remembrances of a false Christ means of salvation? Is there any other name
under heaven by which men are saved, then by the name of (the true Act. 4. 10.
12 1 Cor. 15. 2. 3. 4.
Christ) Jesus the Son of God, crucified by the Jews, and raised again by God
from the dead? If the remembrances of a false Christ be means of salvation,
then is salvation had by a false Christ. The Apostle makes the sacrifices of
the Gentiles, means of fellowship with devils; these men make them means 1 Cor.
10. 20. 21. 22.
of fellowship with God: The Apostle teaches, that they cannot stand with the
remembrances of Christ's body and blood, the cup of the Lord, and the Lords
Table; these men make them the same in effect, and remembrances of Christ. The
Apostle means of provoking the Lord to anger, and so of condemnation; they,
means of pacifying God, and of saving men. Else where, these men in their hot
zeal, will have all, Mystery of Iniqui. p. 91
even the most zealous Ministers in the Church of England, preach and pray, and
do all other things by none other spirit, but the spirit of the man of sin,
and that all the effects of their so preaching and praying is, but the false
enlightening and heat of a Deu. 32. 1^ 1 Cor. 10 20
false spirit. And yet here, in their hot charity toward the heathen, they
will have their sacrifices, in which they offer to Psalm. 106. 35. ^7.
Pausaniasin Ach. i^is* M^crob. 1. Saturn, etc. and ali^.
devils, and not to God; yea, those in which they sacrificed their sonns and
daughters unto them, and that as histories mention by the devils special
direction in his Oracles; these they will have means of salvation, by which God
calls his guests to the marriage of his Son, and as a good Phisit on, offers
to heal the fick of sin. Thus t^ansforming God into the devil; the true Christ
into a false, the Gospel into heinous Idolatry; and the means of salvation
into the high way, and most effectual cause of utter p^^d^tion.

To conclud^ this point. If in Religion, that which is false be none, (which
elsewhere they make the ground of their rebaptizing) how had or have the
Heathens any means of salvation, which have only the means of knowing, and
acknowledging a false Christ?

For the time since Christ's coming in the flesh, their first p^oof Page 53.
is Luke 3. 6, All flesh shall see the salvation of our God: But I demand, of
what sight of Christ John here speaks? Not of bodily, without doubt; neither
availed it them, if he did. Of spiritual then. But so to see, is to enjoy, as
Ioh. 3. 35, Psalm. 69. 49, and 99. 15, 1 Ioh. 3. 6. Neither does the bare
offering suffice to give sight of Christ and of salvation by him, except there
be withal an opening of their eyes to whom he is offered, so as they discern,
and acknowledge him and his salvation, in the means so offering him, to wit,
the Gospel. But to let pass them that never heard of Christ, how many are
there that understand not the Gospel preached to them; yea, Mat. 13. 13 14.
19. 1 Cor. 1. 23
to whom it is mere foolishnes? And how do these see the salvation of God in
Christ? The meaning then of the words is, that the Gentiles indefinitely, as
well as the Jews, and in greater number then they, should beleev in Christ to
salvation. By all Nations is meant, as we have formerly showed, not every
particular Nation without exception, much less every particular person, but
commonly the Gentiles with the Jews. The Sun and Moon teaching God, was as well
before, as since Christ, but never taught Christ the Mediator, but only God
the Creator, and governor of the world. Neither is the Gospel, which is not
known but by supernatural revelation of the spirit, so common as the Law,
which is natural and written Ephesians. 3. 5.
by creation in the heart of every man. Neither should it be a fault, if God
offered not Christ to all, as they most absurdly insinuate. Page 53.
He ows not the offering of him to any, more then the giving of him for any.
All is of mercy, and therefore no fault, but justice only where no such offer
is.

Where they affirm afterward, and truly, that some to whom Page 54.
Christ is offered, put him away quite, as Jews, and Turks. I demand, how then
they keep and practice any remembrances of him, or make any acknowledging of
him, which even now they affirmed every man in the world to do? Or if the
fathers put him quite away, how can the children have, or make any remembrance,
or acknowledgment of him, having no new offer of him? Can that which is quite
put away be still continued?

That Christ might have been manifested to every particular person whatsoever,
to wit, if God had so pleased; is true: but both besides the question, which is
not, what God might have done, or does, but what he has done, or does; and
also against themselves; for to say, God might have done a thing, is to
insinuate that he has not done it.

In adding, that if the means of salvation have not been offered Page 55.
to every particular soul of reason, and understanding, the Scriptures are not
true, they are like themselves; but the Scriptures are true, and their gloss
upon them false. God is true, and all men liars; even such as tell a lie for
God, as they do, whom God will reproov therefore.

The two last kinds of their proofs are strange, and either brought by them in
cunning, to deceiv the undiscerning Reader; with the truth in it self, but
nothing to the ma^n purpose, yea plain against it; or in weakness and want of
judgment in themselves to discern what makes for them and what against them. Let
us consider the particulars.

They profess and promise proof, that Christ has been offered Page 54.
in mercy to every particular man (to whom the Law, either written in men's
hearts, or in tables of stone has come) for reconciliation: But in steed
hereof (as Balaam blessed when he meant to curse) they both affirm and prove the
plain contrary, and that God has not vouchsafed this mercy to many, but in
just judgment has kept it from them. Sundry true grounds they here lay down,
and prove; to which we willingly assent: as first, that God by creating the
heaven and earth, and by their teachings, sends men to seek out the
worke-master. This we grant; Romans 1.
and that the Heathens should by this light (not of Christ to salvation, of
which our question is, but) of Gods power and Act. 17. 27*
Godhead, have gr^ped after God, and the further revelation of h^s will: as he
that lying in a dungeon, sees some little glimpse of light, and groaps aft^r
it, by the wall, hoping to come in time to some door or window. A second is,
that the terrors of conscience accusing them for sin, should have caused them
to seek after God with earnestness, for reconciliation. And to this, we assent
also. A third is, that it is not Gods fault, but their own, that they are
ignorant of the means of reconciliation and salvation. And of this also we are
persuaded, as they, so far as there is a fault. But now what did those Heathens
in this case? They became vain in their thoughts, and their foolish hearts were
full of darkness, so as they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to
Idols: satisfying themselves in their own inventions: And this also, as
consonant to the Scriptures, we willingly admit of? And what then? God for this
(say they) delivered them up to a reprobate mind, that they never knew more:
for, what should he that is not faithful in a little, be trusted with more?
Luke 16. 10, and gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and so they became
past feeling. And to consent with them herein also, the Scriptures lead us
very directly. But what now follows of all this for conclusion? Namely, that
all Nations, Cities, houses, etc. that is, every Page 57.
particular man, and woman, has had the mercy of God in the offer of Christ
affoarded them; that all were bidden to the marriage. Nay, the plain contrary;
and that all were not bidden: but that many in stead of this mercy to be
bidden, were in justice left to themselves, and given up to their own vain
imaginations; the Lord suffering all the Nations to walk in their own ways, as
Act. 14. 16.
the Apostle says, and refusing (as themselves confess) to trust them with
much, which had not been faithful in a little, so as they never knew more. And
whereas they cunningly shuffle in, now and then, that men might have had Christ
given unto them, or offered them, and that Christ might have been manifested to
every one if they had would (how congruously to the Scriptures they speak
therein we now dispute not) is not only besides the matter in controversy;
which is, what was, and is, and not what might have been done; but to their own
prejudice, feeing that which only might have been, is not, specially that bar
being put by men's own default, which effectually hinders the being of it, as in
this case.

Having thus showed that these men either fight busily with their own shadows,
in proving at large things never called into question by us; or may easily have
their weapons turned upon themselves, in the main matter: I will even now
proceed, after that I have briefly observed some particular mistakings by them.
And first, they both add to the Text, and err in applying that which is
written, Romans 11. 32. The Scripture is, God has concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, they add, of their own, every
person: whereas the Apostle neither speaks of every person; but only of the
Gentiles indefinitely at one time, and of the Jews at another, which he there
opposes the one to the other: neither speaks he of the offering of grace and
mercy only, as they deem; but of the actual conferring of it upon all, of
whom there he speaks, who believed and obtained mercy; the other remaining in
unbeleef. And this, both the drift and words of the place expressly manifest, v.
30. 31. 32. Neither does that other place alleged, Tit. 2. 11, speak of all,
and every particular person, but of persons of all sorts, servants as well as
masters, or any others. The Apostle v. 9, and 10, provokes believing servants
to obedience to their masters; rend^ing this reason of encouragement, v. 11,
for the grace of God which brings salvation unto all, has appeared, etc; as
if he should say, that even they, though poor bondslaves, if they continued in
faith, and faithful obedience, should have their part in the salvation of God,
as well as any others. Secondly, as I will not simply deny, that God punished
the Heathens other sins with the want of preaching Christ unto them; so is it
certain, that greater sinners, and deeplyer drowned both in idolatry, and other
lusts, none in the world were, then the Corinthians, Athenians, Ephesians, and
others to whom Christ was preached, and faith thereby given to many unto
salvation. The Lord tells the Prophet, that though the house of Israel, to whom
he was sent, would not Ezech. 3. 6.
hear, yet if he had sent him to the Heathens, surely they would have heard
him: So the Lord Jesus upbraids the cities of Chorah, Mat. 11. 2^ 21. 23.
Bethsaida, and Capernaum, where he both preached, and wrought most of his
mighty works, that they were deeper in the contempt of God, and further from
all disposition to use aright the means of salvation, then the Heathenish
Cities of Tire and S^don, yea, of Sodom it self: unto whom yet he vouchsafed
not the means of repentance, and revelation of grace, which he did to the
former. By which, it does appear, that the Lord does not observe the order
prescribed unto him by these men, for the dispensing of his favors this way,
in trusting them with most, who are of their faithful in a little; (that is,
wholly faithless indeed;) but as the wind blows where it lists, so Ioh. 3*
does he by the sweet gusts of his Gospel, and spirit, according Mat. 11. 25
Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. 5.
to the good pleasure of his own will, (and not according to the good pleasure
of men's will, in their use of natural light and conscience) dispense
supernatural grace, both for means, and efficacy. Lastly, as they here
contradict their main Page 57.
ground of universal calling, in supposing some Nation to have no means of
knowing Christ: so I would learn of them, how the Gentiles (wholly void of
faith) could rightly examine all things, touching the offense of God, an
accusing conscience, and the satisfying of Gods justice, as they would have
them: or in so doing, could promise to themselves the revelation of Christ by
one means or other, as they liberally undertake for them? They tell us, He that
seeks shall find, Math. 7. But we answer them, that Christ there speaks not of
a seeking by blind, and unbeleeving Gentiles, but by his faithful Disciples.
Mat. 5. 1. 2.


Now, albeit the eternal and unchangeable election of God do not manifest it
self, in time, in the bare outward calling of the so elected, common to many
others with them; but as the same has joined with it the effectual work of
true faith and repentance in the heart, peculiar to them alone: Yet seeing
these adversaries labor upon presumption of an universal grace offered to all
in the preaching of the Gospel, to establish an uniuersall election of all,
(that is, in truth, to overthrow all election) I will here annex, to the things
formerly laid down, two or three plain testimonies for th^^ further conviction.
The first ^s from the Psalm: He showed his word Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so
with any Nation, and as for judgments, they have not known them. The Heathens
therefore (if we will give credit to the word of God had not the knowledge of
Gods word, and so not of the Gospel, which is most hidden, as being of
supernatural revelation only. Of the same Gentiles the Apostle testifies,
that God in times past suffered them all to walk in their own ways: that is,
did not manifest Christ unto them for faith in Act. 14. 16 1^.
his blood, and repentance through him, but only his power and Godhead,
giving them rain from heaven, and other bodily Romans 1.
blessings to witness the same. With this accords that elsewhere: The times of
this ignorance (which had been amongst Act. 1^. 3^
the Gentiles before Christ) God regarded not, or winked at: but now commands
all men every where (as well Gentiles as Jews) to repent. The Apostle opposes
the time now, in which he preached, to the former times: and shows that God
now, and not in times past, called all to repentance by the preaching of the
word. To conclude, the same Apostle expressly teaches, that there is no
salvation but by believing in the Romans 10. 14. 15.
name of the Lord Jesus, by the preaching of the word and Gospel, by preachers
sent of God, for that end. But now for any to say, that every particular person
in the world has had, or has the word of the Gospel preached unto him by a
preacher sent of God for that purpose, were an assertion of him whose
impudency better deserved a club, then any grounds that possibly he could lay,
a refutation; considering both the infallible experience of all ages, and
testimony of scripture to the contrary, Romans 15. 20. 21.
and that there were places even in the latter end of the last Apostles time,
where Christ had not been named, nor spoken of.

Next follows to be examined their exposition upon Romans Page 57. 58
9, in the introduction whereunto* they mingle truth with error. They deal
craftily in bearing the Reader in hand, that the disputation of Paul herein is
hard, and the matter darkly handled, that so they may turn the thoughts of the
Reader from it; or at least dim them with prejudice against that plain and
evident truth of Gods free election, and reprobation joined therewith; Both
which things he sets down most clearly (though the reason of the Lords
different dealing toward them, that are in themselves alike, he makes
unsearchable, and determines in the free purpose of his will) if men did not
trouble the pure and clear water of Gods sanctuary with the foul feet of their
corrupt gloss. They also err in making this one of the places in Paul's
Epistles, of which the Apostle Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 3. 16. Peter does not
say, neither will the Greek text bear it, that there are things hard in Paul's
Epistles; but that in those matters in his Epistles (to wit, about the day of
the Lords coming, and the dissolution of the heavens and elements, and the new
heavens and new earth promised) were things hard to understand, etc. Their
perverting of the Scriptures, (which they lay to the charge of others) both in
the Epistles of Peter and Paul, and every where else, we have formerly
disclosed. Neither do we affirm, as they here charge us, that God reprobates
either the greatest number, or any, as they understand, and elsewhere expound
themselves, that is, predestinates them to condemnation without any condition.
He predestinates Page 90.
none to condemnation; or which is all one purpose, to condemn none, but for
sin freely by them to be practiced, as the foregoing cond^tion, and only
deserving cause of condemnation. Neither say we (as they slander us) that God
denies means of salvation to men, because he would have them perish; but as
the Apostle reaches, that he hardens (by that and other his holy
dispensations) whom he will, that he might show his wrath, and make his power
known upon the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. Romans 9. ^8. 22.


ADVERSARIES.
LEt us now come to their exposition. The scope (say they) as of the whole
Epistle, so of this chapter, is, that not the Law, but the Gospel is the power
of God to salvation: and that we are not justified by the works of the Law,
but by faith, even that faith which Abraham had.

DEFENSE.
AS the proper and particular scope of diverse parts of this Epistle, is diverse;
so do they miss of the drift of this particular chapter, which is not (as they
conceive) to prove justification not to be by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Christ in the Gospel: But to show that the first and highest cause,
why, of all mankind fallen in Adam, one is cleared, and another not, is only
the good pleasure, and free will of God, and not man's deservings: and yet that
God in so choosing, or electing one before another, does nothing unjustly, as
shall appear in the particulars hereafter to be explained: and may in the
mean while be gathered by these three general reasons.

First, for the Apostle, when of purpose he handles the matter of justification
by faith, chap. 3. and 4. does so often and again iterate and inculcate the
terms of Faith, and Justification, almost in every verse whereas here, he never
so much as once mentions either of them in the disputation it self. which is
to the end of verse. 24. where he descends from the matter of election to the
calling of the elected, both of Jews and Gentiles.

Secondly, it is unreasonable to conceive, that the Apostle, having in the
third and fourth chapter so fully handled, and so expressly concluded that
matter of Justification by faith, and not by works; and chap. 7. the effect and
end thereof, Peace with God, and perseverance to salvation; and chap. 6. the
matter of sanctification; and chap. 7. the imperfection of that sanctification
in this life; and chap. 8. the afflictions of the faithful, and their
perseverance notwithstanding to the death; should now again without any
occasion, and against all order, return to the same matter of justification, so
fully handled and ended before. This might well agree with these men's wanderings
in this their treatise, but agrees not with the wisdom either divine or humane
wherewith the Apostle was furnished. Much more absurd is it to imagine, that
having formerly handled that subject matter of justification so plainly as he
has done, chap. 3, and 4. he should return to handle the same matter so
darkly and obscurely, as all the adversaries to the truth, and fautors of this
conceit, are compelled to confess he has done in this place.

Thirdly, if this were the Apostles proper drift, what needed he to have made
such deep protestation of his hearty sorrow for the Jews as he did, more in
this place then in the former, where he handled that matter more clearly then
here? It was in truth no other thing that moved the man of God to these sad and
sorrowful protestations, then to remov the offense which might be taken at the
Jews rejection, and calling of the Gentiles in their stead; of which, and the
highest cause thereof, he was now to speak in the 9. 10. and 11. chapters.

Lastly, we shall (God willing) make it appear in sundry particulars, that
these Adversaries, by wresting of some things, and omitting of others, pervert
the Apostles words to a strange sense, how soever they think to get advantage
by striking others first with that imputation.

And first, though they account it plain, and without difficulty, that the
Apostles meaning v. 5, and 6, is, that not all the Israelits, not all the
children of Abraham's flesh specially, not such as boasted of the observation of
the Law, were therefore in the state of salvation, or should be saved: yet in
truth, he plainly means another Page 60.
thing; namely, that all Israel, all that were the seed of Abraham, and
children of the flesh, were not that Israel, that seed, those children to whom
the promise was made: that is, were not they touching whom God by his promise
declared his purpose of election mentioned, v. 11. For though all are saved
that receiv the promise by faith, and none by the works of the Law, yet the
Apostle in this place, neither speaks a word of salvation (as the effect of the
promise) but of election (as the cause thereof:) nor yet of men's receiving the
promise by faith; but of Gods making it, according to election; that so the
purpose of God, and promise manifesting it, might stand according to election,
v. 11, that the word of God might take effect, v. 6. even the word of promise;
At this time will I come etc. v. 9, they are then called children of the
promise, not because they received, but because the promise (Sara shall have a
Son, etc.) was made unto them, according to the election of grace, and
stableness of Gods purpose, v. 8. 9. 11, which promise also, they did in time,
receiv by faith, according to the election of that remnant from the rest, the
promise following the purpose of election; and faith, and salvation by it
following the purpose and promise. Though Israel, that is, all which were of
Israel, obtained not that which he seeks for, yet the election has obtained
it; even the remnant of Israel, to whom Gods promise is, according Chap. 11. 5.
7.
to the election of grace: in regard of which remnant according to election,
the word of God is effectual, and the promise fulfilled touching the younger
son of Rebeca: of whose two sonns, it was said before they were born, or had
done either good or evil, the elder shall serve the younger.

And as they truly affirm, that neither birth nor works did prefer with God:
so I demand here, what those works were, by which Esau sought for
justification? The Scriptures expressly Heb. 12. 16. Genesis 25. 32. 33, etc.
term him a profane person; that is, a despiser of goodness; yea, of his very
birthright, which was a special legal privilege: How then sought he to be
preferred with God, and justified for birth or works? Or how does this example
of Esau fit their imagined plain exposition? specially to prove that the
children of Abraham's flesh were not in the salvation, who so much boasted of
being Moses disciples in the observation of the Law: when as the Law of Moses
was not yet given, nor the Lawgiver born.

Their words following, that God purposes to prefer those that seek it by his
free election, through faith in Christ, are true in themselves, but not in their
sense. Their meaning is, that God purposed to save them effectually that should
beleev in Christ Jesus: whereupon should be meant in this place only, such a
purpose of God as was no more toward Iakob then toward Esau: for God, by
their doctrine, purposed to choose Esau if he believed; and not Iakob but upon
his believing first. But the Apostle speaks more then evidently of such a
purpose of God, as was toward Iakob particularly and alone, excluding Esau.

Besides the standing of this purpose, and election, are here noted as two
distinct things; of which, election is the former, and that according to which
this purpose of God stands: whereas they make them one and the same, accounting
election nothing but the purpose of bestowing salvation upon them that beleev.

Thirdly, the Apostle cannot mean such a purpose and election as presupposes
faith in Christ, (which they would have) seeing he expressly affirms it to have
been when the children had done neither good nor evil. Is to beleev in Christ,
to pu^ on the wedding garment by faith, and obedience, to submit to the
righteousness of God (which they will have the condition upon which election
depends, and the quality for which God elects the Page 39.
persons in whom he finds it) are these to do no good with with these men? and
is the doing of the contrary to do no evil?

Lastly, he says not, that the purpose of God, according to election might
stand, not of works* but of faith, as they say: but not of works, but of him
that calls; that is, as follows, that will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy. By which it is Verse. 15.
plain, that Paul does not in this chapter (as chap. 3. and 4, and Gal. 4,)
oppose works and faith; but works, and Gods calling: He should have said for
their purpose; that the purpose of God stands not of works but of faith, or of
him that believes: and not, as he does for the purpose of the Holy Ghost, of
him that calls: Showing thereby his meaning to be in this whole discourse,
that the obtaining of righteousness, or standing of Gods purpose in its
actual effect, depends upon God alone, according to three degrees here
expressed: first, his gracious purpose of election in himself toward some:
secondly, his free promise manifesting his purpose: thirdly, his effectual
calling, in which his word of promise has effect, and his purpose stands firm
and undisappointed, notwithstanding the unbeleif of the body of Abraham's seed.

Their making Iakob and Esau types as they do, is like the rest, or worse. The
Scriptures are not to be drawn from their natural and simple sense, without
apparent warrant. It is the high way to heresy, to be bold in framing typical
expositions. And with what spirit these men are led this way, appears by their
expounding the parable, Luke 15, making the Jews the elder brother, Page 64.
who sought salvation by works; and the Gentles, the younger in the offer of
the Gospel, seeking salvation only by the free promise of God: whereas the
plain meaning of Christ is, only to avow his preaching to the Publicans and
sinners resorting unto him, against the pride and envy of the Pharisees; those
Publicans and sinners being Jews as well as the other.

Secondly, I demand, what it was, in which Iakob typed out believers, seeking
righteousness by God? and in which Esau typed out workers, seeking
justification by their own works? The contrary in Esau is expressed in the
Scriptures.

Lastly, seeing it cannot be denied, but that Iakob as a faithful and godly
man was in time actually beloved of God, and Esau, as godless and profane,
actually hated; it must needs follow, that God before the world was, purposed
in himself accordingly, to love the one and hate the other: seeing whatsoever
God in time does, by way of emanation or application to, and upon the creature,
that he purposed to do, as he does it, from eternity.

If the Apostle, v. 13, Iakob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, confirm his
former doctrine, as they say, then he confirms Page 64. 65
the doctrine of Gods eternal and steadfast election from eternity. And their
boldness is excessive in calling them perverters of the words of Paul, which
will have this to be before Iakob and Esau were born: seeing the Apostle adds
this Scripture out of Malachy, to show the reason of that contained in the
former, which both Moses and Paul with him, expressly affirm to have been before
the children were born: namely, that the Genesis 25. 23* Verse. 11.
highest cause of the elder, (to wit, Esau) his serving the younger, (to wit,
Iakob) was Gods love to Iakob, and hatred of Esau.

That following is partly true, namely, that v. 12. and 13, is not showed for
what cause God loved Iakob and hated Esau: for that is showed so far as God
would have us see, v. 15. 18. But falls, where they say, that they show not when
this was. For this love and hatred was (and before) when God said, The elder
shall serve the younger: and this he said, when the children were not yet born:
the effect of which was, that the purpose of God according to election might
stand in after time, and that both in respect of the two persons themselves, and
of the bodies of the Nations to come of them, though not of every particular.
And so indeed they are to be considered both as instances in their persons, and
heads of their Nations; the Scriptures accordingly every where testifying, that
God loved, and chose from the rest, the Israelits in their fathers Abraham,
Isaak, and Iakob, Genesis 1^. 7. 8 Exodus 3. 6. 7 Deuteronomy. 7. 7. 8. and 29. 12. 13. 14.
according to the tenor of his gracious promise and covenant of being their
God, and the God of their Seed, expressing his eternal, and most steadfast
purpose of will.

That which they add in the last place of Gods not hating (to wit actually)
and destroying without desert, is most true. But Page 65.
when we speak of Gods loving or hating any before the world, we mean only of
his decree of loving, which he actually exercises in time for Christ's
righteousness by faith applied upon the so loved; and so of his decree of
hating, which hatred he comes not to exercise actually, but for sin deserving
it. God from eternity purposed in time to glorify his justice in the deserved
destruction of Esau, and not of Iakob. Of this different decree of God,
touching Esau, and not Iakob, and his leaving him in and to his own corruption,
and hardening him in the same, rather then Iakob, our reason is, the will of
God; but of Gods actual hating and destroying of him rather then the other,
the Scriptures show sufficient reason, to wit, his obstinacy in sin, the only
cause of his destruction.

Verse. 14, upon the premises, that God of two alike in themselves, and without
respect of good or evil, in the one, or other, had loved the one, and hated
the other, an objection is framed, that by this, injustice might seem to be
with God: which the Apostle denies, with God forbid. This objection our
Adversaries Page 65.
understand to be upon Gods rejecting the fleshly Israelites, for contemning
their salvation offered them by faith in Christ, as Esau was rejected for
contemning his birthright. But herein (as children skip, where they cannot
read) they leav out the principal part of the objection, which is not only
moved upon Gods rejecting some, but withal upon his receiving of others. The
Apostle in the words before going (which occasion the objection) mentions not
only Esau the elder hated, and serving; but also Iakob the younger loved, and
served: so in answering the same objection, he speaks first, and most of Gods
showing mercy and compassion, and last and least of his hardening any. Now
whether they have omitted this part of the objection in cunning or
inconsiderateness, themselves best know. This is certain, that the adjoining
it, qutie overturns their exposition. For comparing together two such persons,
as whereof the one glories in his own righteousness, as perfectly answering to
the holiness and righteousness of the Law; justifying himself, when the Law
condemns him; despising the grace and mercy of God in Christ offered, and
making him a liar in not receiving the testimony which he gives of 1. Ioh. 5.
10. 1 Timothy 1. 13 Gal. 4. 29.
his Son and joining with these, blasphemy and persecution, and all injurious
dealing against them that do receive this grace of Christ all which those
proud justiciaries, and carnal Israelits did: and the other, as honoring Gods
justice and holiness, in the sense, and confession of sin, and misery due
therefore; flying to the mercy of God in Christ, and by receiving the
testimony Ioh. 3. 33*
of his Son, setting to his seal that God is true; and therewith repenting
with all his heart, which every true believer does that God now should show
mercy upon the latter of these, and not upon the former, cannot minister to
any man, endued with common sense, occasion of objecting injustice to God;
seeing the light of nature teaches every natural man the reason of a
difference. And if any should be so senseless, as to object injustice to God
in such a case (as they conceive the objecter to be) yet was not the Apostle so
witless, as to fly for answer to the absolute will of God, and to plead, that
God will do so, because he will or pleases to do it, as v. 15. 18. I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, etc. Which answer of the Apostle also
ministers matter of further and more difficult objection, as appears v. 19.
20. Whereas if the objection had been cast in their mould, a child could have
answered it and said, that it had been a most just and equal thing for God to
have received and loved the one rather then the other; considering how the one
honored the holiness, justice, truth, and mercy of God; which the other
dishonored and despised. They err therefore in applying to this purpose Romans
2. 4. 5. Neither does the Apostle there speak of a mercy and bounty, to be
showed to them that believe, and repent, as they conceive; but of that which
goes before repentance, as a means to lead unto it: But here he speaks of a
higher work of Gods showing mercy; namely, the purpose of his will according to
election to glory; and the means thereunto.

And truly, these men's boldness is too great in putting, for, God has mercy
on whom he will have mercy; God has mercy on them that seek him by the means
that he himself appoynts. For though it be most true, that God has mercy on
such; yet the Apostle here speaks no more of Gods appoynting or commanding will
for his showing of mercy, then of his appoynting or commanding will for his
hardening, v 18, whom he will he hardens. He speaks of that will, according to
which he himself works in love or hatred: not of that according to which he
commands and appoints men to work. These men in truth confound all things,
setting man's will where Page 67.
Gods should stand. God says, on whom I will: they say, on him that himself
wills, or seeks as he ought, etc. The same Idol of man's will they advance and
set up, v. 16, where in stead, of Gods showing mercy; they put, man's believing
mercy. The Lord by willing, and running, v. 16, excludes whatsoever is of, or
in man, and either within, or without him: and draws all to himself alone. In
the stead of God showing mercy, they put themselves, and their free- will
receiving mercy by God offered, as the proper cause of difference between man,
and man.

The 17 verse. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, etc, they handle very
slightly: saying something (such as it is) about Gods hardening Pharoahs
heart; but not meddling at all with the place, according to the coherence which
it has with the words going before: unto which, yet the Holy Ghost strongly
tyeth them, in saying* For the Scripture says, etc. And herein they are in
truth, wise in their generation. These words must needs answer to the latter
part of the objection of unrighteousness with God in hating; that is, as they
interpret it, in rejecting such as seek righteousness by the works of the Law,
as did the fleshly Israelits. But wherein, I wonder, did Pharaoh so? How sought
he justification by the works of the Law? Who so professedly despised the God
thereof, saying, Who is the Exodus 5. ^.
Lord that I should obey his voice? Did they see, that this example of Pharaoh,
and their exposition of the place could not stand together; and therefore chose
to cut off the coherence so firmly tying the words together, rather then to let
fall their preconceived erroneous exposition? Whatsoever they intend herein, we
know it is brought for an example of Gods absolute (but righteous) power of
hardening (rather then another) whom he will; and not whom he finds most
deserving it; (for whom finds he not too much deserving it, if he would deal in
like manner with all?) as it is said, whom (that is, which rather then other)
he will, he hardneth, v. 18.

And let it be diligently minded, that the Apostle here opposes Gods showing
mercy to some, and his hardening of others; and not his showing mercy to some,
and his condemning of others. The adversaries, by Gods showing mercy, would
have us understand his saving of such, as beleev and repent. And then, on the
contrary, by Gods hardening, should only be meant his not showing mercy to,
but punishing and condemning such as do not beleev, nor repent. But we know,
that the not hearing God voice, not believing, and repenting follow Hebr. 3. 7.
8 15. 18. 19. Romans 2. 1. Ezech. 11. 14 and 33. 21. 26. Exodus 4. 7, 8, etc.
upon hardness of heart. Whereupon the Lord promises, that in the day of his
mercy, and pity, he will take from his people their stony and hard hearts.
And so touching Pharaoh, the Scriptures expressly show, that his hardness of
heart was the cause of his unbelief, and disobedience. Whereupon I conclude
evidently, that the Apostle here speaks not of such a mercy only, as follows
faith (as the Adversaries would have him) but as goes before it also: as he
speaks of such a hardening as go^s before unbelief.

Note we here also, that the Apostle in this place propounds Gods will as the
cause of his dealing diversely with diverse persons; and not of his saving such
as are to be saved, after a diverse manner from that, which some, namely the
carnal Israelites imagined.

ADVERSARIES.
NOW to return to them. They lay down a question thus. What is the meaning of
the hardening of Pharaoh? Page 68.
And in their answer wholly pass by God, as no doer in the business. They
make Pharaoh a doer in hardening his own heart, which is true; and Satan a doer
in hardening Pharaohs heart, and this is true also; but God no doer, but a
sufferer only, in giving him up, that is, as else where they expound it, in
leaving him to himself, and to Satan, to be hardened.

DEFENSE.
BUT first, the Text imports a further thing in God, whom it brings in thus
speaking. For this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, and that Exodus 9. 16. Romans 9. 17.
my name might be declared through all the earth. Is Gods raising up (which is
his hardening, v. 8,) nothing but his letting a man lie still, and fall down
lower then he was before? Besides, the end, which was the glory of Gods power
and name, shows God to be a worker. Every end must have an efficient or working
cause. The glory of God was not the end of Satan's work, nor of Pharaohs work;
and therefore of Gods work in it. Thirdly, God hardened Pharaohs heart, by
sending Moses and Aaron unto him, as by an occasion, though not a cause; as the
Law is the occasion of sin; and the Gospel the occasion Romans 7. 8. Mat. 10. 34
35.
of strife and variance. Fourthly, God deprived Pharaoh of the use of common
sense and reason; otherwise it could not have been, that after so many
experiments by him taken of Gods powerful hand against him, and for the
Israelits, he should so furiously as he did, have followed them into the
midst of the Sea. Lastly, besides, and above all these, God, in whose hands
the hearts of Kings are, as the rivers of waters, to turn them Prove. 21. 1.
whether he will, hardened Pharaohs heart, by ordering his pride, cruelty and
contempt of God to this effect of obstinacy, appearing in his most desperate
course; without which powerful, and unerring hand of God (all the former
notwithstanding) it might have come to pass that Pharaohs heart might have
been softened by the miracles and means used; and so Gods word, which before had
foretold his hardening, might not have taken effect; which is, contrary to the
truth, and drift Verse. 6.
of the Apostle in this place. God therefore was not only a sufferer, but a
doer in the hardening of Pharaoh.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir next question is, How consider you these words: Who Page 69.
has resisted his will? v. 19. Unto which they frame this untoward Answer,
viz. that those Jews seeking salvation by those works of the Law did not resist
Gods will, and so gave him no cause to complain.

DEFENSE.
NOthing less, as we have showed, and shall further manifest by and by, from
the Apostles answer, v. 20. The meaning is plain. The words v. 19, Thou will
then say unto me, why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will?
are an objection against that which immediately went before; whom he will, he
hardens. Now against this, it may colourably be objected, that if God
hardens whom he will, he has then no reason to complain of men's being
hardened in disobedience; for Who can resist his will, if he will harden them?
A piece of an eye is sufficient to see the plainness of this exposition, and
coherence. Their discourse then following, that God would save all, and have
all repent, amend, and beleev, is frivolous. The objection is of Gods will to
harden men; their answer is of Gods will to soften them by repentance.

ADVERSARIES.
HEre they lay against their Adversaries (Gods friends) Page 70.
two false accusations: First, that they make God hate Esau, and Pharaoh, and
the Reprobates before they be born: from which hatred he decreed their
damnation: and that, by his secret will, which cannot be resisted: to which the
will of God, declared in the Scripture, is contrary: secondly, that* God
compelled Pharaoh to trespass, and so to suffer.

DEFENSE.
BY the Law, the false accuser must be done by, as he would do Deuteronomy. 19.
by his brother. These men's slanders therefore being false, are as odious in
them, as were the opinions odious in us, if true.

First, we know that God hates none before the world, otherwise then they are,
and that they are no otherwise then in Gods decree, and foreknowledge. He hates
none actually, or by application of hatred, till they have actual, yea sinful
being; but hates them before in decree only, as they are only in decree and
foreknowledge. This decree of God we consider according to two objects, Sin and
Condemnation: For sin* we say, that God decrees to suffer the sin, which he
could hinder by his almighty power, if he would, and to order both sin and
sinner, both before he sin, and in sinning, and having sinned, to his own holy
ends. For damnation, we hold, that God decrees it toward none, but for their
sin, by him infallibly foreseen, and by them freely to be committed and
continued in without repentance. For though God be moved only from within
himself, and the love of his holiness, to decree the condemnation of a
sinner; yet does lie not so decree to condemn him, but for sin, as the
deserving cause, foreseen, and by him to be practiced. Neither yet do either
of these decrees pass forth from God for themselves, but both the one, and the
other for the glory of his power and justice to be made known to men and
Angels, v. 22. Neither is the secret and revealed will of God held by us,
contrary one unto another, as they mis-judg^ no not though he will that by the
one, called revealed, which can be resisted* and will not, but will that by the
other, called secret, which cannot be resisted, I say, though God will the same
thing by the one, which he nils by the other: for some things God wills by both:
for example, the repentance of Paul and Peter, and of all that do repent. It
is his revealed will which requires it; but his secret and unknown will to give
it, till he make it known by giving it. Neither does the willing and not
willing, (no nor nilling, which is more) of the same thing, make two contrary
wills, save as they cross one another in the same respect, else they are but
diverse in respect of diverse objects in consideration.

To open this a little further. It was the revealed, or commanding will of God,
that Pharaoh should let Israel go: but so it was not his secret, or working
will; that is, God did not so will this, as that he would use his omnipotent
power, and do what he could to bring it to pass. God, who turned Genesis 31.
Act. 9. Prove. 21. ^.
the heart of Laban, persecuting Iakob, and of Saul, persecuting the
Christians; and in whose hands are the hearts of Kings as the rivers of waters,
which he turns whethersoever he wills, could (had it so pleased him) by his
irresistible power have softened Pharaohs heart toward his people Israel. It
was Gods revealed will (wherewith Moses acquainted him) that he should let the
people go: his secret will, which he knew not, till he felt the woeful
effects of it, to harden his heart for the declaration of his power in his
deserved destruction. So for Abraham's offering up his son Isaak, it was Gods
revealed will, Genesis 22*
that he should offer him up for a burnt offering, as is plain, in that he
commanded him so to do, v. 1. 2; yet withal, it was Gods secret will, that he
should not offer him, nor lay his hand upon him, nor do any thing unto him; as
he also revealed unto him in due time, but purposed in himself before: God
being without variableness, or shadow of turning, and not to be conceived Iam.
1. 17.
to have changed his mind, as vain man does; yet were not these two wills
contrary one to another, but diverse, not in God, in whom all things are one
(even one God) but in respect of diverse objects and ends. God willed Isaaks
offering, so far as the commanding will reached, for the trial of Abraham's
faith and obedience, and this he revealed: But now God would not have him
offered, in regard of the event of the thing: but this as secret for the
present, and till God revealed it in its time. Neither do we (or the Apostle
whose steps we tread in) by teaching that God hardens men by a will that cannot
be resisted, say (as they ignorantly accuse us and him) that God compels men to
trespass, and so to suffer. There is no compulsion of any, but of him that is
unwilling: but he that is hardened, is willingly hardened, as well as
necessarily. His hardening of himself in a course of sin, is as voluntary, as
is Gods hardening him by way of punishment, necessary and irresistible.

The Apostle teaches, how it is impossible for these who were Heb. 6. 4. 5. 6.
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, etc. if they fall away
to renew them again to, or by repentance. If it be impossible for them to
repent, then they remain impenitent necessarily by Gods just judgment upon
them, and yet I suppose, voluntarily also, even our adversaries being Judges.
Their impenitency therefore and hardness of heart, though in regard of men a
sin, and therefore voluntary: it is in regard of God a punishment, and
therefore necessary and irresistible, except we will say, that men can resist
Gods judgments: and do that which the Apostle affirms to be impossible.

Neither needs this deep and divine mystery of Gods judgments trouble any that
considers aright of these three things. First, that as the Sun puts no ill
savor into the dunghill, though the stink thereof be increased by its shining:
so neither does God add any hardness, or impenitency to any, but only leaves
unrestrained, occasions, stirrs up, and orders the corruption which he finds in
men to this event. Secondly, that man is more willing to be impenitent, and
hard-hearted, then God is to have him so. Thirdly, that this, in regard of man
is a sin: in regard of God, a punishment of former sins.

The Apostles answer to the objection now follows, v. 20. Nay, but O man, who
art thou that disputest with God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay, of the
same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another to dishonor? Wherein
first, he represseth man's insolency, who being but man, yet dare presume to
call Gods doing into question. 2. He justifies the Lords doing by his absolute
power over the creature, as the potter has power over his clay.

And by this answer of the Apostle it appears, how these men mistake his
meaning in the question. His answer is not at all of this or that manner of
saving men, (as they imagine and maintain) but of the saving of this person
rather then that: they being both alike in themselves, and as the clay of the
same lump. If Paul's answer should be shaped according to their misformed
question, then the meaning must be; that the potter might choose which way he
would make a vessel of honor, Page 71. 72*
whether by the works of the Law, or by faith and obedience to the Gospel:
and so not of the same lump, but of two contrary lumps: the one believing and
obeying; the other, not turning from hi^ wicked way* and yet seeking salvation
by his worke^. The Apostle here plainly pleads the Lords power over the
creature, to make him a vessel of honor or dishonor: they plead the Lords
power over the means only, by which he will do this. He, the Lords power over
the clay of the same lump: but they, over clay of clean contrary qualities.
Besides, if Paul meant here to bring in the Jews defending themselves, that
God had no cause to complain that they stuck to the Law, that is, looked to be
justified by it, seeing Gods will was that men Page 69.
should obey his Laws, and so live in them, what needed he to have sought so
far for an answer, as the absolute power of God? seeing he had an answer at
hand which might have stopped all mouths, and which he ever presses when
question is Romans 3. 23. and 4. 15. Gal 3. 9. 10 etc.
of justification by the works of the Law? which is, that they could not
fulfill the Law, and therefore could not possibly be justified by it.

Lastly, their exposition of these words, Why have thou made me thus? that is,
that I cannot obtain salvation by the works of the Law, directly crosses the
Apostle, who grants that God made men, as is there* objected, and justifies him
in so making or framing them, both in his decree, and work of holy providence,
by the power which he has over men, as the potter over his clay, Has not the
potter power over the clay? etc. Besides, Verse. 21.
men make themselves incapable of salvation by the Law, in that they keep it
not. But the Apostle here speaks of Gods making men, vessels unto dishonor, and
not of men's making themselves; and of the potter making the vessel, and not of
the vessels making it self thus, or thus. It is plain Paul grants the
objection, that no man can resist Gods will; and yet justifies his complaining,
considering his power over his creature to decree, and so to bring unto most
contrary estates by just and convenient means, persons in themselves alike,
and as the clay of one lump, v. 21. 22. 23.

ADVERSARIES.
IN the opening of these verses they follow their usual, but ill custom of
carrying the Reader away to other places, and things: and enter upon a tedious
discourse upon Ier. 18. from whence they affirm, the Apostle has these words,
and so speaks of the same making of a vessel of dishonor with the prophet in
that place.

DEFENSE.
I Deny their peremptory assertion, and require their proof. If they say the
same words are there; first, that is not simply true; for part of them only
are there to be found, and so are they in other places, by name Esaias 45. 9.
where it is evident, the Prophet speaks of another matter. It is too weak a
collection, that because the like phrase or form of speech in part, is to be
found in two places, that therefore the one is taken out of the other, and that
to the same purpose. And to put the matter out of doubt, it is evident that the
Prophet, and Apostle speak of clean diverse things: the Prophet speaks of
marring the vessel, and making it again; that is, of destroying persons or
peoples, if they repent not; or doing good to them which repent: The Apostle,
of making the vessel out of the mass, or lump, honorable or dishonorable.
The Prophet speaks of the making or marring of one and the same vessel: the
Apostle of diverse vessels, and the making of one to honor, and another to
dishonor. Lastly, the Apostle here speaks of the Lords purpose and work,
without respect to good or evil done by the persons, and considering them as
clay of the same lump: the Prophets, of Gods dealing with persons, according to
the good or evil which he finds in them, and so being diverse, yea clean
contrary lumps. And where they insinuate, that we hold the making of the clay
to be in creation, which they affirm to be in vocation; they speak untruely in
both. No man ever held that God in, or by creation made any vessel to
dishonor; neither can they ascribe this, as they do to vocation. Gods calling
men is not to dishonor, but to honor only. It is the devil, and his
instruments, and not God, who call men to dishonor, which these men also prove
against themselves at large, in the two pages following; Page 72. 73
and therein pull down with the one hand, what they have built with the other,
as children use to do with their cob-castles.

That which follows, v. 24. 25 etc. is not to the thing in hand. The
disputation about election ends, v. 23, and that of vocation follows: which
latter is an effect of the former, declaring indeed the persons, but not
confounding the things.

And thus, if these men may be their own Judges, and may have the praise which
their own mouth gives them, they have very sufficiently explaned the ninth
chapter to the Romans, and to full satisfaction of him that doubts, resolving
him in every difficult place thereof, as they blow the trumpet, or rather the
bladder of their own praise: But if the Scriptures in their true sense, and
scope may be judge, and give sentence, they will be found neither to know them,
nor the power of God over his creature. Which power, yet v. 22, is declared not
to be tyrannical, but most just, never punishing, but after the enduring of
the vessels of wrath having sinned: as is his mercy also richly glorious in the
salvation of the vessels of mercy, v. 23.

ADVERSARIES.
THE last place which they take upon them to answer is, Act. 13, So many as
were ordained to eternal life believed; that is, say they, So many as beleev,
and obey the truth, are ordained Page 75.
to eternal life.

DEFENSE.
A Strange perverting of the Scriptures, setting the head in the feets place,
and the feet in the heads. For although the thing which they affirm, be in it
self true, yet is it not the Evangelists meaning. Luke descends from the cause
to the effect; they crosly ascend from the effect to the cause. The Evangelists
meaning is, that Paul's preaching in Antioch had a diverse event with diverse: of
whom so many as were pre-appointed, or ordained to life believed, that is, of
unbeleevers, which they were before, became believers in Christ: according to
that Romans 8. 30, whom he predestined them also he called: that is, he gave
them to beleev and repent. Their preordination or predestination to life
therefore, went before their effectual calling and believing, as the cause
before the effect.

Their assertion in the application of their Similitude, of a Page 76.
merciful rich man, offering money to so many as come, that they who proudly
refuse the rich man's gift were ordained to have it, as well as any that
received it, is most erroneous, being applied to the matter in hand, and
strikes directly against the Text, which says, that so many as were ordained
to life did beleev; that Job. 1. 12. 1 Job. 5. 1^ 12.
is, did come and receiv eternal life by believing in Christ. If all, or so
many as were ordained received it, then they that received it not, were not
ordained. Neither does v. 46 (as they affirm for a conclusion, that their end
may answer their beginning) testify any such thing: but only that they who
thought themselves unworthy of eternal life, had the word of God preached unto
them: but that they were therefore ordained to eternal life, is not the
testimony of the Text, but their unskilful gloss. The Holy Ghost expressly
opposes unto them to whom Paul speaks, v. 46, them that were ordained to life,
v. 48.

CHAP. III.
Of falling away.

ADVERSARIES.
THE third Head questioned is, according to their order, Page 78.
whether a man may full from life eternalls but is more plainly and fully thus
laid down; Whether a man truly and effectually called, justified, and
sanctified, may wholly fall away from the grace of Christ? They hold the
affirmative; and that a man may thus fall away: though they set down their
opinion both in unproper, and doubtful terms, where they say, that the promise
of Gods election is continuedupon continuance in the condition of faith, and
obedience to Christ's Gospel.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, the Scriptures speak not of the promise of Gods election, as they here
do again, and again. Election, or gods purpose of electing is before the
world: the promise not, till men actually be. Gods purpose must needs be before
his promise, for he but promises in time, what he purposed from eternity. If
they had spoken of Gods purpose of, or according to election, Romans 9. 11
it had been something: but what the promise of election means, I understand
not; nor, I suppose themselves. All election is to somewhat* and this, of which
they speak, to Page 39. 42 45. 75.
salvation, the Kingdom of God, and eternal life* In their meaning then, God
promises to choose to eternal life, and continues to promise to choose to
eternal life, upon condition of continuance of the condition of election,
faith and obedience* Now a promise made upon a condition to go before, is not
to be performed till the condition be performed: and so, by their doctrine, God
does not elect any till they have continued to the end, in faith and obedience,
that is till they be dead. And so actual and particular election, is not of
men living, but dead: To which absurd assertion, these men's Masters, the
Arminians are driven. It is true, that God neither purposes nor promises to
save any, but such as persevere in faith and repentance unto the end: So is it
also true, that this perseverance in grace depends upon election, which is,
both to the end, and means, Christ Jesus, and perseverance in faith in him, and
Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. 5. ^.
obedience unto him.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir Arguments are of two sorts: the former drawn from such Scriptures as
teach (as they say) that the godly may fall away: the latter from such, as
exhort and admonish godly men to keep them-from falling away. The latter of
these two they prosequute ^n the first place, upon this ground; that if there
were not danger, and great need of warning, the Lord, who says not in vain
unto his people, Seek ye me, Esaias 45. 19, would not so often move them to take
heed, beware, and the like.

DEFENSE.
AS they are deceived, by the translation which they follow, Esaias 45, the Lord
not speaking of his not saying in vain to his people; Seek ye me: but of their
not seeking him in vain; seeing all his words tend to righteousness: So the
ground which they lay is true in its self; namely, that were there no danger
any way, then it were in vain, to warn to take heed, which to affirm of God,
derogates from his wisdom. We are therefore in the first place, by way of
distinction, to consider a faithful man, either in respect of himself, as
sustaining himself: or in respect of the grace of Christ sustaining him.
Considering him in himself, we willingly grant, that a faithful man may as
easily fall away, as did the Angels in heaven, and Adam in paradise, being left
to themselves: grace not being (as is reason) an inseparable property, but that
which is Col. 2. 9. Ioh. 17. 6. 8 Ephesians. 2. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
separable from man's nature. But now considering the same faithful person, as
a living member of Christ's body, receiving nourishment from him the head; and
given to Christ by the Father, that he might save him; as having the spirit of
Christ dwelling in him; and as kept by the power of God, through faith to
salvation: in that regard we deny, that it can come to pass possibly, that
such a one should wholly fall away from the grace received. And this diverse
consideration of one, and the same person, is founded in the Scriptures, and
light of reason. The Apostle teaches, that both he and all others are
insufficient of themselves, to think any thing, as of themselves: but 2 Cor. 3.
5. 2 Cor. 12. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
sufficient, as of God; that the faithful may be weak in themselves, and have
God perfecting his strength in man's weakness; that not a man's self, but the
grace of God in him may labor abundantly, that is, he by ^t, and not by his
own strength. Thus (to open the distinction yet full^er) might Christ's flesh
have seen corruption, considered in it self, as being made of the same mould
with ours: but so could it not possibly in regard of Gods purpose, promise, and
work of providence to the contrary. So considering his bones in themselves, and
their Psalm. 16. 1^.
natural strength, it was as possible they should have been broken, by the
soldiers, as the bones of the two thieves, crucified with him: but yet this was
impossible in respect of Gods Number. 9 12 Ex. 12. 46. Psalm. 34. 21. Ioh. 19. 36*
precedent word and prediction, Not a bone of him shall be broken; and of his
present work of most powerful providence, according to his word.

If now with this consideration, that a believer may of himself fall away, we
conjoyn this other, that the exhortations, and admonitions in the Scriptures,
are means sanctified of God to keep, and preserv all his from such apostasy,
how should it seem strange unto any, that God should infallibly obtain his own
end (the perseverance of his Saints) by his own means, which these exhortations
are? Is it a good argument that God may fail of his end, because he uses
effectual means whereby to obtain it, as exhortations and warnings are, to
perseverance? Is it a good argument, that the conduit may want water, because a
man (skillful in waterworks) lays the conduit pipes with all diligence, and
Art, between the Springhead, and the Conduit? Or that the child (whom his
father holding him fast by the hand, in a slippery way, and bidding him look
that he fall not) can fall out of his fathers hand? Nay, though left to
himself, he may, yea cannot but fall; yet considering his Fathers strength
(supposing him one that cannot fall himself) whereof the child is made
partakers for his supportance, he cannot fall: Such a holding, and helping hand
of God are these exhortations, made effectual by his Spirit in the hearts of
his children, true believers. Unto whom, as the Lord suith, Seek ye my face;
so they answer, Psalm. 27. 8.
Thy face, Lord do we seek: The Lord says in his word, Take heed, Stand fast,
Beware that ye fall not away, and the like. Unto which their godly hearts
answer, Lord we do take heed, do beware, etc. For by these the servant of
God is warned: Ps. 19. 11. Luke 8.
They are as seed sown in good ground, which brings forth frui^ with patience
to the harvest. So as in truth, the clean contrary doctrine to these men's
collection, is true; that therefore the truly faithful cannot fall away,
because they (they I say, being faithful, obedient, and of honest hearts) are
by such exhortations, and admonitions, armed against such evil of apostasy.

To conclude this point. The Lord Jesus gives his Apostles Mat. 28. 19 20.
in charge to teach all Nations whatsoever he had commanded them: adding
thereunto, the promise of his presence with them, if they so did, to the end of
the world: against whom also a Woe was denounced if they did not preach the
same Gospel. ^ Cor. 9. 16
I would now know whether it could so come to pass, that these Apostles should
not, and that willingly, preach this Gospel, and the truths thereof? This to
affirm were to blaspheme the holy Spirit of God, by which they were immediately
and infallibly guided in their Ministry. Promises therefore and threatenings are
not in vain for the provoking of men unto those duties, which by reason of the
Spirits powerful work in them, it is not possible but they should perform.

ADVERSARIES.
THE Scriptures brought by them for their Assertion, Page 79.
follow. The first is, Hebr. 11. 15. whence they gather, that as Esau lost his
earthly inheritance, to which he had right, so may the Saints loose their
heavenly inheritance, which they have right to.

DEFENSE.
THE Apostle does not so conclude, but exhorts them only to take head thereof:
and of that matter we spoke Genesis 25. 23. 27.
even now at large. Esau was a profane person before he sold his birthright,
and never other; No doubt but a profane person, or hypocrite, nourishing in
himself the root of bitterness, though living in the Church, may loose
whatsoever right he had; and of such the Apostle here speaks. If it be further
objected, that Esau had right indeed to the birthright (by them unskilfully
called the inheritance) I answer, that he had never right to it spiritually,
nor in Gods appointment, but only in outward course, and in regard of men: and
such a right to the heavenly inheritance may be, and is, by too many lost, as
the Apostle here insinuates. Lastly, who sees not the difference between the
inward grace of faith and holiness in the heart of a true believer; and the
carnal right to that which is common to good, and bad?

In Math. 5. 15. Christ says not as they accuse him, that salt may loose his
savor: but if the salt loose his savor, as he says. If it be possible, let
this cup pass from me: which yet (all things Mat. 20. 39*
considered) could not be. Of which form of speech we have lately treated, and
shall more hereafter. I suppose it was never seen, that salt wanted saltness:
and if it do, how is it salt? Besides, Christ calls not his Apostles salt,
and light, in regard of the grace of faith in their hearts; but of their
preaching the Gospel, therewith to season and inlighten the world. 2. Pet. 2.
20. they pervert as the former places: making that absolute which is but
conditional, and with an If. They (say they) which are washed, may return with
the sow, to wallow in the mire, and their latter end be worse then the
beginning. The Apostle says, If after they be washed, etc. These forms of
speech, whether in scripture, or other where, If this, then that, do not
necessarily prove, that either this or that is so indeed; but only, that if
this be so, then that also. Both this and that in themselves may be impossible,
and yet the consequence good: as if I should say at midnight, If it be day,
the Sun is rising; or at midday, If it be night, the Sun is set: so in the
Scriptures, Luke 19. 40. 1. Cor. 15. 13, 14. 15. 16. etc. Gal. 1. 5. 10. and in
infinite other places. It is sufficient for the truth of a conditional
proposition, that the latter part follow infallibly upon the former; if it be;
but requires not that it should be. These men and others herein labor of the
same mistaking with the Disciples, Ioh. 21. 22. 23. who upon Christ's words to
Peter touching* John, If I will that he tarry till* I come, what is that to
thee? concluded, that John should not dye, but should survive till the second
coming of Christ; which fancy also continued a long time in the minds of
many. But the Evangelist in Verse. 23.
the same place teaches them that will learn, not to interpret conditional
speeches, as absolute? Jesus said not unto him, he shall not dye; but, if I
will that he tarry till I come, or dye not.

If it be further replied, that the Apostle aims at certain particular
persons, which denied the Lord that bought them, whose pernicious ways others
followed, and unto whom it did happen according to the true proverb* The dog is
turned to his vomit again: Verse. 4.
which same persons Jude also charge to have turned the grace of God into
wantonness; I willingly grant the thing so to have been; but deny the
conditional form of speech to prove it absolutely. And for the thing, I
answer, that the Apostles there speak of men's being purged and washed, and the
like, according to the outward profession only, which they formerly made, and
which the Church took knowledge of: and not according to the inward truth of
the heart, which they knew not, but God alone. I add, to put the matter wholly
out of question, that these Apostles thus speaking, do in the same places both
gather themselves by the event, and teach us that these persons, of whom they
speak, were never truly and effectually sanctified, but only in their own,
and other men's opinion: as where Peter, v. 7. 8. 9. opposing righteous Lot to
the wicked Sodomites, adds, that as God delivered him, so fo he knows, that
is, can and will deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the
unrighteous to the day of judgment for punishment. Likewise v. 21. The dog is
turned to his own vomit again: and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire. They were always then, in truth, but Dogs and Swine, though
sometimes vomiting dogs, and washed on the outside as swine are in the waters.
And yet more plainly, of the same persons Jude says, v. 4. that they were
ungodly men, and before of old ordained to that condemnation, and such as crept
in unawares. They were at the best but hypocrites, in truth, and such as had
crept in unawares, though seeming for a time to others (and it may be to
themselves also) sanctified and purged, by their outward profession which
profession formerly by them made, the Apostle upbraids them with, to their
greater confusion.

To Heb. 10. 29. the same answer serves. The form of speech is but
conditional, If we sin wilfully, etc. v. 26. which proves, that if any so sin,
then there remains no more sacrifice for him: but proves not that any truly
justified and sanctified, does so sin. If it be asked, to what end then serves
the fearful denunciation used? I answer, first, to keep the truly faithful
from so sinning: 2. to awaken even the secure, if not not desperate. 3. to
paint out the fearful state of incurable hypocrites and Apostates. And as the
particular persons unto whom the Apostle there has reference, could not by him
certainly be discerned ever to have been truly and inwardly sanctified ( for
what man knows the things of a man, save the 1 Cor. 2. 11.
spirit of man, which is in him?) so by their after course of Apostasy from
Christ, he seems not obscur^ly to gather, and pronounce of them, that at
their best they were but hollowhearted; as v. 38. 39. making an opposition
between the truly just that lives (and perseveres notwithstanding all
temptations) by faith; and those with-drawers to perdition. So chapt. 6.
speaking of the same, and like persons, If they fall away, v. 6. he insinuates
against them, v. 8. that they were never other then thorny earth, opposed to
good earth, bringing forth herbs meet for him that dresseth it. As also, v. 9.
10. he makes it a point of Gods righteousness not to forget the work and labor
of love of the truly faithful, or beloved; viz. so as to suffer them to fall
away from the things which accompany salvation. With which accords that
elsewhere, Faithful is he that calls you, 1* These. 5. 22* 23.
which will also do it; that is, will preserv the truly faithful blameless
unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ: as does that also in the parable,
where only the seed sown in the stony, or thorny ground withered, and was
choked before the harvest; but Matthew* 13. Luke 8.
not any one corn sown in good ground.

To 1. Tim. 1. 19. where it is said, that some, as Hymenaeus and Alexander by
name, have put away a good conscience, and made shipwreck of faith, I answer,
(letting pass other things) that Paul speaks no more of them then he knows:
and so not knowing their heart, and inward man, (which only God does) he
speaks of their faith, and good conscience, not as considered in their hearts,
which he knew not; but in outward profession, whereof he had taken knowledge.
The same answer serves to 1. Tim. 5. 12. if by the first faith there be not
meant these women's former promise of serving the Church, in the widows or
Deaconesses office; and then it is nothing to the matter in hand.

It is not said Exodus 32. 32. 33. in the text, but in their gloss, that some
written in the book of life may be blotted out, Moses only desires-there, that
if God would not pardon his peoples sin, and bring them into Canaan, he would
blot him out of his book. But the Lord answers him in the same place, that that
cannot be, but that he that sins against him, him he will blot out. Is it to be
conceived, that Moses for the sin of others; whereof he was altogether
innocent, yea for his holy zeal and love toward Gods people, should be
blotted out of the book of life? If you say, that yet some (to wit sinning) may
be blotted out, I grant it in Gods sense, but not in theirs. For first, this is
meant of temporary, and not of eternal life, of the blotting Deuteronomy. 9. 14.
their name from under heaven; of the destroying them, and making of Moses a
nation greater then they. Of that of which God is said to repent upon Moses his
prayer, v. 14. which was only in regard of their temporal state and life. 2.
It is not only vanity, but impiety also to affirm that these persons were ever
truly justified and sanctified. Not only Moses and Aaron, but God himself
upon this very occasion testifies the contrary, v. 9. 22. Deuteronomy. 9. 7. 13. To
Psalm. 69. 29. I answer, that David means* no more, then that his adversaries
should no longer be continued in the Church and fellowship of Gods people, the
latter part of the verse expounding the former, Let them not be written with
the righteous: which the Prophet Ezech^el terms, not being written in the
vvriting of the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 13. 9.
And seeing David here speaks of certain particular persons his adversaries,
let these men show the marks by which he knew certainly that they were once
truly justified and sanctified, or by which they know them so to have been.
They take that for granted, in which the maine question lies; and laying such
foundations, what can their building be?

As the Black-more changes not his skin; so neither do they their bold
manner, in putting their gloss for the Scripture: as appears in the next
place cited by them, Rev. 3. 5. Christ there teaches, that some (namely they
that overcome) shall not have their name blotted out of the book of life. They
bring him in saying, that some written in the book of life may be put out. God
blots not out their name that overcome: and if any overcome not in the
spiritual warfare, it shows his name was never written there. All that dwell
on the earth shall worship the Rev. 13. 8. Verse. 11.
beast, whose names are not written in the book of life of the lamb. On the
contrary, the Saints indeed, and elect, get victory over the beast, by faith
and patience. Rev. 15. 2.


That by the Talents given to the servants, Math. 25, is meant the graces of
justification and sanctification; and not the gifts of the Spirit given for the
edification of the Church, as 1. Cor. 12. 7. and Ephesians. 4. 8. is their
presumption. Justification and sanctification make men the servants of Christ
at first these talents were given to them that were servants already: and that
according to their several ability for their special places. Besides, the
taking away of the talent here spoken of, is not in this life, but at the day
of judgment: and therefore is unskilfully brought for their purpose.

Touching Paul's affirming that the Saints at Rome were justified by faith, Romans
5, and yet threatening, that if they continued not in the bounty of God, they
should be cut off, chapter 11. 21. I answer, as before; first, that the threatening
is conditional, as Gal 1. 8, If we, etc. Was it possible that Paul should
preach any other Gospel? Or were he an Angel from heaven, or of God that
should so do? I suppose no, chapter 4. 14. But an Angel from hell rather, and of
the devil. The question is not whether if any should not abide in the bounty
of God, they were to be cut off or no? But whether any with whom he has dealt
so bounteously, as indeed to justify and sanctify them, have not also a
promise, by his power, to be kept in that his bounty, by the means which he
has appointed? Secondly, Paul pronounces those Romans justified, not from the
judgment of certainty, but of charity. Of whom as some were undoubtedly
sincere, whom God did by this, and the like warnings, preserv and keep in his
grace: so for the hypocrites mingled amongst them, it was but that which we
say, if in their time they were broken off from that which formerly they seemed
to others by their profession (and it may be to themselves also) to have had.

And indeed, this very place, if it be well minded, ministers full answer to
the most of their Arguments. This warning (though immediately given to the
Romans) concerns all Christians as well as them: And being founded upon an
example of the Lords dealing with the Jews, must be expounded, and applied
accordingly. Who then were these exemplary Jews, formerly cut off by the Lord
from the olive tree? Were they such as had once truly believed, but had after
made defection? I suppose not even in these men's judgment; but such as
occupying a place in the Church, yet were, in truth, faithless hypocrites, and
as chaff in the Lords flore, which Math. ^. 1^.
the Son of man coming with his fan in his hand purged out. And in these we
may see, what kind of branches they are, which in time come actually and
visibly to be broken off from the Olive.

The instances following of Elies house loosing the Priesthood, Saul the
Kingdom of Israel, and the Israelites Canaan, serve only to fill up room. That
Priesthood, Kingdom, and Canaan, were not the graces of faith, and
sanctification in the heart: nor the loss of them sin, but punishments only.
Only the last place Math. 18. 32, where debt forgiven is, as they say
recalled, were something to the purpose, if the drift of the parable were to
show, that God indeed forgivs sins, and after unforgives them: which were
lightness unbecomming any grave, and honest man. But the scope of the parable
being no more, then that we ought to forgive such as offend us, and that
otherwise God will not forgive us: to draw more from it, is to forget that it
is a parable, and to take the high way to to most grievous error. Besides,
there is in this parable no color for falling away from grace, and true
godliness, formerly had; but only (even their exposition being admitted) that
a man may have his sins pardoned, who yet wants all brotherly love and
goodness, which the Scriptures every where deny, Math. 6. 14. 15, Mark. 11.
24. 25, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. 15, Romans 8. 1, Ps. 32. 1. 2. Thirdly, by these grounds,
no man can certainly know, that his sins are indeed pardoned, whilst he lives
in the world, because he may still fall away, and so have his pardon recalled,
though sealed up unto him by the very spirit of God it self. And so all our
faith must be but adventure Ephesians. 1. 13.
whilst we live in the world, whether our sins past be in truth pardoned, or
no; contrary to the Scriptures. Lastly, this impeacheth both the justice of
God, and his truth. His justice in making him require double satisfaction for
the same debt; first, of his Son, even the price of his blood, and the same
also by faith, applied to the person that has sinned and believes; and after
of the person himself. Of his truth, and that both of his word absolutely
promising forgiveness of sins to him that believes, and also of his spirit,
by which Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. 1. 13.
he seals up the same unto their hearts.

Their second and third reason, taken from the fall and sin Page 80* 8. 1
of Adam, and all men's falling, and sinning in and by him, are wholly besides
the question: which is only of falling from the grace of God in Christ* from
election in him, from the love Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 5. 8. and 9. 15.
of God toward us, when we were enemies, from mercy which presupposes sin,
and misery, and is properly Evangelicall. God gave Adam his portion in grace by
creation, and left it in his own keeping, which he soon misspent: but has
dealt more mercifully with us in making his Son our feof^er in trust, that he
as our head, might keep and improve the grace of God belonging to us, as is
meet for us: lest we having ^ll at once, and that same left in our own hands,
should mispend all, as Adam did.

To that which they allege from Ephesians. 1. 4, compared with Rev. 2. 4. 5, I
answer, first that Paul styles those Ephesians elect only as he knew them so
to be; which was by outward appearance of holiness. Secondly, that the leaving
of their first love was not a total falling from grace, but only a decaying of
their former zeal. Thirdly, the threatening of the Candlesticks removing, was to
the truly called, an effectual means of drawing them to repentance. When
these men can make it appear, that any one of the truly elect and sanctified
Ephesians did wholly despise this and the like means of their bettering, I will
then grant their proof strong. It may as well be concluded, that therefore the
fire goes out, because it has good and fresh fuel put unto it, and is
diligently blown. For these exhortations and admonitions are as fuel and
blowing to preserv from going out, the spark, and fire of grace in the hearts
of believers.

That only he that continues to the end, and overcomes shall be Page 81. 8^*
saved; and that the promise of acceptance, and salvation (by them miscalled
the promise of election) is no otherwise intended to us, then upon our abiding
in the faith, and obedience of Christ. We beleev and confess with them,
according to the Scriptures: but withal are taught, and beleev according to
the same Scriptures, that God keeps all his holy ones unto the end, Ier. 32* 40*
and gives them to overcome; that he puts his fear in their heart, Mat. 13. 23
that they shall not depart from him; that the seed sown in good ground shall
neither wither by persecution, nor be choked by cares of the world, or
deceitfulness of riches, or otherwise; but shall grow up to the harvest; that
the gates of hell shall not prevail Mat. 16. 18
against the Church, or any one member thereof, built upon the 1 Cor. 10. 13 1
Pet. 1. 5.
rock of Peter's confession; that God is faithful, who with the temptation will
give a way to escape, for all his; that they are 1 Ioh. 3. 9. 10.
kept by the power of God, through faith to salvation; and that being born of
God, they do not sin nor can (to wit, as the children of the devil do)
because his seed remains in them. Page 82. 83*


Their objections following, that by our doctrine men need not fear falling
into condemnation, though they fall into notorious sin, nor repent having
committed such sins; are of no weight: seeing God, though he promise salvation
to the truly called, certainly, yet he neither promises it, neither are they
to beleev it immediately; but by means of fearing to sin, and of Ier. 32. 40.
repentance when sin is committed, which he also promises Ier. 25. 12, and
29. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
to work, and put in their heart that they shall not depart from him. The Lord
prom^sed by the Prophet Jeremy that after 70 years of the Jews captivity
accomplished at Babylon, he would visit them, and cause them to return to
Jerusalem. And whereas it might be objected against the certainty of this
promise and event: What? Shall they return though they repent not, nor seek the
Lord, but remain rebellious, as they have been, and their forefathers before
them? He answers, that then they shall call upon God, and pray unto him, and
seek unto him; and he will hearken unto them, be found of them, and return
their captivity. He promises both the end and the means; and he that
promises is faithful in performing, and providing for both temporal and
eternal deliverance, and the means thereof.

Their Argument taken from exhortations, and admonitions Page 38.
in the Scriptures, that we receiv not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1,
and the like, has formerly been fully answered. They are not in vain, either
in respect of elect or reprobate: neither yet will we own their absurd answer
here fathered upon us, that the whole Scriptures are given to keep both elect
and reprobate from falling into gross sins; yet that neither the elect can be
damned by transgressing them, nor the reprobate saved by observing them. The
Scriptures have diverse ends; and amongst others, are given to keep all, not
only from gross, but from all sins. Neither do we affirm, that the elect
cannot be damned by transgressing them; or that the reprobate cannot be saved
by observing them, as they like deceitful proctors, plead for us, or rather
for their own advantage. But this we say, that the elect and truly sanctified
are so kept by the power of God in his fear, that they never transgress as
the wicked do; nor can, because his seed remains in them: that they
continually renew their repentance; particular, for sins known, into which
through infirmity they fall; and general, for sins unknown, as David did; and
that even by means of those 2 Samuel 12. 13* Psalm. 50. Ps. 19. 12. Act. 16. 14. 2
Cor. 3. 6. 7
exhortations and admonitions; which God opens their hearts to attend unto, and
gives increase accordingly. And the contrary, the reprobates, being left to
themselves of God, have by their own and satan's malice, their eyes so blinded,
and hearts hardened, as though those means of exhortation come unto them, they
either understand them not, or beleev them not, or despise them; but never
observe or obey them aright.

Their curses of the doctrine in this point received in all Reformed Churches,
as Atheistical and damnable; and their blessing themselves from it, is here as
every where, the fruit of that wild zeal, wherewith their ignorant hearts are
possessed.

Their answers follow to the Scriptures brought against Page 84.
them. The first is, Math. 24. 24. If it were possible they (the false
Teachers) should deceiv the very elect. Whence we conclude (as they say) that
it is not possible the elect should perish. And here first they show, who are
the elect of God; noting indeed the persons, but perverting the order of grace.
If in saying, as they do, that the elect of God, are those that receiv and
obey the truth of Christ, and abide in him unto the death, they meant, that
such as are chosen of God in his decree before the world, and actually and
effectually, chosen and called in time by the Word and Spirit, to beleev and
obey, did so abide to the death, it were but the truth, which the Scriptures
teach and we profess: But intending, as they do, that men have only the
promise of actual and particular election till then, but are not absolutely
elected; and that absolute election follows this abiding in Christ till death;
they are like the foolish builder, which would lay the foundation upon the
roof of the house. By their comment upon Christ's words, men should be in
danger to be seduced by false Prophets, when they have abiden in Christ unto
death; for till then they will have none elect: and the elect are here said to
be in danger to be seduced.

That which they gather from the manifold warnings in the Page 85.
Scriptures to the elect, that none deceiv them etc. is true; namely that the
elect may fall from their election (or rather from the grace received) if they
take not heed. But they should withal prove, that God does ever, so far leav
and forsake any truly justified, and sanctified in Christ, as that they take
no heed at all, as they ought. It is certain, that if the very elect Angels in
heaven, or Christ Jesus upon earth* had taken no heed to Gods commandments,
they could not have observed them.

That which is added, that many fall away, not by being deceived* but willingly
forsaking the truth: and again, that many fall away willingly, not being
deceived, is neither pertinent, seeing the place in question speaks only of
such as are deceived: nor true, seeing a man cannot will any evil, but under a
show and appearance of good, so presented to the will, by a deceived, and
e^^ing understanding. And so the Scriptures every where Psalm. 95. 5. Es^^* 53.
6. Pro^. 14. 22 Hebr. 3. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 17, etc.
ascribe all manner of defection from God, and his holy commandments, to
error, either in the general ground, or particular case.

The next place is Ioh. 10. 27. 28, My sheep hear my voice, and they know me,
and follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any take them out of mine hand. My Father which has given them
me, is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers
hand.

They here conceiv the purpose of Christ to be, to confirm his Page 86.
sheep, so long as they continue his sheep, etc. But herein they draw violently
Christ's purpose to their own. For Christ, as may be seen, by comparing herewith
v. 16. 26. 27, is to show how it came to pass, that some of his hearers
believed and obeyed his voice, and some not. Many of the Jews believed not,
because they were not his sheep: some did, being his sheep, to wit, by
destination of God. Christ says not, that they are not his sheep, because they
beleev not; but that they beleev not, because they are not his sheep; that is,
not being of the elect of God, they are left to their own impenitent, and
unbeleeving heart, which they also willingly harden against Christ's voice.
Where v. 16, he says, Other sheep I have which are not of this fold, whom also
I must bring etc, he means the elect amongst the Heathens destinated to that
one Sheepfold, under him that one Shepherd, and by his voice to be brought
thereto. This is yet more plain v. 15, where he says, I give my life for my
sheep. Christ dyed for the ungodly, Romans 5. 6. 8. By his sheep, therefore in
this place, are meant the elect from eternity* for whom he dyed: the fruit of
which election of God, and death of Christ, shows forth it self in their
timeous faith and obedience.

Further, note we for the thing in hand, that Christ gives Verse. 28.
unto his sheep, that hears his voice and obey him, eternal life: as elsewhere
also he says, He that believes on the Son has everlasting Ioh. 3. 36.
life. If this life which they have given them, and have (in the beginnings of
it) even in this life, be eternal and everlasting; how can it be broken off
afterward? Or if it can be interrupted and broken off, how is it everlasting
and eternal?

Lastly, if none be able to pluck Christ's sheep out of his, and his Fathers
hand: then no sinful person, or temptation, no malice of Satan can turn them
from God: for if they can, then they can pluck them out of Gods hand. Is not
the destroying and corrupting of men's faith and obedience, the plucking them
out of the hand of God? V. 12, the same word is used, the wolf catches and
scattreth the sheep, that is, corrupts them, as Math. 7. 10, Act. 20. 29,
where the same word is used also. As they are elsewhere too prodigal of
Christ's benefits to all the goats in the world, so are they here too niggardly
of them to his own sheep: Although in truth they grant, though unawares, as
much as we plead for, in saying, that those sheep, so long as they continue his
sheep, have spiritual peace and safety etc. Spiritual peace and safety is
against all assaults of all spiritual enemies, laboring to subvert the
spiritual state of Gods people.

To the Scriptures here alleged by them for their purpose, the answers
formerly given touching conditional threatenings, and Gods people in appearance,
must be applied.

Of the former of the two Scriptures following, which is Page 87.
Ioh. 13. 1, Whom he loves, he loves to the end, they speak as the thing is,
of Gods love: but as loath to be too much beholden to him for it, and desirous
Pharisaically to justify themselves, they pull down what they formerly built,
in saying, that the question is not of Gods and Christ's love unto his, but of
the continuance of our love unto him: wherein they both gainsay Page 78. 80.
81. 82. 83. 85. 90. 3^, etc. Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. Romans 5. 8. 10. Gal. 1. 15. Romans 9.
11. Mat. 11. 25 Rom* 3. 24. Gal 4. 5. 6. Romans 8. 15. Ephesians. 2. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 25.
1* Cor. 10. 13. 1 Thessalonians* 5. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 14 Romans 5. 5.
themselves in this whole Treatise, and the Scriptures throughout. They put the
question themselves of Gods election, and of the promise of election. And is
election, and the promise of election a work of our love to God, or of Gods to
us? The Scriptures also ascribe the whole work of our salvation, as election,
redemption by the blood of Christ, vocation, revelation of heavenly things,
justification, sanctification, adoption, faith, repentance, and the giving of
the Spirit, issue out of temptations, and continuing blameless to the coming
of the Lord, unto the good pleasure and love of God alone. It is true, that we
must also love God, as they say: But we must know* withal, that this our love
of God depends upon his love of us first, and the same shead abroad into our
hearts by his Spirit, which gives testimony thereof to our spirits: which, as it
were, forces love again from us to God, and the continuance of it the
continuance of our love; according to that of the Apostle, The love of Christ
constrains us. For as the beams of the Sun shed into the bosom of the earth
first heat it, and so cause it to reflect heat again toward heaven: so by the
love of God shead into our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us, our
hearts are most effectually drawn, and persuaded to love God again, and men
for, and according to him. Which I further also manifest thus. Our love,
whether to God or man, arises from 1 Timothy 1. 5.
faith unfeyned. Faith stands in the assured persuasion of the heart, by the
Holy Ghost, of Gods love to us: Whereupon I conclude, that our salvation
depending immediately upon our faith, love, and obedience, as conditions
requisite by Gods ordination, and they upon Gods love (and the same known) to
us, and so the continuance of them upon the continuance of it; the question is
properly, and principally of the love of God to us, and the unchangeablenesse
thereof.

For Romans 11. 29, they dream waking, that the meaning is Page 88. 89
that God will never repent of saving all persons at all times, in all places,
that seek salvation by faith in Christ, and continue therein. If this were all,
what needed the Apostle v. 33, to break out into that admiration of the riches
of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, and of the unsearchablenes of his
judgments? What strange thing is it, that God should not repent of so gracious
a purpose and promise, as is that of saving such as beleev in his Son.
Secondly, it is more then evident, that he speak not here of saving all at all
times, but of the saving of some at sometimes; namely, of the Israelites in
their time, and of Verse. 25. 26 30. 3^.
the Gentiles in theirs. Thirdly, the Apostle speaks not of saving them that
beleev, but of giving the election to obtain mercy, to beleev. Lastly, the
words are a reason of that which goes before, the Israelites touching election,
are beloved for the Fathers sake, v. 28. For, or because the gifts and calling
of God are without repentance; as if he should have said: though for the
present, the body of the Israelites be enemies for the Gospel, that is, in not
believing it, till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; yet the election,
such as are that Israel, according to election, and Gods people which he
foreknew, v. 2, them he loves in his decree unchangeably, for their father,
Abraham, Isaak, and Iakobs sake, and without repentance; and so will in their
time make them actually partakers of his most gracious gift and calling. They
here add certain Scriptures (and may do many more) proving that God denies the
effect to conditional promises, men breaking the conditions first: But as the
Scriptures cited by them, speak not all of salvation in Christ; so neither do
any other show, that God ever alters purpose, or promise of saving any, whom he
once loved in Christ, whether in decree, or application of love.

The last place which they labor to elude is, 1 Ioh. 2. 19. They Page 90. 91*
92. 93.
went out of us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they
would, no doubt, have continued with us, but they went out, that they might be
manifest, that they were not all of us. And here, in stead of answering
directly to the place, they make out-leaps, as their manner is: making us to
affirm that God has predestined some persons to salvation, and some to
damnation without any condition: and that these persons (the elect) making
never so great show of wickedness, and walking in the ways of Belial, are
still elect, and can by no means fall out of their election: the other persons
having never so many testimonies of godl^nesse, and walking in the Church of
Christ, yet can never but be reprobates, and if ever they fall away from the
Church, or truth, that they were never truly of it.

We affirm, that God predestinates none to salvation but with condition of the
death of Christ, and the persons (coming to years of discretion) faith, and
repentance, and continuance therein to the end, to go before that their
salvation: nor to damnation, but with condition of sin, and impenitency therein
to go before that their damnation. But our Adversaries being bold and
presumptuous, speak evil of the things which they neither know, nor are
walling to understand. Only, these two things we further hold in this case.
First, that the former conditions (Christ, and faith in him) are Gods free
gifts also, infallibly and effectually obtained by the former persons: the
latter condition (impenitency in sin) the certain effect of Satan's malice, and
their own corruption, being left of God thereunto. The second is, that other
reason, why God has, of two alike corrupt in themselves, preordained the former
to salvation, by the former means; and the latter to condemnation, by the
latter; the Scriptures do not acquaint us with then the mere pleasure of him,
who has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he hardneth: Romans
9. 11. 15. 18.
and who has loved Iakob, and hated Esau, to wit, in decree, the children not
bing yet born, neither having done either good or evil. Secondly, we say not
that the elect so remain, though walking in the ways of Belial; but deny, that
ever they so walk after their effectual calling, though through the remainders
of corruption (in some more strong then in others) they have not only their
common slidings, but often their greater falls, from which they recover
themselves by repentance: the spirit always lusting against the flesh, and they
in regard of the Law Romans 7. 15. 17. 23.
of their mind, and spiritual man, not allowing, but hating the evil, which
through the sin dwelling in them, they do.

Neither, on the other side, do the Reprobates ever show any one (much less
many) true testimonies of godliness; though many seeming such oftentimes, both
in their own judgments of themselves, and other men's of them. He that should
challenge a man for affirming, that it could not but be light at midday, nor
but be dark at midnight, in comparison; that he affirmed, that it could not but
be light at noon, though the Sun should not be up: nor but be dark at midnight,
though the Sun were not set; should but use slanderous cavillation: even such,
and no better, is their collection upon our assertion.

Where they add, that as all men's estates are one by creation, Page 90.
and one by transgression, all being dead in sins; and that, as all are shut up
in unbelief, so he has mercy on all, to wit, every particular person alike,
they mis-interpret the Scripture, as has been formerly showed; mistake the
proportion of nature (whether by creation, or corruption) with that of mere
grace; and are most impious against Gods mercy, which they make all one toward
Pharaoh and Moses; Herod and Paul: Besides, it should follow hereupon, that God
has mercy actually on all Romans 11. 30. 31. 26 27.
and every person in the world, in taking away their sins, and saving them;
for the Apostle whose words they cite, speaks expressly of such an all as obtain
mercy that way.

With like truth do they after affirm, from Math. 13, that Page 91.
the sower sows the seed of salvation upon all. It cannot with modesty be
denied, but there are, and have been many millions, unto whom the Gospel (the
only seed of salvation) was never preached. And as they begin, so go they on
with this parable; as being of them; in whose mouth a parable is like the Prove.
26. 7. 9.
legs of the lame that are lifted up, and like a thorn that goes up into the
hand of a drunkard. As first, where by the good seed they understand the seed
of salvation, or Gospel, and by tares, false doctrines: as if they know the
mind of our Savior, better then he himself: who expressly teaches, that the
good seed are the children of the Kingdom (so called, because they are the
heirs of their Fathers Kingdom) in which the righteous are to shine forth as
the Sun, v. 43, and the tares the children of the wicked one, which do
iniquity, are to be gathered by the Angels in the Verse. 38. 39. 40. 41, etc.
end of the world, and cast into the furnace of fire, etc. And if the good seed
were the Gospel, and the tares false doctrines, as they (transforming persons
into things) would make them; yet is it untruely affirmed by them, that the
persons of them who receiv the good seed were no better then the other, nor the
persons of them who receiv the tares any worse then the other. That both are
alike, to wit, dead in sin, when God offers the Gospel, we willingly grant,
and are glad to hear them confess: but to say they are both alike, when the one
receivs the Gospel, and the other refuses it, and receivs the tares contrary
unto it, is to say that the good ground, and the bad, are both alike. For what
makes them that are alike, when the Gospel comes alike unto them, not to remain
alike still? And what is the reason why the one receivs it, and not the other?
They say, because the goodness of the Sower first sowed it, and therefore he
has cause to Page 91.
praise him only. But, say I, this goodness is alike to both the two in
sowing, or offering the Gospels seed: Whereupon it must follow, that he who
receivs this good seed, has no more cause to praise God the Sower, then he
that receivs it not: for it is sown alike on both, in regard of outward offer;
but for the ones receiving of it, rather then the other, he has cause to thank
himself alone, and his own freewill. And indeed this is the mark at which all
those Adversaries arrows are shot. But the Scriptures teach us a further thing,
then these ungrateful persons will acknowledge; which is, that besides, and
above the offer common to both, God gives the increase 1 Cor. 3. 4.
to some (without which, all preaching is nothing:) even by opening of the
heart to attend unto it, as he did the heart of Lydia. Act. 16. 14
And as persons receiv the word of God into their hearts by his opening them
first, so in that his gracious work in them, he makes them which were before
alike, in spiritual consideration, to become unlike, and better then other;
and so more beloved then others for the godly qualities, as they call them,
which he has wrought in them. Neither does the Lord hate only the works of
wicked men, as they say; but also the workers of iniquity: not with a passion
of the mind, as hatred Ps. 5. 5 6.
is in man, but with a holy will to punish the violation of his righteous Law.
And though with a general love of the Creator to the creature, he always,
after a sort, love the persons of men, as being his generation, yet he loves,
(as is meet) the honor of his holiness, more then the happiness of his
creature, having violated and profaned it without repentance.

They further bewray their ignorance, where they think to Page 92.
mend the matter, in saying, that God hates the persons, as weapons and
instruments of those wicked qualities. Where has God ever so spoken, or any
other man before them? The godly qualities, or graces of knowledge, faith,
love, patience, and the like, 2 Cor. 6. 6. 7 Ephesians. 6. 13. etc. Romans 6. 13.
are the spiritual armor and weapons of godly men; the members also of men
are called the weapons of righteousness, or unrighteousnes, for that with them
they practice* and perform the works thereof: But to say, the persons are
weapons and instruments of the qualities, is to put the person in the hand of
the weapon to be used by it; whereas on the contrary, all know, that the weapon
and instrument is in the hand of the person, and to be used and exercised by
him. They here, in desiring the Reader well to observe what they have said, as
being a most blessed truth, are loath that their nakedness should not be seen
in their spiritual drunkenness.

ADVERSARIES.
NOW for the words of the Apostle, to which they return after so long wandering;
their comment is, They Page 92. 93.
went out from us, etc. that is, say they, Those lying spirits, those persons
who had once the spirit of truth in them, went out from the Apostles and other
Saints. And again, those lying spirits and Antichrists in men's persons, went
out etc. and were never of the truth: the sum of all being, that lying
spirits, and Antichrists in men's persons, went out of the truth.

DEFENSE.
A Riddle, better fitting H. N. then the professors of the truth in
simplicity. It behoues us therefore a little to insist upon the Text, opening
it according to the Apostles meaning, and ours with him; and first proving
against them, that by those that went out, are not meant the lying spirits in
the persons, but the persons themselves.

And first, these words, They went out from us, or better, from out of us,
show, that those out-goers were formerly of them in a respect; else how could
they have gone out from them? But lying spirits were never of the Apostles and
Saints; but the persons sometimes were. Secondly, he says not, as they
corrupt the Text, If they had been of the truth, but of us; nor they would hane
continued with it, but with us, nor, but they are not of it, but they were not
of us: all carrying it to persons so, and so qualified. Thirdly, Is it to be
conceived, that the Apostle would complain (as here he does) that lying
spirits did not continue with the Churches? Fourthly, in saying, They went out
of us, that it might be manifest that they were not all of us, he shows that by
their out-leaps, something was manifested which was hid before. But it was
plain before, to the Apostles and Saints, that lying spirits were not of the
truth. He speaks therefore of the persons of hypocrites, whom by this their
professed defection, God discovered. Fithly, in saying, they were not all of
us, he insinuates that some of them were; What? some lying spirits of the
Spirit of truth? No, but that not all the persons that formerly professed the
truth with them, were true members of Christ's body, which they were. Lastly, v.
20, He makes an opposition between them of whom he writes, and to whom. But
ye What? ye spirits, and so v. 28, little children, that is, little spirits.
All may see with what spirit these men are led. He then speaks of the going out
of persons, not of spirits, as they mean; but being indeed Antichrists, as v.
18, in regard of their spirits, and doctrines, for which they pretended the
spirit of Christ.

That which they add of the spirit of Hymeneus, together with Page 93.
his person, being in fellowship with Paul, is like the rest. By his Spirit it
seems they mean his faith, in saying faithful Hymeneus was of the truth;
erroneous Hymeneus was never of it. Has the faith of a person fellowship with
the Saints? Or did Hymeneus his faith sometimes hold faith and a good
conscience, and 1 Timothy 1. 19 20.
after put them away? Or are not these things plainly spoken of the person of
men? Paul speaking that of Hymeneus, and others, which he knew in regard of
outward appearance, and not that which he knew not of, the inward truth in the
heart.

The meaning of John is plain enough, that these Antichrists went out of the
Church, not by making any separation, or schism from it, as some think (for
they still continued in the outward fellowship, preaching, and prophesying and
deceiving;) Chap. 2. 26. Chap 4. 1.
but in it, by heresy and profaneness, contrary to that outward profession
of faith, and holiness, which they had formerly made: by which their defection
they showed, that they were never truly regenerate, and inwardly and indeed
living members of the body: but having been hypocrites, at their best, God so
ordered, that they should hereby discover themselves. For had they been indeed
of the number of the faithful, they had so continued to the end. Which truth
this Apostle confirms further, chapter 3, very evidently, saying; whosoever 1 Ioh.
3 9.
is born of God does not commit sin: For his, that is, Gods seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. He does not say, as some
would have him, he cannot sin, or commit sin, that is, give himself to sin, as
the wicked do, whilst the seed of God remains in him, or whilst he is born of
God; but for, or because, this seed of the new birth remains in him.

One observation I will here annex, and so conclude this Head. It cannot be,
says Christ, but offenses will come. And of Math. 18.
all offenses, none is greater, and which more wounds the tender heart of a
weak Christian, then when he sees such, as by their former profession and
appearances, have purchased to themselves the opinion of piety and godliness,
to apostate, and fall away from that their former profession, either to gross
error, or profaneness. This occasions him to suspect (Satan by suggestions
of unbelief, furthering him herein) that there is not in the course of
Christianity, that power of grace, stablenesse, and true comfort, which it
promises. This stone of offense, which Satan's malice casts in the way, Gods
spirit removes, in providing, that where there is in the Scriptures, either
mention, or insinuation of man's falling away from the grace of God, there is
withal commonly an item given in the same place, that such persons were never
effectually sanctified, but hypocrites, at their best, whatsoever they seemed
either to others, or to themselves. Thus, where some at the first, receiving the
word with joy, are after when tribulation* or persecution arises* offended;
others have made some growth, yet become unfruitful by the cares of the world
and deceitfulness Math. 13.
of riches: the Lord would have us take knowledge, that such were never better
then stony and thorny ground. Thus, that Judas being lost, was none of them
whom the Father had Ioh. 17.
given unto Christ, but a child of perdition. Thus where, Israel did not obtain
that which it sought for, but was broken off, yet that Rom, 11. 1 Cor. 10.
the election obtained it: the gifts and calling of God being without
repentance. Thus, that they, which fall, are such as think (that is presume,
that) they stand, rather then ever do so indeed. Thus, that though some come
to err concerning the truth formerly 2 Timothy 2.
professed by them* yet the foundation of God stands steady, having this soul,
The Lord knows who are his. Thus, that if some enlightened, and tasting of the
heavenly gifts etc. fall away, Heb. 5. and 6*
it is they that are dull of hearing, like the earth, that bears but thorns,
and briars, notwithstanding the rayns falling upon it. 2 Pet. 2, with Jude.
Thus, that false Teachers, and such as follow their pernicious ways, were at
first and best, but men creeping in unawares. Lastly, that such as went out of
the fellowship of the Apostles and Churches, in the outward profession of
faith, and holiness, were never truly, and inwardly of them, as was made
manifest in due time.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Freewill.

AFTER a loud blast in the beginning, as formerly, of their full and sufficient
dealing in the former point, our Adversaries begin this with a false, and foul
accusation.

ADVERSARIES.
THE Calvinists hold, that wicked men are compelled to sin Page 94. 95.
by Gods power; and again, that men are compelled by the power, force and
compulsion of Gods predestination to all wicked, and cruel crimes. Against
which they alleag out of Bastingius, and These. Genev. that Man by evil was
spoiled not of his will, but of the soundness of his will. Therefore that which
in nature was good, in quality became evil: and that, as Bernard teaches,
there is in us all power to will, but to will well, we had need to profit
better; to will evil we are able already by reason of our fall: as also, that
there remains freedom in all good, natural, civil, moral, and judicial
things, but not in spiritual. These things, they say, if we will stand to, they
require no more.

DEFENSE.
BOth we will stand to them, and they must fall by them, as they might
evidently see, if they considered, that all our question is about freedom of
will in spiritual things; which alone we deny.

The ground of their error here is, that they unskilfully confound necessity
and compulsion; and conceiv not how a thing, both free and casual in it self,
may be the overruling hand of Gods providence be determined necessarily this
way, or that. The difference between necessity and compulsion I have formerly
both proved and opened at large: showing how man's Page 20. 21.
freewill in choosing that which is evil, and Gods powerful hand in governing
him in that his choice, according to his wise counsel, to his holy ends, may
well stand together. And for that which is good, God works it by inclination,
by his Word and Spirit; which inclination cannot be compulsion, seeing
compulsion and violence is only against the inclination of the thing, and not
the inclining of it. God herein first takes away the former corrupt
inclination, that ^t reign not, which is the coard wherewith a man is tied, as
they speak, and then gives a new inclination contrary to the former, not
haleing up a man by main force, as they mishape a similitude for Page 98.
us, but giving inward will and strength of grace for the man to raise up
himself by. And if all kind of necessity abolish all kind of freedom, then in
truth a man does nothing freely; for whatsoever he does, he does it
necessarily, when he does it.

They do here in vain heap up Scriptures like medicines Page 96.
upon a sound stomach, to prove that election, and choice cannot be but in, or
rather with liberty. We acknowledge that whatsoever good or evil a man does
outwardly, or inwardly, where the will comes to work (for there may be acts of
the understanding, and motions of the affections before and without the wills
working) he uses liberty and freedom in choosing, or refusing: that is, he does
it not by any violence or compulsion, but from the inward principles of his
mind; the understanding directing, and the will consenting; though yet the
wicked, being left of God, cannot but do wickedly, any more then the
Ethiopian can change his skin, or the Leopard his Ier. 13. 23.
spots: nor the godly but do godlily, by the grace of God effectually
inclining him thereunto. Neither does our affirmation make void, or unmoveing
the threatenings of God; but makes both threatenings, and promises, and precepts,
and all, most effectual; God by the inward work of his spirit giving an
increase to the outward preaching; and opening the heart to receive the same.
One man can move another by outward motives, words, and the like. Will these
men Numb. 11. 25. 26. Judge. 14* 5. 19. Ps. 51. 11. 12. Ezech. 11. 19. and 36.
26. 27. Luke 1. 15. Act. 1. 8. and 2. 17. 18. Romans 8. 9. 18. 26. 27 Page 95.
afford God no more, or other work? Will they deny any inward work of Gods
spirit at all, above the words work, though in, and by it? What mean then the
holy Scriptures speaking so frequently of this Spirits work in men, with means,
without means; for ordinary, and extraordinary operations, both gifts, and
graces? Or if there be such a spirit of God dwelling, and working in men, why
do they deny unto it, a prevailing power, wheresoever it pleases God to
bestow it? And for those that cannot repent, as they plead for some; God, and
their own consciences will plead against them, that they will not repent: and
so are not tied with a coard by others, and violently withheld, as they plead
for them, but do willingly cast, and keep the coards of iniquity, and
rebellion upon themselves.

We acknowledge also (and they therefore prove in vain) Page 100 101.
that to whomsoever the word comes, them God would have gathered unto him,
hearken unto his voice, repent that they might live and not die, to wit, in that
degeee of willing, which stands in commanding those things, and approving them
if they follow; and that the fault is only in men's obstinacy, if they repent
not.

Neither do the Calvinists, as they surmise, make either Gods decree, or the
defect of his grace in fault, if men repent not; because they affirm that God
decreed not to give them the grace to repent, nor does give it them; except
either God may not require repentance of all, or be bound to give it to all. It
is not my fault, that a drunkard falls and lies in the street, though he cannot
but both fall, and ly there, except I hold, and help him up; except withal I
be bound so to help him: nor my fault that a prodigal spend-thrift comes into
debt, and is cast into prison, and cannot escape the one, or other, unless I
pay his debts; except withal I be bound to pay them: so neither is it Gods
fault that men remain and peri^h in that impenitency, out of which they neither
will, nor can come without Gods special gift of repentance, except it be Gods
bounden duty (as these men seem to make it) to bestow that grace upon them.

The two places Esa. 5. 1. 2. 3, etc. and Math: 11. 21. 22, we will a little
more particularly examine. In the former where God says, he could do no more
to his vineyard then he had done, he speaks only of outward means, as the text
makes it plain, I fenced it etc. I would ask these men, whether there be not
requisite, that the natural vineyard may bring forth fruit, something besides
the fencing, gathering out of the stones, and the rest there mentioned? It
cannot be denied, that, except besides, and above all these, God give the
increase by an inward blessing, all planting, and watering, and outward
dressing whatsoever is nothing: so is it in the spiritual vineyard much more
though planted by Paul himself, yea by Christ himself in the outward ministry.
And where God says, He expected sweet grapes, but it brought forth wild v:4.
we must not imagine (as our adversaries seem to do) that God is deceaved in
his expectation, as men often are: but only, that the Israelites did not
perform that which God required, and they ought.

Touching the repentance of Tire and Sidon. First I would know how they prove
that Christ speaks of other then legal repentance, such as Ahab manifested in
sackcloth? which was 1. King. 21. 26.
not from a godly sorrow for sin; but from a servile fear of punishment.
Secondly either this repentance should have been wrought by those mighty works
alone, or by them with other helps. Mighty works alone cannot work faith, and
repentance, Romans 10. 17 2. Tim. 2. 25. Mar. 16. 20
which must come by hearing, and instructions of the word, which they serve to
confirm unto men. If Christ speak of his mighty works, as means though not
sufficient of themselves, yet availeable, with other requisite helps, he
excludes not the spirits work, but includes it. But, in truth, the meaning of
Christ seems to be no more, but to reprove the obstinacy of Corazin in a form
of speech like unto that Luke 19. 40. If these should hold their tongue, the
stones would imediately cry out. And as it were a vain thing hence to dispute
about the speaking of stones; so is it, to gather any thing thence of the
Tyrians repentance. The meaning of the Lord here is not to commend the Tyrians
at all, but to upbraid the Chorazites, and to show their hardness of heart to be
greater then the others. The like form of speech we have to the like purpose
Ezech: 3. 6. And if so be there were in these Tyrians this pronenes to
repentance* if they had enjoyed the means which the others did, but they
wanted; and withal, that God so desires the repentance and salvation of all;
how came it to pass, that God did not afford those helps unto them that were
so prone and willing to have used them aright? It seems, the former case is now
altered, and that men might say to God, that they would, but he would not.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir invincible Argument servs only to bewray their incurable Page 101.
disease in heaping together many Scriptures to prove that, which no man doubts
of; namely, that the works wrought in us by God are attributed to us also; as
the cleansing of our hearts etc: wherein yet they mingle with Gods truth their
own errors, and that in particular, in affirming, that God takes Page 102.
it to himself as a proper title, to justify a sinner: and yet that Dasaith, he
justified his heart.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, if it be proper to God to justify a sinner, how is it common to David
with him? Secondly, They slander David in making him say, he justified his
heart. Could David forgive the sin of his heart? which God does in justifying a
sinner. David Psalm. 73. speaks of sanctification, not of justification.

They ignorantly apply the Scriptures, Psalm. 108. 12. and Psalm. Page 103.
118. 13. to Gods working grace in men, being meant only of his working
deliverance for them.

They vainly, and deceitfully affirm, from Acts. 7. 51. and Page 103. 104.
13. 46. that man may resist the grace of God, wrought by his word and spirit.
The places speak not of any grace wrought by either of them. The former speaks
only of resisting the spirit; as the Author of the word in the Prophets and
others. The latter of resisting the word of God, not working, but offering
grace only. Besides, they notably abuse those Scriptures cited, Page 104.
in making them plainly to show that man has free choice (to wit alike) to
work with God, or against God in the work of his grace. It is true, that men
whether receiving or refusing grace, do it freely, and without compulsion: but
the latter freely of themselves, being left of God to themselves; the former
freely* by Gods special grace, and spirit, giving them, and effectually
drawing them to Christ. I say more effectually* Ioh. 6. 44.
though not violently, then any one creature can by violence draw another. Oh,
that any made partakers of this free grace of Gods spirit dwelling in them,
should deny the powerful work of it, to establish their own freewill!

After Scriptures, they come to experience. And first, Page 104.
they err in thinking, that liberty and necessity of sinning in wicked men
cannot stand together. It is certain, that the more wicked either man or devil
is, he sins both the more freely, and the more necessarily. Their
similitude, of a man's drinking poison, is against themselves, so far as it is
pertinent. I would know of them how the drinking of poison by any is
unavoydable? If they say, because he knows it not to be in his drink, therein
they grant that sins of ignorance are done unavoydably, and yet not by
compulsion, as they conclude. Secondly, who would think, that any, after the
profession of the knowledge, and obedience of the Gospel, which these men have
made, so many years, both in the Church of England, and else where, should so
far apostate therefrom to Popery, and Pha^isaism, as to think it as easy a
thing, for a man, yea, though never so wicked, to keep himself from all sin,
as from drinking of poison, which he knew to be in his cup? For he that knows
it not cannot avoid it. How grievously err they, in affirming, that all men
are able to keep the Law, to Page 105.
wit, without the least failing, all their life long, in thought, word or deed?
For this they plead in this whole Section, that except it be possible for every
man thus to keep the Law, neither his conscience can accuse him, nor God justly
punish him for breaking it.

Neither do the Calvinists hold, as they barbarously speak.* and unjustly
slander, that men commit evil by force of Gods providence, or are decreed to
do evil, or compelled to sin by power. But they beleev, as the Scriptures
teach, that all men in Adam have Romans 5. 12. 15. Romans 8. 3.
sinned, and by sin lost the Image of God in which they were made; so as the
Law is impossible unto them by reason of the flesh, and so cannot possibly but
sin, by reason of the same flesh reigning in the unregenerate, and dwelling in
all: (which these light persons, expressly confess in the sequel of this book:)
and Page 117. 119.
that this so comes to pass by Gods holy decree, and work of providence
answerable, not forceing evil upon any, but ordering all persons in all
actions, as the supreme Governor of all: and that the wicked, being left of
God; some destitute of the outward means, the Gospel; all of them of the
effectual work of the Spirit, from that weak flesh, and natural corruption,
daily increased in them, sin, both necessarily as unable to keep the Law; and
willingly, as having in themselves the beginning and cause thereof, the
blindness of their own minds, and perverseness of their will and affections;
and so are inexcuseable in Gods sight.

Here, with the loud boasts of their large and undeniable Page 106. 107.
proofs, they join sundry errors. As first, in making the good things of
creation to come from Gods grace, viz. for salvation, of which our question is.
The good things of creation the Scriptures Gal 5. 4. Ephesians. 28. Romans 7. 5.
account our own, and of our selves, ever opposing them to the good things of
grace, to salvation. Secondly, they err egregiously, in saying, that what Adam
had in creation, and lost by transgression for himself and his posterity, that
is restored through Christ, to wit, to all; for so the question is. By this,
all should be restored actually into Gods favor, have his image repaired in
them, and be wholly free from that weak flesh, making the Law impossible unto
them. With like perverseness do they misapply to all Adams posterity without
difference, that which the Apostle speaks of himself, and other godly
Ministers, and Christians only, Romans 8. 3. 4, 2 Cor. 3. 5, Phil. 4, 13, as any
that pleases to peruse the places, may see. Lastly, they most Romans 1. 6. 15.
and chapter 8 1. 8. 12. 13. Gal. 5. 17. 24.
absurdly affirm, that the flesh through Christ is able to fulfill the Law;
whereas we fulfill the Law no further, then as we kill, crucify, and destroy
the flesh, and lusts thereof, by the Spirit.

ADVERSARIES.
TO the question, Whether a man can do any thing in the Page 107. 108.
work of his regeneration, they answer, after much froath of words, that faith
and repentance is regeneration, and that it is most plain (as what is not to
their peircing eye) that even in the work of regeneration, man may submit to
it, or hinder it.

DEFENSE.
AN ignorant assertion, showing the ground of their error in not putting
difference between Gods work, and man's. They may as rightly say, that the life
and motion of the child is its begetting. To regenerate is nothing else, but
to beget anew. Does the child beget it self? Or does not the parent only
beget it? So God begets by the Ministry of the Word, and man is begotten by
him: according to that of the Apostle, Every one that loves him that begat,
loves him also Ioh. 5. 1.
that is begotten of him. So Iam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us, by the
word of truth. By these men's doctrine we should beget our selves of our own
will. Begetting in creatures, is both in nature and time, before the being of
the begotten. Men then before they be, must beget themselves, by their saying.
And as God regenerates, and not man; so does man, being regenerated, beleev and
obey, and not God. Whereas, if faith and obedience be regeneration, then God
believes and repents; seeing God regenerates. Besides, as the outward means of
regeneration may be, and are, by too many hindered from working, and made
unprofitable: So where God pleases to add to the outward means, and motives of
the Gospel, the inward work of the Spirit, of which Spirit, we are born or
begot Ioh. 3. 5. 6. 8 1 Pet. 1. 23.
anew; of the Spirit, I say, though by the Word; by the same Spirit which he
puts within them, he takes away first what might Ezech. 11. 19. Ier. 24. 7. and
31. 33. Ezech. 36. 27. Ephesians. 2. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 25
hinder their regeneration, even their stony heart; and giving them a heart of
flesh, a heart to know God, and putting his fear in their hearts, and by
putting his Spirit in them, causing them to walk in his statutes; he thereby
regenerates them, or gives them faith, and repentance, which they must have
before they can beleev or repent: as the child must have life before it can
live, or do acts of life, and must be generated, or begotten, before it have
life, or being. Regeneration therefore goes before faith, and repentance.

This Head they shut with answering three Scriptures. The first Math. 22, but
mistaken, for Luke 14. 23, which as it is frivolously objected (if by any) so
is it easily answered.

The second is, Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come to me except the Father draw him.
This is not meant (say they) of violent compulsion. Page 109.
True, nor yet only (as they would have it) of outward teaching by heavenly
doctrine: For thus the Father drew many that came not to Christ; whereas he
speaks here, of such a drawing as is peculiar to them that come to him; who
shall never hunger, v. 35, and whom he will in no wise cast out, v. 37. He
speaks not therefore of the outward teaching only, but withal, and
principally, of the inward teaching of the spirit, as Esa. 54. 13, Ier. 31. 33.
34, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. The most of them whom the Father drew by heavenly doctrine,
that is, to whom Christ preached, murmured at him, v. 41: this he reproues,
verse. 43, and verse. 44, takes away the offense which might arise, at the
consideration of the small effect which his words had with many, considering
what he testified of himself, v. 39. 40, showing that such was man's
perverseness in spiritual things, as that except God, to the outward word,
adjoined the inward work of the Spirit, thereby drawing him, his obstinacy
could not, nor would not be tamed, nor he turned to God.

Lastly, to Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in you both the will and deed,
after much impertinent discourse, and many errors Page 110. 111. 112.
mingled among, they answer, that God does this in men by reasons, and
persuasions, that they would choose life, and avoid death.

And first, they conclude without and against reason, that if the regenerate
have power to resist, they have power not to resist: which is, as if a man
should say, if a fool can do foolishly, then he can do wisely, or the like.

Secondly, it is a slander upon the Calvinists, that they are divided in this
point; or that any of them affirms, that the elect though unregenerate, cannot
resist good. Whilst they are unregenerate they can do nothing else but resist
in spiritual things: But God in time (as he has decreed) by the spirit of
regeneration, overcomes their corruption, and works in them, not to resist, but
willingly to follow him, that calls them.

Thirdly, I would know what they mean by these phrases, of Gods sending his
word and spirit to work our regeneration: and again, of God by the power of his
word and spirit, showing man the benefit of life etc. If they consider the
spirit only as the Author of the word, speaking in the men of God, why do
they not say the Spirit and the Word, rather then, as they do, the Word and the
Spirit? Or how does God send the spirit, thus understood, to work regeneration
in men? If they answer, that God is ready to give the spirit, and so does to
them that will receiv it: first, to be ready to give, is not to give or send:
secondly, they should understand, that to be willing to receiv spiritual
things, is a main fruit and effect of regeneration, and therefore not a cause,
as they mistake. For the will, thus holily bent, presupposes the understanding
divinely enlightened, whose direction it follows, and without which going
before, it is blind and brutish. Neither can a man possibly will a thing, but
as he understands it to be good for him. If the understanding be divinely
enlightened, and the will holily bent, then the whole man is before regenerated,
that is, begotten before of God by the spirit of regeneration. In truth, they
but speak of Gods sending his Spirit to work in man's regeneration, as
Senacherib by Rabsakah spoke of Gods sending him 2 King. 18. 25.
against Jerusalem. He to cover the pride of violence; and they to cover the
pride of free will, in bending it self, of itself, to receiv grace offered.

To conclude this Head* referring the Reader to the Arguments Page 44. 45. 46.
47.
of conviction formerly laid down, I only add thus much: that if God only
bend the will by persuasions of promises and threatenings, and works not
otherwise, then by force of reasons, Page 108. 109. 111. Mat. 11. 25 1 Cor. 1.
26. 27.
and by using strong arguments and persuasions, as they expressly affirm; then,
that, whose contrary, both the Scriptures and experience confirms, would
ordinarily come to pass; namely, that the wise and prudent should have
heavenly things revealed unto them, and discern them much more easily and
effectually, then babes and weak persons; and so should be converted sooner
then they: specially sooner then harlots and light persons, considering how
much better they mind and understand; arguments and reasons of all sorts; then
the other. We therefore conclude with the Apostle, that God works in us both the
will and the deed: not only by his word working on us, but by his Spirit
working in us: not only by sending Paul to plant, by propounding strong
arguments of persuasion, but also by giving the increase by the most effectual
work of his Spirit, inlightning the eyes of the understanding Ephesians. 1. 18.
to see the force of those arguments, opening the heart to attend unto them,
and so writing them in the same heart, and most inward Act. 16. 14. Ier. 31. 34.
parts, as they cannot be blotted out.

CHAP. V.
Of the Original estate of Mankind.

THE main question here to be discussed is, whether all Infants sinned in Adam,
and so be guilty of death, and condemnation naturally, and without mercy in
Christ, or not? This I will prove (God willing) against them; answering, and
disproving what they bring to the contrary, and that in their own order, as
follows. Page 113.


ADVERSARIES.
INfants had no life, nor being, as Adam had, at that time, when God gave the
Law to Adam; and therefore no Law was given unto them; and therefore sinned not,
nor were guilty of condemnation.

DEFENSE.
I Grant, that infants had then no life and being, as Adam had, to wit,
actual, and distinct: but affirm, that they had both, after a sort, and as the
branches in the root. Odegos (the guide of the blind, as Romans 2. 19,) affirms,
page 114, that mankind was in Adam in bodily substance; they had therefore being
in Adam after a sort, namely, so far as they were in him. If they had being in
Adam any way, they had life also in him: for nothing in Adam was dead, but all
living: their being therefore so far, as it was in him, was a living being.

We read Hebr. 7. 9, that Levi paid tithes to Melchisedeck in Abraham. But
how could this be, might one say, seeing Levi had then no life and being? The
Apostle answers, that he was in the loins of his father Abraham, when
Melchisedeck met him. And reason teaches, that none can do any act, but he
must first be, nor do it otherwise, then as he is. Levi therefore then had a
kind of being, and that living, and reasonable also, as he performed that act
of paying tithes. He in Abraham as a particular root: Mankind in Adam, as in a
general root.

2 That Infants had a Law given them, I thus prove. First, the word of God,
Genesis 2. 17. In the day, that thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good, and
evil, thou shall die the death; show, that whom God threatens with death, to
them he gave the Law. The punishment Genesis 3. 17. 18. 19, reaches to all Adams
posterity, and so the threatening, and by consequence the Law. Secondly, the
Apostle teaches, Romans 2. 15, that the Law is written in the hearts of the
Gentiles, according to which Law of nature written in their hearts (though they
had it not written in tables of stone, as the Jews) they shall be judged at the
day of the Lord, v. 15. 16. 17. These Gentiles cannot be imagined to have this
Law thus written any other way, then as God in the beginning created Adam, and
all mankind in him, after his Image, in righteousness and holiness; in which
respect also they are said, to do by nature the things contained in the Law,
having also a natural conscience in them, which without a Law were vain: Under
which general Law, binding the reasonable creature to faith and obedience in
all things (in disposition before use of discretion, and in act afterward:)
the particular Law, Genesis 2, is contained, and to be referred unto it. Thirdly,
if infants have reasonable souls, then have they the faculties of
understanding and will, though not the actual use of them, as men have. This
understanding cannot be conceived by any to be without all disposition and
pronenesse, either to the knowledge of God, or to ignorance, error, and
doubting of him; nor this will to be without all disposition, and inclination
to will according to, or against Gods will. As the young whelps and cubs, of
Lions, Bears, and Foxes, have in their natural and sensitive faculties, a
pronenesse and inclination to raven; and every beast pronenesse to the things
of its kind, after, actually performed, and practiced by them: so have infants
necessarily in their reasonable faculties, a disposition, one or other, to
understand and will things, specially such as concern God, by reason of the
most natural, necessary, and indossolible relation, between the reasonable
creature, and the Creator, and that specially in those most noble faculties.

The objection from Romans 7. 1, has in it no color of truth: for neither are
there any such words, that the Law is given (especially only, which must be
added) to them that know it: neither does the Apostle there intend at all, to
show to whom the Law was given, or not: but only, that the Christian Church at
Rome (specially many of them being Jews, as appears chap. 16,) to which he
wrote, was not ignorant of the Law, whether general or particular, to which he
had reference in that place.

To Deuteronomy. 11. 2, besides things answered by Mr. Ainsworth, I add, that Moses
there excludes not only infants, but many grown men as appears, v. 3. 4. The
other two places Matthew. 13. 9, and 1 Cor. 10. 15, exclude too many men's of
years also, considering how few have ears to hear, or understanding to judge
aright of spiritual things.

For the third head, and that all sinned in Adam, it is so plain from Romans 5,
as they have nothing at all to answer, Verse. 12.
though they object the place: only they bring certain other Scriptures, in
such a manner, as if they would disprove one Scripture by another. And indeed
what exposition can be given, or evasion found, considering the expressenes of
the words? As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so
death passed upon all men, for that (or as the original has it) in whom all
men have sinned. So v. 19, As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
etc. If they say, as some do, that all are made sinners by imitation only,
they are clearly confuted; first, by daily experience, in which it is plain,
that children coming to some discerning, will lie, filch, and revenge
themselves, though they never heard lie told, etc. It is alas too evident, that
they bring this corruption into the world with them. Secondly, by the Apostles
words, v. 19, For as by ones man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. If we be made unrighteous
only by imitation of Adams sin, and not by his performing it, as our root
naturally; then we are made righteous only by imitation of Christ's
righteousness, and not by his performing righteousness, and fulfilling the
Law for us, as our spiritual root, in which we are grafted by faith.

Lastly, these Adversaries grant, that by Adams sin all his Page 117.
posterity have weak natures* by which when the commandment comes, they cannot
obey, and live* but sin, and so die, Romans 8. 3. Romans 8. 3.
Can they which are accustomed to do evil* do well? Or will these men never
leav their godless custom of corrupting the words of the text, for advantaging
of an evil cause? For flesh, which the Text has, they put nature: whereas it
is without all question, that by flesh, the Apostle there understands properly,
sin and sinful flesh: as he expressly calls it, and as is plain in the whole
context, v. 1. 2. 4. 5. 6. 7, etc. In all which he opposes the flesh to the
spirit, and the sinful life of the one, to the righteous life of the other.

And I would know of these deep Divines, what but sin could possibly make Adams
posterity unable to keep the Law? This flesh, or nature, as they will have it,
must be contrary to this good and holy Law, and resist it. And is not that Romans
7. 12.
properly sinful and unholy, which resists, and is contrary to See Romans 7. 17.
18, etc. and Gal. 5. 17.
that which is good and holy; Lastly, this enemy to the Law of God in a man,
must be in his soul. And what else can it be, then a disposition in the
understanding, to ignorance and error, touching God and heavenly things; and
an inclination in the will and affections to evil? Which is as properly sin,
as their acts and effects are properly sinful. Infants therefore bring sin
properly into the world with them.

Two things they here object: First, that Christ often accounts children,
innocents, as Math. 18. 3. 4, and 19. 14. I answer, first, not as they mean;
that is, such as have in them nothing virtuous Mat. 18. 4. and chapter 19. 13. 14.
Mark. 10. 14. 15. 16.
or vicious; good, or evil; but as being humble, and without pride; and such,
as unto whom the Kingdom of God, and his blessing did appertain. Secondly, He
speaks not of all children, but of those, of, and in the Church.

Their second objection is, that our souls being the subjects of sin, are
created of God imediately. But to this objection, they that referrs the souls
original, imediately to Gods supernatural, and indeed miraculous work, do
give diverse answers, which these Adversaries should have refuted. Amongst
others, Mr. Ainsworths answer is worthy the consideration. But let us consider
their proofs for the souls immediate creation. The first is, Act. 17. 26, Of
one blood God made all mankind, etc. But this place makes rather against them;
seeing the body alone makes not mankind, but the soul with it, by which
specially the man is. The next place is Heb. 12. 9, whence they gather that
Adam is the Father of our bodies, and God the Father of our Spirits. But first,
the Text neither mentions Adam, nor can agree to him in the state of creation:
seeing in that estate there was no use of correction. Secondly, it says not,
the fathers of our bodies, but of our flesh: nor the father of See: Com. pub.
and private pa. 107
our Spirits, but of Spirits. And the meaning seems unto me (with due respect
had to other men's different judgment) only to be this: that if we give honor
to men (our carnal or fleshly fathers) chastening us, as they think good: how
much more owe honor to our spiritual father, chastening us for our eternal
good? And surely God, in his kind, is the father of the whole man, not of the
soul only: So is man, in his kind, the father of the whole man, and not of
the body only. Lastly, seeing the drift of the place, is to show, that God as
a father, chasteneth his sons which he loves, and on the contrary, that they
that are not chastened, are not sons, and so Verse. 6.
have not God for their Father, I see not how the Apostle can speak of the
creation of souls, seeing in that respect, wicked and godly, children and
bastards, have God alike their father. The Preacher, chapter 12. 7, speaks of the
manner of the creation of the first man Adam only: but no more proves that our
souls or spirits are created by God imediately, then that our bodies are made
of dust immediately. That chapter 8. 8, has no color of proof in it.

Against our fourth and last assertion, that all by Adams sin are guilty of
death, Romans 5. 12, they cavil, that we were not in Page 114. 115.
Adam to bring any soul to hell for the breach of that commandemant, Thou
shall not eat.

Where, first (to pass by their incongruity of speech) they free Adam himself
from the guilt of condemnation of which our question is, as well as his
posterity, by that his sin; seeing it brought not him himself to hell. But
secondly, and for the thing it self: They grant, acording to the Scriptures,
that Page 116.
death, as a part of the curse, came over all Adams posterity for his sin: And
will they then deny, that eternal death was also due by the same law of
justice? Is not the justice of God infinite, and so requiring infinite
satisfaction? To what reasonable creature soever, the smallest punishment is
due from God; the greatest is due also in rigor of justice. And so the curse
(as they grant) extending to Adams generation Page 116*
by his sin; eternal condemnation, as the principal part of it, extends
unto them necessarily, except mercy be showed them.

Neither will it help our Adversaries, that other creatures die Page 116. 122.
also; seeing their absolutely mortal condition limits their punishment to
this present life: But such is not the estate of infants; but their immortal
souls, unto which their bodies at that day are to be reunited, makes the whole
capable of a more full declaration of Gods justice, if he deal in severity
thereof without mercy, as he may. Besides, the Apostle says, that death passed
upon all, for that all have sinned, viz. in that Romans 5. 12.
one man Adam. Does death come over bruit beasts, because they have sinned in
Adam? They are brutish that see not the difference, which these men will not
acknowledge. It is said elsewhere, that in Adam all die. Do beasts die in
Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 22
as his posterity does? As all that are Christ's, are in Christ, and made alive
by him; so all Adams posterity were in him, and die in him: Which death also
the Apostle makes no less, then judgment to condemnation, to wit, if
redemption be not obtained: Romans 5. 16. 21. Page 117.
to which he opposes justification, and eternal life. Ioyn herewith, these
men's confession, that all mankind by Adams fall are made unable to keep Gods
precepts, when he gives them, and so all fall under the wrath of God, and are
therefore said to be children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3, and there is sufficient for
their conviction, as has been showed. But I add, that the Apostle means
plainly a further matter, and that all are born children of wrath: for to be so
by nature, and to be born so, are the same. We are children of wrath by sin
only: If therefore all be children of wrath by nature, it is by the sin of
nature, which we call original sin, and not by actual sin only, as they
surmise.

Lastly, I demand whether, if Adam had not sinned, he should not have
transferred to his posterity the Image of God after which he was created, and a
pronenesse to keep it. (as notwithstanding sin, he does some feeble remainders
thereof) Romans 2. 14. 15*
and therewith right to eternal life? If yea, why not then sin, and the guilt
thereof, by proportion, having sinned?

To Ezech. 18, I have formerly answered. He speaks of the sins of immediate
parents, not of the first sin of our first father; which was natural: whereas
the other but personal; yea, not only other men's, but his after sins also.
Secondly, it is plain, he speaks of such children, as seeing all their fathers
sins, consider, and do not the like, but do that which is lawful, and Ezeeh.
18. 14. 15, etc.
right, keeping, and doing all Gods statutes. To such God imputes no sin.

Their affirmation following is strange, that Infants shall Page 118. 119.
receiv no judgment, because they have done neither good nor evil, according
to which all judgment passes. By this, they should neither be saved, nor
damned: for what else is it to receiv judgment of salvation, but to be saved?
and so for the contrary. They do ignorantly exclude Infants from a state one,
or other, for wanting that condition, which is required of men of years only.
They might as probably say, that Infants shall be damned; seeing Christ says,
He that believes not shall be Mark. 16. 16. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
damned: or should not eat, because it is said, He that will not work shall not
eat.

To the place, Ps. 51. 5, Behold I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceiv me; they answer not directly, but by many Ifs, and ands:
choosing many uncertain vanities, rather then one certain truth: which is, that
David in this whole context confesses his transgression and sin. And as men
ascend by the stream to the fountain; so does he in those words to the fountain
of all evil. As if he should have said; Lord, I am not only stained with, and
guilty of these particular evils; but I am even wholly corrupt by nature from
the very womb, and have brought a fountain of sin into the world with me, from
whence these particular mischiefs have issued.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir Answers follow. The first is, that David confesses that he is made, as
Ps. 103. 14, of weak flesh, and unable to resist the Tempter, being dust, etc.

DEFENSE.
Does man's being made of dust make him unable to resist the Tempter? Then God
making Adam of the dust made him unable to resist the Tempter also; which both
crosses the truth, and their own assertion. The Prophet, Psalm. 103. 14, speaks
of bodily weakness and frailty only, which is nothing at all to the matter
in hand; and which, if it had been greater in David, would have been more
advantageable against that sin into which he fell.

Next, for their advantage, they corrupt the Text, Romans 8, Page 119.
in saying, Christ came in sinful flesh: where the Text says, he came in the
similitude of sinful flesh. He came in nothing sinful, but all holy, and pure
from sin. So do they that, 2 Cor. 5. 21, leaving out for us: which shows, how
Christ became sin for us: that is, as our Surety, and liable to the curse due
to our sins; but not in sinful flesh, as they erroneously say. Thirdly, they
absurdly affirm, that the sin of his mother, whether Hevah, or that bare him,
is that sin or punishment laid upon her, which he here confesses, in saying, I
was conceived in sin. David confesses a sin as evil, whereas all punishments
are Gods good work: yea his own sin only of which he desires forgiveness.
Neither do the words here at all agree with those, Genesis 3. 16, as they say.
The Reader that will, may see them opened at large by Mr. A^nsworth.

They add, that it is frequent with the Holy Ghost to call punishments Page 120.
for sins, by the name of sins. But first, not so frequent by a 1000 times, as
to call the transgression of the Law sin: secondly, the phrase in sin: is
never taken but properly, as to be in sin, to live in sin, to continue in sin,
to die in sin; and specially to be born in sin; as Ioh. 9. 34, the Pharisees in
so judging, followed the error of the Pythagorean Philosophers: thirdly, where
Christ is said to bear our sins, it is primarily in regard of the guilt, as he
was our Surety. Of what sin of his mother was David guilty?

They unjustly accuse us, as saying, that David sinned in being Page 120. 121.
born and conceived; or that the very matter and substance whereof David was
made, was sin. Vayn are they, in imagining such vain things of us. David was
merely a patient in being born, and sinned not therein; neither yet did his
mother sin, either in conceiving or bearing him, though she conceived and
brought him forth in sin. But he having sinned in Adam, as in a general root,
was so conceived and brought forth, by his mother, in sin.

Secondly, it is one thing to be conceived and born in sin, another thing to be
made of sin. The former, David affirms of himself; the latter, they vainly
impute to us, and refute in us, with many words.

That Infants are under condemnation; that is, naturally guilty Page 122. 123.
thereof, has been formerly proved: that actual faith in Christ is required
for their reconciliation to God, does not follow hereupon. Actual, I say, for
the seed of faith they have, and of all graces: (for but by Gods holy Spirit in
them, which carries all graces with it, they cannot be holy; and so not be
glorified, if they be not holy first:) but that hereupon they need actual
faith, is their saying, without proof. Actual sins indeed require actual
faith: but for sin in disposit on (called original) why may not faith in
disposition suffice, through the mercy of God, for the applying of it?

About the Infants of Sodom and Gomorrah, they discourse Page 123.
marvellously, as first, in ranking them in their deaths with unreasonable
creatures in theirs: secondly, in making them not only innocent, but godly
also. The Scriptures teach, that besides the temporary death, those Cities
suffer the vengeance of Jude 7.
eternal fire. Let them prove children not to have been of those Cities. If
God exempted them, or any of them, from that vengeance, it was not for any
condition common to them with bruit beasts, as they insinuate, but with respect
to Christ; besides whom, the Scriptures acknowledge no other Savior, nor no
other salvation, but by him.

ADVERSARIES.
TO a question moved by themselves, What need Infants Page 123.
have of Christ, if they be not under condemnation: they answer, that through
his redemption they live, and move, and have their being, and enjoy all other
earthly blessings, with resurrection from the dead, and glorification, 1 Cor.
15. 12.

DEFENSE.
THus they make Christ and Infants amends. But how prove they, that by Christ's
redemption they live, move, etc? The Scripture Act. 17, to which they have
reference is meant of the natural life of all, by Gods work of creation Math.
10. 28. Hebr. 9. 26, etc. Ephesians. 1. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Tit. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 13. 1
Cor. 15. 45
and providence (which is nothing but continuation of creation) and nothing at
all to Christ as Redeemer. The redemption for which Christ came is from sin,
and so from the curse due for sin, as the Scriptures every where testify. The
first Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam a quickening spirit. We have
therefore our natural life, motion, and being (common to Heathens with
Christians) by the first Adam; our spiritual, and glorious life, by the second.

Lastly, the Apostle saying, 1 Cor. 15. 22, In Christ shall all be made alive,
speaks only of all believers, as is evident, v. 14. 17. 18. 19, who have
Christ for the first fruits, and are Christ's, v. 20. 23. Are any Christ's but
Christians? Is not the lump and the first fruits one? Men should have risen
again, though Christ had never come, or been promised; but to condemnation: Our
resurrection, only in regard of the glory of it, is from Christ's glorious
resurrection. And if Infants have glorification from Christ, then they have the
pardon of sin from Christ also, 1 Cor. 15. 17. 23, and therewith his Spirit
dwelling in them for sanctifying and quickening them, Romans 8. 9. 10. 11. These
men divide Chrst, making him a King to some for glorification, to whom he is
not a Priest for redemption 1 Cor. 1. 13.
by his blood.

Next, to a question by themselves moved, How we must Page 126.
have the Son, they answer, by keeping his commandments; forgetting faith, by
which alone we receiv Christ: from which Ioh. 1. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Act. 15. 9.
follows love, purity of heart, and obedience. Which faith has more properly
the consideration of a condition, as a hand to receiv a promise; then of an act
of obedience to a commandment.

It is true (being rightly understood) which they add, that Page 127.
repentance is of all sin: to wit, particularly of all sins known; and
generally of sins unknown. For, Who can understand his Psalm. 19. 13.
errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults, said he, that observed, and knew
his ways better then either these men, or I. Do they think nothing amiss
slips from them, in thought, word, or deed, or ever has done, whereof they do
not, or have not repented particularly? Is their knowledge so perfect as they
need not pray for further enlightening, as Ephesians. 1. 17. 18? Are they certain they
are ignorant of, and err in nothing in the Scriptures, written for their
bearning? This their book Romans 15. 4.
sufficiently reproues their Pharisaicall dream of perfection.

Where speaking of Idolatry they affirm, that God cannot be Page 128.
worshipped after a false manner, they expressly contradict the 2 Chr. 32. 17.
Scripture, saying, The people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto
the Lord their God only. Here was worshipping the true God, and him only, and
yet after a false manner in a respect. The same the Apostle teaches the
Athenians, The God whom Act. 17. 23
you ignorantly worship, declare I unto you. When Papists direct their prayers
to God, the maker of the world, and father of Jesus Christ, hoping the rather
to be heard by means of the Virgin Mary's intercession, who doubts but they
worship the true God, but in a false manner? Neither does Deuteronomy. 18. 20, prove
the sin one, of speaking in the name of a false God, and speaking falsehood in
the name of a true God, but diverse; though both deserving death.

Next, they in their wild order, come to treat of Faith: Page 128.
where they affirm, that no man can have faith to justification, before he have
repented. If they had said, that no man has the grace or habit of faith before
the grace of repentance, it had been true: (God, by the spirit of regeneration,
infusing the habits of all graces at once:) But that the act and exercise of
faith in believing, is before our repenting, appears both by Scripture and
common sense. We live the life of Christ (whereof Gal. 2. 20. Act. 15. 9. Romans
4. 5.
our repenting is a part) by the faith of the Son of God. God purifieth the
heart by faith: and justifies the ungodly by his faith. In all which it is
plain, that faith has the pre-eminence and first work. So 2 Cor. 7. 10, Godly
sorrow works repentance. Repentance then presupposes godly sorrow. Godly
sorrow, or whatsoever is truly godly, must needs please God, which without
Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 23.
faith no man can do; but even every thing is sin. Faith working that which
works repentance, must go before it. Secondly, godly sorrow is not only for
the fear of punishment (for so the devils are sorry) but for the offense of
God specially. Now none can be sorry for his offending God, except he love
God; nor love him, except he know first that he be loved of him in Christ, in
which faith consists. We beleev therefore, before we repent, in the truth of
the thing, and order of causes; though we can hardly discern this order in our
own sense.

CHAP. VI.
Of Baptism.

IN the next place they come to Baptism, in which they think themselves in their
element, as a fish in the water. And beginning with John's Baptism, they will
have it so Page 129.
called, as Paul calls the Gospel his, Romans 1. 16, But they mistake. It was so
called, because John was (under God) the first, both instituter, and exerciser
of it. By their rule John Murton, might be called John Baptist. Secondly, they
err in saying, Baptism is repentance for the remission of sins, etc. Repentance
goes before Baptism: Repentance is inward; the Baptism Act. 2. 38. 2 Timothy 2. 25
outward, of which our question is. God gives repentance; Men confer Baptism:
Repentance is man's work; for it is man that repents by grace: Baptism
(considered as inward) is Gods work; as outward, the Ministers under God. They
affirm, p. 169, that the baptizing, or washing, of which we speak, is an action
of the hand. Is repentance so with these men? Indeed that repentance upon which
they rebaptize, is rather the work of their hands, then of Gods.

The Scriptures alleged, page 129. 130, show what is required Page 129. 130.
of men of years, before they be baptized: but are misapplyed, as a bar, to the
Infants of believers. Diverse of them might more colourably, though alike
untruely, be brought to prove, that no infants could be saved; as elsewhere
has been Relig. Com. Page 71. 72.
showed them.

Their answer to the objection, page 130, is but the fencing of their own
stroke. We willingly acknowledge, that the doctrine and practice for baptizing
men of years, brought to beleev by preaching, and unbaptized before, is
perpetual. This was the state of the persons instanced; and this alone the
places cited do prove.

ADVERSARIES.
AGainst the baptizing of Infants, they alledg, that there is neither
commandment, nor example, nor true consequence for Page 131.
it in Chrsts Testament, which is perfect, etc.

DEFENSE.
THE perfection of Christ's Testament we avow, and that the estate of the Church
under the Ministry, and Institution of the Apostles, those great
Maister-builders, was most perfect, as otherwise, so in respect of Ordinances.
But in saying, that we grant, that there is neither commandment, nor example
for baptising infants, they take their own presumption for our grant. We grant
that the Scriptures no where say in express terms Baptize infants, or that
Infants were baptized: But withal they should consider with us, that
whatsoever can by just consequence be drawn out of the Scriptures, expounded in
their largest extent, is contained in them first: else how could it truly be
drawn out of them? whatsoever then can be drawn by true consequence out of a
commandment, is commanded in it, though not expressly, yet truly, and as well,
as if it were expressed. Else how could all duties toward God and our
neighbor be commanded in the decalogue, called the ten commandments? Surely
not; except things be commanded which are not expressed, if by consequence they
can be gathered. Else how could Christ say from Deuteronomy. It is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall Math. 4. 10
thou serve? Whereas the word only, upon which the special weight of Christ's
answer lies, is not expressed, but the thing only included, and thence to be
truly, and necessarily collected.

But let us trace their footsteps in disproving manifestly our consequences,
and taking away clearly all our objections to every man's conscience, in the
sight of God: If bold promises may be taken for due performances.

And first, in observing what Baptism is, they again untowardly Page 132. 133.
confound the inward and outward Baptism. Which though they ought not to be
separated by Gods appointment, yet are too often by man's default, and should
always by us be distinguished: the outward, as the work of man's hand, as
themselves Page 169.
elsewhere confesses; from the inward, as the work of God alone: the former
being with water, the latter with the Holy Math. 3. 11 Ioh. 1. 31. 33.
Ghost; as John expressly distinguishes his baptizing, and Christ's that came
after him.

The meaning of the English Primer, and of Vrsinus, they mistake. They speak of
the inward and outward Baptism jointly: whereas our question is, of that which
is outward, and in man's power to give, or withold. So the faith and
repentance, which they require in persons to be baptized, is actual indeed, in
men of years, but in Infants only in disposition. Neither does Ursinus simply
say, that the Sacraments are no Sacraments in an unlawful use* as they cite
him, but that they are not Sacraments, but to them that receiv them with true
faith, only they have benefit by them. In like manner, the Apostle tells the
Corinthians; that their coming together, was not to eat the 1 Cor. 14. 20.
Lords Supper; that is, not for the better, as v. 17; else they did eat the
Lords Supper outwardly. So elsewhere, He is not a Romans 2. 28.
Jew, which is one outwardly; neither that circumcision, which is outward in
the flesh, that is, not, that wherein God took delight; else, he was a Jew, and
that was circumcision, after a sort.

I demand of these Rebaptizers, whether Simon Magus, being baptized by Phillip,
and yet remaining in the gall of bitterness, Act. 8.
and without all part in the ministration of the Gospel: and so whether those
false brethren creeping in unawares, and being (without Gal. 2. 4. Jude 4.
doubt) baptized by the Apostles, or others, had that inward, and greater
Baptism or no? If not, as is plain, how were their Baptism a Sacrament in the
lawful use? And if God gave any of them repentance afterward, were they to be
baptized anew as being unbaptized before, because they wanted the inward and
greater Baptism, when they received the other? I suppose no, even in these men's
judgments. If any object, that the fault here was only in the baptizeds
unfitness in Gods sight, he says truly, but must withal remember, that
notwithstanding, the inward and greater Baptism wanted, which by their ground
should have made a mere nullity of the other. And note heerewith as of special
consideration, that Baptism is most corrupted by an unworthy receiver: since
both the Baptism is ministered, and the baptizer ministers for the baptizeds
sake; who being impure himself, all things are impure unto him: and that his
baptism, no baptism of the Lord Tit. 1. 15.
to him in right use, but rather a profane usurpation, till by his faith and
repentance, God afterward giving them, it become the Lords baptism to him, for
the confirmation of hi^ faith, in the bloud-shedding of Christ for his sins.

Neither is it requisite, that we prove, as they require of us, that Infants
have faith and repentance: but let them prove, which they presume, but prove
not, that the actual having, and manifesting of these graces (being conditions
requisite for men of years) are to be exacted of Infants, if they be admitted
to Baptism. May they not as reasonably, and charitably, conclude, that Infants
are not to eat, because they work not, from 2 Thessalonians. 3; and are to be damned,
because they beleev not, from Mark. 16. 16. And was there not that required at
Abraham's hands for his circumcision, which was not required at Isaaks for his?
Or not more of such Heathenish men of years as became Proselytes, then of
their Infants, to be circumcised with them? The ground of this error in so
many is, that they understand not the true nature of the Gospel, and
Ordinances thereof. The Gospel aims not at the exacting upon man (as made
after Gods own image) obedience due, as a natural debt from the creature to
the Creator, as the Law does, but considers him as a most miserable creature*
drowned in sin, and altogether unable to help himself: neither yet servs it,
and its Ordinances, primarily to declare and manifest, what man in right owes,
and performs to God; but what God in mercy, purposes, and does, and will
perform to man: being (...) a joyful message, or glad tidings of salvation by
Christ. So, to apply this for the baptizing of Infants, albeit they on their
part, can for the present, make no manifestation or declaration of obedience or
thankfulness, or any other goodness: yet suffices it for Evangelicall
dispensation, that God, according to the Covenant of grace, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed, can and will make manifestation and declaration of his
gracious mind of washing them, with the blood and spirit of his Son, from the
guilt and contagion of sin: they also, being bound in their times, to
reciprocal duties. Let us not think scorn, as proud freewillers do, of Gods
taking, both of us, and our infants, to be his people, going before our, or
their taking of him to be our God: But let us rather magnify his mercy in
this regard, both toward us, and them.

ADVERSARIES.
NExt, they undertake to prove, that Infants are not regenerate, and so not to
be baptized. Their reason is, because Page 134.
they have not faith and repentance. This Regeneration they define to be a
turning from sin to God: which they would prove from Romans 6. 11.

DEFENSE.
THE Apostle, Romans 6, speaks not of regeneration it self, which is Gods work:
but of our living to God, as an effect thereof. For as our natural life is an
effect of our first generation, or begetting by our parents: so is our
spiritual life an effect of our regeneration by God, and his Word, and Spirit.
Turning from sin is man's work, by Gods grace: Regeneration is Gods work, not
man's. So for Repentance, they roav about it on all sides, but scarce touch the
true nature of it. Repentance, to wit, Evangelicall, required for Baptism in
men of years, is neither a sight, and knowing of sin by the Law, for that the
wicked also do: nor a confessing of sin, for that is outward, and follows
repentance in the heart: nor a sorrow for sin, for that goes before it: nor a
promise to forsake sin, for ^ Cor. 7. 10
that follows after it, as an outward effect: no, nor yet properly, an endeavor
to forsake it, though that come nearest. Repentance is properly, a growing wise
afterward, and changing of the mind from sin to God, in the purpose of the
hea^t^, having an effectual endeavor to forsake sin accompanying it, as the
effect thereof.

Now their argumentation in this place, that because Infants have not faith,
and repentance, to wit, actual, and that in manifestation also (which are the
conditions required in men of years for their Baptism, and the inseparable
fruits of regeneration) therefore they are not regenerate, and so not capable
of Baptism, is, as if some idiot would affirm, that infants are not born, nor
to be reputed reasonable creatures, nor endued with the faculties of
understanding and reason, because they make no manifestation thereof, no more
then bruits do.

Their proofs against the Regeneration of Infants thus disproved, I manifest
the contrary, as follows.

Christ the Lord teaches, that except a man be born, or (as the Ioh. 3. 5*
word more properly imports) begot again, he cannot enter into Gods Kingdom.
Either therefore regeneration is to be granted Infants, or Gods Kingdom to be
denied them. If any say, this is meant of men of years only, the Text
convinces him; which opposes the first birth, or generation, (which is of
Infants) to the second regeneration: The first, as v. 6, being of the flesh,
making them so born incapable of Gods Kingdom, without the second, by the
spirit.

Secondly, they confess, elsewhere, that all, by Adams Page 123.
fall have that weak flesh, Romans 8. 3, by which they cannot keep the Law, etc.
Now I demand, whether Infants to be glorified, carry this weak flesh, (hindering
thus effectually true holiness) into heaven with them, or no? If not, as is
certain, then it must be purged out of their souls, and hearts, as the seat,
and subject thereof. But nothing can purge out that which is contrary to
holiness, save the holy Spirit of God, the Spirit of regeneration, which lusts
against the flesh, and is contrary Gal. 5. 17.
unto it: either therefore they must be regenerated, or not glorified.

Thirdly, the Scriptures teach, that by the spirit of Christ, which is the
spirit of life for righteousness, dwelling in us, our bodies Romans 8. 10. 11.
Page 123.
shall be quickened, and raised up unto glory. Children therefore, by their
grant, being to be raised again, and glorified by Christ, must have Christ's
spirit, which is the spirit of sanctification, and regeneration, dwelling in
them.

Lastly, join with these things, that all are by nature, I say by nature, with
the Apostle, not by act alone, as say the Adversaries, children of wrath,
having right to wrath, as children Ephesians. 2. 3.
to their fathers inheritance; and therewith, that baptism is the lavacher, or
washing of regeneration; it will follow, that Tit. 3. 5.
children, if to be freed from the wrath to come, and glorified, are to be
regenerated and baptized also. Christ saues, and so glorifies, his body only,
which is the Church; which he sanctisies Ephesians. 5. 23. 26. Ephesians. 44 5
with the washing of water, and the word: and there is one body, and one
baptism.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir Answers to the Scriptures, brought for the baptizing Page 134. 135.
of the Infants of believers follow. To Act. 2. 38. 39. Repent, and be baptized
every one of you etc. for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to
all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord shall call: they answer,
that this is meant of such fathers of the Jews, and their children, and fathers
of the Gentiles, and their children, as beleev, viz. both fathers and children,
and that by children are often meant men of years, in the Scriptures, specially
Abraham's children.

DEFENSE.
THat such are sometimes meant, we grant: but deny that meaning in this place.
And first, by them a far off, are not meant the Gentiles far off in state, as
Ephesians. 2, but the Jews, far off in time, as the original carries it. Besides,
neither (...)
was Peter himself, as yet, sufficiently persuaded of the calling of the
Gentiles, Act, 10: neither if he had, was it, as yet, seasonable to mention
that matter to the Jews.

Secondly, in saying, the promise is made to you, and your children, he speaks
of some solemn promise made to them all, and the same to have its fruit and
effect in them, and their children with them, upon their repentance. This could
be no other, then that promise made to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God
of thy seed, in that blessed seed Christ.

Thirdly, he exhorts the Jews to repent, and to be baptized, for that the
promise was unto them and their children; and therein shows, that he speaks not
of a promise made to Abraham's children, upon their faith and repentance, as
they mistake: but on the contrary exhorts to repentance, upon a promise made.
The promise is the ground of the exhortation, and presupposed by the Apostle,
as going before it. Hence also it is, that he calls the Jews, which had denied
and killed the Lord of life, Chapt. 3. 25
and not yet repented, as appears, v. 19, Children of the Prophets, and of the
Covenant, which God made with the fathers: with which accords that, Act. 13.
32. 33. They were not therefore here called, the children of the promise because
they repented; for that they did not: but because they came of Abraham, Isaak
and Iakoh, and so had Christ promised unto them as their King and Savior: and
so were by faith and repentance to receiv the fruit of the same promise, and
the confirmation or seal thereof by Baptism to them and their children. Of
which here, and every where, they are exhorted not to deprive themselves and
theirs. Neither is this exhortation to repent, and be baptized, made to the
children, but to the parents for the obtaining of the benefit and confirmation
by Baptism, of the promise both to parents and children.

If any demand, Was not Christ promised to the Gentiles also? I answer, not as
to the Jews: He was promised to the Mat. 21. 5. 43. Luke 19. 12 14. Ephesians. 2. 19.
Jews (indefinitely, as the Church of God, and Abraham's seed) as being their
King; but to become the King of the Gentiles: the Jews were his Citizens; the
other were, by faith, to become his Citizens, and of the household of God.

ADVERSARIES.
TO 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your children unholy, but now are they clean: they
answer, that the believers children were no otherwise holy, then as their
unbeleeving wives were holy, namely, to be used by their parents.

DEFENSE.
HEre first, as commonly, they treasonably clip the Lords coin in leaving out,
for their advantage, to the believing husband, and to the believing wife. The
Apostle says simply, The children are holy; so says he not simply, that the
unbeleeving wife is holy; but holy to her believing husband; and the
unbeleeving husband sanctified, or holy, to the believing wife: as Tit. 1. 15.
all things are pure to the pure.

Now for the better clearing of this place, the Apostles drift is to be
considered: which was to teach believing husbands, that they might lawfully,
and without scruple, keep, and converse with their unbeleeving wives, (and so
believing wives with their unbeleeving husbands) as being sanctified to them,
though not in themselves. This he proves by an Argument taken from their
children, Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy: that is, if
the believing husband might not lawfully retain his unbeleeving wife, then the
children so born should be unholy: but they are holy. Whereupon it follows,
that he may lawfully keep and converse with her. This word (...), else, or
otherwise, ever includes in it a casuality: as Math. 18. 32, because thou
desiredst me: and chapter 27. 6, because it is the price of blood. So 1 Cor. 5. 10,
Else, or for then you must go out of the world: As if he had said; seeing
Christians are not to go out of the world, but to live in it, they may
therefore eat with the fornicators of the world: So here, seeing your children
thus born are not unclean, but holy; therefore you may and ought to retain your
(though unbeleeving) wives. The Apostle therefore making the children holy, and
their holiness a ground of the husbands lawful keeping, and conversing with
his wife, can have respect to no other thing then the Covenant with Abraham, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; as a known and received ground by the
Corinthians, and all other Churches. This will yet be the more plain, if we
bear in mind, that the question propounded to Paul by the believing Corinthians
was, not whether they might keep their children or no, but their wives. He had
therefore no occasion of mentioning the children, as he does, but to fetch from
them an Argument for the retaining of the wives. Now, if his meaning were, as
they say, that the children were holy to the believers use, as the wife was,
then he should have argued from the holiness of the wife, to prove the
holiness of the children: But thus he does not, but the clean contrary.
Besides, if the Apostle had argued as they would have him, where had he laid
the foundation of his proof? Or how had he removed the scruple out of the
Corinthians hearts?

They add, that the Corinthians made no question of their children. True; and
that overthrows their exposition; as showing, that the Apostle argues not from
the wives to the children, as they make him; but from the children to the
wives: Secondly, the Apostle disputes not from the Corinthians supposition, or
persuasion, but from the truth of the thing, the holiness of their children.
But now are (your children) holy.

They object, that these children must be holy, either as the believing, or
unbeleeving part is holy. We say they are holy as the believing part, in regard
of that foederall holiness, and the spirit of regeneration. Then, say they,
They are separated from common uses in which they were used, and are set now
apart to Gods Page 137.
use. We say they are, as were the Infants in Israel, set apart, or severed,
from the world, and taken into the number of Gods people. They themselves
affirm, a few lines before, that Israel was sanctified and set apart from
common and profane uses, to the service of God. And were not the Infants part
of Israel, thus set apart, and sanctified? And yet could they not testify any
purity of heart, or other grace. That which in the very same period they build
with one hand, they pull down with another. Secondly, if (as they say) Infants
be no otherwise sanctified, then to the use of others, and as unbeleevers are,
then can they not be saved: except the unholy can enter into Gods Kingdom.

They object further, that then all the children of believers, though of age,
and unbeleevers, should be holy also. But why rather holy, then Innocent, which
they will have all Infants to be? By their unbelief, they are cut off from Gods
Covenant, as the Romans 11.
Jews were, and from all holiness thereby.

The next objection is ill framed, as they set it down; and Page 138.
the answer worse. The error in both is, that they consider not John's Baptism,
and Christ's according to their distinct parts; John's as outward, Christ's as
inward: John's outward Baptism, and Christ's outward Baptism were the same: for
Christ was baptized by John, thereby sanctifying Baptism to us, as circumcision
to the Fathers by his being circumcised. The inward Baptism is not common to
all, but peculiar to the elect: the outward, whether by Christ, or John, is not
peculiar to the elect only, but common to others with them: witness Simon
Magus. The outward Baptism by John, and all other Ministers was, and is, only
with water, opposed to Christ's, as the inward with the Holy Ghost. Which
Baptism with the Holy Ghost, being understood of extraordinary gifts,
sometimes Math. 3. Ioh. 1.
went before the other, as Act. 10. 47, but commonly followed upon it: But
understood of ordinary graces, did, or should, always go before it in right
order of things.

Next follows, 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2 etc. The meaning of the H. Ghost Page 140.
herein they take upon them to explain to others, not understanding it
themselves, as is evident, in that they will have this baptizing unto Moses in
the clovd, and sea, etc. to have been only for bodily deliverance, and the
offer of Christ. But the Apostle looks upon those things with a more piercing
and spiritual eye: as appears, first in that, v. 1, he calls the Israelites
indefinitely, his and the Corinthians fathers. Morever brethren I would not
have you ignorant, that all our fathers etc. As if he should have said, Let
not the children look for more privilege from punishment, if they sin, then
their fathers have enjoyed. He therefore considers the Church of israel here, as
in the state of a spiritual fatherhood to the Corinthians. Secondly, he
expressly says, that they were all baptized to Moses, and that the meat was
spiritual which they eat, and the rock, or water, which they drank spiritual,
even Christ himself, to wit, sacramentally, and mystically. Thirdly, the
Apostles argument, that it may go in full force, must thus be framed. They
that are alike for substance in Gods benefits, shall alike be punished, if they
sin alike: But you Corinthians now, and Israel of old were, and are alike in
those spiritual benefits mentioned; Therefore, if you sin, as they did, you
shall surely be punished, as they were. If the Apostle had propounded unto the
Corinthians, the tokens of Gods love and protection only for bodily things, as
they carnally conceiv, there had been no force in his reason against the
security of the Corinthians, especially occasioned by their enjoying the Lords
Ordinances of Baptism, and the Supper as signs, and tokens of Gods love for
spiritual blessings in heavenly things. Might they not easily have answered
Paul, that the Israelites indeed might well perish, and be destroyed for such
things as they practiced, having only Gods loue-tokens for bodily deliverance:
but for them, they were better secured against danger, as having the tokens of
Gods love for spiritual and eternal deliverance, by the body and bloodshed
of Christ?

I conclude therefore, that all Paul's, and the Corinthians fathers, being
baptized with the Baptism signifying deliverance by Christ, and many of them
being Infants, the Infants of Israel now are to be baptized also.

ADVERSARIES.
THey object, that the meaning of the Holy Ghost is not, that Moses did at all
wash them with water in the cloud and sea.

DEPENCE.
NEither say we he did; but with the Apostle, that they were baptized to Moses
in the cloud and sea: God not only preserving them bodily thereby from
Pharaoh; but also moystening them with the cloud arising out of the Sea, and 1
King. 18. 44. 45. Psalm. 77. 18.
showering down waters upon them, as the Lords peculiar people, and for
spiritual use (the Apostle himself in this place bearing witness) under the
Ministry of Moses their Pastor or Shepherd; procuring with this, the other
blessings, even of the meat which was spiritual from heaven; and drink which
was spiritual, even Christ mistically out of the rock.

Besides, our Adversaries hold back the better part of Gods love, in saying, he
offered them Christ in the drink out of the rock. If the rock were Christ, and
they drank of the rock, then God not only offered, but they also received, and
drank of Christ's blood, as the Corinthians did, in mystery. Secondly, the
Apostles argument, as they put it, had been too blunt to have peirced the
Corinthians consciences; who might easily have answered themselves and him, that
the Israelites indeed had Christ in their time offered; but for themselves they
received him also, and so were better fenced against Gods plagues; yea, though
they sinned, then the other were.

Thirdly, it is neither true, which after they affirm, that Noah's Ark is called
the figure of Baptism, but that the saving of eight souls by water (to wit
bearing up the Ark) had Baptism, that now saves etc. for a like figure, or
antitype: much less is it said, that Noah and his family were Baptized in the
Ark, or water, as it is expressly said, that the Israelites were baptized in the
cloud, and Sea. Every type of Baptism, is not Baptism, but has only something
necessarily, which resembles it. But the more agreement there is, between Noah's
Arc, and the Baptism now, the more firm Argument may be gathered for the
baptizing of Infants. It is evident, that Noah through faith Hebr. 11. 7.
prepared the Ark for the saving of his household, and not of himself alone.

To their objection, that there is as much warrant to enjoin Page 142.
Infants to suffer persecution, because it is called by the name of baptism, as
to baptize them, because the cloud and sea is called Baptism: I answer (passing
by their incongruities of speech) that Infants may be persecuted, as well as
men of years. Witness Christ himself, persecuted in his mothers lap by Herod.
Besides, the Israelites (and their Infants with them) are here said to have
been baptized by water in spiritual use, and consideration.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir next answer to such Scriptures, as show that whole households have been
baptized, and therefore Infants, as a part Page 143.
of the household, is, that there are many households in which there are no
infants; and that therefore except we prove such households to have had Infants,
it is nothing. Secondly, that it is most true, that as the Apostles practiced
in one household, so they practiced in all: and that therefore they baptizing in
the laylors house such as believed, did not baptize infants.

DEFENSE.
WE grant, that the Apostles practice was the same, where there was the same
reason: but as some Families had in them infants, and some not; so all of years
in some believed, and in some not: according to which diversity of persons,
they administered Baptism diversely; and not alike in all households. Secondly, if
these men would have taken any sound course for the clearing of things, they
should here have given answer to such Scriptures, as elsewhere have been
Relig. Com. page 88. 89.
brought against them, to show, how the tenor of the Lords promise, and
blessing, runs upon godly Governors, and their Families with them: and more
specially to that about Lydia, Act. 16, of whom it is testified, that she
having her heart opened to attend and beleev the Gospel, both she and her
household were baptized. But it is easier for these men to repeat over the same
things many times, then once to justify them.

ADVERSARIES.
TO the Scriptures record, that little children were brought to Christ, that he
might lay his hands on them, and pray, or bless them; and that whereas his
Disciples would have hindered them from him (even upon the same ground, without
doubt, upon which these men excludes them) he being therewith displeased, bids
suffer them to come unto him, for that of such is the Kingdom of heaven; and
takes them in his arms and blesses them: and to our collection hence, they
answer; first, that He says Page 134. 135.
not, that Infants are of the Kingdom of heaven, that is, obeyers of the
Gospel; but that they that will enter into the Kingdom of heaven, must become
as little children, for of such, etc. And that his mayn end was to declare the
innocent estate of Infants, and to teach all to be like unto them by
conversion: and withal, that Christ baptized them not: and lastly, that his
blessings are manifold to Infants in their creation, life, and bodily benefits.

DEFENSE.
LET us examine the particulars: First, they presume, but cannot prove, that
only such are of the Kingdom of heaven, as obey the Gospel. Shall Infants
(which they affirm elsewhere) be glorified in the Kingdom of heaven, and yet
Page 123.
are they not of it? There are not two Kingdoms of heaven; but one, begun in
grace, and perfected in glory. Secondly, they to make more colorable their
erroneous construction of the Evangelists words, and Christ's work about those
Infants, cite for Math. 19, and the like places, Math. 18; that so the slight
Readers, such as their Disciples are, might conceiv Mat. 19. 14 Luke 10. 13 and
chap. 18. 15.
that Christ had no other meaning in the other places by us alleged, then in
that by them; and that he spoke not of a child personally, but in condition, as
David was, Ps. 131. Whereas in that place, Christ's meaning was to reprov the
ambitious contentions amongst his Disciples, by the contrary disposition in a
child, which he therefore took, and set in the midst of them; but in the other,
his purpose was to show what interest the children of the Church had in him,
and in his blessing, for which they were brought unto him by their parents.
Against these depravers, both of the word, and work of God, I thus argue. That
which the parents, which brought their infants desired, that the Lord did for
them: But it is plain, that their desire in bringing them was, that he might
pray for them, and bless them, as the Scriptures expressly teach he did.

But, say they, he baptized them not. True; for he baptized none, though
actual believers. It suffices, that he did that Ioh. 4. 2.
by which he declared that they had right in him, and in his blessing, and that
it was his will they should come unto him. Let them show a way, how they can
now come to Christ, save by Baptism? Or how they can have right in his
blessing, and yet have no right in his bloodshed, and in Baptism, for the
signifying and applying it?

They add, that Christ healed the sick, and gave bodily blessings of life,
growth in stature, and the like. But as it is merely, and vainly imagined, that
these children were brought for the healing of any bodily diseases: so are we
taught expressly by the Holy Ghost, that Christ's blessing them was not for
bodily benefits, but because, the Kingdom of heaven was of such: that is,
appertained to them, and to such as they were.

ADVERSARIES.
TO our next Argument, taken from the circumcision of Abraham's infants, they
answer: First, there is no commandment Page 145.
for baptizing of Infants now, as there was for circumcising them then:
Secondly, that that commandment was for males only, children, or servants,
though unbeleevers: Thirdly, that circumcision was to be performed only on the
eight day: so as there is no proportion between Circumcision and Baptism.

DEFENSE.
HE that pleases to read the former passages between Relig. Com.
them and us, which they have in their hands, but answer not, shall see how
weightlesse this exception is; and how we have proved against them, that the
Church of Israel, and ours, is one in substance; the covenant the same which
God made with them in Christ to come, and with us in Christ come in the flesh:
and withal, how our Baptism succeeds their Circumcision. They trifle in
objecting the Legal difference of Gal. 3. 28. and 4. 10. Esa. 66. 21.
days, and sexes, which the Scriptures expressly teach to be abolished. Are
not Pastors now the Lords Ministers, as the Levites were of old, and their
successors therein: and yet are they not tied to any certain Tribe, as they
were? Is not our Lords Supper the same in effect with their Passover? Both the
one and the other, the mystical eating of the Lamb of God: Which yet is not
tied to any certain day or month, as was the former.

Lastly, they err grievously in saying, that unbeleeving servant, and children
were commanded to be circumcised. The Lord would have all the wicked cut off
from his people: and would Deu. 17 12 Ps. 101. 8. 2 Chro. 15. 12. 13. Genesis 17.
7. 10. Romans 4. 11.
he have unbeleevers received unto them? Has God entered Covenant with
unbeleevers to be their God, as he has done with all to whom Circumcision
appertained? Was it the seal of the righteousness of faith; and yet due to the
faithless? Rather then these Adversaries will admit the seed of the faithful
to be of Gods people now, they will have very Infidels and Unbelievers of old,
to have been of his peculiar ones. If their heresy were detestable, who made
the God of the Law worse then the God of the Gospel; surely, theirs is not
light, nor small, who thus contumeliously speak of him in his people, which he
took near unto himself, and whose God he became; and of that special
Ordinance, by which he differenced them from the profane world, as holy unto
him; in which they interest the unbeleevers, and unholy.

ADVERSARIES.
NOW follows our main foundation, that as the infants of Abraham, and of the
Israelites his posterity, were taken into the Church Covenant, or covenant of
life and salvation, as they call it (and rightly in a true sense) with their
parents, and circumcised: so are the infants of the faithful now, and to
receiv accordingly the seal of Baptism: to which they say, and prove (as they
say) that neither Circumcision was, nor Baptism is a seal Page 145.
of the Covenant of salvation, but the spirit of promise which is ever the same.

DEFENSE.
THeir dispute from the seal of the Spirit, to prove that there is no other
seal, is as if a man should deny all teaching, direction, and comfort by the
Word and Sacraments; because the Spirit teaches, directs and comfort the
faithful. This point I have elsewhere proved at large against Relig. Com.
page 90. 91.
them; neither are they either able, or do they go about to give any show of
answer; and yet, without modesty, they repeat their former bare sayings, fully
answered, and refuted. Where the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1, and Ephesians. 1, and 4, speaks
of the seal of the spirit, means he, that the Spirit makes a material print in
the soul, as a seal does in Wax? Or not this only, that it helps to confirm,
and comfort a Christian inwardly in the love of God, and hope of salvation? And
are not the Sacraments outward helps of comfort and confirmation of a believers
heart in the same love of God, and hope of glory? Upon the same ground, that
the Apostle calls it a seal inwardly, we call them seals outwardly.

ADVERSARIES.
TO show that the Covenant in question was the Covenant of Page 146. 147.
the Law, and old Testament, and not the covenant of salvation: and so
Circumcision the seal thereof, and not the sign and seal of life and salvation;
they discourse at large upon Gal. 4, and of the two seeds of Aoraham, the one
after the flesh, unto which the covenant appertained, whereunto circumcision
was annexed.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, they err greatly, in denying the very Covenant of the Law to have been
the Covenant of life and salvation. For Romans 7. 10. Lev. 18. 5. Gal. 3. 12.
the commandment was ordained to life. And the man that does the works of the
Law shall live in them. And if the Law promise not life and salvation, then
neither does it threaten death and condemnation. The Covenant then is of the
same things, but the condition diverse: The Law exacting perfect obedience of,
and by our selves: the Gospel requiring true faith, and repentance, which it
also works in the elect.

Secondly, it is most untrue, that Circumcision was the sign or seal of the old
Testament, or Law, taking it properly, as they Romans 4. 11. Gal. ^. 16. 17. 8. 9.
do. The Apostle expressly calls it, the seal of the righteousness of faith,
opposed to the righteousness of works, or of the Law; of which more hereafter:
else where showing, that the same Law was given four hundred and thirty years
after the covenant or promise to Abraham and his seed, confirmed before in
Christ, through the peaching of the Gospel, that they which are of faith might
be blessed with faithful Abraham. How preposterous are these men's ways, who
will have the seal so long before the Covenant?

Thirdly, Circumcision was the seal of that Covenant, by which Abraham, and his
posterity became the Lords peculiar people, separated from all the
uncircumcised heathen unto him for his inheritance, and therein blessed: For
blessed is the nation, Psalm. 33. 12. Ps. 144. 15.
whereof the Lord is God, the people that he has chosen for a possession to
himself; and blessed is the people, whose God is Jehovah. Now will these
gainsaying spirits have men blessed by the law whether God will, or no? Says
not the scripture, that by the law all are accursed? and that as many, as are
of the works of the law are accursed; as being unable to keep it? The Covenant
then by which Israel became Gods people, and therein blessed, of which
Circumcision was a sign, and seal, was not the Covenant of the law, but of the
gospel, and so of grace, and salvation by grace.

Lastly, how wide, and wild are they in expounding the allegory of Abraham's
two sons? Gal. 4 making Abraham's children after the flesh, the Infants of the
faithful: never considering the Apostles general scope, unto which the
particulars are to be applied. Does he in that place deal against the Infants
of the Galatians, or against the men of years, though children in knowledge?
who had begun in the spirit, but would be made perfect in the flesh: that is,
would be justified by the law, specially Gal. 3. 3. verse. 11. chapter 5. 2. 3. 4.
chapter 4. 21. 29 30.
by circumcision in the flesh: by which they made Christ of none effect and
fell from grace. Were they Infants to whom he says, Tell me, ye that desire to
be under the law etc. So where he adds He that is born after the flesh
persequutes him, that is born after the spirit, does he mean that Infants are
persequuters? Or is not his meaning plain, that such as glory in the flesh, and
in circumcision and other fleshly prerogatives, and so despise the free promise
of grace in Christ, and them that rest under it (as Ismael did both in truth of
person, and type of others) are these persequuters, at all times, to be cast
out, with Ismael; as having no right to the inheritance of grace or glory. Are
the Infants of believers to be cast out for their persequutions? Out of what, I
marvail, and for what persequutions? These men in opening this Allegory, or
Parable verify that of the Wiseman, As a thorn goes up into the hand of a
drunkard, Pro. 26. 9.
so is a Parable in the mouth of fools.

That the Covenant Genesis 17. whereof circumcision was a sign, Page 147.
was the same, which we have now in the Gospel, we have not Relig. Com. p. 76.
77. 78.
only said, as they say we have done; but proved by so clear arguments, as
that, had they only set them down, there had needed no further confirmation of
them, notwithstanding any thing that they could have excepted, But they have
cunningly passed them by in silence, as if no such thing were in the book; and
do only repeat over, and again, the same things with great irksomnes,
specially to those, that have formerly confuted them.

ADVERSARIES.
BUT they tell us, that the Covenant under the Gospel is a new and better
Covenant then the old, etc.

DEFENSE.
WE grant it: but affirm withal, that the Covenant with Abraham was not the
Covenant of the law, or old testament, as they mean. The Covenant with Abraham
was Gal. 3. 17. 19. 10. 14.
confirmed of God in Christ, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ. The Covenant of the Law, or old Testament was 400
and thirty years after, and was added for transgression til the seed should
come, to whom the promise was made: that is, to detect and manifest men's sins,
and cursed state thereby; that so they might fly the more earnestly to the
promise of Christ (the blessed and blessing Seed) made formerly to Abraham.
Neither do the Scripture in this matter ever oppose Abraham and Christ; but
Moses and Christ. Ioh. 1. 17. Heb. 10. 28 29.
The Law was given by Moses; but grace and truth by Jesus Christ. So Hebr. 10,
the Law of Moses, and Covenant of the Son of God, are opposed: and Moses made
the Mediator of the old testament, and Covenant, established in the blood of
bulls and goats: Hebr. 9.
and Christ the mediator of the new by his own blood. And I would know of these
men where the law is ever called the law of Abraham, as it is every where, the
law of Moses: which law or old testament (opposed to the new) was written and
engraven in Tables of stone, and had therefore, not Abraham, 2* Cor. 3. 7.
but Moses the mediator of it.

Lastly, for the ceremonial part of the Law, old Testament, or Covenant, the
Author to the Hebrews makes it plain, that it was received under the
Leviticall Priesthood, having a Heb. 7. 11, and 9. 1. 2. 10. 13.
worldly sanctuary and ordinances, and diverse washings for the purifying of the
flesh, but not of the conscience from dead works: whereas by the promise and
Covenant to Abraham, and his seed, the blessing of justification came, both
upon the Jews in their Gal. 3. 11. 14. 16. 17.
time, and Gentiles in theirs, through Christ Jesus, in whom it was confirmed.

In adding, that the Old taught that Christ was not come in the flesh, nor into
their hearts at their Circumcision: They make the Lords Covenant negative, as
teaching what is not, and not what is. A Covenant is a promise upon condition;
and a Testament, or Will, that, in which Legacies are given. But by this
doctrine, here should be nothing either given or promised. It is, besides, very
ungodlily said, that Abraham, (in whom principally we are to consider both of
the Covenant, and seal thereof Circumcision) had not Christ in his heart, when
he was circumcised. Both Moses in Abraham's history, and the Apostles, who well
understood it, affirm the contrary, and that he was justified in
uncircumcision, by believing in Christ: In which respect he is called the
father of them that beleev, Romans 4. 9. 10. 11.
not only circumcised, but uncircumcised also. Have his children that which he
for substance had not; even in that wherein he was their father? This thing
they grant in the very next page; and that Abraham had the covenant of grace
promised him, by which promise he had salvation in the Messiah to Page 148.
come* and therein, that the Covenant made with Abraham, whereof Circumcision
was a seal, was the Covenant of the Gospel, and the same with ours now. It is
strange that these men, who so magnify Baptism, as they will have men made
Christians by it; should so vilify Circumcision, as to make it of right to
appertain to godless and wicked men: for such were and are all, at all times,
since Adam sinned, that had, and and have not Christ in their hearts. Was it
not an holy Ordinance of God? and therefore not to be prostituted to the unholy,
and unpure, as all unbeleevers; that is, all into whose Tit. 1. 15.
hearts Christ is not come, are: and unto whom nothing is Genesis 17. 7. 11. Romans
4, 11. 1* Sam. 17. 16. 36. Judge. 14. 3.
pure or holy. Could it be to any a sign that God was their God; a seal of the
righteousness of faith; a pledge of Gods protection; and note of distinction
between Gods people and others: And yet belong to such as were wholly without
Christ, and so without God in the world? When any of the Heathens became
Proselytes, they chose God to be their God, came to trust Ruth 1. 16 and 2. 12.
Neh. 10. 28
under the wings of the Lord God of Israel, and separated themselves from
Idolaters to the Law of God: and of all this, they made solemn profession by
Circumcision: which they must either do without faith, and so not please God
therein (which is absurd Hebr. 11 6.
to say they did, which did it, lawfully:) or else with faith, by which Christ,
though not come in the flesh* was come into their hearts.

Of the Ceremonies of Moses, and so of Circumcision which Moses took of the
fathers into the body of the Ceremonial Ioh. 7. 22.
Law; and of their diverse considerations, I have elsewhere; Relig. Com. p. 84
85 86.
written at large, and do refer the Reader thither for satisfaction in that
point.

That none of the Church of Israel (called by them affectedly Abraham's seed in
the flesh) had the Ordinances of the new Covenant, is not true. They had John's
Baptism, which even now these men avowed as the Baptism of the new Testament;
and Christ's also, who baptized more Disciples then John; and with them, the
twelv had the Lords Supper also, and all these, whilst the Jewish Church and
Ordinances stood in their full strength. It is true, that John's was not in the
Kingdom of God, as Christ speaks, Math. 11, that in the state of the Church and
Ordinances dispensed under Christ glorified: Otherwise, the Jews had the
Kingdom of heaven, which else could no^ have been taken from them and given to
others: neither could Math. 21. 43. 5.
Christ have been, as he was, the King of Sion. So the Patriarks received not
the promise, that is, Christ come in the flesh; Gal. 3. 23.
to which purpose the Apostle says, Before faith came, etc. Shall we therefore
say, that before Christ's coming in the flesh none had true faith to salvation;
or that true believers received not Christ, though to come, as we now receiv
Christ come in the flesh? They, Christ promised and prefigured, by the Word and
Ordinances then: we, Christ manifested and remembered by the Word and Ordinances
now; properly called the New Hebr. 9. 16. 17.
Testament, as founded in the actual death of the Testator.

ADVERSARIES.
HEre follows an exception against me in particular: which is, that by the old
Covenant mentioned Ier. 31, and Hebr. S* is not meant, as I affirm, that which
was made on mount Sinai, Exodus 19, but the Covenant mentioned, Exodus 3. v. 6,
etc. Their reason is, for that God made that Covenant with them, when he took
them by the hand to bring them out of Aegipt, which is mentioned Exodus 3, and
not Exodus 19. For then, say they, did God appear to Moses, and commanded him to
take them by the hand, and lead them out of Aegipt, where the Covenant is
mentioned, I am the God of thy fathers, Abraham, etc.

DEFENSE.
FIrst, to let pass, that though they bid, mark the words, yet they cite them
not: I answer, that these words, in that day, as the Text has it, cannot be
restrained to that particular day when God appeared to Moses; seeing the Lord
did not that particular day take them by the hand to bring them out, but diverse
days after, as is expressly affirmed, chapter 12. 51, Psalm. 77. 12, and 105, 27.
43. By that day therefore is not meant, any particular day, but indefinitely the
time of their transporting out of Aegipt into Canaan: as, elsewhere, by the day
of their Ezech. 16. 4. 5.
birth, is meant the whole time of their foregoing misery. So, many hundred
times, in the Scriptures, by the day, or that day, is meant indefinitely the
time in which a thing happens, or is done. Besides, where the Prophet speaks
of the day in which God took them by the hand; they speak of the day in which
God appeared unto Moses, and commanded him to take them by the hand; which was,
whilst he was in the land of Midian. God indeed then showed his will to Moses,
but stretched not out his hand for their deliverance, till many days after.

They say further, that Exodus 3, the Covenant is mentioned, I am the God thy
father Abraham etc. But is every mentioning of a Covenant, the making of it?
And did God make a Covenant with, and become the God of Abraham, Isaak, and
Iakob, at that time? That is, when they were now dead diverse hundred years
before. What can be more plain, then that the Lord does not there make a new:
but remembers the old Covenant made before with Abraham, etc. of which the
bringing his posterity out of Aegipt into the promised land, Genesis 45. 13. 14.
15.
was an appurtenance? God promised to be Abraham's God, and the God of his Seed,
that is, all-sufficient for the good things, not only of this world, but also
of the world to come, as Christ expounds his fathers words, Math. 22. 32. 33,
and so gave them accordingly the land of Canaan, as a storehouse of earthly
good things; and figure of heavenly. These men therefore, in this place,
unskilfully transform the fulfilling of an old promise into the making of a
new. Which they also confess, in effect, in the very same place, in saying,
that the promise (that is, the Covenant on Gods part) was made to Abraham, Genesis
17.

The word everlasting Genesis 17. I urge not further to prove the Covenant with
Abraham perpetual; then as the nature of the same Covenant carries it. It was
that by which God became Abraham's God; and more he is, or can be to none: and
that which Christ himself extends to the very resurection of Math. 21. 31. 32.
the bodies of Abraham etc. whose God the Lord was, and is.

Two reasons I will annex to justify mine exposition of the Prophet Jeremy,
and Apostle after him; and to prove that by the old Covenant, they meant the
Covenant of the Law given on mount Syna. The former from the opposition,
between the old and new Covenant, expressly made in the general; and
particularly insinuated in these words, I will write my Law in Ier. 31. 31. 32.
33, etc.
their hearts, and will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sins no
more: which was, not according to, but most unlike to the old Covenant, or Law
given on mount Syna, written in Tables of stone, and by which sin, and
transgression was not forgiven, Rom 7. 8. Gal 3. 19. Hebr. 9. 1. 2. 3. 4.
but quickened and increased. A second reason is, for that the old, and first
Covenant (opposed to that in Christ) had ordinances of divine worship; and a
worldly Sanctuary, or Tabernacle, wherein was the Table, and Candlestick, etc.
which no man that believes the Bible, can make doubt to be meant of the Law, and
Covenant given on mount Syna* to and by Moses. By the old Covenant is meant,
that of the Law by Moses on mount Sina, unto which the other is opposed.

Their exception, that Abraham's children of 8* days old could Page 149. 150*
151.
make no covenant, nor agreement, is too childish to exclude them from it: and
that, by which they should have been in no covenant at all with the Lord, nor
he with them; new, nor old; Legal, nor Evangelicall: for they could make
none. It is not required, that every one comprehended in a Covenant, should
actually stipulate, or promise. Witness the Covenant with Noah, in which, both
all his seed, and every living Genesis 9. 9. 10*
creature, both foul and cattle, were included. It was therefore sufficient
to bring Abraham's seed into the Lords Covenant, that God in grace made, and
Abraham by faith received, the promise that he would be his God and theirs.

That every faithful man and his seed, is (as) Abraham Romans 4. 12. 16. Gal. 3.
6. 9.
and his seed, the Scripture prove, in teaching, that every believer is of the
faith of Abraham, and walks in his steps. For if Abraham did by faith receiv
the promise, that God would be his God, and the God of his seed, without which,
no promise had belonged unto them: then, where the same faith is for substance,
there is the same promise for substance to every believer; though a son of
Abraham as following his example* yet as Abraham himself in believing as he
did. And this is most manifest, in that by this very covenant God was not only
the God of Abraham, and his seed Isaak; but of Isaak, and his seed Iakob; and
of Iakob, and his seed the Patriarks, and so successively: not by fleshly
descent of the children from their parents (as they absurdly cavil) but by
spiritual and divine promise of grace: which they ungraciously despise for
their children, because they cannot be doing something to God again* by their
free will, to require him withal.

Next comes to be examined that notable place, Romans 4. 11. Abraham received the
sign of Circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had
being uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all that beleev* though
uncircumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also.

ADVERSARIES.
THeir evasion is, that by faith here, is not meant faith in the Messiah, by
which he was, and we are justified: but, say they, Circumcision sealed up
Abraham's fatherhood of the faithful; that is, was a seal of his faith in
believing God, that he should be the father of many Nations.

DEFENSE.
AND this faith, say we, was the faith of the Gospel, and faith in the
Messiah, which the Apostle expressly says, was imputed to him for
righteousness, and by which he was justified; as is plain, from v. 17, I have
made thee a father of many Nations, compared with v. 22, where he infers
thereupon, even upon that faith, And therefore it was imputed to him for
righteousness: Which also, that it was the same in substance with ours now,
the words following manifest. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that
it was imputed to him; but to us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
beleev in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered
for our sins etc. v. 23. 24. 25.

This will yet the more clearly appear, if we consider what is meant by these
promises, I have made thee a father of many Nations, and so shall thy seed be,
recited by the Apostle for the purpose in hand: In these words, I have made
thee a father of many Nations, he opposes many Nations to that one Nation of
the Jews. Of these many Nations, he was the father, even of all that beleev,
though uncircumcised, v. 11. And how a father? By way of example, that, as he
was justified by faith in the promise of God, and of the promised seed Christ,
even when he was uncircumcised: So they, believing the same promise of God in
Christ, now come of him, though uncircumcised, should in like manner, be
justified as he was. Which is yet further confirmed, where it is said, that he
is the father of all them, though not of the circumcision, that walk in the
steps of the faith of Abraham, which he had yet being uncircumcised. Whence I
gather, that if we be justified by the same faith that Abraham was justified
by, and that he was justified by faith in that promise* that then that promise
was made of, and in the Messiah Christ, the blessed and blessing Seed: as it is
said: So shall thy seed be: and Abraham believed, and Genesis 15. 5. 6, and chapter 12
3, and chapter 18* 18. Romans 4. 17. 18.
he counted it to him for righteousness: And again, In thee shall all Nations,
or families of the earth be blessed. Now of this faith the Apostle here speaks,
and of it he testifies circumcision to have been a seal to Abraham. It cannot
be denied, but that the Apostle in this whole discourse, speaks of faith to
justification; proving partly, by the example of Abraham, and partly by the
testimony of David, that we are justified by the faith of Christ, and not by
the works of the Law. And to what end, or with what order should he thrust in
an impertinent discourse of any other faith? To affirm this, is no better then
to defame the Holy Ghost with equivocating. Or to what purpose should he
mention the sign of Circumcision, as a seal of faith, if not of that faith, of
which he treats? For whereas it might be objected, that if Abraham were
justified by believing before he was circumcised, as is said, v. 3. 9. 10, then
what needed he after to have been circumcised? The Apostle answers, v. 11,
that he received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of
faith which he had yet being uncircumcised, which faith v. 9, was reckoned to
him for righteousness: that by it the covenant of grace between God and him
might be confirmed, as covenants among men formerly agreed upon are, by the
seals thereunto annexed.

Lastly, who endued with common sense, and modesty can deny, that by the
righteousness of faith, whereof Circumcision was a seal, is meant the
righteousness which is by faith, as v. 3, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, and v. 9, faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness: which righteousness of faith, in this whole discourse, he
opposes to the righteousness of works by the Law, as is expressly to be seen,
v. 3. 14. 15. 16.

But now what say our Adversaries to these things? as men in a maze, and not
knowing how to find the way out, go sometimes backward, sometimes forward,
and sometimes leap unorderly from one place to another: so do they in
expounding this Scripture. In their out-leaps about Abraham's fleshly children,
I shall not need here to follow them. Where, after, they say, that
Circumcision was a seal of Abraham's faith in believing God that he should be
the father of many Nations, and that this was imputed to him for
righteousness; they say as much as we Page 151.
do, or desire they should. But where they say, in the very same place, that
he received not circumcision to seal up his faith in the Messiah, they go
backward most dangerously, to bring in a faith to justification, imputed for
righteousness, which yet is not in the Messiah. Was righteousness ever, or is
it imputed to any for justification, but by faith in Christ, then promised, now
exhibited? The reason insinuated by them is a pleasant one; namely, for that
Abraham had faith in the Messiah 24 years before he was circumcised. Whereas on
the contrary, it could not have been a seal of such faith, except he had had
the faith before, whether longer or lesser time, it matters not, but is, as it
pleases him who bestow^th both the one and other. Signs and Seals are not to
be set to blankes, neither do they make things that were not before, to be?
but serve only to confirm things that are.

These things thus cleared, the Reader must be requested, not to measure our
arguments from Abraham and Isaaks circumcision, to the Baptism of Infants, by
the crooked line which these men draw between them: but by the right rule of
sound reason, applied as follows in three particulars.

First, that the Covenant unto which Circumcision was annexed, was the Covenant
of the Gospel, and not of the Law and old Testement, as they take it. For then
it could not have been to Abraham the seal of the righteousness of faith, any
way: but of unrighteousness and condemnation every way: for righteousness is
not by the Law, which works wrath, Romans 4. 15 and chapter 7. 9. 13.
and by which sin revives, and becomes exceeding sinful. And surely it is more
then strange, that any believing the Scriptures, should beleev that the Lords
Covenant made with Abraham, and so with Israel in him, by which he took them to
Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 7. 6. 7. 8 Psalm. 33. 12
be his peculiar people, from among all other peoples, because he loved their
father and them; by which they were a blessed Nation, having Jehovah for their
God; in remembering of which covenant Lev. 26. 42.
with Abraham etc. he so often showed them mercy, and did them good; and in
time, gave his Son Christ to save them from their enemies: and lastly, by which
Covenant they Luke 1. 71. 72. Romans 11. 25 26. etc.
shall again be called when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in: and so all
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Syon a
Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Iakob. For this is my Covenant
unto them when I shall take away their sins. As concerning the Gospel they are
enemies for the (Gentiles) sake: but as concerning the election, they are
beloved for the fathers sake: for the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance: that this covenant of love and mercy, making them blessed which are
taken into it, and procuring the giving of Christ, and of 2 Cor. 3. 6. 7. Romans
4. 15. Gai. 3. 19. 20.
salvation, should be the covenant of the old Testament and Law: Of the Law, I
say, and old Testament, which is the ministry of death; the letter that
kills: which works wrath, was added for transgression; by which sin
reviveth, and all die, Romans 7. 9.
and are accursed. What is this else but to bring the current of gracious
mercy, into a channel of severe justice, and to curse where God blesses, as
Balaam purposed to have done?

Secondly, we conclude hence, that the Church of the Jews, and Church now is
one in substance, though diversely Esaias 5. 1. Ier 2. 21. Math. 21. 33. 34.
ordered: one Uineyard (in which there are both grown trees, and young plants;)
one Kingdom which was taken from them, and given to us; the branches of one
olive tree, holy in the same holy root Abraham, from which most of them were
broken off for unbelief, and we by faith planted in their place; one body, Ephesians.
3. 6.
and therefore having Infants in it now, as then, and the same therefore to be
baptized (there being also one Baptism, as one Ephesians. 4. 4. 5. Relig. Com. page
62. 63.
body) as they were circumcised of old: Baptism (as elsewhere I have proved at
large, to their silencing in that point) coming in the place of Circumcision.

Thirdly, that all their disputes against Infants Baptism, because they cannot
manifest faith and repentance, are but the same quarrels which might have been
picked of old against Infants Circumcision.

That there was something in Abraham's circumcision extraordinary, is true: for
he first received it for his posterity; and for the Proselytes with them, which
joined themselves to the Lord: so was there also in his faith, as he was the
father (by example) to all that should beleev after him.

Their profane assertion, that faith was required of none (to Page 152.
wit men of years) for circumcision, I have formerly disproved. How can it come
into the hearts of reasonable men, that the Lord in whose eyes the prayers,
sacrifices, and all other services of ungodly men were so abominable, should
like of their circumcision?

Lastly, for Abraham's children of the flesh (according to their
misunderstanding of them) they were by nature children of wrath as well as
others, and had thereby no more right to circumsion, then the Infants of Sodom.
It was of grace, and not of nature, that they were within Gods Covenant. Of
Gal. 3. and Romans 9. we have spoken at large formerly, and of their
misconstructions of the Apostles meaning.

Lastly, we neither run, as they say, nor go to the old Testament, Page 153.
Law, or Moses for the baptizing of Infants; but to the Covenant of the Gospel
solemnly made with our father Abraham long before the Law was given, the old
Testament established, or Moses born.

Their discourse about Rome is vain, except they can prove that the outward
baptism there administered (though unlawfully) is not to be retained by such, as
unto whom the Lord afterward vouchsafes the inward baptism of his spirit; and
so answer our Reasons to the contrary, which they have, and have had so long
time in their hands.

These things thus cleared, it remains we come in the next and last place to
examine their defense of that their own unhallowed baptism in use amongst them:
formerly proved by me a mere nullity by their grounds, and practice set
together. Their ground is, that baptism unlawfully ministered is no baptism,
their practice, that he who ministering his gift (poorly as their manner is)
does convert (in truth pervert) another: may also baptize him without any
special calling.

For foundation of my proofs I laid down these two Rules. 1. There is no
lawful baptism, but by him that has a lawful calling to baptize. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 11. Heb. 5. 4. 5. And unto this they assent. 2. Only he has a lawful
ordinary calling to baptize (and extraordinary they challeng not) who is called
thereto by the Church. This their first rebaptizer Mr. Smith had not, neither
have they, that now administer baptism amongst them; neither do they account,
that more is requisite for power, and right to baptize, then a personal gift
of teaching, and making thereby one of their Proselites, and supposed converts.
Whereupon it follows, that they themselves being baptized by such, as want a
lawful calling, are not lawfully baptized; and so by the verdict of their own
quest, unbaptized persons.

Their defense they begin with the perverting both of my words, and meaning,
very unhonestly, in setting down the state of the question; which yet seems not
strange unto me, considering their licentious dealing in like sort, with the
Holy Ghost in the Scriptures. They frame the question; whether any but Pastors
or Elders may baptize? and my charge upon them; that they are unbaptized,
because, they want Pastors.

But where have I so spoken? or how gather they that to have been my meaning?
had it so been, why could I not as easily have said, that none but Pastors (for
of baptism by others Elders which labor not in the word and doctrine, we
approve 1 Timothy 5. 17*
not) may lawfully baptize; as, that none but such as are lawfully called by
the Church may baptize? which are my words. My meaning was not to deny, that a
Church wanting Pastors may appoint a member able to teach (though out of
office) to baptize: for which much may be said, and has been by some so
minded. Which though I do not simply approve of; yet neither did, neither had
I occasion to deal thereagainst, but only against the wild course of these
Allalikes; of whom any that can wrest a few Scriptures (intended of men of
years only) against the baptizing of Infants, to the corrupting of some
simple man, or woman, thinks himself another John Baptist, as their practice
and profession manifests. Now whether they have thus altered my words, and
perverted my meaning out of bold rashness, as being more hasty to answer, then
to understand their adversary; or out of cunning for their advantage, the Lord
and themselves be Judges. Only this any may see, and I shall make appear,
that the most, and most colorable of their Arguments are against their
misconceaved, and not mine intended sense: which gives occasion to suspect,
that they have rather been cunning, then careless in the thing.

ADVERSARIES.
LET us come to the particulars: and first to their first and main ground, and
foundation of their course which is, that members, and Churches of Christ are
made both by faith, and baptism, and not by the one only.

DEFENSE.
THIS their foundation in respect of baptism is sandy: seeing it servs but to
signify, and confirm what was before; but makes nothing to be that was not.
The Scriptures (being many) cited by them are partly impertinent, and partly
against them, some of them expressly, and the rest truly.

Some of them indeed speak of being baptized into Christ, Gal. 3. 26. 27. Romans
6. 1. Cor. 12. 13. Heb. 6.
and into his death, and into one body with him, and make baptism a foundation:
but mean not (...) to show, that men are made Christian souls by baptism, as
ignorant persons think and speak; but only that they are confirmed, and
furthered thereby in that which they were before. Some of the places join with
baptism the Lords Supper, others the laying on of 1. Cor. 12 13. Heb. 6
hands (which yet rather is meant of the doctrine, then ministration of those
things). Now do they conceive, that such as were no true Christians before,
are in part made Christians by the Lords Supper, and laying on of hands? When
the Scriptures affirm any thing of an ordinance, they must be interpreted
according to the nature of the ordimance. As where Christ says of the bread,
This is my body; or of the rock, And the rock was Christ: or the Apostle here,
that we are baptized into Christ, and draw near unto Christ by baptism, and the
like; we must understand the speeches as sacramental, so far as they are
applied to ordinances; that is, as intending those things, for signs, and
seals, and means of confirmation; and not otherwise.

Others of the Scriptures brought by them are so plainly against them, as it is
marvail that in setting them down, they thought not of the Lords answer to the
evil servant Luke 19. 22. For example, Math. 28. 19. Go teach, or as they well
turn it, make all nations disciples baptizing them etc. The Apostles then were
first to make, to wit, by their teaching, disciples, that is Christians; and
after to baptize them. Is it not the Scriptures Acts 11. 26
constant voice, and these men's plea (true in it self, but to a wrong end) that
men must first believe, and repent, and upon manifestation thereof, be
baptized? Are not they that beleev, and repent Christians with them? Otherwise,
How do they baptize them? But thus it is with men in all sects, that are lead
by passion, and appetite, more then reason: they doatupon some one thing truly
or apparently good: and labor above measure, to magnify it, esteeming all
things without it, as nothing. Thus these men esteem of baptism, others of
Church government, others of separation, others of imposition of hands by
Bishops; And so, according as men have advantage by particulars, or suffer for
them, or are otherwise prejudiced toward them, they set high valuation upon
them. But as grace teaches us to acknowledge better things in Christians then
any outward ordinances; so must wisdom warn us not to ascribe too much to any
one, as fond folks use to do to the person, or thing which they affect.

Math. 18. 20, is against them. To be gathered together in Christ's name there,
presupposes a Church state. So is Io^. 4. 1. Christ made and baptized
disciples: they were made disciples by preaching, and after baptized. Ioh. 3.
5, speaks of regeneration by the spirit compared in that place to water, as
elsewhere to fire for its property in purifying. And admit, it speak of the
ordinance of baptism: yet must it follow regeneration, as a means of
confirmation.

As therefore Christians are not made by the ordinance of baptism; so much
less are Churches. This I have elsewhere Rel. Com. p. 47. 48.
proved against them by many firm Arguments: to which seeing they neither give
answer, nor show thereof: (though this be a main matter in question between
them and us) what should I say more to them? These they may answer, if they be
able, as I am sure they are not: nor, I think, will ever go about it. Only, I
here add this one thing. If members, and Churches be made by Baptism, I demand,
when I. M. alone baptiseth one of his converts alone, what Church, or member of
what Church is here made? And if one alone may receiv or make members of the
Church, why not also cast them out, and excommunicate them without the Churches
presence or privity? Such is the confused course of these men.

Here they cite sundry Scriptures, but proving only that Page 156.
which we willingly grant: viz. that men and women converted from Heathenism,
and Judaism, to the faith of Christ, and so to be added to the Church, and
being before unbaptised, were to be baptized. But how proves this, that they
were made either Churches or Christians by Baptism? When any of the Heathens
became Jews, that is, embraced the Jewish Esth. 8. 17. Nehem. 10. 28. Ruth. 2.
11
Religion, and separated themselves from the other Idolaters of the land to the
Law of God, and came to put their trust under the wings of the God Israel, and
were to be circumcised: did their Circumcision make them such? Or did it not
only, declare and confirm that state of grace, in and unto which God had
called them? Neither yet could the things forementioned be performed by their
infants: and yet were they made partakers of Circumcision with them.

ADVERSARIES.
BUT mind here a futher matter. They say, The Church at Jerusalem was the
first Church of Christ; and by faith, and Baptism made a Church: and in the
next words, that the twelve were so made also.

DEFENSE.
IF the Church at Jerusalem were the first Church of Christ (as in a sense it
may be so called) I would know how the Baptism of Christ before that time, and
of John's before Christ's (having also joined with them faith in the baptized)
made Churches? Were any made before the first? Or what, and which were the
Churches which they so made, and gathered? Both the one, and other living, and
dying members of the Jewish Church. I add, considering how it is said of John,
that Jerusalem and all Judea, and the region round about Jordan Mat. 3. 5. 6
Ioh. 4. 1.
were baptized of him, confessing their sins: and of Christ, that he made and
baptized more Disciples then John; it is very evident, that thousands,
afterward made members of the Churches in Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria, and
Galilee, were baptized long before, by John and Christ: and were made members
of the Church, in our sense, long after their Baptism. Here then we see Baptism
administered, and yet no Church made: and again, Churches made, and yet many the
members thereof, not then, but long before baptized.

We grant (as they say) that Rome is that Aegipt, Sodom and Babylon, in
mystery, mentioned in the Revelation: but deny (which they adjoyn) as being
both untrue and uncharitable, that all in that Church are in Gods account as
the worst pagans, etc. God has his people (considered in their persons) in
Babylon, unto whom he says, Come out of her my people, etc. being held captive
there, by her craft and cruelty. Neither is Babylon called an habitation of
Devils, for that the devil possesses Rev. 18. 1.
men; but to show its desolation after the day of the Esaias 13. 18 20. 21. and
21. 9. 10. Ier. 10. 2. 8 39. 40, etc.
fall thereof: the Evangelist in that speech, alluding to the forms of speech
used by the Prophets before against Babylon Civil, in regard of her utter
ruin, and desolation shortly to follow.

Neither is the Baptism in Rome, a Babylonish, or Egyptian Page 157.
washing, as they calumniate; no more then the doctrine of Baptism, in the name
of the Trinity is a Babylonish doctrine; but it is as a vessel of the Lords
house, though profaned there. Much less can that vitupery agree to the Church
of England, where the faith is sound for justification and salvation, and
effectual for obtaining the same in those that truly profess it. The
Circumcision of Gods people (though too much infected with their sins) in
Aegipt, and Babylon, were no^ Ezekiel. 23. 8.
Egyptian and Babylonish; no more is the Baptism in Egypt and Babylon
spiritual: specially in regard of Gods people there; as not a few also show
themselves to be by coming out thence at the Lords call: though some more
slowly then other; as of old they did out of Babylon Civil, as Esra, and
Nehemiah testify.

That the everlasting Gospel commands believers to be baptized; Page 158.
to wit, if unbaptized before, we grant: but that men become an habitation of
God by his spirit, and water; is as if they said; water dwells in men, as the
spirit of God does? It is hard to say, whether Papists bread, or these men's
water, be made the greater Idol. Neither do we in retaining the Baptism
received in Rome, take a corner stone out of Babylon, either for foundation, or
wall, but bring thence a vessel of the Lords house there captived with the
Lords people. I know not but that the very circumcision of the Shechimites
might have been Genesis 34.
retained, if any of the males had survived and embraced the truth of religion:
which yet was far from being lawfully administered.

Lastly, though all were true which they say for anabaptizing in the general;
yet were their particular practice not justified thereby, nor our exception
cleared, being against their manner (and the same singular, from all other of
their Sect, in all places) of baptizing, by persons uncalled thereunto, either
by God immediately, or mediately by the Church, ^^ or otherwise then by their
own particular and personal motion.

To their objection arising from the supposed proportion Page 159.
between Baptism, and the Ministry; and to their Demand, Why I cast away my
Popish Priesthood, and retain my Popish washing for my Christianity (as they
please to speak) I have answered Iustificat. etc. page 390. 391. etc.
elsewhere at large: neither have they been able, to this day, or now are, to
say against mine answer any thing at all, either true, or colorable: and yet
neither have they the humility to suffer themselves to be taught better; nor the
modesty to hold their tongues in the matter: but do irksomely demand a new the
things of old answered. For the present, I will only note these three
differences. First, it is absurdly said, that a man is made a Christian by his
Baptism, as he is made a Minister by his outward calling. He that is not a
Christian before he be baptized, becomes not one thereby: But by the outward
calling of the Church, he that was no Minister before, become such properly
and imediatly. Secondly, a man is to be baptized but once: and God adding to
the outward 2 Chronicles 30 18. 19. 20.
washing with water that which is inward, and by his spirit, sanctifies the
former, and covers many faylings in the manner of administering it: but a man
may on the contrary, upon occasion, be called diverse times to a Ministry, in
diverse Churches, one after another. Thirdly, the Ministry is the 1 Cor. 3. 21
22. 23. and chapter 12. 28.
Churches, and depends upon it as the adjunct upon the subject, so as if the
Church dissolve, the Ministry cease: which the same Church also that gives
it, may take away, and make him that was a Minister no Minister: Besides, that
in the mean while his Ministry is bounded within the precincts of that Church
whereof he is an officer. But in the ordinance of Baptism the case is clean
otherwise. For neither can the Church which has given it, take it from him;
neither cease he to remain a baptized person, though alone, and without
either Church, or other Christian in the world with him; neither is he in any
Church where he comes, to be barred from the privileges of his Baptism, or
use of any thing depending upon it.

ADVERSARIES.
FOR the justifying of the manner of their rebaptizing, Page 161.
and to prove that the Disciples of Christ, though no Pastors (they must add,
nor having any Church-calling) may baptize: their first instance is from John
Baptist, who was no Pastor, and yet baptized.

DEFENSE.
WE grant it; No more was Christ himself a Pastor in our sense, nor his
Apostles. But we say John, as they, had an immediate and extraordinary calling,
not only to exercise, but also to introduce the ordinance of Baptism: being
expressly prophesyed of before by Esaias and Malachy: Esaias 40. 3. Mal. 4. 5. 6
Luke 1. 11. 13. 14. 15, etc.
promised to his father Zachary, by an Angel of the Lord, and filled with the
Holy Ghost from his mothers womb. Will these men compare their conceited gift
of converting, with John's divine, and extraordinary charter and endowments? We
say, with Christ our Lord, that John was a Prophet, and more then a Mat. 11. ^.
Prophet: They answer us, that the least disciple, or that has John's doctrine,
in the Kingdom of God is greater then he. But we reply, that Christ does not
there mean the least disciple, but the least able Minister of the new
Testament, whereof these Anabaptizers are none. When Christ asked the Jews, if
they went out to see a Prophet: Think we, he meant of any ordinary Jew, having
a poor gift of expounding the Scriptures, like these men's? Or not rather of
some, both of singular abilities, and special calling? So, by the least in the
Kingdom of heaven, he means the least Minister of the new Testament, furnished
with special abilities, and calling. Besides, his meaning is, not that the
least Minister, no nor the greatest neither, was greater then John the Baptist
in respect of power of ministering Baptism: for none was comparable to him this
way, being under God the instituter of it, and the Baptist, which neither Peter
nor Paul was: But the greatness here, is in regard only of the more full
knowledge of Christ, not only come in the flesh, and entered upon his Ministry,
as in John's time; but having finished his work upon earth, and being dead for
our sins, and risen again, and ascended into the heavens; whence he did, and
does most graciously, and powerfully administer his Kingdom amongst men. Is it
not enough for John Murton, and his consorts, to be equal with John Baptist in
the power of baptizing, but they will needs perck above him therein, and be
greater then he. But it is no new thing for the bramble to advance Judge. 9.
it self above all the trees, even the vine, olive, and fig tree. But such
pride will have a fall. The Lord grant it may be by, or with repentance, to
prevent the downfall to perdition.

To their instancing the disciples of Christ, and Ananias his Page 161. 162.
baptizing, what shall I say more then I have done in the very writing which
they undertake to answer? Wherein I have proved, that these instances are so
far from helping them, as that they make plainly against them, as the Reader
that will, may see. To my proofs they answer nothing at all, nor confirm their
own tenent further, by any circumstance of the Text. Only they tell us in the
general, that these things were written for our learning: We grant it, and
therewith affirm, that amongst other things, we are to learn this from them;
that such as are to baptize, are to be furnished with (besides, and above the
gift of teaching) a special warrant and calling from Christ, either
extraordinary and immediate, as had these disciples, and Ananias; or ordinary,
and mediate by the Church: which alone is delegated by Christ the Lord, with
authority to call men to the ministering of his solemn Ordinances; whereof
Baptism is one, and not the use of a gift, as bare teaching is.

In opening Math. 28, Go teach all Nations, etc. they show Page 102* 163.
a strange streyn of wit; in gathering from thence, that any disciple of Christ
may baptize, from whence all others of learning or judgment (of all Sects) do
gather the contrary, and that none, but such as have special calling to teach
may baptize. Let us examine things particularly.

And first, I affirm, that the Lord in that place gives an Apostolical
commission properly; which I thus prove. First, because he bids them Go, or
go forth and teach all Nations: opposing the Apostles going forth, and
teaching all Nations then, to the Prophets tarrying, and teaching that one
Nation of the Jews formerly. Do or can these men (though their feet abide not
in the house, Prove. 7. 11,) go to, and teach all Nations? Their answer is
frivilous, that every Disciple is to do this according to his best ability,
seeing the Lord calls none to a state or work, but such as he furnishes with
answerable abilities. By such answers, the calling of any how unfit soever, to
any place or state how excellent soever, might be justified. Secondly, if not
in this place, I would know when, and where Christ gave the commission properly
Apostolical.

Where they add, that the Apostles have left their power wholly behind them,
and that nothing is dead but their persons: they err not a little; For not
only their persons are dead, but their office also is ceased. If any now have
the power of Apostles, they have then the office of Apostles first, from which
the power is, and in which it is to be exercised. If they say, they are
Apostles; they are not, but are easily found liars by plain direction of the
Scriptures. Besides, they expressly contradict Gal. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 9. and ch*
4. 9.
themselves in the same place, in saying, The commission was given to such, as
whose persons remains to the end of the world. If their persons be dead, how
remain they? But they add, as their corner stone, that this commission was
given to the succeeders of the Apostles in their doctrine from time to time,
with whom Christ promises to be present always, even to the end.

If I should answer (as I know not but I might lawfully,) that these words of
Christ, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, are to be
expounded as those of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. 17, We which are alive, and
remain unto the coming of the Lord, etc; and that the meaning of both is, that
all should so walk, as if that day of the Lord were to come every day of their
lives, what would they reply?

But admit this be spoken mediately to the successors of the Apostles (not in
their power Apostolical, for that cease with their office Apostolical, and
their office with their persons; neither is there left in the Church any
authority or direction for the choosing of Apostles, but) in the performance of
such ordinary works, in lawful order, as the Apostles were to exercise
themselves in, specially of teaching and baptizing, there mentioned: I thus
prove, that by those successors are not meant, as they conceiv disciples, but
such as have special commission, and authority, and so specially Pastors.

And first, Christ here opposes them to whom he speaks, as the makers of
Disciples (as the words are) to Disciples to be made by them. Secondly, if
every disciple of Christ, then why not women also, which are disciples as well
as men, and whereof there are diverse to be found better gifted then any of this
fellowship? Neither can they object the Apostles prohibition of women, 1 Cor.
11, and 1 Timothy 2, seeing they hold Baptism no Church action, but personal
only; and so administer it as privately, as Midwines use to do. Thirdly, if
Pastors be most rightfully the Apostles successors in other works of their
Apostolical commission here given; by name, in administering the Lords Supper,
and over-seeing the flock, and defending the same in the truth, which they
grant: why not in teaching, and baptizing also, which alone are expressed?
Math. 28.

ADVERSARIES.
BUT this they account a mere fiction, seeing converting and baptizing is no
part of the Pastors office, which is to feed, watch and oversee the flock of
Christ, and defend the same in the truth: then which they deny further charge
to be laid upon him by his office: quoting for that purpose, Act. 20. 28, Tit.
1. 9, proceeding also to challenge it as an imagination, that he is to preach
Page 163.
by virtue of his office: yea, adding that any disciple having ability is
authorized, yea commanded to preach, convert, and baptize, as well, and as
much, if not more, then any Pastor. To this height of usurpation are these
Chorites come.

DEFENSE.
FIrst here, as always, they alter the state of the question, which between
them and me is not whether only Pastors, but whether only such as have a
special Church-calling, may baptize? Secondly, it is true, that Pastors in the
right state of things, are not to be set over herds of goats and swine, but
over flocks of sheep: yet does it not follow thereupon that Pastors in no sort
convert. For first, there may be in the Church hypocrites undetected, or after
detection, yet uncensured, which they may by Gods blessing effectually convert.
Secondly, the Pastor as Pastor of the flock, and feeding it, may convert a
stranger coming in: and why then not baptize him by their own ground? The
person so converted publicly, may and ought to be baptized publicly; and
should not the Pastor do it (by whom also he is converted) rather then a
private member? Thirdly, it is not all one (though they confound them) to
convert, to wit, from being wicked to become godly, and to make a disciple.
Children born in the Church may be made Disciples, yet not so converted; as it
may be never having been such, as of whom it could be said, that they were
wicked. Fourthly, it is their ignorance to make converting of men, and the
baptizing them, actions of the same nature: seeing only men and women before
converted, and repenting, are to be baptized. Act. 2. 38.
Lastly, in granting, according to the Scriptures, that the Pastor 1 Cor. 4. 15
and 9. 14. Iam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23
is by office to feed the flock: they cannot deny, but that he is to baptize
thereby: seeing baptism is a part of that feeding properly, serving to confirm
the faith of believers in the washing away of their sins by the blood of
Christ; Begetting is by the seed of the word, the word of truth: and so
whatsoever means follow thereupon, is but for feeding and nourishing the so
begotten.

ADVERSARIES.
BUT that which follows is admirable, viz. that the Pastor is not required
to preach, nor does perform it by virtue of his office, when he does it.

DEFENSE.
MAny men (and these with the rest) have spoken many absurd things in religion:
but these in this exceed them all, yea and themselves. They from Act. 20,
affirm that the Pastors are to feed the flock by their office. And can the
flock be fed as it ought without preaching, and where the bread of life is not
broken unto it? They also grant in the same place from Titus 1. 9. that he is
to defend the flock in the truth against all gainsayers, But why to defend the
flock etc. as their cunning and corrupt gloss is, rather then as the words of
the text are, by sound doctrine both to exhort, and convince the gainsaier. Are
exhortations and convictions by sound doctrine no preachings with these men?
yea, are they not directly for the conversion of gainsayers? And how then
belongs it not to Pastors, to whom these things belong, to convert? So where
it is required that the Bishop (to be called) be apt to 1 Timothy 3. 2.
teach, is he not by his office to do that which is requisite in him for his
enabling unto it. I say for the enabling of him unto his office, and not for
the adorning of it only, as hospitality is: which though he wholly want ability
to perform, yet that disables him not; as the want of aptnes to teach does.

Ioyn with these the Apostles exhortation, that the Elders that rule well be
had in double honor; specially they that labor in 1 Timothy 5* 17.
the word, and doctrine; for the labourer is worthy of his reward: and what can
be clearer, then that the Pastor is to preach by his office, and that as being
the special work, for which his wages are due unto him. Is not to labor in
the word and doctrine here spoken of, for him to preach, and that as an Elder;
as the former rule, as Elders? Strange it is that, a Pastor Ephe. ^. 11.
or Teacher by office should not teach and preach by office; that is, not
exercise their office or ministry, the Teacher in teaching, and Exhorter, or
Pastor in exhortation. And see we Romans 12. 5. 7. 8.
not here what new Patrons dumb ministers have gotten; of whom the old almost
every where are ashamed? If it be not required of the Pastor to preach by his
office, then though he never preach at all, yet it cannot be said to Archippus,
fulfill thy Col. 4. 17
ministry, which thou have received in the Lord. The Pastor might, by their
Canon, most faithfully perform and fulfill his office though he never preached
one sermon all his life long.

But as all errors have some truth either in them, or nigh unto them, and so
are raised upon mistaking of one thing for another, with which it has some
affinity: So is it in this case. For first the ability or gift to teach is not
by the office, but before it, and merely personal, and so remains even in the
officer; and the same greater in one then in another, though the office be the
same in both. Yet because the gift fits for the office, and enables to the
performing of it many unskilfully confound them. Secondly, there is both a
liberty, and duty of using the same gift in time and place, before and without
the office. But herewith (the office concurring) is joined, and added a bond of
authority, and special charge upon the officer to wait upon his office, the
Teacher in teaching, the Exhorter, or Pastor in exhortation, as the Apostle
speaks.

Here amongst sundry Scriptures, not so much as looking Page 164.
toward the matter in hand, but speaking of the general liberties of
Christians, and graces of Christianity, common to women with men, and to such
men as want all gifts of teaching with others, they alledg, 1 Cor. 14. 1, and
the Apostle then commanding every believer to covet to preach.

But first, why put they preaching, and not prophesying, as the Text, and all
translations have it? Secondly, it is their presumption, that he speaks of
every believer. Was every believer to covet spiritual gifts, to wit, all both
extraordinary and ordinary there mentioned? And are there not many in all
Churches, who, without a miracle, cannot possibly attain to any competent
ability to teach publicly in the Church? But let them stretch the words to
their own size, what follows hereupon? All are to desire the gift of
exhortation, etc. and such as have it, to use it in time and place: Ergo, it is
not required of Pastors by virtue of their office to exhort. Why not then thus?
It is required of every member of the Church in his place, to watch for the
good of the whole, and to defend the same against gainsayers in the truth: and
therefore it is an imagination, which these men in the page before going affirm,
that the Pastor is by his office to watch, and defend the flock against
gainsayers: Or thus. It concerns every Romans 12. 13
Christian, being able, to distribute to the necessities of the Saints, and
therefore not to the Deacons by virtue of their office; which yet for the very
thing are called Distributers in the same Verse. 8.
place. Every citizen and subject is bound to defend his city and country
against the enemy in his place and standing; and therefore by their
consequence, not the Magistrate by virtue of his Magistracy. Their conclusion
therefore, that a Pastor is not bound to teach by his office, because he
mightafter a sort, and in an order, teach without it; it is, as if they should
tell us, that he who is bound to a post with one coard, cannot be bound with
two.

ADVERSARIES.
THey add, that the Church may receiv in members, without officers, or when
they are sick, or in prison, and so baptize them, as the primitive Churches
were gathered by faith and baptism, and that being without Pastors a good
while, which the Apostles afterward placed amongst them.

DEFENSE.
THey often say, but never prove, that Churches are gathered by baptism. Baptism
is an ordinance and service given to Romans 9. 4. Ps. 147. 19. Ioh. 7. 22.
the Church, as were the statutes and services of old, given to Israel, and
Circumcision amongst the rest. If the Church receiv in men by baptizing them;
then it is to cast them out by unbaptizing them. For they are to be put out or
excommunicated by the undoing of that, by the doing of which they were taken in.

Besides, receiving in, and casting out of members are dispensations of Christ's
Kingdom; Baptism of his Prophetical office.

Thirdly, as both infants might be born in the Church, and men of years
received into it, and both the one and other be be baptized afterward, as God
affoarded fit and lawful means: so can it not be proved, specially in the
plenty that 1 Cor. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 3 Tit. 1. 5.
then was, that the Apostles still left not behind them some extraordinary
Officers, Prophets, or Evangelists to water, where they had planted, and to
order things unperfected.

Lastly, let be observed, how in this place, they make it a Page 164.
work of the same power, to baptize, and to receiv members into the Church: and
whereupon it must follow inavoidably, that Baptism administered by one alone, and
without a Church power (which theirs was, and is,) is unlawful: seeing one
alone is not a Church, nor has power to receiv in, or cast out members.

To conclude the point about the Apostles successors. The Apostle Paul, calling
unto him at Miletus the Elders, or Bishops of the Church of Ephesus, and
charging them to feed the flock Act. 20. 17. 18. 19, -- 28 etc.
whereof they were made Overseers by the Holy Ghost; and for their direction
therein, propounding unto the^ his own Apostolical example to be followed by
them in so many particulars, shows who are the Apostles ordinary successors in
their several charges. The same also does the Apostle Peter, in calling
himself a Sympresbyter, or fellow-Elder with the ordinary 1 Pet. 5. 1.
Elders. And truly what man, not at utter defyance with common sense, will
deny that a Pastor in his charge is more properly an Apostles successor, then
a private brother.

In answering mine exceptions, they build amiss upon my Page 165. 166.
foundation, and father their bastards upon me: knowing that I both put, and
have proved against them, elsewhere, a difference between no Baptism, and
Baptism unlawfully administered, in diverse respects; and that the latter, though
it ought not so to have been administered, or received; yet ought not to be
iterated; specially, if God have added thereunto the inward Baptism of the
spirit of regeneration.

Now my proofs, howsoever by them vilified, confirm, 1 Proof.
that besides and above the personal ability to teach, a special calling is
requisite for him that dispenses the ordinance of Baptism. This special
calling ordinary is by the Church, which alone has Christ's delegated power
for Ordinances. 1 Cor. 3. 21 22. 23. Math. 18. 17. 18. 19. 20.
The Argument I thus frame. That which by many proofs of Scripture appears to
have been done by special calling, and commission from Christ, and never
otherwise; that not being done by such special calling, and commission, is
unlawfully done: But by the proofs by me brought, it appears that Baptism has
still been ministered by special calling, and commission, and not otherwise*
therefore, these men's Baptism not so administered, was, and is, unlawfully
administered; and so they by their own grounds (which they vainly make mine)
unbaptized persons.

Neither can they make an escape by saying, that they in Page 166.
whom I instance had no calling by the Church, nor were Pastors of particular
flocks: Seeing our question is not of Pastors, but of such as have a
Church-calling: and that John Baptist, Christ's disciples, Phillip, and the
rest, had a calling extraordinary, These Adversaries neither have the former,
nor challenge the latter. And indeed, by this defense, so often renewed by them,
they make it evident to all the world, that they neither consider of their own
practice seriously, nor of mine exceptions.

Of the difference between teaching and baptising, I shall speak in the fourth
Rule: as I have also formerly, both in this Treatise, and elsewhere, at large
cleared their exception about ordination: which they cunningly dissemble. Here
I only demand of them, whether one man alone, without either presence, or
preceding election of the Church, may ordain a Pastor, as is their manner of
baptizing. And for me, do they not know in their consciences that I was
ordained publicly upon the solemn calling of the Church, in which I serve,
both in respect of the Ordainers, and Ordained? Whilst then they account me
wilfully blind in putting difference between my Church ordination and their
Baptism; they show themselves witlesly blind in making them alike.

To my proof, from Math. 3, that Christ in coming to John Page 168.
to be baptized of him, fulfilled all righteousness, etc. they answer, That
this is still done, when any disciple, etc: Wherein first, they make both John
and Christ, disciples of Christ: Secondly, if Christ had herein considered John
as an ordinary disciple only, what needed he to have come from one country
to another, even from Galilee, to Jordan in Judea, to have been baptized of
him? Why might he not as well have used some ordinary disciple near at hand?
Christ therefore, in being baptized by John, fulfilled all righteousness, in
consecrating unto us Baptism, as Circumcision to the fathers, in his own
person, who of God is made unto us righteousness: and 1 Cor. 1. 30
that by John's ministry, who had a most solemn and singular calling thereunto.
Lastly, it is not likely, which they take for certain, that John in these
words, I had need to be baptized of thee, meant not (to wit at all) of the
baptism with water, considering that the quest on between our Lord and him, was
about that Baptism and none other. The words therefore insinuate, that some
special state and calling is required in the Baptizer above these men's common
disciple-ship.

Here first in answering Ioh. 1. 19. 25, for their own credit 3 Proof.
they disgrace the Priests and Levits, as blind and ignorant Pharisees, for
demanding of John, by what authority he baptized. But considering both their
places, and John's practice in bringing a new ordinance of Religion into the
Church, they did nothing herein not well sorting with their office.

Secondly, their answer, that John proovs his authority to baptize, by proving
his authority to preach, from Esaias the Prophet: Esa. 40. 3, shows, how short
their wits are in gageing the depth of the Scriptures. He does not prove his
authority to baptize, by a common authority or liberty to teach, which any of
Israel (gifted) might use; but he justifies his whole ministry, in all the
parts of it, by his special calling, as the harbinger and forerunner of
Christ, plainly foretold by Esaias and Malachy. Do they think, that the Prophets
words, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, etc; appertained to every
Israelite that could teach; as they ascribe power to baptize to each of their
teaching disciples? Or might John, without a special calling, have instituted
and brought into the Church, as he did, a new ordinance? Yea I would know,
which of John's disciples ever offered to baptize? Of whom yet it cannot be
doubted, but diverse were able to teach.

As Cowards most vilify in words, where in deed they dare 4 Proof. Page 169.
do least, so do these men account this proof most vain, against which they
have nothing to bring, saving an equivocation in the word Ordinances, and a
cunning course in leaving out that which I alledg from Romans 12. 3, which would
discover the fallacy. The different nature of baptism and teaching (merely by
a personal gift) is evident. A man becomes a Prophet, and able to teach, by
the gifts of the Spirit, knowledge and utterance. 1 Cor. 1. 5*
But I would know by what gift of the Spirit any becoms a Baptizer, or able to
baptize? 2 Besides the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 1. 12, etc; the light of nature, and
general law of love, shows, that he who knows any thing profitable for
another, should in his place, and upon occasion declare it to him: so as
teaching by him that has ability, has its plain foundation in nature: But so
is not Baptism by the light of nature; but merely ordained and instituted of
God by supernatural revelation; in which respect I call it an ordinance* And
this consideration alone, if there were nothing else, will with reasonable men,
oversway all their presumptions* Actions of religion are some of them performed
immediately from a personal gift, and grace of the spirit in the heart, as
preaching, or prophesying, and prayer, out of a special state or office;
others, by no special gift of the spirit at all, but by authority conferred
upon some special person; as the ministration of Sacraments, censures,
ordination, and the like: and lastly, some others by both, as pastoral
preaching, prayer, etc: the gift ministering ability; and the office charge to
use the gift, for feeding of the flock committed to the officer.

In answering my fifth Proof, the alledg things partly imper^^n^nt, 5 Proof.
Page 169.
and partly unreasonable. Of the former sort is their discourse about the
Eun^^chs being a member of Christ, and his remaining in any particular Church:
Whereas they should have answered directly, whether by his faith and baptism
he had been made a member of any particular Church, or not? But they seeing
what would follow upon a direct answer, have rather chosen an indirect evasion.
Of like hue is that which they add of Isreal's renewed covenant, (conceiving
Israel as a true Church) which we meddle not with in this business.

Absurd it is in it self, and a slandering of our practice, Page 170.
which they affirm of one casting out another, where there are but two of a
Church. Which of us ever so held or practiced? One man, or woman either, may
upon just ground, separate from a whole Church: may he, or she therefore
excommunicate a whole Church? Or has I. M. excommunicated the whole Church of
England? Separation, where lawful, only shows the liberty, which every
Christian has to keep himself pure from the sins of others: Excommunication
imports a judiciarie power and state of authority to execute a solemn censure
and punishment: which appertains only to the Church gathered together in
Christ's name; which one cannot Math. 18. 19* 20. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5
be. Two may join together, and so receiving one another mutually may become a
Church: or may, upon just occasion, part a sunder, and so dissolv: but cannot
receiv in, to speak properly, or cast out one another, by solemn ordinance:
this imports authority; the former, liberty only. But thus it becomes the new
builders of Babylon, to use brick for stone, and lime for well tempered mortar.

Their answer to my sixth proof about witnesses of the baptism, Proof. 6. Page
170.
that Phillip baptized the Eunuch, and Ananias, Saul, none else being by, is
presumptuous. It is apparent, Act. 8, that the Eunuch had diverse in his
r^tinue, and most probable, that some of them were godly also, and baptized
with him, though the story mention him alone. Neither is it like, that Ananias
in that city, where so many Christians were, was not accompanied with some or
other of them. Besides, those Baptisms were administered by extraordinary, and
miraculous direction, and assistance; and therefore not to be drawn, for the
manner, into ordinary example. Lastly, these instances overthrow their main
ground, which is, that all particular Churches, are gathered by Faith and
Baptism. One alone cannot be a Church: Neither is a Church gathered by that
which may lawfully be performed without a Church-gathering. Paul's own
manifestation of the grace of Christ received, was sufficient testimony of his
conversion; and the Churches weakness it was, to stand need of further witness.

In their answer to mine other demand, that any disciple Page 161.
present, though no instrument of conversion, may baptize, they raze their own
main ground (which how sandy soever, yet Page 162.
is theirs) from Math. 28. 19, that Every Disciple, that can teach, or make
disciples, according to his best ability, may baptize; and whosoever makes a
disciple may baptize; and that Christ has coupled them together, and that no
man should separate them, etc. yet here themselves separate them, in affirming
that any disciple, though making no disciple, nor being instrument of
conversion, may baptize. Their instances of Christ's baptizing none, but leaving
that to his followers, and Paul's baptizing few in Corinth, are too
presumptuous. It is too much vanity for base persons to play on stages the
parts of Kings: what is it then for John Murton, to play Christ and Paul (if
yet Paul had not Evangelists in his company) in commanding others of his
disciples to baptize his converts, as Christ our Lord did his?

About women's baptism, they are like a bird in a net, seeking many holes to get
out, but finding none. First, they answer, that women may neither teach nor
baptize in the Church: True: But why not, as they do? which is, not in the
Church; but out of it, and in a corner, where, it may be, none is present but
the baptizer and baptized? They say further, that women have been, and may be,
worthy instruments of converting of others. I grant it, and that even of men.
But may they therefore baptize them? This they dare not say, nor do; and yet
except they say it, they must unsay their so often repeated lesson, They that may
convert, may baptize.

Their dispute from my former plea out of Mr. Perkins, that where God gives the
word, he gives the power also, helps not: For first, both Mr. Perkins, and I,
speak of a Church having 1 Cor. 1^. 19.
this power of the Lord, and not of a single person. If all the body were one
member, where were the body, or Church, says the Apostle? These men make all
the body, and one member the same. One and all, and all and one, is all one
with them. Secondly, we speak of having and using the power of the Lord,
according to the Lords order; and not in their confused* fashion. Which order
of the Lord is, that men first be called (ordinarily) by the Church, and so
minister baptism as the stewards of the mysteries of God.

Lastly, they most wrongfully accuse Peter Martyr, and me from him, as pleading
for women's baptism: the Reader that pleases, may see the contrary.

I do not, as they here challenge me, in answering their objection, Page 172.
that because men, by virtue of their gift, without other calling, may do the
greater which is teaching, they may do the less, which baptizing is: wrong
them; as saying, having no calling, but no other calling but by their gift. If
they have any other calling, though not Pastoral, let them show it; and so
renounce their former plea raised from their personal gifts alone.

Their proof that he that may do the greater may do the less, Page 173.
is taken from Matthew 23. 16. 17. - 19. 20. etc. Wherein they say, Christ
proves plainly, that either it was not lawful for them to swear by the gold,
and the offerings, which were lesser: or that it was lawful for them to swear
by the temple, and altar.

Nothing less. It was lawful to swear by none of them Lev. 6. 13. and 10. 20,
all, but by the Lord only: The meaning of Christ was to reprove the hypocrisy
and coveteousnes of the Pharisees, that bare the people in hand, that if they
swear by the altar, and temple, it bound them not, at least, in comparison; but
if they swore by the gold, or offering, that oath bound them to performance;
that by this means, they might possess the peoples minds with an high opinion
of the offerings, and gold, which turned to their proper advantage and profit.
If from hence they would conclude any thing as lawful from the greater to the
less, they must argue thus. If it be lawful to swear by the greater, then by
the less much more: But it is lawful to swear by the greater, and greatest,
God himself, that dwells in the temple: Therefore it is lawful to swear by
the temple, altar, sacrifice, heaven, earth, etc. If they would be ashamed of
this conclusion, so may they be of their argumentation.

My plea for the power of calling ministers, and censuring Page 174.
offenders by the Church where officers are wanting (which here again they
bring in) is in their hand, like a sword in a child's hand, wherewith he sooner
hurts himself, then his enemy. For (to let pass the difference between the
power of receiving in, and casting out of members, and so of choosing of
ministers, on the one side; and of baptizing on the other, elsewhere manifested)
they here strike through their own course, in confessing that these things must
be done by the Churches power and right; by which they baptize not, but merely
by a personal liberty: by which yet they themselves, I suppose, would be loath
to avow the calling of ministers, and censuring of offenders.

That my collection from Scripture is their conviction, and makes plainly
against their corner stone, that he which may do the greater may do the
less, they may see, if they please to consider it. For if the Prophets in
Israel (not being Levites) though preaching Gods word, might not carry the
ashes from under the altar; but the Levites only; then their rule holds not
absolutely, that he that may do the greater, may do the less; and so they
must confess, except they will deny the preaching of Gods word to be a greater
thing then the carrying of the ashes out of the Temple.

The former part of their first answer; that the priests only Number. 4. 13
(they should say the Levites) were appointed to this, makes against them, as
showing, that we are not to measure our liberty or power by the greatness or
smalnesse of the thing, but by Gods appointment, who has allotted to every one
his portion. Their second answer is of admirable devise, that as the priests
might meddle with all the services of the old Testament; So all the saints
being priests unto God (no men excepted) may meddle with all the services of
the new Testament.

But why might, and may; and not ought, and must? The Priests under the Law
were bound (leaving unto the high Priest his function, and to the Levites,
theirs) in their courses, to all the services of the Tabernacle, and Temple So
by their crooked rule, every Christian (no men excepted) not only may, in
liberty, but must in duty, minister not only baptism but the Lords Supper
also, and all other ordinances, in his turn: and so all must be alike for
public ministrations; for all are Priests to God alike. All the congregation
Number. 16. 3.
are holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them, and you Moses and
Aaron, take too much upon you; said Korah of old. They err grossly therefore in
making all Priests, for all public ordinances in the Church: whereof some
appertayn to Christ's Prophetical administration as the sacraments, which are
seals of the Covenant dispensed by preaching: others to his kingdom, as the
appointing of officers, and censuring of offenders. Our Christian Preisthood
stands only in our offering of spiritual sacrifices to God, our selves first,
and so consequently the sacrifices of praises, and prayer from a broken heart,
works of mercy, and the like.

That baptism is a service of the Temple, that is, an ordinance of the Church,
we have formerly proved: And surely strange it is, that I should need to prove,
that there is any ordinance of religion which the Church is not to administer.
Paul and Apollos, and Cephas are the Churches, and is not their baptism theirs?
This whilst they compare to the hewing of stones in the mountains, they lay in
common for ministration to very unbeleevers, with disciples: for the Zidonians,
or other of the Heathens, as well as Israelites might either square 1 King. 7.
18.
stones, or hew wood for the Temple.

Lastly, touching my similitude. As it cannot be denied, but that the setting
of the seal unto the Kings pardon granted to a malefactor, is a matter both of
more solemnity, and authority, then the bare manifestation and making known of
the same pardon; which any, ordinarily, may do to any, as opportunity servs: So
have I proved long ago against these Adversaries, by many Arguments, hitherto
by them unanswered, and I assure my self unanswerable, that the outward
baptism, of which we speak, is an outward seal of the Covenant of grace: that
is, an holy outward sign ordained of

God, as a means by the work of the spirit, to confirm the faith of the Church
in her washing, both from the guilt and contagion of sin, by the blood of
Christ Jesus. More then this, we mean not in calling the Sacraments Seals, with
the Apostle; Romans 4. 11*
and less none can yield them, that has learnt their right use, either from
his own fruitful experience, or the Scriptures information. Glory be to God,
and good to men.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, take knowledge that (the Author being absent) through
oversight these faults (mostly material) have escaped, which I pray thee
correct as thou read: if more thou find, impute them to hasty oversight.
PAge 24 line 5, for sin stands not in etc. read, sin stands in, etc. page 40,
lin. 1, for are done, read, are not done: p. 44 l. 3^, for of themselves the, r.
of the: p. 45. l. 20, for and, r. add: p. 56, l. 12, for calling, r. calling:
p. 72. l. 6, for falsifying, r. falsitie: p. 80. l. 11, for purpose, r.
purposes: p. 81. l. 8, after verse. add comma: p. 93. l 4, for but will, r. but
nil: p. 134, l. 4, for regenerate, r. unregenerate: p. 137. l. 25, for
indossolible, r. indissolible: p. 156, l. 12, for casuality, r. causality: p.
168, l. 22, for or Will, that, in r. or Will in^ p. 175, l. 15, for things, as,
r. things? As.


