In God rejoice, With Instrument and voice.

THE SCHOOL OF MUSIC: WHEREIN IS TAVGHT, THE PERFECT METHOD, OF TRVE
FINGEring of the Lute, Pandora, Orpharion, and Uiol de Gamba; with most
infallible general rules, both easy and delightful.

Also, a method, how you may be your own instructor for Prick-song, by the
help of your Lute, without any other teacher: with lessons of all sorts, for
your further and better instruction.

Newly composed by Thomas Robinson, Lutenist.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Este, for Simon Waterson, dwelling at the sign of the
Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS, HIGH, AND MIGHTY PRINCE KING JAMES, OUR DRED
SOVEREIGN, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. long life, happy days, and most
prosperous reign.
AS there is not any thing in this world more acceptable unto God, (most
gracious Sovereign) then a contrite heart: so I presume that there is not any
thing in this world (next to the love of God) more acceptable unto your
Majesty, then a true and loyal subject. Thus using this persuasion, for a
sure argument of your Majesty's gracious acceptance, I presume to manifest my
self, a most true and loyal subject unto your Majesty. In token whereof, I
have gathered the chief of my treasury, the which in most humble and obedient
manner, I present unto your Highness: beseeching your Highness not to mislike
your subject, for the subject, since it is for the good of all your Majesty's
loving subjects. The Art is divine, the Jnstrument laudable, my Meaning good,
my Skill drownde in the depth of Catoes words (who says) Nec te collaudes,
nec te culpaueris ipse. And yet I can say for my self, that once I was thought
(in Denmark at Elsanure) the fittest to instruct your Majesty's Queen, our
most gracious Lady and Mistres.

Thus prostrating my self at your Majesty's feet, incessantly craving pardon
for my bold attempt, I rest. Restles in prayer, for your Graces welfare, both
now and ever.

Your Majesty's most loyal and obedient subject, Thomas Robinson.

To the Reader.
RIght courteous Gentlemen, and gentle Readers, your favorable acceptance of
my first fruits from idleness, has eccited me further to congratulate your
Musical endeauours. And in my conceit, I can no way better fit your good and
willing minds, then in showing you how you may very soon, and very perfectly
instruct your selves to play (upon your best beloved instrument) the Lute, also
the Orpharion, Pandora, and Viol de Gamba, any lesson (if it be not too too
trickified) at the first sight. But be it as it be may, you shall have rules
of reason, to overrule unreasonable odd Cratchets, giueing you to understand,
that what is beyond the true course of Nature, must needs be without all
compass of Art; and withal, nothing out-runneth Nature but Folly: so much
for that.

Also (for example sake) I have set some lessons of all sorts: whereof some
being old, I was requested to set them new after my fashion, some new out of
the fat, some neither very new, nor very old, but yet all mine own setting,
and the most of them, mine own invention.

But Gentlemen, once more I will make you promise, that if these Masterlike
rules, and Scholerlike lessons, do but any whit content you. I will come
forth, With Crack me this Nut, (I mean) only lessons for one, two, and
three Lutes, and some with ditties, wherein I will strive either (for ever) to
win your favors, or starve in the dole of your disgrace. Vale.

More for you, than for himself, Thomas Robinson.

(...) and Violl de Gamba, Dialogue wise, betwixt a Knight, (who has children
to be taught) and Timotheus, that should teach them. KNIGHT. YOU are hartelie
welcome into the country, and the better welcome, for that you come at the
first sending for, for it is an old saying, that cunning men are curious,
especially Musitions.


TIMOTHEVS. Sir, if I had thought I should not have been welcome, you might
have thought me unwise to have taken all this pains: again, it was my promise
to instruct your children, and am ready at your pleasure; but I pray you, why
should Musitions be more curious then others.


Kni. In keeping your promise, you have done well, and so well as I can, I will
answer your demand: in mine opinion, I think it impossible to be a good
Musition, except a man be seen in all the seven liberal Sciences, for I know
many great clerks in Divinity, Physic, Law, Philosophy, etc. that have
small, or no knowledge at all in Music; nay, some that quite reject it. Now
since it behooves a good Musition to be somewhat seen in all Arts, I conclude,
that this all (with the help of an od crotchet) is the reason why Musitions are
so curious.


Tim. Truly sir, your concluding all, is both short and sharp, how be it I
must grant you this, that it is behouefull a Musition that would be
excellent, to be seen in all or the most part of the seven liberal Arts, and
so near as I can, I will show you which, and how necessary those are, that a
Musition ought not to be ignorant off. First he must be a divine, that is, he
must be diuinelie given, he must above all things serve God, that God may
bless him, in all his good indeuoures; he must read the scriptures, for it is
the fountain of all knowledge, and it teaches the divine harmony of the
soul of man: for Music is none other then a perfect harmony, whose
divinity is seen in the perfectness of his proportions, as, his unison
shows the unity, from whence all other, (concords, discords, consonancies,
or others whatsoever) springs, next his unity, his third: (which is the
perfectest concord that is in all Music) represents the perfect, and most
holy Trinity; his fifth, (the most perfect consonance in all Music, for that
it is the very essence of all concords) represents the perfection of that
most perfect number of five, which made the perfect atonement, between God,
and man; His eight, (which as it is, but as his unison,) represents his Alpha
and Omega: and as what is above his eight, is but as a repetition, as from his
unison, as it were a new beginning; so it shows our return from whence we
came, as it were, in notes of Music, in a long or short time, sweet or sour
composition, and thus, (I hope, without offense to that most holy Alpha and
Omega) I conclude, the necessity of divinity in a Musition. Now that a
Musition should be a Physician, I see no such necessity, But that Music is
Phisical, it is plainly seen by those maladies it cures. As it cures
melancholy; it much prevails against madness; If a man be in pains of the
gout, of any wound, or of the head, it much mittigateth the fury thereof: and
it is said, that Music has a salve for every sore. But of necessity, a
Musition must be a perfect Arethmatition, for that Music consists
altogether of true number, and proportion, and thus, at this so chief, and
necessary science of Arithmaticke, I hold it best to stay the process of
Music, as touching the necessity of other than these, which I have mentioned
to be fit in a good Musition.


Kni. I like you well, and love your Music the better, for your good discourse
thereof, and my hope is (in a manner) already satisfied, but notwithstanding,
there remains in me, a little spark of fear of an evil that may happen,
after all your pains taken, and my cost bestowed.


Tim. Why sir, it may be you fear least your children should die, when you
have brought them up well, and bestowed great cost upon them, or if they should
prove unkind hereafter, or if they should set light by that good quality,
which cost them so little, and you so much.


Kni. You say well good Timotheus, all this is to be doubted, but I fear none
so much as the last, which is, that they will be careless and forgetful, of
so excellent a quality as is playing upon the Lute; and my fear is the
greater, for that it was mine own fault, that in my youth could have played so
well, as any in those days, and now it is as clean forgotten, and which is
more, I have no willing mind in the world, either to practice (to recover that
I lost,) or to learn a new: for the play that is now, and the lessons (that
are now a days) are so curiously set, that we of the old mine, are smoakt up
like to sea cole, and this age, has the golden ore, and sparkling diamondes of
divine Musitions, that for mine own part, I am content, to give place both to
youth, and the time, only content to be an auditore, and lover of the best,


Tim. Sir, it is very true, that many, both men and women, that in their
youth could have played (for that kind of play) passing well, in their age, or
when they once have been married, have forgotten all, as if they had never
known what a Lute had meant: and the reason I find to proceed (in the
beginning of their learning) from the ignorance of their teachers, for in older
times they strove (only) to have a quick hand upon the Lute, to run hurrie
hurrie, keeping a Catt in the gutter upon the ground, now true then false, now
up now down, with such painful play, mocking, mowing, gripeing, grinning,
sighing, supping, heauing, shouldring. laboring, and sweating, like cart
Iades, without any skill in the world, or rule, or reason to play a lesson, or
finger the Lute, or guide the body, or know any thing, that belongs, either
to skill or reason.


Kni. Now truly Timotheus, I am persuaded you have hit the mark, and when it
went so hard with them in such easy, and simple stuff, as then they used, what
shift would they make to play at the first sight (in these days) an
indifferent lesson set, if they were now living, but I pray you can you play
any lesson at the first sight, and also teach others to do the same.


Tim. Yea Sir, that I can, or else I were not worthy to be a teacher, for it
has been the most part of my study to bring the Lute, Citharen, (and other
instruments of Music) into a method by general rules, most perfect and easy,
so that with my instructions, one (that cannot use the Lute, or other
instrument) may very readily attain to a good habit thereof.


Kni. Well Timotheus, the very truth is, I have hard so much as you say, and
therefore in the name of God, begin with my children when you please, and God
willing) you shall be pleased for your pains, but I will make this condition
with you (good Timotheus) that you shall give me leave to ask you some
questions, by the way, in your instructions, for it does me good to hear your
reason, how say you Timotheus, are you content it shall be so?


Tim. With all my heart Sir, for by so doing, I shall daily enjoy your good
company, and with all, it will greatly further the profit of your children,
and with the more ease, and comfort pass over the tediousnes of teaching.


Kni. I thank you Timotheus, but what if you did first write down all such
rules (as you use for instruction) that they may from the beginning, (having
them by heart) do nothing but that they may have it in memory and grounded by
reason.


Tim. You say well it shall be so, and at your pleasure ask what questions
you please, and I will show you the reason for it to the full, and I hope such
as shall satisfy you fully, wherefore in the name of God I thus begin. First
it behooves a scholar to have a very good instrument very well strung, fair
to the eye, and easy to reach any stop whatsoever, and very well-sounding.


Kni. Why, me thinks it were no great matter what instrument a beginner has,
considering that for the most part, young beginners, soon make old
instruments, as young scholars soon make old books.


Tim. Indeed to have a good instrument lies as much in the ability of the
parents or friends, as also in their good wills to have it so; but why I think
it good to have (if it were possible) even the very best instrument for a
learner at the first, is this: a good instrument will please a learner every
way, for it delights them to look and behold it now and then, likewise they
love easy and smooth instruments, and although they can do but little, yet it
will sound well, and so encourage them to learn with delight, whereas
contrariwise, a bad or dull instrument will quell their spirits quite, so that
in a long time, or never, will they profit in their forced labors.


Kni. I promise you, it now seems to me very good reason that it should be
so, and again it is an old and true saying, that one good thing is ever worth
ten bad, also there is small loss in a good thing, it ever yeldeth money with
profit: well here is a Lute according to your desire in all points, I pray you
go forward good Timotheus.


Tim. Now you have a good Lute, it behooves you to love it and use it well, for
by the usage you shall show your love, therefore mark how you ought to use your
Lute, above all things, keep it from wet, for wet will spoil the strings and
make loose the ribs, and when you have done playing upon it, put it up into the
case, putting the Trebles a little down, but first you shall learn to handle
your Lute with a comely grace, ready to play with delight, and to this
purpose in the name of God, do as I shall instruct you.

GENERAL RVLES.

FIrst sitting upright with your body, lean the edge of the Lute against the
table, and your body against the Lute, not too hard for hurting your Lute,
neither to softly for letting of it fall, for the table, your body, and your
right arm, must so poyes the Lute, that you may have your left hand at
liberty to carry to, and fro, at your pleasure, letting the middle part of the
neck of the Lute, slide up and down the brawne of the thumb which is against
the nail of the said thumb, houlding out the wrest of the hand, and always
carrying your thumb against your forefinger in any stop whatsoever, for so
shall your hand be the more comely, the more ready, and with the more ease,
stop any stop the cleaner, now for your right hand, called the striking hand
lean upon the belly of the Lute with your little finger only, and that,
neither to far from the Treble strings, neither to near, and although you
ought to lean lightly, yet carry your hand steddilie, not sliding out of his
place, also remembering, to lean lightly upon your anne upon your Lute, for
otherwise it will pain the sinews and hinder your play. All the aforesaid
had, both in memory and practice; (the houlding of your Lute, carrying of your
hand, and sitting upright with your body, I mean) then (in the name of God)
houlding the Lute (as is aforesaid) comely with your thumb against your
forefinger (as it were ready to stop, yet but only houlding your Lute then
with the thumb of your right hand (houlding the rest of the fingers straight
forth before your thumb (neither to near the strings nor too far off, begin
to strik the first string downward with the thumb only, and also striking
with your thumb behind your fingers say: Base, Tenor, Contra-tenor, Great
Means, Small means Treble. This done: then begin at the Trebles and so go
upward viz. backward, striking them string by string with your forefinger
before your thumb, that is, houlding down your thumb behind your fingers, and
name them in order saying, Treble Small Means, Great Means, Contratenor,
Tenor, Base, this doing so often, downward and upward, nameing them, and also
striking them with the thumb behind the fingers, that you have it most perfect
and ready both in mind and fingers. This perfectly had: learn to know your
frets in order, and in stoping them comely, cleanly, and strongly, the first
string or Treble, stopped in the first fret, by the head of the Lute with the
forefinger, is ^ in the Treble, and so stopped in the small means, great
means etc. The first fret is ^ the second fret is ^ the third fret is ^ and so
forth until you come to ^ which is the last fret about the neck of the Lute,
but you may glue on more fretts in fit place and space (until you come to ^.
Again if you have 14. 16. or 18. strings, those bases are called Diapasones,
now having the names and knowledge of the strings and stops perfectly by roate,
you shall also learn to know them by book (called Tableture.)


Kni. Now truly Timoth: I like this method very well, for I perceive, great
reason in it: But we (in old time) have been taught with rigor, not by reason,
and that made us the^ run, now unregarded; for I see, that the houlding of the
thombe always against the forefinger, gives (not only a great ease, and
grace to the player) but also, it determines a certain limitation to the hand,
as of necessity it must be so: proceed good Timotheus.


Tim. Sir, by this you see, how necessary a thing it is, to know how to hold
an instrument, before it is to know how to stop it, and likewise, how fit it is
to know (both how to hold, and what to stop, first by roate, before it were
fit to learn by the book: for quell the spirits, and quail delight. Now you
know how to hold your Lute; also, what the strings and stops are, without
book: Now you shall learn what they be by the book; look how you name them
upon the Lute in order, upward, and downward, so these lines, by the like
denomination, shall signify unto you what strings they be by Tableture.
Example.

Treble. ^ Small Means. ^ Great Means, ^ Contra-tenor. ^ Tenor. ^ Base. ^


SOme in the steed of (i) put (y) and although you, here see but six single
lines, and upon the Lute every string double, you shall understand, that two
strings are in one tune, and also bear the name but of one string: as Base,
not Bases, Tenor, not Tenors. Now let us proceed, to learn a lesson by the
book. But first take this lesson by the way, offer not rashly to stop or
strike, but be well advised, with what finger to stop, and with what to strike,
and for that purpose, mark what figure stands under the letter, whether the
figure of 1. 2. 3. or 4. for these figures represent the 4. fingers of the left
or stopping hand. The figure of 1. represents the first or forefinger. 2.
the second. 3. the third, and 4. the little finger. Also that letter which is
to be stricken downward, and if there be a prick under the letter, that letter
must be stricken upward: this well noted, begin to play these stops and strokes
following, striking them by 4. and 4. all in one length of time, until you can
play it a pace, or run it quick. ^

Do these points perfectly, not striving at it, but with such ease, as if you
did it carelessly, observing the carriage both of hand and body; and when you
are weary, leave it, and to it again, but go to it with a willing mind.


Kni. How would you have them learn this lesson, not knowing the times over
head? were it not necessary to teach them that first?


Tim. No, for the time without stops or tune, is but an abstract, and my
purpose is, first to teach the^ the stops, and then the times with all
afterward: and therefore, I have set it with all one time over head, as you
see, until the lesson be perfectly had, and both the name and nature of that
time well committed to memory, and this lesson had, than will I instruct them
in all the varieties of times: as follows.

A young beginner (although this were Semiquauer time) shall in the despite of
his heart, make every stroke a Semibrefe, and then as he multiplyeth in
perfectnes, so he shall multiply in fastness of time, whereby is to be noted,
that from one time all other are multiplied and doubled, as for example. This
long stroke here ^ is in Tableture, a Semibrefe, which by adding of one dash to
the top, as thus, ^ makes it double his time, that is twice as fast a time as
it was before. And by adding one dash more to that dash thus, ^ makes it yet
as fast again as the second: and by adding a third dash thus, ^ makes it yet
as fast again as the same. And by adding the fourth dash thus, ^ doubleth the
time before him: whose names are as follows. ^ A Semibrefe. A Minim. A
Cratchet. A Quauer. A Semiquauer.

So that you see two Minims go to a Semibrefe, as thus; ^ two Cratchets to a
Minim, as thus, ^ two quauers to a Cratchet, as thus. ^ And two Semiquauers to
a Quauer, as thus, ^ All which multiply the Semibrefe, as here you see. ^

Here you see, two Minims make a Semibrefe. Likewise, four Cratchets make a
Semibrefe. Also, eight Quauers go to a Semibrefe. And lastly, sixtene
Semiquauers go to a Semibrefe. This is sufficient for the knowing of the times;
only, that if there be a little prick, beside any one of them, thus, ^ that
then that prick does make the time he stands by, half so long again as it
was before; as a prick by a Semibrefe makes it a Semibrefe and half a
Semibrefe: and so of all the rest; and this learn by heart.


Kni. Well when they can run this point or treble (as you call it) by 4. and 4.
together in order, a Quauer or Semiquauer time, what is thereby to be noted, or
learned, as a profit attained toward the ready playing of a lesson at the
first sight, which they never see before.


Tim. It is a very necessary question which you demand, and you shall
understand, how necessary, true, and perfect a rule it is, which not known,
it is impossible that ever one should play a lesson, either at the first sight,
or cunningly: For first, where you see a letter or stop without any prick under
it, you shall for ever in the like stop, strike it downward, for two reasons,
the first is, if it stand alone, that is, if it be a ^ and the next a ^ or the
first a ^ and the second a ^ the first a ^ the next a ^ going so inseuerall
times, as thus. ^ These are said to stand alone, that is, not being accompanied
with fellows, all of one time, either Cratchets, Quauers, or Semiquauers: as
thus, ^

And also being of a long time, as Semibrefes and Minoms, for it is a general
rule, that every stroke, is more natural to be stricken downward, than upward;
but the swiftness of time, is the cause of striking upward, and the farnesse
off, of seconding a point, as thus: ^ for here ^ in the treble being the first
of a point, is stricken upward, which if the point were all of one string, or
still the next unto it, thus: ^ Going in 4. and 4. then for ever, the first is
down, the second is up; so that if the pricks were away, this is a general
rule. Now by this rule, you may by occasion, strike twice down together; as if
you have a point begin thus, ^ Here the first is downward, because it stands
alone; And the second, is stricken downward, because it is the first of a
point; this is one necessary rule, and also profitable. The second rule is,
you see in the first point, how you use but two fingers in all the whole
lesson, that is, the forefinger and the second always houlding your thoumb
against your forefinger. Now, it is a general rule, that where you leave no
stop, leave no finger; and where you leave a stop, leave a finger, as this
example following shows.

^

Here you see betwixt ^ and ^ no stop between, therefore you leave no finger
between; again you see, that in the next stop where you have ^ and ^ you
leave a stop which is ^, and consequently you leave a finger between the first
and the third, which is the second, and this is ingenerall, in playing of any
Treble whatsoever. Now you have a general rule for striking, downward and
upward, and also for leaving a finger and no finger. Now you shall have a
general rule to grace it, as with pashionate play, and relishing it: and note
that the longer the time is of a single stroke, that the more need it has of
a relish, for a relish will help, both to grace it, and also it helps to
continue the sound of the note his full time: but in a quick time a little
touch or jerke will serve, and that only with the most strongest finger.
Passionate play is to run some part of the squares in a Treble (that is four
and four) first loud, then soft, and so in a decorum, now louder, now softer,
(not in extremity of either) but as company of other instruments, or farnesse
off gives occasion. And to the better instruction of all scholars for the
Lute, I will (God willing) set down some, Trebles, which shall contain all
manner and kind of points for the fingering, in their due place of my book,
and the grounds also to be played with them, when they please, (and can have the
ground played to them.) And now (God willing) I will proceed to instruct my
scholar how to play, a full lesson, what strange invention soever it shall
seem to have in it. Notwithstanding, I have known some (which have been more
curious, than either cunni^^ or wise,) who have striuen to find out stops,
both unnatural, unpleasant, and unusual, (forsooth to be ^hought great
bugges) that have in all their lives, not been able to play even but an easy
lesson (in comparison) at the first sight. But rob, and run by guess, seem
gaye, and goodly etc. But let such look here; and they shall find reason to
guide them, and truth in Art. And so let them take heed of thould saying, Art
has no enemy but Ignorance. Now to the purpose, before: I have taught you,
how to behave your self in all single stops, now be as diligent in all sorts
of full stops: for in this lies all the whole skill: for that in a full
lesson, all manner of stops, full or single, swift or slow, are contained;
therefore know this, and know all, all which I will show you in brief and
general rules (God willing,) with all such examples as shall seem fit.

First, you shall understand, that we term the forefinger, and the little
finger (of the stopping hand) two extremes: for that they be the outmost parts
thereof; and that in going downward with a point, (from the head of the Lute)
the point is always begun with the forefinger, as thus: ^

But contrariwise, from the body of the Lute, to the head, the point must be
begun, with the other extreme, as this example shows. ^

All such points, I will set down in a fit place by themselves, but by this
example of the two extremes, you see the first governs the upper part or
frets, and the other, the nether part, or next lowest: and thus the forefinger
always, in any stop where (b) is, full, or single, except there be in one
stop, 2. (bees,) and an (a) between) is to possess the stop (b) as this
example makes plain: ^

Note also, that ^ in any of the Bases in a full stop, wherein is an ^ (and in
the more Treble strings ^ is the lowest of the stop) that that ^ is to be
stopped with the second finger always: but if there be (in sted of ^ with ^ in
one of the Bases) an ^ than ^ must be stopded with the forefinger, as thus: ^

But in any full stop whatsoever, wherein there is never an ^ there lay your
forefinger along in the highest of the stop, flat upon the neck of the Lute;
as thus: ^

Here lay your forefinger along, in the first stop, in ^ in the next, in ^ in
the next, in ^ in the next, in ^ etc. Always noting this, that in any stop
whatsoever, that you pluck away no finger, until you needs must. And as
before I have taught you how to relysh in a single stop, with that finger which
is the strongest, so take this for a general rule, that you relysh in a full
stop, with that finger which is most idelest, in any string whatsoever: either
a strong relysh for loudness, or a mild relysh for passionate attencion.


Kni. In mine opinion, you have spoke so much as may be spoken, for the left
hand in all points: but I pray you, are there not the like rules for the right
hand, called the striking hand.


Tim. Yes Sir, that there be: for what avails it to stop never so neat, fine
and clean, and if it be flubberd with a bad touch, or stroke: therefore, let
these rules following, be observed diligently, without the which, all fine play
of the Lute is spoild, and nothing worth. Note, that you strike clean, plump
together in a full stroke of many parts or strings, sometimes loud, sometimes
soft, letting your right hand, answer the left hand at the instant, striving
with no stroke: and to conclude, the touch of the one hand, to answer the stop
of the other hand, in the full harmony of consent, (called a Simpathie,) and
then to know what strings to strike, with what fingers, mark all these rules
following, and let them not be forgotten.

You have heard, that every strok is more naturally to be stricken downward
then upward, which is very true, but above all, the Bases are to be stricken
downward, and for the same purpose, you see how aptly the thumb fitteth that
office, and likewise the fingers remain as ready to strike upward and meet
the thumb with their troops of notes, as who should say the one were ready
to aid the other; and so they be, yet sometimes several, one before the other,
as sometimes first the thumb, and the fingers after, sometimes the fingers
first, and the thumb after, and sometimes both together, as here underneath
you see. ^

Here, the Tenor begins the point with ^ open stricken downward with the
thumb, and ^ in the Treble follows stricken upward with the third finger, next
^ in the Contratenor stricken downward with the thumb, and last of the 4
follows ^ in the small Means, stricken upward with the second finger. And now
the reason why ^ in the Treble and ^ in the small Means, are stricken upward
with the third and second fingers, is this, the more strings are between the
Base and Trebles, the more fingers are left between the the thumb and little
finger, and likewise the fewer strings the fewer fingers, as you see above
mentioned.

Again where you see three pricks under any letter as thus ^ you shall strike
that letter upward with the third finger, and so when you see two pricks thus
^ upward with the second, and one prick with the fore finger as thus ^. It
skils not what letter, or strng it is, but if a point begin with two letters
together, although it follow the point either in the Trebles, Means, or Bases,
yet shall the second of the point be stricken upward as for example.

^

Here you see the forefinger possess his due place, as is above mentioned,
always observing the distance of strings, and this is sufficient for all such
points or places whatsoever.


Kni. Although this at the first, seem hard to understand, yet it stands
with very good reason, and it must be won with labor and diligence, and when
a man has said never so much, or all that he can say, yet there will somewhat
remain for a learner to find out and consider upon by himself. Yet is there
remaining (to speak of two especial points behind, which is, when and how to
use a fall with a relish, and also a rule to tune the Lute.


Tim. You say very true Sir, and one more then you think off, not less
needful then any of the rest, and that is this: remember always to keep
your hands clean, and your nails short, and also early and late to practice,
Quia Labor vincet omnia. Now to your fall with a relish, or a fall without a
relish: take this for a general rule, that all falls in what stop soever, in a
flat note, must be performed with the nearest finger to the half notes, and
in a sharp note or stop, with the nearest and strongest finger to a full note.
As here you see underneath for example. ^

Here the stops where ^ is placed, must have his fall from ^ in the same
string where ^ is placed, (the finger laid along in ^.) must have his fall from
^ in the same strings, in the next where ^ is in the Treble, because ^ is
sharp, must have his fall from the full note ^, and ^ having had his fall, may
so be held still without moving the forefinger, and the relish continued (with
the little finger) in ^ which is under half note, and so of all the rest.

Now you shall learn to tune your Lute, and for a general rule, first set up
the Treble, so high as you dare venture for breaking, setting them both in one
tune or sound called an unison; then in the like sort set up the small Means,
stopping them in ^, and making them in ^ agree with the Trebles in ^, which is
likewise an unison. Likewise make the great Means in ^ an unison with the
small Means in ^, the Contratenor in ^ an unison with the great Means in ^,
the Tenor in ^ with the Contra-tenor in ^, and likewise the Base being stopped
in ^ to agree with the Tenor in ^ in the unison, as appears in the form
following. ^


Kni. Now I thank you Timotheus, for all your pains, I like it passing well.
Now set down some lessons, for now there remains only them behind.


Tim. I hope I have not erred very much in my endeavors, and for lessons, you
shall have some of all sorts, but yet (besides lessons) there is this that
follows remaining, to be spoken off.

When you have learned all the rules spoken off before perfectly, and can give
a good essay of any lesson at the first sight. Yet this one rule more, shall
fully conclude, what has or can be said concerning the playing of a lesson
at the first sight. Therefore whenever there is a lesson given you to play at
the first sight. First look it over before you offer to play it, for these
reasons following.

First see what manner of lesson it is, whether it be a set Song, Innomine,
Pauen, Galiard, Almaine, Iigue Lauolta, Coranta, Country dance, or Toy,
whatsoever, according to the nature of the lesson, to give it his grace with
gravity or quicknes. Secondly by looking it over, you shall see the fastest
time in all the lesson contained, that accordingly you may so begin as you may
go through without check. Thirdly by looking it over first, you shall see
whether it be fair and true pricked, without blots. Lastly, by having once
seen it, you may the better remember it when you see it again. All these
reasons well considered, you shall find in them such necessity, such truth,
such ease, with such content and delight, as you will confess, that it were
impossible to play well with out the knowledge thereof: For true Art makes hard
things easy, labor makes hard things perfect, or (to speak more truly)
ready. Now, when you can play upon the Lute, I will (God willing) show you how
your Lute shall instruct you to sing; in so much that you may be your own
teacher, and save the charge of a singing man, and then what by your skill in
playing upon the Lute, and the knowledge you have in the pricksong, you may
very easily attain to play upon the Viol de Gambo, either by Tabliture or by
pricksong notes. For the carriage of your left hand upon the Lute, is likewise
justly to be observed upon the base Viol, as shall be more plainly declared
in his due place after the Lute lessons.

And thus for a last farewell (for this time) I give you in general charge, to
use all instruments with a good grace, comely play, without anticke faces, or
shouldrings, except such (which of necessity) the nature of the instrument
does require; as, reaching stops upon the Lute, where you lay your finger along
and stretch out your little finger along at length, as from ^ to ^, and in
coming from the Trebles of the Viol, to the Base, where of necessity you must,
somewhat thrust the neck of the Viol from you, and shrink in the bow hand, to
come fitly unto it. And now it makes me somewhat shrink, to think that:

PArhaps, there may some Chriticke Satire sad,
(Fraught with the Froth of vulgars excellent)
Hunt for a praise, and say how that is bad,
Which he does know so much as Jack a Lent,
Such Hounds I say, when they their mouths have spent,
Let them take heed their hunting be not spide,
Least that the Glouer hang them for their hide.
I know, the Envious, Idle, Ignorant,
Will spit at me the poison of their spleen,
Again, I know (...)
Will not mislike, when they my works have seen,
An Honest mind will soon know what I mean.
For Countries cause a Soldier spends his Blood,
And I my Talent for my Countries good.
Now I have led the Way and broke the Ice,
Cast out the Lumps and left the Water clear:
If any one to follow make it nice,
And yet that they can Better it will swear,
To such I speak Aloud that they may hear,
Except they Do It they will not be Believed,
And being Cast, it is hard to be Repreeu'd.
I do not Rob the Skillful of their due,
Nor Patch my Bad, with other Good invention,
For if Old grounds False set, I do make True,
Therein I show of Art the true intention,
And this (I hope) deserves no reprehension.
But yet I know, how Well I ere intend it,
Some will far sooner find a Fault then mend it.
Some Mandrake Mome, disposde to pick a Quarrel,
(Ass. if he do, it is a thing that drempt I on)
Will say I speak too much upon the Barrel,
And so I do, but yet it is an empty one,
How ere it is, yet so it is that tempt I on,
The Wise, to work his everlasting Fame,
The Fool, to work his everlasting Shame.
T. R.

FINIS.

THe Queens good Night. ^

Here follows the Ground.

TWenty ways upon the bells ^

Here follows the ground.

ROw well you Mariners. Here keep your forefinger along in ^

A Galliard.

A Galliard ^

A Plain song for two Lutes. ^

A Plain song for two Lutes. ^ Laborant, ^

GRisse his delight. ^

PAsser^ezo galyard. ^

^ Here follows the ground to this Treble.

A Fantasy for two Lutes. All in Unisons. ^

A Fantasy for two Lutes. All in Unisons.

A Toy for two Lutes. ^

A Toy for two Lutes. ^

A GALLIARD. ^

MErry Melancholy.

RObinsons Riddle. ^

Go from my Window. ^

A TOY. ^

AGIGVE. ^

AN ALMAIGNE. ^

AN ALMAIGNE. ^

A TOY. ^

A TOY. ^

RObin is to the greenwood gone. ^

ATOY. ^

THe Queens Gigue. ^

VT Re Mi Fa Sol La 9 sundry ways: for one Lute. ^ ^

MY Lord Willobies welcome home. ^

^

BELL VEDERE. ^ ^

THe Spanish Pauin. ^ ^

AGIGVE. ^

AGIGVE. ^

WAlking in a country town. ^

BOny sweet boy. ^

AGIGVE. ^

LANTERO. ^

THree parts in one upon an old ground.

Here ends the Tabliture for the Lute.
Rules to instruct you to Sing.
FIRST, you shall understand, that all that is to be done in song, is within
the compass of an eight, called a Diapason, for what is above an eight, is but
a repetition of the same notes which you uttered before, in the eight notes of
your Gam-vt.

As for example.

^ Here you see, that from Gam-vt to G-sol-re-vt in space, to G-sol-re-vt in
rule above, are the same in number, quantity and quality: which according to
the Alphabet, from G. a. b. c. d. e. f. and then G. again by rule and space,
are expressed in the Diapason, by five terms, words, or notes, as thus. Vth
for vt, re, mi fa, sol, la, and so still the higher you go, fa, sol, la, mi,
fa, sol, la, etc. which is thus expressed in tablature.

^ Now you have gotten the way to tune your voice, (note for note) with the
Lute in the unison, (that is: all in one tune or sound, or eight under) then
you may rule your voice to the Viol also: First knowing the quantity of times,
and their rests; for the which purpose I have set out some Psalms, both to the
voice, and Lute, and voice and Viol, in the Unison, for your sure guide. Also,
I have set them full to the Lute, so that you may use which you please it your
pleasure. The times of pricksong, you may know by the times of the Lute: as
follows.

^ Hold your Viole somewhat strongly between your legs, and in all points,
carry your left hand upon it, as you do upon the Lute.

Hold your bow or stick, hard by the Nut of it, with your forefinger, above
the stick, your second and third finger (in the hollow of the Nut) between the
heir and the stick, and your little finger beneath the heir, slack quite from
it.

UALE.
^ VT Re Mi Fa Sol La La Sol Fa Mi Re Vt Re Vt.

vt mi re fa mi sol fa la la fa sol mi fa re mi vt.

vt fa re sol mi la fa fa fa fa la mi sol re fa vt ^

vt sol re la mi mi fa sol sol fa mi mi la re sol vt. ^

^ v s r l l r s v f f l l f l ^

^ A Psalm. s l s f s f l s s s f l s f f f l f s l f l s s f l l s s ^

s f f s l l s l s f s s f f f f l s s f l f s f l l s ^

^

A Psalm. s m l m s l m f f m l s s l l ^

l m l s s f s m l s s f s ^

A Psalm. ^ ^

A Psalm. ^ ^ ^

A Psalm. ^

^A Psalm. ^

^ For the Viol by song.

FOr the Viol by Tableture ^ ^ ^

^A Psalm. ^

^ SWeet I E S V who shall lend me wings. ^

^ A Psalm. ^

^ O Lord of whom I do depend. ^

^ O Lord that art my righteousness. ^

Finis

