A most friendly farewell, Given by a welwiller to the right worshipful Sir
Frauncis Drake Knight, General of her Majesty's Navy, which be appointed for
this his honorable voyage, and the rest of the fleet bound to the Southward,
and to all the Gentlemen his followers, and captains in this exploite, who set
sale from Wolwich the xv. day of July, 1585.

WHEREIN IS BRIEFLY TOVCHED his perils passed in his last dangerous voyage,
with an Encouragement to all his sailors and soldiers, to be forward in this
honorable exploite. Published by Henry Robarts of London Citizin.



Imprinted at London by Walter Mantell and Thomas Law.

TO THE RIGHTVVORSHIPFVL AND THRICE RENOWNED GENTLEMAN OF our time Sir Frauncis
Drake Knight, General of her Highness Navy and the rest of the Fleet bound
to the Southwarde, Your worships poor countreyman, and faithful well willer
H. R. wishes you all the happiness that ever this world can affoorde, with a
prosperous return from your determinate voyage, and honor answerable to your
hearts desire.
RYghtworshipful,
the Persians honored their Kings* (as I read that never saw him) as he
passed through the Countries in his Progress he was presented of many his
wealthy Subjects with rich gifts, which he thank fully received. A poor
Shepherd standing by, and noting earnestly the courtesy of the King, was
grieved at the heart, that he had not to bestow as largely as the best: yet to
show his zeal, he hyeth him hastily unto a precious well not far off, and
dippyng therein his sweatie hat, presents it full of water unto the King: the
which he so gratefully received, as he did the richest gift, noting in the
poor swain his zeal, and love which by his simpleness appeared to be more
to him then many that were then present: My self (Worshipful sir,)
representing the simple shepherd, humbly do present these my rude labors
unto your hands, and do crave of your Worship favorable acceptans of the
same, accounting of it, as of the hat full of water, and considering the zeal
of the giver, not the worthiness of the gift, excusing the boldness of
blind Bayarde, whose will is far greater then his skill, your Worship
shall then show your self in courtesy the rightful heir of the Persian
King. Wherefore hearing of your Worships pretended voyage (being a courtesy
amongst us Englishmen) to represent unto our betters whom we honor some
simple gift as a farewell in writing whereby their names might be remembered in
their absence, and seeing none of the learned sort have undertaken to write
according to custom, I being the vnworthyest, yet the most willing, was loathe
good Knight that you should depart our English coasts without some remembery
to be published in praise both to your worship, and the rest of your
Gentlemen followers in this your noble exploit, who although by name I do not
know them as I would, whereby I might give them their honor due unto them
yet ever as long as my tongue can speak, or my simple hand hold pen to
write, I will ever renown your worship, and them whose service for Country
has been such as never English gentleman or other yet achieved but you:
therefore they that have not given you that honor worthy your desartes, have
sought to rob you of your worthiness, a base thing in scholars and the
learned who sees other countrymen that has not undertaken the one half of
your troubles to be registered in the minds of all men for ever, by their
means which has by writing given them their desartes: as the conquest of the
West Indyes can witness, wherein many of their names is explained in other
writers also: then Englishmen what dishonor do you our famous Drake, that you
have left his name so long unwritten of, whom fame has bruited in all the
whole world for his most famous enterprises, and has made him to be admired*
among his mortal foes for his valor, O noble English heart, never yet
daunted, whom the report of any evil news how vehement soever they be, can
let from thy determinate voyage wherein you may rightly be compared to that
conquered Monarke, for valor of mind Alexander who although he was by his spies
advertised that the host of the Persian King Darius was in a manner to be
compared as a mountain to his molehill, yet valiantly he gave him the
overthrow, and achieved the victory, the like victory thryse famous Knight
God send unto you, that you may triumph over all your enemies like Alexander
in this exployt, all this happiness with much more wish I unto the most,
valiant and fortunate Sir Francis Drake, that with such honor and willingness
undertakes our princes service, yea, we are all bound by duty to pray for
the happiness of your estate for that there be few, that are not the better
for your last prosperous return, which God for his mercy send now to be so
happy, that as little David your power may be such that you may beat down all
them that as Golias shall come to hinder you of any Jot of your determination,
well worthy Knight, would my ability were answerable to my will, then should
thy honorable name live eternally amongst us men on the earth: Unthankful
Englishmen that can suffer your wohthy countreyman to r(...)his, (...) with
unthankfulness, so soon to be forgotten, my self the vnworthyest of the
Country have long expected some thing from the learnee in your commendation,
but seeing them all to be so unmindful of so worthy a personage, I baue thus
rudely adventured, though simply, to let all my good countrymen by publishing
the same to understand of your Worships departure to the Seas, with all your
worthy company, whereby they may see the valor that is harbored in your noble
heart, and pray with me for your happy return.

Worthy Sir Francis Drake, that has so nobly adventured in many calamities
three whole years, continuing at fortunes hazard, eftsoons likely to be
drenched in the raging floudes, and then in danger of the unknown rocks,
besides many other perilles incident to sea faring wightes, as falling into the
hands of your professed mortal foes which daily awaited your return: yet all
this can nothing daunt his worthy heart, nor any one whit dismay him at all,
for the Lord which is most gracious in all his works has left you here among
us as a mirror for our countrymen to look into, by your example to move
others to the attempting the like enterprises: many other Gentlemen there be in
this our laud, but I know few that will undertake the like, or none at all
that can with skill so well perform it, or (...) norant people like my self,
I hear to say mutteringly, O Lord, what do these Gentiles mean so to room
from home that enjoy such wealth as they do, and may stay at their own
pleasure, but the rein they show their baseness, which is so unanswerable to
the minds of the valiant, as the flint stone to the precious diamonde, but
such are those base fellows as for gain at home will not stick to do any
thing, when the noble mind abroad aduentureth for fame, which when with great
peril they have most valiantly achieved, the enuiousnesse of our countrymen
is such as they disdain to give them the honor they have gained for their
right as it is well seen by that worthy Knight Sir Humphrey Gylbert whose
valor deserved thanks of his country if they had been grateful, the which
they be loathe to bestow upon him, but he is dead, and in countries cause
shortened his life, leaving many sorrow for his death, yet I think it were
great pity seeing his actions were such, as your worship I know can witness
to be honorable that his valiant name should so suddenly die with his body,
without some remembrance whereby his children hereafter might reap the reward
of their fathers fame, and by his good actions be encouraged to imitate his
ways. This renowned Knight as your worthiness is more then any I know, and
that you have so well deserved, I trust some learned which can write, will of
their good nature emploie their pains to your praise and in learned style
register your noble fame, whereas I poor I can do nothing yet have this
rudely adventured, thereby to show what zeal I have to such honorable minds
as your self, that in your absence by these few lines published you may be
remembered when you shall be absent in this your honorable voyage, and the
rather have I undertaken this because I never saw any to bid you farewell from
England, and partly for countries cause being borne in Devonshire where your
worship was, these causes good Sir considered, first that by my simple writing
it may encourage others to write that can do far better, and then the zeal
I bear to my country, and to all such as venture for the common weal, I hope
your Worship will pardon the rudeness of the writer, who wishes heartily
your welfare and prosperous success in all your worthy enterprises, and daily
shall beseech God to make you as fortunate as Alexander, and in all your
voyage to shield you from your enemies, as he did the Prophet David from the
hands of King Saul which persecuted him, and send you a happy return from
this your pretended voyage and many joyful years to live here amongst us,
and when it shall please God after you have spent here many happy days on the
earth with much worship and increase of al worldly felicity and that you must
pay your due to death by nature, you may happily arrive to that port of all
joy to rest with God in heaven where Christ is chief Pilate.

ROBARTES HIS FAREVVEL TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR FRANCES DRAKE* KNIGHT, and
to his Gentlemen followers, who set sail at Wolwich to depart toward their
voyage the xv. day of July. 1585.
When true report had blased abroad yt iii. years taken toil,
Of that rare knight Sir Francis Drake through many a foreign soil.
Who by his travail on the Seas unto his endless fame,
Did purchase for his country wealth, and credit to his name.
I did expect some Ouids pen to paint his worthy praise,
Who when he dies shall still remain with fame on earth always*
But none has writ that erst I saw which makes me say,
The brunt was spread of trauiles his the Poets did dismay,
My mind was forward with yt first, but yet my heart did fail.
That against my will I forced was to strike my simple sail.
Yet hearing how ye second time this worthy venterous knight.
Does go to seas accompanied with many a worthy wight.
My willing heart has forced my pen thus much to undertake,
To him and to his famous crew* a farewell for to make.
I doubt not but his noble heart will way of my goodwill,
That boldly dares presume thus much yt have such simple skill.
And pardon me his country man who writes for countries sake,
And for because no one as yet, did ever undertake
To tell unto all Englishmen what dangers he abode,
And eke what cou^tryes strange he past, while he did rome abroad
Yea all the world almost Sir Francis Drake has seen.
And welcomes great has ever had where he on shore has been
The Heathen Princes honored him, and favors did him give,
And victuals store of such as did their bodies all relieve.
Yea this and many a strange thing else there happened to him the^.
When many of his company for fear ran back again.
And gave report that dead he was, and sunk in foming flood,
Which news to some right joyful was yt wished him no good
When such as were his friends indeed with watery eyes did wail.
And wished their blood were shed with his, so it might him avail.
All this our Poets might have wrote if they his fame did tender,
Besides the wealth yt he home brought a good cause to remember
You might have taken this small pains ye same by pen to show,
To make his name with fame resound and cause the world to know.
When many a thousand lived at home and slept with quiet ease.
Great pains abroad our Knight endured with perils on ye seas.
The dangers he has passed through would make a many muse
That keeps their cha^bers close with shame and hearken after nuse,
But long may good sir Francis live which has enricht our la^d,
The like was never seen nor heard since Englad first did stad.
How like Ulysses did he show his policies each were,
And like Achilles bearded his foes and daunted them with fear.
The Lord has blessed him noble knight and with his mighty arm
Defended him from foreign foes that sought to do him harm.
And brought him safely home at last where favor he did gain
Of our good Queen with welcomes great and thanks for taken pain.
That he so nobly had employed: to nobles all alike case,
A wight more welcome then he was came never in this place.
His credit since has still increased and God has so him blessed,
That he the love of all has gaind from best unto the worst.
What should I say but this of him his deeds deserve so well,
That of all others which I know Sir Frances bears ye bell.
For Bounty, sure he does exceed to those that do deserve,
And feeds ye hu^gry naked souls which else were like to sterue.
And such as in his voyage last to sea with him did go,
And by demeanor ill, has brought them selves to careful woe.
He daily does them still relieve and all their family.
A mirror of a worthy mind fraught full of courtesy,
O noble Knight what should I say, my pen is to too base,
To write thy fame, it rather does thy worthy deeds disgrace.
What wrong has poets done to thee that learning has at will
That have in giving thee thy due not showed forth their skill.
Who lives now within the land that merit does such fame*
Then learned poets give it Drake that does deserve the same.
Would God my skill were such thy praise so for to paint,
That foreign foes to hear thereof with danted fear should faint.
And noble valiant Gentlemen that goes with him to sea,
Although your names I do not know, I Will learn the^ as I may.
I know you go to purchase fame, and that shall be your hier.
And for to show your valiancie it is your chief desire.
For dastardes use at home to stay, and there will sit and talk.
When you in many a foreign soil in danger daily walk.
But nothing can dismay your minds, your noble hearts to try?
And idle drones which fear to fight you do them all defy.
Your general a valiant Knight was never daunted yet,
But bravely made his foes recoile, when face to face they met.
Now is your bravery to be shewe^, there must you al take pain,
Else look for lasting ignominy when you return again.
Well, England has to few such Knights, yt dares to do so much
again to hazard life and goods, the peril being such.
He that does know the danger past, and venture does again.
Is worthy have a crown of gold to counteruaile his pain.
Well since that thou are going hence to take thee to the seas,
Forsaking wife and country both, thy costly cheer and ease.
To God thy voyage I Will commend, to whom I still will pray.
To grant thee life and safe return to see that joyful day.
Wherein thou may behold again thy loving countrymen,
Which wishes well to thee, and prays for thy return again.
Set forward noble mind, God send thee wind at will,
With coast full clear and weather fair, thy voyage to fulfill.
And shield thee safe from foes, and such as wish you death.
Would that I might adventure life to reaue the^ of their breath.
Good Eolus be friendly now, and send a happy gale,
That captain Drake and all his men on seas may safely sale.
And God that guides the heavens above, so prosper thee with hap,
That all the world have cause to say, thou lie in fortunes lap.
And this farewell x. thousand times the mirror of our years.
Farewell the Phoenix of our age, whose acts admittes no peers.
Farewell you gallant Gentes, who here might live at ease.
Yet thrust your heads for countries wealth in hasard on ye seas.
We be no Trojans borne against who^ durst Juno justly skold,
Happy be we at your return, your foes confusion to behold.
Thus whilst my tongue can talk or pen may paint thy praise,
I will set down what dreadles deeds were done wtin thy days.
Thou Neptune god, if favor ought might fierce Achilles find,
Vouchsafe to send my countreyman a calmed wave and wind.
Thy parting now is blased abroad, as every tongue can tell,
Thy ships are lancht, thy sails are hoist, Sir Francis Drake farewell.
H. R.

FINIS.
Robarts his farewell to the sailors and soldiers appointed for this exploite.
ANd sayl^rs all and mates what ever that you be,
which willing are with this good knight, these exploits for to see.
Let never courage quail, but show your selves like men,
For good sir Drake is generrall, come show your valor then.
You hear before what he has done, when he at sea was last:
And eke what knowledge he has gaind of every foreign coast.
The worthiest pilate in this land that ever I did know,
Your selves I ask to judge with me, and many a thousand mo*
And how he has enricht the land, and stored it with gold.
And how he did reward his men, my pen can scarce unfold:
And honored them in all their deeds, because they did take pain,
And friendship ever at his hands their duty did them gain.
Yea, he dealt with them so bountiful, and gave the^ such large pay,
That he for it is worthy praise, they so of him will say.
A very lamb unto his friends, as every tongue can tell,
But unto such that it deserve, he is both fierce and fell,
You know the valor of the man is more then I can say,
Then fear not hearts, but venture on, and please him al you may.
Your foreward he himself will be as ever he has been.
In any point of service he will venture life and lim.
Be valiant then you noble hearts, and when you meet your foes,
Apply your manhood all you may, for to increase their woes.
And in your fighting evermore, think you are Englishmen,
Then every one of you I hope, will stay of Spaniards ten:
Or any else what ere they be, that shall disturb your peace,
And seek by any kind of mean your quiet to disease.
God and S. Georg you worthy wights, proceed triumphantly,
In Princes cause let no one quail, but all courageous be*
The Drum and Fife you warlike wights, shall ever by you ^^and,
As long as any fight indures, for comfort by your hand.
Gain honor then, and hold the same, as song as ere you live:
But if like dastards you do prove, o how your hearts may grieve
That ever noble wight should trust to such a mate,
As eats his vittails with the best, yet fears to show his pate.
Once for to look his foe in face at any time to see,
God shield that any such among this warlike crew should be.
Since you are they must honor win, the^ try your force on foes
And show your selves courageously, apply your english blows.
Then valiant hearts that seek for fame, be sure the same to gain
For with her trumpe of glitring gold she will requite your pain.
And at your home return again, such praise for you i will write,
Shall do you good to hear the same your travel to requite,
If you return, as God I trust will send you all again, ^
Your general will reward you all as you employ your pain.
Be just therefore and gentle too, each look unto his charge,
And see against your general commit you no outrage*
Serve God, obey your governor, and him both love and fear,
You are commanded so my friends, your princes charge you bear.
Then God shall bless you still if you do live in awe,
If you offend he punish may by virtue of his law.
Therefore agree in unity, and love one with the other,
(...)d join your selves in amity, as brother with his brother.
(...) in this cause you are as one, though many souls you be,
Then fellow mates look to your selves, and never disagree.
For whereas brawles be set abroch, and quarrellers remain,
It greatly will your general grieve, and vex his heart with pain.
To see that men which ought be wise so given unto will,
And in a harebraine humor seek each other for to kill.
My loving friends and countrymen, let these my words avail,
And think upon these simple lines, when ship is under sail.
Thus unto God I you commend, to whom I still will pray,
To send you safe among your friends, and shield you on the sea.
I mean you all good will, I trust you take it so,
(...) english ^^ts. God keep you all from woe.

