A NEW YEARS GIFT.

THE COVRTE of civil Courtesy:

Fitly furnished with a pleasant port of stately phrases and pithie precepts:
assembled in the behalf of all young Gentlemen, and others, that are desirous
to frame their behavior according to their estates, at all times, and in all
companies:

Thereby to purchase worthy praise; of their inferiors: and estimation and
credit among their betters.

Out of Italian, by S. R. Gent.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Ihones. 1582.

To the flourishing Youths, and Courteous young Gentlemen of England, and to
all others that are desirous, and lovers of Civil Courtesy: R. I. the Printer
hereof, wishes an happy New year present and many: to the pleasure of God,
and their own hearts desire.
MOst Courteous young Gentlemen, presuming upon your great Courtesy: I have
been so bold as to present your estate, in token and wish of an happy new
year, with these the first fruits of my poor Press, finished since the
cumming in of the same.

Surely, the traueill of a Gentleman whom I know not, no not so mutch as by
name, much less by person: And concerning the copy, as he that brought it
unto me made report, that it was translated out of the Italian, by a
Gentleman, a freende of his, desiring me that it might be printed. And I being
always desirous to farther the study, and procure the delites of all men, by
publishing books of semblable argument: thought good to dedicate the same unto
you, judging it in this respect a present more meet for your most flourishing
degree: for that I perceive it to have been first written by a Noble and g^^^^
personage of Italy, and directed unto his Nephew, a young Gentleman also of
noble parentage, for the better conforming of his behavior at his entrace into
the Court, as it may appear by his Epistle hereafter following. Now for that
this case is common unto most of you, and above all other the study of ciuell
Courtesy, most incident unto your calling, I am the bo^^er to crave your
Courteous countenance, and friendly favor in accepting the same now in English
at my hands, as a testimony of my serviceable heart, and good meaning toward
you. And that receiving it now from me as your own* you would vouchsafe of
your great courtesy, to take both me and it in to your assured protection: and
to defend both the present, and him that offers it, from the spightfull
toungues of malicious carpers. And in so doing, you shall evermore bind me to
emploie what traueill and service I can, to the aduauncing and pleasuring of
your most excellent degree.

Farewell in the Lord.
The Censure of a friend, concerning this work.
Our Parents well deserve the prick of price,
Who give us life which we had not before.
The teachers care deserves great thank likewise,
Who trains the child, and gives the learned lore:
Immortal praise we ought give him therefore.
Some strife has bin in respect of these things,
Who best deserves of these two Noble springs.
Though one give life, the other learning lendes,
Let reason rule, let wit this matter scan.
And things are iudgde, according to their ends,
And proverb old says manners makes the man.
The vital sprite must yield to learning than.
Wherefore you youths, sprunge up from gentle line,
Unto this Court your courteous ears incline.
This Court, the which of Courtesy takes name,
Declares what port each Gentill shall ensue.
At all assayes how he himself shall frame,
To follow what, and what for to eschew.
Thrice happy he whom God shall so indue.
A thing of weight, and wun for simple price,
Reject by fools, but purchased by the wise.
Bengalassa del Mont. Prisacchi Retta, unto Seig. Princisea Ganzar Moretta. For
his behavior. vz.
To my Nephew Seig. Princisca Ganzar Morretta.
AT MY LAST BEING at Prisacchi, understanding by your fathers talk, that he
minded to have you a while in the Court, where he has spent the better part
of his life* and because it is frequented with all sorts of companies, as any
place in Italy is. I have directed this little book, which if you read and
mark diligently, shall be as it were a guide, to lead you from a number of
snates which you may be trapt withal, also for your behavior in all
companies: with many other things fit to be known of young Gentlemen, and
especially for such as have not been conversant in all companies.

Fare ye well.
The Contents of the Book.
HOw a young Gentleman may behave himself in all companies: and be prepared
for ordinary entertainements, and to get a good opinion and credit among his
bettars. Chap. 1. How a man shall behave himself in had company, and among
such roisters as will offer familiaritye with him, will he or no: and first a
guess of such means as they will use thereto. Chap. 2. How a man shall
answer to the praise and thanks, and courtesies seriously offered by his betters
or equals. 3. How a man shall acquit himself toward noble persons, that
shall either for his friends sake, or his own, offer him courtesies: or assure
him of friendship, willing him in all chances to be bold with him. Chap. 4.
How when the foresaid speeches be offered by a Noble person pleasantly, that
is of acquaintance: which must be also pleasantly answered. Chap. 5. How to an
equal, or but little better: being a friend and familiar. Chap. 6. How a man
shall take thanks of a noble person. ca. 7 How a man may give thanks to his
betters and equals. Chap. 8. What manners be requisitie of the Table, and what
to be shunned: what is to be considered in the washing before Dinner, and in
the sitting down, is set forth in ye beginning of this Direction. Chap. 9.
How a man shall pacify his friend, his better, or his equal: if he have given
him unwillingly any cause of offense. Chap. 10. Now a man shall shift off
reproaches or tauntes offered between sport and earnest: by envious and
scornful persons that will seem to do it so cunningly as the other shall
have the taunt, and yet at his own pleasure will deny it. Chap. 11.
FINIS.
The Court of civil Courtesy.
How a young Gentilman may behave himself in all companies, and be prepared
for ordinary entertainments, and to get a good oppinion and credit among his
betters.
Chap. 1.
FIrst he has to consider, that the lack of good behavior, which is a
comely audacitie, with out a sausie presumption (which argues discreet
judgment and wisdom) makes his inferior to be his equal, and makes his
equal his better, till himself has attained not only the habit of being the
like, but the time to make himself know to be the like. Therefore if he shall
light in the company of any, whose living and birth is worse then his own, and
yet perceyueth the other for his wisdom and gravity to be well esteemed of
by others, it becomes the young Gentleman to give him the place (or at least
with instance to offer it him) but yet with such a modest audacitie, mingled
with a smiling grace, and courteous speech, neither too loud nor whispering,
as the rest of the company may well perceive: it is the virtues, and not the
man that is preferred, and that it is offered rather of a courteous disposition,
then of a sheepishe simplicity, which will be the better understood if he
shall utter some familier speech in yelding the place at the door, as thus.

I pray you go, for I love to follow the steps of mine elders. Or thus:

You must needs go, for I cannot away to go foremost. Or thus.

On, on I pray you, you be the next the door. Or thus:

If you go not we shall strive all day, for I will not. Or thus:

You make too mutch ado for so small a matter: And at the placing at the
table, as thus:

Will you sit sir, and I will be next you? Or thus:

Not I by your leave. Or thus:

Such a one will needs have you by him. Or thus:

You shall not rule me till you come to your own house. Or thus:

The place is fitter for you then for me. Or thus.

Go too, shall we strive all day like women.

And if it be one that be of great estimation, either for office, or ancientie,
and will yet of too much curiosity refuse the place, then it shall be best to
sit down first, but to take a lower place either on the other side, or on the
same side. But there (by the way) it is to be considered that this curtesy is
not so precisely to be used, either at common tables, where each man pays
equally for his meal, nor yet at ordenary tables in the Court: for in either
of these two places, except diversity of degree make difference, men use not
this curiosity: then this aforesaid at the table, is when men meet in their
equals or inferiors houses, in which it is to be considered that the owners of
the tables must bear the swaye of placing, if he be the better or equal.
Howbeit, if the owner shall call or place one (either not knowing who ought or
not caring who do) that is inferior every way, saving for wealth, in such a
case, the young Gentleman shall do well not to tarry till other be set, not
abiding the placing of the owner: but taking his next companion to set
himself down first, rather two or three lower, then he should be the next to
his inferior: whereby the owner shall be (in silence) taught to consider better
an other time.

And he must not suffer himself to be removed any higher, that he may keep
the owner still in doubt whether he so placed himself of mislike or of good
fellowship. But if there be much ado made, and that he find the owner to
find his own error: then it will be curtesy to couller the fact with good
words pleasauntly, As thus:

Why? think you that I can eat no meat but at the upper end of the bourd.
Or thus:

I pray you hinder not my good hap, I am where I like. Or thus:

I pray you give me leave to sit where I like. Or thus:

I pray you trouble not your self, you shall see us as merrye here as you be
there. Or thus:

As long as I find good meat I never use to study for my place, Or thus:

I warrant you if I had not liked this place, I would have bin so bold as
chosen an other. But if happen the owner of the house, be so gross and
careless, that he either do not or will not find any mislike of the matter:
then would I wish in such a case, the young Gentleman should be furnished with
some guirding speeches or else some pleasant scoffs, to countenance out the
matter, with those that sit by him, that the rest may see he choase the place
in scorn of the other, Or thus:

I am happily placed here, for if I had mounted any higher, I had been clean
out of countenance. Or thus.

We will be as merry here, as though we sat at the upper end of the bourd: or
to some companion, that sits next abooue by the young Gentleman's placing, thus:

If you behave not your selves gently, and be good to us of the second mess,
we will keep you from mounting the next time. Or thus:

Beware friends, pride will have a fall: speak not so loud your betters be in
place. And to conclude, to make as much mirthe and pastime as may be all the
meal. But if a man be in a noblemans house, or a Knight of great reputacion,
then he must be contented for that time, as pleases them. But he may the next
time, take as good a place as he can with modesty get, and when he is from the
bourd, not loose any place that reason or courage can advance him to. For as
no man is disgraced by giving (of his curtesy) place to whom he list, so to
have it taken from him by others being his right, is an abasement not to be
suffered, if a man can take it either by slight or courage.

Now that this young Gentleman, may know in what sort he may accompany
himself with all sorts, and to all estates: he shall know, that the eldest
son of a Knight while his father lives, may count himself equal with a
Gentleman of.cc. li. land rent of assise (for so the Statute limiteth) and may
offer himself a companion with the best Squire, if his wit with a modest
audacitie will serve him thereto, but not without some reverent respects in
his speech: specially if the said Squier be of gravity, and so of
reputation, either for his wisdom or office, as if he will ask a question,
thus:

I pray you sir, what? where? or why is such a thing? Or thus:

Will it please you to do, or have such a thing: and in his affirmation and
negation to answer, as thus:

Ye sir, no sir. And if the other ask him any question, as whether he will do
this, or that. Then thus:

Mary sir I will tell you. Or thus:

With a good will, if it please you, etc. As the matter shall fall out. Howbeit
these speeches, if it be to no better then to the best Squier, or an ordinary
Knight be to be used, with such a famillier kind of pronuntiation, as it may
appear to be vttred by him of his curtesy: meaning rather to give them more
then he greatly needed, then of any great difference he thinks to be between
them: specially if they be such, as he is not like any way, either to be in
danger of their hurt, or in need of their help. And though these kind of
reverent speeches need not to be so curiously used, by the inferior, to one
much his better, when they be once very familier: yet they become the speaker
so well, as if they be used with a good audacitie and familier countenance, a
man may use them to his inferior, without any abacement or disgrace at all to
himself, and specially to Ladies and Gentlewomen of credit.

Then he has to consider that among young Gentlemen, or young Noblemen, there
needs no great curiosity, but before a Barron, and so upward, he may not be
covered while he stands in his view, except the Nobleman bid him: unless
that Nobleman use such an ordinary kind of fellowship with all men (as he
soeth) as mean as himself use him with small curtesy: and yet he must way
withal whether that good-fellowship be withal men indifferently, or only to
such as be his familliers: for such as be Noble may make their companions
whom they list, and the rest though they shall be better to such companions, not
to use ever the less honor to him.

And let this stand for a general rule, that whatsoever familiarity a noble
man shall show to any his inferior, yea though he profess to make him his
equal friend: let the inferior still beware of using himself rudely, sawcely
or carelessly, especially in the presence of others, For though many to assure
their inferior of their goodwill, seem to banish all curiosity: yet such a
one shall be best esteemed, and longest hold friendship with his better, that in
all their greatest familiarity can make it appear to others that he does not
forget, that he plays or iesteth with his superior. Which a man may very
well do and yet hold company in all manner of sportes, testes, and pastimes:
then much more he that is a stranger must have the more regard. And as it is
good manner for a man in his own house, or his friends, if he be the best in
the company, to offer intertainement to any noble man: so in a strange place
in the house of his better, though there be no better then himself in the
place, he may not presume to begin intertainment: but it is his part to be
ready, and next the Nobleman in sight, against it pleases him to use him, till
he sees him accompanied with some others, or call some other to him: and if it
be but open talk devised to pass away the time, then to help lengthen the
same at his discretion: otherwise to find some talk with others, and rather
to stand or sit, with a steady and assured countenance, as though he were
studying some matter of weight, or harkening to others talk if it be not
secret: then to accompanye him self with such as be unworthy of his company:
and such count I serving men, and foolish doltish persons though they be his
betters. But when a man shall sit still and say nothing, he must be sure to
have an assured countenance, not gnawing any thing in his mouth, or playing
with his legs, toes, or fingers, and to have always an ear and an eye about
him, to here what is said, and to be reddy if any part of an others talk,
either by word or look be addressed to him, that he may receive the occasion,
and win in the talk: and though no such cause be offered, yet it is a better
grace to harken other folks communication, then to be talking with a person of
vain credit: and if a man shall get him out of the way for lack of
countenance, when noble persons or others of reputation be in the place: then
will his inferior lie in a wait for occasion, and step in, to be of
familiarity before him.

Furthermore, if talk be offered to this young Gentilman by his better, he
has to consider whether the same proceed of a desire to pass away the time,
and for want of other company: or else (as some do) because they will be thought
courteous, they will say some thing to every body, but for fear of too much
familiarity, will not stay long with their inferior. To this last it shall be
good only to answer to the question, adding some reason to verefie the same,
but not to enter any new matter, nor to dilate any further in the old, then he
shall perceive him by his countenance and attentiuenes to hear without
provocation. But if the inferior perceive, that the talk is ministered upon
the first respect, that is to make entertainment: he must not only answer all
his demands, but enlarge the same to the uttermost: And when he sees his
better pawse, so that he turn not away ward (as though he would be gone from
him) to invent some matter of himself, to lengthen talk: And that he may the
better do so, In any wise let a man shun as much as he can in his
entertainments to speak of himself as to tell, what he has said or what he
has done: for that will be taken to come of a desire to tell his own praise,
except it be either to his very friend or else that it be something that the other
is desirous to here.
he must before hand have enquired (of such as come in his company) if
otherwise he cannot learn, what manner of country the stranger dwells in:
from what place he comes: and whither he is going: what pastime or exercise
be loves. By which means he may redemaunde of the wearines, or plesantnes of
the journey: of the fowlenes or fayrenes of the weather: whether the Country he
dwells in serve commodiouslye to the use of such things as he delights in:
whether the Gentlemen of that shyre be companiable in the like or not: and by
this means, also he shall be able so to understand of mo countries, and men,
then he knows, although he met with them as strangers, yet he shall be
provided of sumwhat to discourse with them thereof. But if a man talk with his
better, he must always observe with what attentiuenes or willing mind the
other gives care to him, that he may leave off, before the other be weary: and
to be very heedefull that he speak nothing affirmatively, but that himself
has seen: but he may well say I have hard, or I have read, that this, or
that is thus. And in tellyng any thing by heresay, specially to a stranger, he
must respect three things, the one, that it sound not to the dispraise of any by
name, except it be a thing openly known, and yet the dispraised may hap to be
so near a friend to him that shall hear it, as the teller shall get mislike.
The other is, that when they tell a tale of an other man's mouth, he forbear to
tell the name of his aucthor, especially if he be his friend, for if it shall
seem unlikely though it be true, he shall bring his friends credit in suspect.
The third kind is, that he never take upon him in open presence, to make any
report of the sayings or doings of his betters, except they be such as the
company knows him to be familiarly acquainted with, for otherwise, he shall
make himself compared to them that talk of Robin Hoode and never shot in his
bow. Lastly let him never make up his entertaynements with the disprayse, or
mocking of any, either present, or absent, though he hear other do the like,
(except only in the company of his very assured friends) and that for this
respect. A young man must ever think that it is impossible for him to be so
complete in all perfections of beehauour, but that some thing remains in him
worthy the laughing at, if men should not forbear him in respect of time which
brings experience to the wisest, and peradventure too, even some of the same
defects which he sees scoff at in an other, may be in himself, unknown to
himself, or at least others as ill: And therefore the wisest way is, if his
better seem to deride any for his beehauour, to appear by a smiling
countenance to be of the same opinion: but in words to escuse it, if he may,
as if the doings of him that is mocked show simplicity, thus:

It may be that bashfulnes is the cause: if they show rudenes, then thus:

Want of experience makes men err. But if they be his equals, or inferiors
that so scof, then merelye, thus:

Go too syrs, many a one going about to mock on be cares not for, does often
touch himself or his near freende, or by a similitude thus:

On, on, saw ye never any or this, that litfe up a Weapon to stryke another
and hit himself. Or thus:

Take your pleasure my masters, I warrant you therebe that do as mutche for
us, as we do for them. And in deed there cannot any greater praise be given
to any man, then this, that one shall never here him speak ill of any, and
hearing ill, will make the best of it. Howbeeit, it is both within the
limmittes of honestye, wysoome, and freendship, any man to discourse plainly
with his friend, either of the misbehauiour, or dishonest dealings of any: that
on the one side he may show himself a misliker of ill persons, and also make
his freinde ware of them. And by the way it is to be noted, that there be three
sorts of people, which whosoever shall scoff and skornel at, or else jest with
them, further then the compass of curtesy shall permit, shall receive more
disgrace by doing it, then the other shall by suffering it.

The first is women, or simple mild sprited men: for women must never be
iesters, nor scoffers, further then the bounds of modesty and courtesy, to
make the time pass away the more pleasantly: so that a man to jest so far
with them as they may not for shame answer, nor for insufficiency quarrel
for, will be accounted a dishonorable battle, wherein the vanquished has more
(...) them the vanquisher: This is meant by sharp and taunting iestes when a
man will seek to disgrace or put one out of countenance by iestes.
for it is better to yield with silence, then to contend for the masterie in
vnfytting terms, and to offer the mild spreeted man the like: that fynding
himself agreeued, has neither the wit to shift of it in words, neither the
courrage to revenge i^ in deede^: is (...) the same predicament that the woman
is: And all noble minds do of their courtesies forbear to offend, and offer
to defend all those that either cannot (as feeble persons) or ought not (as the
feminine sex) revenge or defend themselves.

The second sort that may not be mocked or scoffed at ^^e age^ persons, and
such as be deformed, for want either of beauty, fanour, or other blemishes in
their shape, stature or linunes: because none of these things be faults of
their own making, neither lies it in their power to amend them* So as we
ought rather to be moved thereby too thank the maker or us all, for dealing
so much better with us, then with them, then to scorn or deprave them for that
they cannot helped. And if withal we will consider, that the deformities of the
mind, be so much fowler then those of the body, as the soul is of more value,
and ought to be more uniform: it will be a good mean to make the outward
defects of others, very small in respect of our own, which cannot but he
greater and many more, and consequently, rather to escuse them, then despise
them.

The third sort that cannot bear, neither ought to be offered scoffing,
mocking, or lesting: be those that be in miscrie: either by sorrow,
imprisonment, or any adversity, by loss of freen^s, substance or credit: For
these be things sent from God, to put us in remembrance, that we having
deserved as ill, may fall into the like when it pleases him: and in the mean
times be objects for us, to practice our compassion and charity upon. But
there may rise this question, seeing that public enterteinments, specially
among young folks, are continued more often with speech of little
importance, then with matters of weight: How a man finding himself in such
company, as are neither fit to discourse of matters of wisdom, nor yet to be
imparted with of his own private affairs, shall find matter suffici^nt to
pass the time in company? For answer heereunto, let this be remembered, that
where as I have said, that men must take heed in their open talk, how they be
to busy in bringing in the sayings and doings of noble persons, least the
hearers should think that he arrogateth to himself greater acquaintance with
such, then in deed he has: or else, least coming to their ears, they should
mislike that their inferiors should make them their talking stocks. Yet if he
that shall so introduce (by way of confirmation, ensample, or similitude) the
saying of his betters, be sure that it she^^ ^^s wisdom and praise, or at the
least, some pleasantness with but any harm or disgrace to any other, he may
well use it in his talk: Provided that he speak it as by heresay, ercept he
have it in deed by his own knowledge. Also women and deformed persons, may be
pleasanted and iested with, if their wit be such as they delight in the like,
and can in good sporse enterchaunge in the same manner. Provided that the
bounds of courtesy be observed (that is) that there be no cause of blushing
given.

Also, all men in sickness, prisonment, or poverty, be not miserable, for they
be only such that have an afflicted mind: for some can jest and scoff at
their own disgraces, thinking thereby to make them seem the less in other
men's eyes, while they appear no heuier, then such as themselves can
pleasantly bear: And such had rather be rested with then pitied.

The fault therefore that can be committed in these persons, is the mocking
them behind their backs, or despising them, which no man ought to show to
any, except it be to them that be known to be impudent and shameless persons,
or else such as be known to be ouerwenyng fools in their own conceyte, and
be such as do the like by others. Of these a man may talk his pleasure, as
well of them, as with them, without any disgrace to himself: Provided that if
any quarrel rise thereby, he be as readies of courage to maintain it with his
hand, as of speech to utter it with his tongue.

Also a man may test with his very famillier friend: if he find him of
disposicion willing to bear it, and of wit sufficient to answer it. And it
skilles not what he lay to his charge, though it be dishonestie: provided that
it be not true that is imputed to him, or if it be true that the other be so
brazen faced as he will not be ashamed of it.

I would not advise any man to jest mutch with his inferiors, unless they be
such as he knows, both can and will use a restraint of over male partnes. For
if a Gentilman should be saucely used by jest, by his inferior, he cannot
escape disgrace, whether he bear with it, or quarrel for it: but bearing it
is best, and to shut it up rather with a pleasant nip, then any way to seem
angry, if the mirth he of his own beginning.

And thus much for a taste how a man may pass his talk among his betters and
equals, in a strange place, and in strange company.

Yet this admonition more I must add, that who so in his entertainments shall
endeavor to tell any tale to move laughter (spectally in strange company)
had need to be sure that it carrye that life or quickness with it, as he be
not so much deceived of his expectation, that he be feign himself to laugh
alone: for that will be so great a disgrace, as in steed of laughing at the
table, they will smile in their steeues at him: and therefore to shun that he
must beware that he take not in hand to tell any thing for foolish, that is not
folly: nor for wise that has couller of folly: nor for a wonder that is not
wonderful: nor for rare, that is common: for want of experience may deceive
all these.

How a man shall beehaue himself in bad company, and among such Roysters as
will offer familiarity with him, will he or no: and first a guess of such
means as they will use thereto.
The second Chapter.
THeir manner is lightly, if they find a young Gentleman that is to be of a
fair living, if they see him soberly given, after they have made their devise
among themselves, how every man shall play his part, that one of them shall
pretend great gravity with him, and he shall praise him to the clouds, and
become his counselor: another shall tell wonders to his fellow, to see if
between them they can catch a Woodcocke of him.

Another (if the first device serve not) will go about in scoffing and iollying
sort, to see if by putting them out of countenance, they can make him glad to
be of their faction, and to further the same, an other shall seem to reprove
all them. And as though he were the plainest honest man in the company, he will
offer to quarrel with them in his behalf: and all will be done with such
oaths and sad looks, as for all a man is warned (he shall doubt) whither
there he any that mean good faith or not. And it may be indeed that some of
these may mean honestly, and that may be the first and the last, (for the other
two bewray themselves) and therefore a man must use those he doubts of in such
sort, as he neither utterly reject them, meaning well, nor show him so foolish,
as at the first or upon small acquaintance shall take upon him to praise or
advise him, let him consider what reputation and countenance he is of, or if
they be such, as be of living, and withal can be contented to live within the
compass of his own, then there is the less suspicion to he had of him,
further then this: that every wise man will suspect any man that too mutch
praises him (except it be his famillier and assured friend) but for the more
suerty it shall be well to answer in this manner: not seriously, but somewhat
myling and famillierly. Me thinks it very good that you and I were never better
acquainted: for by that means you may be kept in that good oppion which now
ye seem to conceive of me, either by heresay, or by your own guess, least by
too much conversation you be made to chainge your mind: but in the mean time
I thank you, both of your good liking, and of the good advice you profer me:
for I shall ever have need of good counsel: and if there be any other thing
(because I am unfurnished to requite you in the same) wherein I may pleasure
you as much, you shall find me as ready. And so to shift him of, and fall into
some other talk, enquiring of this or that, him or her, as the object of the
eye or mind shall lead.

Now for the wonder tellers, I find three or four fortes of them: the one
sort only upon pleasure to pass away the time, not looking to be believed of
any, but to be iolled within the like: With these the best way is merely to
take upon you to know it to be true, and to ad to it something that may make
it seem more unlikely. And though it should so fall out that the tale should
be true, that to another seems either unlike or impossible: yet is there no
harm done, in not seeming to believe it, while I know no reason to lead me
thereto: mary, if after the same with sad asseueracion and others be justified
to be true: a man must of courtesy seem to eredit their oaths, but never the
more to coufesse it likely, except they can show so by reason.

The Other sort for that they would be taken for dooers or knowers of great
things, will for their own glory tell maruels, either of such things as they
have done, or such things as they have seen in straung Countries. And will
think in deed, what by his solemn countenance, what by swearing and lying,
either to be credited, or at least that no man shall seem to discredit them:
and if any go about it to quarrel with them. In this case I would either say
nothing, or if he should direct his tale to me, whereby I must be drouen to
says something: I should be in such sort as I would seem to soothe him in
words, but others such as I thought my friends, should perceive by my
countenance I rather thought it pity to put him out of his vain, then was of
the mind to believe all he said. Yet that must he done so cunningly too, that
if the teller or the hearers should, to pick a thank, challenge me for the
same: I would be able (if I list) without denying any thing I said or did, or
make the blame light on them that would go about to distaine my meaning, as
thus:

Can I not look on such a one, or speak so, but that I must mean as ye
would: it is you, me thinks, that go about to bring in question that which no
man else thought on, if I were as be, I would thank you for that, etc.

The third, and the worst of these wonder tellers, is he that in very deed
makes it his art, of purpose to catch Woodcockes, as they term it, and they
will use it either so conningly or so impudently, as they will make him, whom
they hunt after to be a Fool in that point, or seem a fool: for they will
so mingle things like to be true, or at the least not impossible with things
merely, faulse and impossible: as if the hearer shall either receive all
indifferently, or reject all indifferently, he shall seem either too ignorant,
or too light of belief. And if he shall by judgment scan and sever the other
from the other, and so condemn any part, though not the whole: then
swearing, flowting and quarreling, will be offered to justify the matter: and
this it is, will they say) to tell a tale to him that has never gone further
then his mother and nursery, to call for his pappe in a morning, etc.

And then must the last man that I first spoke of and is the fourth in this
tragedy, step forth and tell his fellow he offreth the young Gentleman too
much wrong, and he shall not take it at his hands, and himself will take his
part, and go into the Field either with him or for him.

To shift both these of, the best way, if any will rid it, is first to let the
other to tell all his lies, and to let him pass with a smile in the sleeue, as
they will call it, rather then to use either admiration, or negation: but if he
be urged to say his oppinion, as he shall, if it be a verse of course, then
shortly to answer, thus: or the like.

I say no more, but it may be true for me: for there be many things that seem
impossible, and yet prove true Matters of faith may not be reasoned on, Or
thus:

Me thinks it is a very good tale, I mean not to scan any further on the
matter. And these or the like words may be uttered with such a grace, as the
countenance may show the mind, and yet the speech keep them from quarrel.
But if they will needs prosecute it to the uttermost: then he that shall seem
to set the young Gentleman a gog. and offer to be his companion: he must of
courtesy seem to thank him, but not be so unwise hs accept him.

For no wise man will accept into his company, at such a bargen, a stranger if
he have any of his friends to make account of, though he suspect no practice at
all, but yet he must be put of with good words, as thus:

I thank you, you shall not need to take the pain, for I hau^ promised a
friend of mine, There is a difference between ruffaly phrases and such
reprochefull words as express the fowlenesse of the act or the illness of the
person.
in these cases (if I take any body with me) it must be he: I will quarrel
with no body, but if any body have any quarrel to me, I have business into
such a place, such a day, at such an hour: I will have but my self and my
man, or but my self and my friend, there he may find me if he dare: and so
as much as may be to forbear ruffainly words. But if any man be called by any
reprochefull names, they must needs be required both in terms and deeds, but
after sundry manners according to the person, the cause and the place.

If the noble man be not of authority.
For if a man's better, being a noble person (not being of the counsel) shall
in scornful words challenge his inferior for any thing of offense toward
him, the inferior ought by all means (not abaceing himself too mutch) to
escuse the matter. Or if it be a fault (such as he can yield no reason for
the committing of it) to yield with request of pardon. But if either the
escuse will not be taken, or that the inferior had just cause to ^ommit the
offense, and that thereupon the nable man break out in terms of repreche, as
knave, or lie: it may very well be answered thus:

I neither am knave, nor lie any more then you, take it as you lift, Or thus.

My Lord, I know you are a noble man, you may peradventure ouermatch me with
your train, and yet I must scamble as well as I can too: These terms be very
unsitting, you must either forbear them, or give me leave te think too, Or
thus:

Your Lordship may bestow these liueries on those that live by you, and cannot
live without you: if you will not have me forget you, forget not your self, for
I am much afeard I shall respect the villainy you offer me above the dignity
of your estate: But if a great personage shall reprove one for any fault,
then mediation of friends, and humble words, as thus:

I am sorry your L. should grow to these terms: I neither am such, nor deserve
to be so called of you: howbeit you be to great a state for me to contend with,
but if the proudest he in this land being mine equal, or not so much my better
should use me so, if I did not my best to teach him better manner, you might
well publish me for such as you call me: but I will bear all these and be
glad of your L. favor if I may get it, if not I must live like a poor man,
and do as I may, Or thus.

My Lord, these be very ill terms to offer to a Gentleman: and I must tell,
you offer them to him that would not bear them at many men's hands, but I must
bear them at yours, For I confess you be able to ouermatche me: your train
is longer then mine: if I had thought you would have used me thus, your
Lordship should have pardoned me for coming to you at that time.

Now it is to be considered that words all this while as they break no boanes
(so from one mutche a man's better) they be no great disgraces: and a man may be
compted the wiser to forbear, where he knows he shall by power and rowtes of
men or kindred, be ouermatched. But if the best under a Counselor should give
a blow, a man shall be ashamed, if he do not his best to reach him another,
whatsoever come of it.

Now if between equals, reproachefull words do rise, it must be distinguished
thus:

If I give one occasion of offense that touches but his profit, and he give me
reprochefull names for it, as the Lie, or Knave: I must for my credit sake, not
only requite those words with like words, but count the wrong mine: The best
way to this is to lend him a blow.
and either offer the first blow (if the place serve for it) or else challenge
him into the field: unless I can (for policy sake) drive him to challenge me
to save my self from the danger of the law.

For fighting quarrels never are made for profit, but for honor: and therefore
whatsoever hurt be done, not touching credit, the quarrel must be his that
receives the first reprochefull words: so touching the cause, the right
consideration is this: If I offer the first reproach, disdain, or dispite, the
quarrel is the others: his part it is to challenge, and I need not to my
equal to make the challenge. But if the other give me the first lie, or like
disgrcae, it is not enough to say he lies again: but I must needs offer a
blow, or challenge the feeild.

But yet the villainy may be such as he may strain good manner.
In the house of his friend, I mean in the dyning place at the bourde, or where
any assembly is, a man may not offer a blow: but if he have cause given him,
he shall do well to make show in words that he forbeareth the present
occasion, respecting the disturbance of the company.

This is no place to grow in terms in, if it were you would not be so brave,
Or thus:

These be too great villainies to be borne, if it were not in mine own house,
where thou know I am able to eat thee up, Or thus:

No into words, this matter shallbe eased anon you shall see, Or thus:

I thank you sir, nay take your pleasure, I could rail too, but then I should
be like such a rascal as thy self, tell me this soon if thou see I forget
it: but if I do take me for such a cowardly boy as I will take thee for, till
thou meet me in such a place, Or thus:

If it were not for troubling this company, I would be your caruer of a piece
of my Dagger: but doubt not but I shall find a time for you. Or thus:

Away rascal with thy villainous words, I hear by thy great boaste I shall
pass my journey quietly at such an hour, in such a place, I know, I shall
have cause to report thee for a good quiet fellow: I, no more a do, you know
my mind.

But to conclude in this, I shall advise the young Gentleman to inform
himself before he have need by enquerie at their hands, that the experienced
in that trade, that when he has need he may not only be provided of courage,
but also of words, phrase and manner to it curragiously: and in the stoutest
and seemliest manner for all that I have written hithertoo of this matter, has
bin rather to show that in every thing there is a mean to be used, in one
sort to inferiors: and in another sort to superiors and equals: to the end
to provoke him to learn the right manner, then of a meaning, to show any skill
of mine in the same, belonging nothing to my profession: and therefore I will
now say something how he shall take the iestings, the praysyngs, and the
thanks of hia superiors and equals, as things that are both fitter for me to
write, and shall of him be oftener and sooner put in practice.

First I will discriue some sundry manner of jesting, One is, when a man will
charge his famillier freinde (a man's famillier may be either his equal or his
better, that list of courtesy to become his equal, or one somewhat his
inferior to whom he list by like courtesy to make his equal) with some ill
matter that all the company knows to be untrue.

In that kind there is no difficulty to answer: but it is good to have
varitie of phrase, and not to answer still after one manner: to his mere equal
thus:

You do well to exercise your tongue in matters of no troth, you may hap else
to be taken for a lie teller. Or thus:

Go too, you will have every body see what a lavish tongued fellow you be,
that cannot so much as keep counsel of that he knows not, what would he do
think you of that he knows? Or thus:

Nay I dare say you would feign have it believed, for it greeueth him that any
man should be taken for honester man than himself, Or thus:

Go too, you were best leave your tatling, least I fall a telling of true
tales, Or thus:

Nay tell on, for I am sure all is Gospel that comes out of those lips of
yours, Or thus:

This is nothing finely handled of you, you should have said sumthing that had
carried some likelyhoode with it, Or thus:

Go too, I will make you no more of my counsel seeing you be such a blab, Or
thus:

Is this the trust you perform with your friends, to tell all and more too?
Or thus:

Houlde thy peace fool, for my honesty is so well known, as no body here
will believe thee.

Now in the like case to a man's better must be other phrases, as thus:

You say truth sir I have been taken for a sore fellow at that, when I was a
yongeman, Or thus:

If my credit were not very good, this were enough to disgrace me quite, Or
thus:

It may be true that you say, but I warrant you I handle the matter so
cunningly, that there is no proof to be had of it, Or thus:

It were great pity any body should doubt of that matter, Or thus:

Thus a man's credit is put in danger by you, if the hearers be not the more
favorable, Or thus:

Some measure other men's trades by their own, but I would be loathe any body
should think I mean so by you.

An other kind of jesting with a man's friend is, when they charge him to have
said or done something of a third person, that only himself and his freinde
knows to be feigned: but yet it may be told with such a resemblance of
truth, as the hearers may doubt whether it be true or no. In this case also it
is not good to make denial: but to use some such phrase or rountenance as the
hearers may perceive he makes so little accounte of it, as it needs no
escuse or denial, as thus:

You have lost mutch good labor now, if you be not believed, Or thus:

You may sell this good cheap, seeing it is of your own making, Or thus:

I like you well, for I see you love to make the best of any thing, ever, when
you wot not how to make the woorst, Or thus:

I pray you believe him in this, and you shall see he will take such a pride in
it, that he will quoyne you new stuff every day. Or to a man's better: Very
well, you may say that and more too, if it please you, Or thus:

You must look with a sadder countenance when you will be believed.

An other kind is when they will touch one with something which is true: and
though it be no great infamy, yet it may be somewhat that a man would be
loathe to confess, and yet as loathe to be taken for a denier of that which is
known to be true. In this case a man may answer thus:

You do but dream peraduentuoe, when you wake you shall find it otherwise,
Or thus:

Lo, now you have heard say so: and being of a good faith, you beeleeued it
straight. Or thus:

Nay no doubt but it must needs be true, if you say it, Or thus:

Did I: you speak your pleasure, a good tale in deed if it were long enough.
Or to your better.

These and like speches with altringe only the sound and countenance may serve
in sport or between sport and ernest, if a man like not to be iested with.
This is but some malicious tongue, that has founded this in your ears, I am
sure you do not believe it, Or thus:

Nay you may say what pleases you, for I will do so mutch as confess it,
rather then you should not be believed, Or thus:

I perceive you mind to make me beholding to you for giving me so good report,
Or thus:

I know sir your good word is ever at hand for your friends, and I perceive by
this that I am one of them, Or thus:

I am bound to you always, I trust to be able one way or other to make you
amends, Or thus:

No I warrant you, there shall no man be able to catch me in such a fault, Or
thus:

Well this you would do if a man's marriage lay on it, Or thus:

Well, when I lack one to speak well for me, I know where to find him at a
need. Or shus:

If you look so sadly, you will make them believe you in deed.

An other kind of jesting is, when one praises another for well handling of
any matter, either in saying or doing, that in deed has not been well, or
not so well or wisely as it might have been: whereby the other knows he
speaks by contraries, this is to be answered diversely, as thus:

Now if another time you lack one to do such a thing finely, it is but
sending for me, and you shall be sped, Or thus:

It is a sign you have a good insight with you, for I may tell to you, and yet
I would be loathe to vaunt too: it was very excellentlye well done in deed, Or
thus:

Well, ye see I love not to brag: but when I do a thing very wisely, I love
such friends as will tell me of it, Or thus:

O nay, but if you had had the handling of it, it would have been
exquisitiuely done. Or to a man's better thus:

Well, if a man chance to show all the wit he has in doing of a thing, were
it reason there should be any more required? Or thus:

I may tell to you, I did it withal the provision of wit I had at that time in
store, Or thus:

Nay, I trust I shall never surfeit with doing too wisely, Or thus:

I love not to dissemble with my friends, I mean to show them all my wit at
once.

To conclude, in any thing that may seem to carry some defect in the doing,
if the doer can himself either with wit turn it to some merry conceit, or
else help merely to mock him, himself for company: it will appear either no
defect, or else to be committed rather by carelessness, then for want of wit.

Another kind of jesting is to praise a man to his face of things that be true
in deed: as for his personage, his wit, his qualities, his good nature, or his
learning: and whether this be spoken in sport, or in earnest, it is all one:
for a man must ever take upon him as though all praises were spoken in jest: by
which means he may in sport arrogate them all to himself, with less glory,
then if with taking it in earnest he should endeavor to put them from him. So
as all such praises may be answered thus with a smiling grace.

Go too, you think now that I will do as mutche for you: and so I would if I
thought you as worthy of it as I: but you must bate me an ace of that, Or thus:

In deed I must confess it is so: and you that want some of these rare
gifts, which I am endowed with must be contented too, Or thus:

You say true, there be many proper fellows of the name of us, if ye knew
them, Or thus:

These things be but trifles with me, in comparison of that I could do if I
list, Ot thus:

You need say no more, for I warrant you, I believe all this to be true, and
mutche more. Or to a man's better, thus:

I thank you for saying so, for I hope some body here will believe it, Or
thus:

Take heed sir, that you make not me so believe you herein, better then you
beluees your self: for I tell you, it will be hard to make mes think the
contrary. Or thus:

Beware what you say, for it lies in you to bring me in as great an error
as this comes too, Or thus:

I know you will say nothing, but that you be sure is true: and therefore, I
mean both to believe it my self, and also to persuade the audience to be of
a right faith.

How a man shall answer to the praise and thanks and courtesies seriously
offered by his beters or equals.
The third Chapter.
THe praise that any man shall give his freeinds to his face, proceeding of his
own judgment, Any praises or thanks require rather somewhat a smyling grace
then too solemn, though it be a man's better.
in earnest and freendly wise, as one freende may in some order (in uttering
either his own affection, or to encourage the other without touch of
flattery) do to an other: it may be answered to his equal freeind, doing it
of good faith, in part as I have prescribed before toward his better, in
doing the like in mirthe. Or thus:

I may not take your praise for any thing, for the goodwill you bear me,
blindes you. Or thus:

I pray you look better into me, and when you find how much you be deceived,
tell me of it, that I may amend it, Or thus:

If another should tell me so much, I should think he mockes me: but you may
mock me indeed, and pass unespied, for the goodwill I think you bear me.

To a stranger, that shall praise him, or seem to conceive a good opinion of
him thus:

It were best (I think) never to be better acquainted with you, least I make
you of another opinion, Or thus:

I thank you for your good opinion, I would I could beguile every body so
conning as to make them of the same mind. And to a man's better, thus:

How much soever I shall want in this, my readiness to be at your
commandment shall supply it, Or thus:

The good opinion, which rather my good hap, then my deserts has wrought in
you, causes you (I think) to beeleeue that to be in me, which you wish to
be in me. Or thus:

I account my hap good, that it pleases you, but to say thus mutch: for at the
least, I shall be ashamed of as mutch as I find wanting here of in my self, Or
thus:

I cannot but take this as a freindly curtesy, by policy to encourage me to
seek the attainment of that which I am borne in hand to have already. These
and like, answers may be applied also to such as shall bring to his ears
the good reports of his freeindes given out of him behind his back (as they
term it.) Provided that he pick them out according to the distinction of
persons before described: and withal, as it is to be considered that all
things spoken in a show of mirth though it seem to the hearer somewhat sharp
(and peradventure anger him) is yet to be dissembled and answered merely. In
all other entertainements spoken seriously, a gladsome look is a better grace
then a flatteting smile.
So whenever a man in any thing that he may atribute, truly to himself is
praised to his face, though it be spoken earnestly and of good meaning: he
ought also, in his foresaid manner of answers: to show such a smiling
grace, as it may appear he takes it as spoken rather of their courtesy, then
for any cause he finds in himself why they should so say, in speech (for the
most part) the countenance, the grace, and sound in the pronunciation is able
with one self sentence, without altring word or syllable, to please or
displease others, to show himself wise, or make him for so mutche to seem
foolish.

Solomon affirms, that there is nothing that more tries the wit of man, then
the hearing of his own praise: for says he, the wise man is put too his
trial, when he is praised to his face. And therefore for this matter I
conclude, that forasmuch as many times it is hard to find who speaks of
flattery contrary to his thought: who by way of mockery, though he know he
say true, to try him, and who of good zeal to show affection, and to
encourage him: The surest way in this doubt is (except to those whose
freendship by other means he has experience of) to use his answers so, as he
may make them earnest or sport at his pleasure, as he perceives their
asseueracion to provoke him.

How a man shall acquit himself toward noble persons, that shall either for
his friends sake, or his own, offer him courtesies: or assure him of
freeindship, willing him in all chances to be bold with him.
The.iiii. Chapter.
IN this case as in all other of intertainments, the inferior must note in
what manner, whether seriouslye or familliarly, such courtesy or intertainment
be offered him: and thereafter to choose out and shape out answers, agreeable to
each kind: for the first, if he be a stranger to him: but not to his friends
thus:

I know such, or such of my friends so mutche beeholding to you too, as
has bin sufficient to bind me to honor and love you: and seeing it pleases
you to extend your courtesy also toward me, I can but wish my service, as
sufficient as my good will is: to assure you too, of my thankful mind, Or
thus:

My Lord, I can but acknowledge that debte for my self; which before I
thought to owe for others of my friends, that have tasted of your courtesy: but
I am glad that I may by this means show it, which your Lordship shall find me
ready to do, wherein soever I shall think my service may be acceptable, Or
thus:

As this your Lordships goodness rises of your courtesy without any deserts,
so must I confess my self ever unable to counterpeyse it: I can but
acknowledge my self too mutch bound to you for it: and double bound if it
shall please you to command me to the uttermost of my power, Or thus:

I humbly thank your Lordship, I can but requite it with my service, and that
I beseech you command, Or thus:

My humble thanks are but an unequal recompense, and therefore I shall desire
your L. to put my grateful mind in trial, by commanding my service, Or
shortly, thus:

If my service may any way be ought worth, if I may but understand it, it
shall not need to be commanded, Or thus:

I humbly thank your L. and I beseech you command me, as your servant, Or
thus:

I humbly thank your L. and I beseech you think that you voutchsafe this
courtesy on him that will be as ready to requite it with the uttermost of his
service, as he that is better stored of words. The use of long or short
sentences must be employed according as he sees the hearer at leisure.

How when the foresaid speeches be offered by a noble person plesantly, that
is of acquaintance which must be also pleasantly answered.
The.v. Chapter.
MY Lord, you know I have no store of eloquence: but what mayme so ever you
find in my utterance, I can assure, you shall find none in my good will,
whenever I may do you any service, Or thus:

I humbly thank your Lordship, I warrant you I make so sure reckoning thereof,
as I am more like to be boulde of your courtesy, then to request it: but I must
pray your Lordship to think that shall be rather for want of power then of
good will, Or thus:

Your Lordship must be content with my humble thanks for this time: but I
would be very sorry to think your Lordship made not account of me, as of him
whom you may most command, Or thus:

My Lord I have had so good experience of your former courtesies, both toward
me and other my friends, as I had need with my service to go about to
recompense some part of that, before I come in debt for any more: But the
less we can requite, the more we must stand bound.

How to an equal, or but little better being a friend and familliar.
The.vi. Chapter.
TO our friend thus:

I am in your debt for so mutch already as if you lend me any more, you will
make me bankroute: and agree with you for the tenthe part, Or thus:

You offer me so mutche, and I can requite so little: as I see, you mean to
make me an ill debtor still, Or thus:

You know I have no curious words in stoare, but in plain terms. I thank
you, and will requite it if I can, Or seriously thus:

I pray you think, that though I use not many words with you, I think my
self so much beholding to you: as wherein I may pleasure you, if you command
me not. I shall think you love me not. Or to a stranger thus:

Sir I thank you of this courtesy, if it shall lie in me to requite it, I pray
you be as boulde with me, Or thus:

Sir I must be your debtor for this courtesy, till time and place serve to
requite it: but in the mean time I thank you, I pray you make the like
account of me.

How a man shall take thanks of a noble person.
The.vii. Chapter.
IF thanks be offered in serious manner and for any weighty matter thus:

My Lord, it was my goodwill, as well as my duty, to have done it to your
best contentation: but if there be any defect in it, I pray your Lordship
impute it to mine unskillfulness. Or thus:

My Lord it is no reason that you thank him, whom you ought to command: and
specially me, that am unable to satisfy for the tenthe part of that dewtie or
goodwill I owe you: but if there be ought done to your contentation, or that
have pleased you, I am very well a paid and sufficiently thanked, Or if merely
thus:

I pray you keep your thanks for a thing more worthy them: for if your
Lordship bestow so many thanks for so small matters, you will make me look
for too many when I shall do you any better service.

To a man's equal freeind, or but little his better, thus:

Nay sir, you will mar me, if you give me too many thanks: for then you will
bring me more in debt for my thanks, that I am yours for this matter by a
great deal, Or thus.

Do freeinds use this curiosity in giving thanks, I am sure it is but to
teach me good manners against an other time, Or thus:

I pray you keep thanks for strangers, and let me know whether it were to
your liking or not, Or thus:

You be at too much cost for so small a matter: I know now where to have
thanks another time when I deserve them.

How a man may give thanks to his betters and equals.
The.viii. Chapter.
IF my humble thanks were a sufficient recompense to your Lordship, I should
not rest so much in your debt as now I am bound to do, for such a courtesy,
etc. Or thus:

My Lord, I have humble thanks to render, for such a matter which did me
great pleasure: but they be so unequal a requital, as I were best to ad this
to the rest of your courtesies or goodness, and stand bound for the whole, Or
thus:

I am so much bound to your Lordship, for such a thing, etc. As I must think
all the service I can do too little woorthe in respect of your goodness
showed therein.

To a man's friend thus:

I am too much in your debte, to give you thanks for such a thing, etc.
For till I can make some show in deeds, I will come upon the score with you in
words, Or thus:

Though thanks be not enough for this pleasure that you have done me: yet I
pray you allow of them till I be able to make better payment.

What manners be requisite at the Table, and what to be shunned: for, what is
to be considered in the washing before Dinner, and in the sitting down, is set
forth in the beginning of this Direction.
The.ix. Chapter.
FIrst, to pause when a man is set, and with leisure to unfold his Napkin,
wipe his Knife, cut his bread, This ceremony is not to be used, but when a
man fitteth at the upper mess with his betters, or at the second, when either
the master of the house sits there, or some noble person.
and there to slay till either his better begin, or make countenance to him to
eat where he list: and then to begin, not at the dish that shall stand right
before his better, except it be offered him: neither of the daintiest meats
which (lightly) stand lowest: but to choose some such dishe to be doing on
the while, till he see whether his better will choose or refuse some other
dishe, that he had rather eat on.

Item to have an eye to such as sit next beneath him and cannot reach, and
peradventure for good manner (if they be any thing his inferiors) will not
speak: and if they eat not, to ask whether he shall be their Caruer. But I
would not have him to be any man's Caruer, without asking him first, except it
be to one so much his inferior, as he knows will be glad of the curtesy he
shows him, though he like not the meat. For as to Carue to a man's better is
a presumption, so to ones equal, except by asking first the question, you know
it will be welcome to him, will be taken for too mutche sawning, except also that
for the daintiness of the meat, or fine choosing of the best morsel, he
offreth it to his very familier friend, by way of a courteous affection: for a
man must for a general rule, take heed that in a strange place he be not to
busy in offering service, or courtesies, though it be to his betters: but in a
man's own house or his Fathers, it cannot lightly be too mutche.

Item if a man be in his own house, or his Fathers, where it becomes him to
give countenance or entertainment he may to his equal, and such as be somewhat
his inferiors, he may the oftener proffer them this or that meat, and drink to
them, but not too much. For if a man every time he drinks (...) shall drink
to one or other, It is counted a foolish grace ever to drink to some body, and
specially at the first draught.
it will be seen* as though he did it for lack of countenance: so that to use
the salutacion of the Cup above twice in one meal, wilbee too mutche, except
the whole company fall to quaffing. For wise men do rather seek to satisfy
their guests with some good speeches then with such dum sygues.

This kind of Cup greeting ought not to be used but in one of these two
respects: either to make our inferior (to whom we mean not to use speech of
familliaritie) to think we will do them a curtefie: or else to our very
freende by way of congratulation. And therefore a man must never drink to his
better, except he be sure that by way of freendship and familliarite he be
content to become his equal, and that not with a solemn or sad countenance, but
with some smiling grace, that the rest may know it proceeds of familiarity,
and not of presumption, yet with reverent words and change of phrase, as thus:

My Lord, if some young Nobleman:

Sir, or Madam, will it please you to give me leave. Or thus.

Shall I be so boulde as salute you with this Cup of Wine. Or thus:

By your leave sir, against it next please you. Or thus:

Will you give me leave to remember such a one* as some friend of his. Or thus:

To pluck you out of your studies. Or thus:

Saving your tale sir.

Item, that above all things in a strange place, or in the presence of
strangers, he attend not so greedely, nor so continually to his feeding: but
that in modest wise, (...) either gazing too long in another man's face: or yet
hanging his head continually (...) his trencher: he has both his eye and his
ear so ready, that nothing is said or done at the bourde, but he may perceive
it, for his learning, that good is to follow, that ill is to eschew. And when
he sees any thing uncomely, to examine himself, whether he have not the same
grace himself: and also to do the like, whenever he hears any man
dispraised. For most men know what is comely or uncomely in another: But many
for lack of due observation in themselves, mock or dyspraise in another, the
same which others mock in them: and the rather for their so doing.

Item, that he pawse between meat and meat, and never to carue himself,
either of meat or bread, while his mouth is full: nor till he have swallowed
the last morsel.

Item that he fill not his mouth so full of meat as he cannot hold his
lips together while he is chawing: for other wise, men shall look into his
mouth, and see the meat roll up and down while he is eatinge: which is a
foul sight, and loathesome: and for that cause, a man must forbear to speak
with meat in his mouth, except he have so little, as he be sure to hide it
in his mouth while he is speaking.

Item, while his better tells him any tale, to cease eating: bethe while he
hears, and while he answers him.

Item, if he be provoked to laughe in the presence of his betters to do the
same with as little noise as may be: and likewise in the company of strangers,
for too loud a laughter, specially, for slender occasions, do make wisemen
counted foolish of such as know them not.

Item, when (...) man will tell a merry tale let him (...) it so a^ ^^^selfe be
not the first that shall laughe at it. (...) smiling sound to make men know he
speaks but in sport, is good: but a fained laughter is ill becoming. A
hearty laughter (so the matter be worth it) is allowable.

Item he must beware that while another tell a tale, or make iestures: that his
wits be not carried away, so as he gaze continually in his face, and make the
same countenances which he sees the other do: for that will make a man
counted doultish.

Item if he be constrained to yawne, teach, belche, cough, sneese, cleanse the
nose, or spit either at the bourde, or in the presence of his betters or
strangers: he must suppress the sound, and shadow the sight, as much as he
may conuiently without making it to nice.

Item in caruing himself or others, he must not embrew too many of his
fingers, nor his thombe: nor wallow his meat up and down to much in the sauce,
because in so doing a man shall wash his fingers in the saufe, which others
will loathe, specially strangers.

Now to conclude, though a man either at home or among his friends, may use
what manner he list, without observing all these ceremonies: yet it shall be
very good somewhat to enure himself by daily custom: otherwise he shall in
presence forgette both them and himself

How a man shall pacify his freeind, his better, or his equal: if he have
given him vnwillinglye any cause of offense.
The.x. Chapter.
IF for a light cause, then merely thus: I am sure you take it not in earnest,
or think I meant otherwise then in the best part: for if you do, you shall
do me great wrong, Or thus: By my truth I did, or said it to no such end,
as you take it: and therefore I pray you think of it, as I meant it. Or thus:

If I had thought it could have bin so much mistaken, I would have bin more
wary: but let it suffice you that I meant but well and freeindly, for otherwise
I did it not I assure you: Or carnestly for some greater matter, then thus:

My hap is ill, that of so good a meaning, should fall out so ill conceiving,
or so ill success: for that I did or said, was as I would have done to my
very freende, or would have had done to my self, it restes in your choice to
believe me: but if you do not, you shall wrong your self, as well as me, in
mistrusting me without a cause, Or thus:

I can but tell you and assure you on my faith, I meant thus, Or thus:

If I have given you any cause to think other wise, or if it have fallen out
contrary to mine expectation: I am not only soarie for it, but I will be
ready to make any recompense I can, Or to ones better thus:

Truly sir, it was not my intent to do herein any thing that might offend:
but I will yield, that it is fault mough that I used no more circumspection,
but that you may conceive ill of it: you need not to give me any penance, for
that my repentance is so murche, Or thus:

If you knew my mind, you would put me in trust for revenging this faut: for I
shall be angry with my self this good while for it.

How a man shall shift of reproaches or tauntes offered between sport and
earnest, by envious and scornful persons, that will seem to do it so
cunninglye, as the other shall have the taunt, and yet at his own pleasure
will deny it.
The.xi. Chapter.
THe best way is, if he can touch the same party as near, without seeming to
be angry: but if he know nothing perticulerly to charge him or to mock him
withal, then, to scorn him beetweene sport and anger again, as thus: Oh
finely handled, were you borne so. Or thus:

Jesus who would have thought you could have thrown so hard to hit your
self, Or thus:

I dare say, you ween you have spoken very trimly now. Or thus:

You have made a great speak sir, Or thus:

That is quoth you, Or thus:

I thank you of your cost, Or thus:

It is but your good nature to take or expound it so. Or thus:

As I remember I desired you not to say that for me: but yet you shall find me
too kind hearted to dye in your debt. Or thus:

Did any body teach you to say so, or comes it of your mother wit.

Now if they shall reply, and go about to make it seem they mean simply,
then thus:

I dare say you do, and therefore I thank you as heartily. Or thus:

Why I trust you think not that I doubt of that, Or thus:

Why I take it so and therefore I commend you for it and so turn it to mirthe
again, if the other will needs have it so. But if the other will prosecute it
with sharp tauntes, under a fleeryng or laughing countenance, then thus:

Nay I am not skilled in iesters art, tell me your mind in earnest, and you
shall find me ready to make you such sport as I dare: Or thus:

I will tell you, if you will needs become a Iester to make Gentlemen sport:
It were best to call some other to help countenance you, that is of your
faculty, for in faith I am nothing apt for you at this time.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, dwelling at the Sign of the Rose and
Crown, near Holborne Bridge.


