DIFFERENCES IN MATTERS OF RELIGION, Between the Eastern and Western
Churches.

Wherein the Roman Church may see her self charged with as many Errors, as
she falsely lays to the charge of other Churches in Europe.

Gathered by Irenaeus Rodoginus.

Joan. 15.17. (...).

LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S for John Budge, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Windmill in Britains Burse. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and most magnanimous Pattern of invincible courage,
my singular good Lord and Patron, George, Earl of Engie, Lord Gordon and
Badenocht, Son to the thrise-Noble and Puissant, L. George, Marquess of
Huntley, Earl of Engie, L. Gordon and Badenocht, Sheriff principal of
Aberden and Invirnesse, L. of Oboyne and Strathaune, Baron of Achindowne,
Melgon and Gartly, etc. all increase of honor in this life, and eternal
happiness in the life to come.
TO lay aside (right Honorable) all the officious complements, used by most
men now adays to make way for the purchasing of the favor of high and eminent
Personages; What your Lordship is to me, J my self know best: neither will J
expose it to the view of Buyers, it being vnvendible, yea, inestimable. J offer
to your Lordships favorable Patronage this little Treatise of lamentable
Dissentions, never (for ought I know) heretofore collected into one Packet:
and as yet rather a Rapsodie, then a Methodicall Relation of Differences. Your
Lordship loves Union; This emboldeneth me. Your Lordsh. hates Schism, for
which I heartily thank God, beseeching him upon the very bended knees of my
soul, that you and all such, eminent in Learning, Wisdom, and Piety, may by
all means possible endeavor to help to pull down these ill-composed walls
of Schism, and to rear up the beautiful and long-desired wall of Peace. God
preserve your Honor, increase your Wealth, and restore you fully to your
former Health.

Your Lordships daily Orator, in all duty and good affection most humble,
Irenaeus Rodoginus.

To his most loving Master, I. R. the Contriuer of this Work.
HEre Schisms, and rents, and breaches manifold,
(With weeping eyes, which now I do behold)
Thou have laid out before the view of men,
With thine exact, and Peace-desiring Pen.
Well do thou wish, for which I wish thee well:
Yet wishing does not fiery darts repel.
But, Oh that Kings and Potentates their best
Would do, and so yield to thy sweet request:
Then should Peace shine, and Gordian knots now fast
Dissolved be, and into Lethe cast.
Misonices Renatus.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
CHristian Catholic Reader, (whosoever thou art) having taken some pains in
collecting these differences, I recommend unto thee, the using and perusing of
them. Come with a mind void of prejudice, and behold the schisms of the
Church, the lamentable and pitiful ruin of Christian people; unless men by
speedy repentance and earnest devotion to God, the Author of peace and
concord, prevent these sure imminent perils and dangers. The coat of Christ is
rent, his garment is torn in pieces, the world is distracted and distempered
with the raging waves of opinion. Some Churchmen, either in ambitious and
extrauagant thoughts are become furious, giving out idle fancies for sound and
solid nourishment; Iere. 14.14.
(the Prophet calls them false visions and the deceit of their own heart,)
or else (as it is ever in schism) are misled, yea rather muzled by prejudice:
so that there is no sauce, (be it never so sweet) which can taste well to
their pre-ocupied pallats, but only that, which relisheth the venomous gall of
bitterness, whereby they may work the bane and utter overthrow of them which
are of a contrary mind* the first sort of these men are led to foster Schism
against conscience; to maintain themselves in Dignities, Wealth, Peace and
Promotion. Of which is a number of the learned, and most polliticke
Christian Prelates, Cardinals, Doctors, and Preachers in the Romish Church.
The second is hurled forward, without any respect, only blown up with foolish
zeal lacking knowledge; so that there is not a moule-hill this day in Religion
between the one side and the other, which to them seems not to be an high
mountain. They can see nothing but through perspectiues, making things a far
distant seem to be very near. Or rather they behold the controversies of
Religion, as they do the Moon in the Horizon, which seems to be a great
deal bigger, (though more distant the^ the Zenith) then when she has
iournied a good way in her course. And that, because of the transparant and
watrish bodies of the Clouds interiacent, which divide the rays of their
sight, and let them not behold that luminous body in rei veritate, as it is,
but so far as they can: till the impediments be removed. The first sort,
though their power and means be greater, yet their action is less; nor yet is
it so rigorous in playing a part in this doleful Tragedy of Church and State
division: seeing preferment breeds emulation from without, and arrogancy as
a domesticke and individual Achates, which let never the giddy multitude so
dote and admire their actions, as that they can lead by their carriage this
wild and untamed Colt, to be the Organ of upholding Schism and idle opinions.
The other sort despising (as it were) dignities, misregarding money, leaving
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, yea all things (so they say) for Christ
and his Gospel, (well) take themselves either to a speculatiue and retired
life; and so they shun the thunderbolts of envy and hatred; or else they
choose an active kind of life, to preach the Word in pulpits, to teach it in
Schools, or to give private informations in doctrine and manners, by
conference, disputations, reasonings, by writing to those, who are far
distant from them, and by leaving monuments of their diligence and industry to
future ages, for eternizing their name and pofession. Both these sorts bring
admiration, admiration inquiry, inquiry notice of the reasons of their
doings, notice breeds liking of their persons and profession, (especially
when the dunghill of foolish and idolatrous opinions is lustred and gilded
with the glistring colors of Rhetoric, which in the ears of Ignorance
sounds as sweet, as the harmonicall concords of the sweetest-breasted
Quiristers.) Liking of the profession is that, which makes men now a days
run to all these heady courses, to murder and massacre poor Christians, to
ruinate Cities, dispeople Kingdoms, kill Princes, invent Gunpowder Treasons;
yea what not? And do the inuentors of these mischiefs, and deuisers of
diversity, with the vpholders thereof, come first upon the Stage to act the
Prologue of these turbulent Tragedies? No surely. They lie securely all the
night long in their beds, in the day time they meditate quietly in their
closets how to uphold these pretty tricks, when as the poor Christian world is
traveling through moore and marrish, casting ditches and Trenches to defend or
offend. And finally the commonwealth is the instrume^tall cause led by the
circlings of these upper powers, in zeal and ignorance to rippe out her bowels
from her belly. Good Lord Jesus! when shall these endless and needless iarring
have an end? when shall the Church Catholic live in union of Faith, and
communion of Charity? When will the Romish Clergy lay aside (yea rather
banish to Hell) preposterous (yea rather hellish) means, used for the
obtaining of secondarie ends, Honor and Lucre: for which they so maintain the
lamentable rent of the Christian world? Good Jesus! when will the Laytie (the
wiser and learneder sort I mean) see with cleere-sighted eyes, and understand
with minds free of prejudice; how they are hood-wincked in an implicit and
heart-tongue-tyed faith, believing all things, yet believing nothing; seeing
they know not what they believe; being like that mad frantic fellow in the
Poet, who thought he was sound in health, though possessed with a deadly ague?
Poor people the Clergy must instruct you; but you should be Berians; the
Clergy must direct you in materia fidei: yet, you ought to enquire for via
trita and regia, the common path, the by-ways of opinions of School
quiddities, and immaginary scar-Crowes, (heresy, to their conceit) and (as
they inform you) the contrarieties in matters indefinible, the positive
resolutions of matters coniecturall; yea of some things that are not, have not
been, nor ever shall be, have so marred the Christian people: that now adays
most men are become Laodiceans, (not in matters of opinion, which would to God
all men were, but in things most necessary to be done and believed) neither
hot nor cold. The rest in the fiery humor of contention, think verily that
it is impossible that their brethren should be saved, if they keep their
opinion, whereas their brethren are more assured of their own salvation then
they of theirs, though they think that they have their salvation sealed by a
most evident and manifest demonstration. Heb. 10.30.
O cruel madness so to incroach upon Gods property, who says, Vengeance is
mine, and I will repay. In whose hands is life and death, who only in his
secret Cabinet has ouerruled Fate, fortune, and all the unprofitable
divination of these peremptory diuinators, who likewise keeps cursing and
blessing to himself. Where is that wonted charity, when it was said, if any
man thinks otherwise, God shall reveal it. Origin Hom. 5. in Leuit. says
that there be some doctrines in Scripture so secret, that even Priests shall
not find them out. But that golden sentence of Saint August. in Genes. ad. lit.
lib. 6. Cap. 9. must be ever in my mouth and in my heart, Ea moderatio est
seruanda, vt in profundo scripturae sensu, praestemus diligentiam requirendi,
quam affirmandi temeritatem, as for the deep meaning of Scripture, we must be
of such a moderation, that we may rather seem to be diligent searchers then
bold and rash in affirming. Cyr. Alex. contra Anthrop. C. 2. Subtiles eiusmodi
atque admodum tritae quaestiones non tam demonstratione dogmatica, quam
dubitatione and discussione coniecturali indigent, such subtle questions stand
more in need of doubting the^ of demonstration. And so he ends Quaecunque
ergo sacra scriptura non dicit aperte, latere oportet and silentio praeterire,
whatsoever things the Scripture speaks not plainly, they must not be
expressed, but rather past over with silence. If this moderation of judgment
this day were in the Christian Churches; Greek or Romish, should the Turkish
tyranny of the faithless Ottoman, so overrule the flourishing and most
famous part of Christendom? Could the sworn enemies of Christ erect their
blasphemous Synagogues and Mahumetan worship, even in the gorgious and stately
Oriental Basilicks? Should Constantinople that Queen of beauty and once
Princess of Europe, now be a den of Dragons and a mansion of Infidels?
Should the invincible Islands of Hellespont, Aegaeum, and Mediterranian Seas
guarded by Nature wonderfully, with Rocks and steep Mountains for walls, with
the waves of the Ocean beating their sides incessantly for ditches: Should they
(I say) now be subject to that monster of Mankind, terror of the Earth and
waster of Christendom? Paul to the Philippians shows the reason, Every man
seeks his own things; and not the things of Christ. This is that, which
brings this depopulation and servitude, this hard and cruel yoke both upon
soul and body. Discord and dissension is is the puppis and prora. Men should
labor to pluck out those things which either hinder the growth of the good
seed of the Word, or which let the Word from being received; and so all men
should live in charity, for as Greg. in post. says, discordes tamdiu nullum
boni operis sacrificium deo immolant, quamdiu a proximorum charitate
discordant, Men can offer no acceptable sacrifice to God, so long as they are
at variance with their brethren. S. Hieron. ad Romans Vbi dissentio and invidia,
ibi chorus non est: Where there is discord and envy, there is no friendly
fellowship; and where there is no fellowship, there is no strength, but all are
weak: whereas if they would join hands together, they would be strong enough
for all their adversaries.

O poor Christians, running to your own murder, and which is worst,
delighting in selfe-killing, thinking all is well, if you die in your own
conceited cause, with the approbation of your hooded Conscience. I ask you,
what think you shall be your reward from God for dying in such quarrels, as
the most part of you do? The Romish Church will condemn the Greekish, as
Schismatike, for her Fermamentum; The Greekish will excommunicate and abjure
the Romish Church for her Azyma. And so the wiser sort cannot but either laugh
with Democritus, or lament with Heraclitus, beholding this mad folly. Greece
will not fast upon Saterdayes, yet Rome will: and herein lies the plea and
action. Good Lord! what shall we say? I must here insert the speeches of
Manuel Caleca, a Greek, from whom I have learned all these foolish and futile
differences for the most part, Lib. 4. contra Graecos, cap. de Ieiunio. Omnino
autem de cibis and potibus, and indumentis quaeque ipse etc. The Grecians
(says he) make the Latins Heretics, because they use not the customs in
meat, drink, and clothing, which they used in the beginning: for they would
have all the nations of the earth (if it were possible) to observe the same
Ceremonies, which they do; not knowing that they themselves may be also
rebuked in the same, and such like. And yet it is not impossible, that all the
world should be brought under one and the same rule, the differences of
tongues, of manners, and such like things being no hinderance for the effecting
of this; for when the Apostles had visited the whole world, they enforced none
to change their ceremonious Customs in common things; but exhorting them to
hold fast 10. or 12. principal Articles of Religion, and to confess them;
they made no mention of any thing else, unless it did openly gain-stand the
former articles. O aureum dictum! a saying to be registered in the hearts, and
printed upon the foreheads of turbulent and furious spirits now adays, who
cannot endure, but with gnashing of teeth, that any Church or Country baptize
with crossing after, have Organs or Altars, Curats, or Prebenders, use Cap or
Surplise, because they have them not, or rather will not have them at all; or
else because they are in use in the Popish Church, (a fine reason indeed.) I
wonder that these men can endure preaching in a Church built by a Papist, or
ringing of Bells, this being a custom used by the Papists, or giving of
thanks after meat, seeing the Papist does the like. And as those men loathe
every Ceremony which the Roman Church has: so does the Romish Church detest
the Greek Church, and she no less the Romish: so that this question being
propounded to Chomatianus, by a Greek, Whether it was lawful for a Greek to
enter into a Latin Church, and worship there being desired; he answered
negatiuely, Tom. 1. Iuris Graecorum. Balsamon says, That all the ceremonies of
the Latin church differing from the ceremonies of the holy Catholic Church,
(he means the Greek Church) are to be rejected, and no society to be kept
with the Latins, Ibidem. Cabasila propounded a question to John Bishop
Citrius, if the Greeks which were buried in the Latin Churches, and had Hymns
sung at their Funerals, could be subject to censure. Yea, after the Council
of Florence, the rage of the Grecians was so great against those that were at
the Council, and accorded to some Articles for the purchasing of aid against
the Turk, who at that time took the never enough lamented city of
Constantinople, that when they came home, though subject to the uncertain and
faithless mercy of the barbarous conqueror, they excommunicated all those who
accorded to the Articles: and when their souls had taken their good night in
parting from the body, they cast them like dogs into ditches, and denied them
most barbarously the benefit of Christian burial.

The Latin Church not being willing to be inferior to her sister in these
prankes, does serve the Protestants after the like manner: for if any of the
reformed Church die amongst them, his soul is determinately sent packing to
Hell by the Popes For every Holy Thursday he curses all Protestants.
cursing; his body it must either lie unburied at all, or else it must be
carried to some place where Protestants use to interre their dead. O my soul!
what shall thou think? How must thou meditate upon the barbarous and beastly
cruelty against the dead bodies of them, who lived to the eyes of all,
unblameable, (perchance) and died in the faith of the Lord Jesus, holding him
only their Redeemer, Savior, and Mediator, baptized in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, giving testimonies of their comfort and
gladness in the hour of their death, showing by their cheerfulness the
Prognostications and infallible tokens of their entrance and fore-smelling of
endless glory. Such men's bones do the Papists debar from resting in that
Portion of our Grandmother Tellus, where the former Saints bodies, which now
in part triumph in delight, rest, waiting for a glorious resurrection, a
perfect beatitude, with a full and plenary indulgence and acquittance from sin,
and her reward, death: for death is the wages and stipend of sin. Is not this
a tyranny going far beyond that of Nero, surpassing that of Decius, and an
hundred times more execrable than that of Heliogabalus? These men can suffer
him whom they have seen with their eyes die in a kennell, stabbing and stabbed
in a drunken humor; or him, who all his life time has played the
throat-cutting Ruffian, or the leacherous whoremonger, and who at last has
dyed in the Pox, without so much as poenitendi animus; yea, him, whom they
have heard with their ears awake Stix, Lethe, and Acheron with hideous and
fearful bannings, abuse with thunderbolts, and cannon-shot volies of
abominable oaths the great and glorious Name of the everliving God: such men
(I say) they can endure to be intombed and incoffined with them, and to have
their portion in their ground, and to lie among them with abundance of peace,
whereas they would strive to ransacke Heaven and Earth; yea, Acheronta
mouerent; they would even trouble Hell it self, if they did know that any
Protestants ashes did rest there. O Lord, how long will thou delay, and suffer
this unheard of cruelty? To return to my purpose. The reason of all these
things, is either the want of charity, or of prudent discretion of things
necessary from things indifferent. This age is pestered, yea, it is consumed
with these firebrarnds in matters indefinable. Many good Christian people have
used direct and indirect means to cure this sore, to quench these faggots with
their Writings full of prudence and piety; but behold their reward, both the
parties have persecuted them with calumnies, calling them Neutralls, neither
hic, nor haec, Nullifidians, Vbiquitaries: yea, the ordinary censure goes so
far, as without soul and conscience now to call them Atheists; Or else both
the parties hate them in such a measure, that they thrust them from their
Communions. This makes the Speakers in this business to be few, but Writers
almost none.

I remember that conferring with a learned man concerning this subject, I asked
him why he did not write his judgment in these controversies. His answer was,
Cui vsui reip. Christianae, et cui bono mihi? telling me, that it could not
help the general cause one whit, but do much hurt to the doer. I know many
such on both sides, who lament the Schism, and yet cannot help it. Oh that
the Roman Church, sometimes the beautifullest amongst women, that fairest and
most glistering Church amongst all her Sisters millitant upon Earth, would
acknowledge her self to be a Sister and not a Mistress. There was a time when
she gave her helping hand, (as at the famous Counsels of Nice, Ephesus,
Constantinople, and Chalcedon) and did not rule with a dictatory power. There
was a time, when in an harmonicall concord she was moved with the rest of her
planeticall and wandering Sisters in this veil of sorrow and trial, by the
revolution of her first mouer, and did shine amongst them all like Phoebus in
his Sphere; imparting out of her devotion and charytie that portion of light,
which her Redeemer had made her Hand-maide of even then, when Arrianisme had
overrun all the Orient and Afric, when Jerome cried out of it, Ingemuit
mundus se Arrianum esse factum; but now the fogge of her smoakie vapors
obscureth the declining rays of Religion and Charity, which in the latter ages
are so fast rushing to their Sunset, yea to their lamentable and darkesome
midnight. Alas, who shall furnish my eyes with floods of waters? and who shall
make my head a living spring, that from henceforth I may water my Couch with
sorrowful tears? Let me mourn with the Turtle, and chatter with the Crow,
for the loss of my beloved: He is gone and left his people to their own
fancies and lunaticke toys. Our sins have banished him; let repentance
recall him. Coldness in faith has lost him; let feruencie find him. Unsettled
hope could not keep him; let steadfastnesse lay hold on him. Perjury,
Swearing, Blasphemy, Idoll-worship, have shut the door of our souls upon
him: Let fear, reverence, with regard of his imperial Majesty and illimited
power open again unto him. Contempt of his Sabbath made him loath us;
frequenting his Sanctuary will force him to love us Mis-regard of Superiors,
Parents, and Magistrates, has made us Tutorlesse; obedience to our Prince,
love to our Magistrates, regard to Parents, will make him have a care of us.
Lying, Slanderous Callumnies, Backbiting our Neighbors, have made him suffer
these intestine Iarres in Religion and worship; love toward our Brethren will
make him reunite our affections in one.

This Treatise of differences I collected, partly by reading partly by the
help of some acquaintance of mine ten years ago in the Low Countries.
Petrus van Heiffen (one of my own profession) at my request collected all he
could find by his reading in private, and searching of Libraries; Iekan Heymer
(a Papist) by his travails to Rome and Germany, helped me with the oddest
pieces he could find, having also travailed in the Turkish Territories, where
by conferring with some Grecians, he got most sure intelligence of their
opinions. These scrowles I kept these ten years, to see if any other had
handled this Subject before in the English tongue; and having found by diligent
inquiry and scruteny, that no man heretofore has touched this matter in this
tongue, I thought good (Christian brother) to let thee smell these differences,
that perceiving the stinking streams which run from these impure and muddy
Springs, thou may learn to have a care of thy self. Aristotle taught
Sophistical captions, not that his Scholars should practice Sophistry, but
that they should be able to repel it. The Persians were wont to paint a whore
with one hand in the youngmans pocket, and with the other holding a knife to
cut his throat; not that their youths should frequent the company of naughty
and lewd women, but that they should seek by all means possible to shun them
and their damnable tricks. O how joyful a thing is it to see brethren hold
fast the bond of friendship and amity. If a man would but behold these
Controversies as a neutrall only, the^ should he plainly see the errors of
both sides, where as spleen and choler does hinder any man engaged on either
side from searching the truth. The Turks in their damnanable Mahumetan
worship, the Pagans in worshipping the Sun and Moon, the Egyptians in their
Isis and Osyris, the Numidians, Lybians, in their serving of cats, dogs,
onyons and leekes, use diversity of Ceremonies and Rites; yet they still
retain the Because there is no good bond of friendship but that which is
grounded upon God and his worship.
ill-tied knot of friendship in their Idol-seruice. But Christians thunder
calumnies and bolt excommunications one against another, if there be but a
difference in any kind of Ceremonies. Christian brethren, this makes those
that are without to be scandalized by us Christians, to loath our profession,
to condemn our faith, to persecute our persons, to overthrow our Kingdoms, to
spoil our Countries, to deprive us of our liberties and privileges, to
enforce many weak ones to embrace Idolatry, to torture the constant with
intolerable, yea inexpressible torments, to the end they may make them renounce
Christianity; yea, which is worst of all, they by our divisions, are kindled
with such hatred against us, and with such zeal to their own profession, that
they think they do God good service, and a great benefit to poor souls,
when they make them abjure their faith and baptism. O miserable Christians!
return, return unto the Lord, for you have fallen by your iniquities, return
(I say) unto him, and he will cure you of your iniquities. Earnest prayer,
endless devotion, volumes of mourning Madrigalls, like David's Penitentialls,
clouds of watery sighs; Nineuies fasting, Manasses repentance, Peter's weeping,
with Paul's reformation, is the sole Mithridaticke, the sovereign Pandoron, the
true Alexipharmacon, the purest simple, the rarest compound that can open this
ulcer, ransacke this botch, and cure this incurable, and never enough to be
lamented dissease of the Christian world. O vtinam tantum facerent qui possunt,
quantum volo qui nil valeo, Would to God the Potentates and Monarchs of the
Earth (the Kings and Princes I mean of Christendom) would join hand in hand
to build the walls of Jerusalem, to raise up the Towers of Sion. O where is
there a Zorobabel to re-edefie the walls of the old Temple? the Temple had a
Solomon to build her, a Zorobabel to rebuild her, though not so sumptuous as
she was at first, yet in great pomp and glory.

I sue for no new Solomon: there must be but one, even he who founded his
Church with his blood, the Lamb of God, Mactatus a iactus mundi fundamentis,
the Prince of peace, the Author of love; yet we may have, yea, we have
presently many Zorobabels, many Masters of work in the Christian world: some
Greekish, some Latin, and some Reformed; some Russian, some Armenian, some
Egyptian, some Abissine; every one according to the measure of his judgment
and Learning, would help to repair those Breaches. And that this may be
effected, you sacred Monarchs use your authority, you nursing Fathers,
chastise with the rod where there is need of the same: Cut away with the Sword
of Justice, (which you carry not in vain) the trunkes of Pride, Vainglory,
and Self-love, which ouer-whelme the Clergy for the most part: Learned
School men, leave the brainsicke and foolish inventions of Aristotle,
Philoponus, Themistius Averroes, leave (I say) to mingle them with the pure and
living Crystal Springs of the Word. Writers of Controversies hunt not after
Victory ambitiously, vbi lis est de lana caprina, for the most part: But search
Truth, sincero, and animo candido, knowing that your account shall be great
before God, if you lead the poor ignorant to fall in the ditch. And this I
say not so much for any danger that is in any modern opinion, but in respect
of the great and dangerous scandal, whereby we offend the weak and tender
Consciences of the poor and ignorant Laity, which solemnly swears (being
so by us informed) that every point of Controversy is either an Article of a
new Creed, or else a new Article added to the Creed; and the Laity erring in
Judgment, do thunder all contrary minds to hell for ever. And so the sin of
the people is not so much an error of belief, (though muzled up like blind
bayards in ignorance, and implicit faith) as it is the defect of charity
toward their brethren, which is the greatest sin a man can commit against
his Neighbor: yea, it makes a man hard in his Judgment, and without
repentance, and therefore damnable.

I remember, that once conferring with a Cousin of mine, a prudent and learned
Gentleman, complete in all endowments of body and mind, (his want of charity
only being excepted) he said, Woe is me, that you should be in Hell, when I
am in Heaven, seeing you are an Heretic, (Protestant he meant) I answered,
Well Sir, you are too rash in judging. I am as sure (said he) of your
damnation, if you die a Protestant, as that Christ is in heaven at the right
hand of the Father. I answered, You that are Papists are very sure of our
damnation, I wonder greatly, that your are never sure of your own salvation:
But thus much I tell you, I will not sit upon Gods Tribunal, to give out the
Sentence of condemnation against you; yet since you lack charity toward me
your Christian Brother, and give out the sentence of condemnation against me so
peremptorily, taking Gods part upon you: I think you will be damned, except
you repent you of your speech. And take not my Judgment for rash, since I
judge the Tree by the Fruit, and you by your Charity, which is the principal
and cardinal Virtue of the law. Devout Preachers, fill your Sermons from the
Storehouse of Scripture: inform in faith from Saint Paul to the Romans, and
from the first and second of James: reform manners from Jeremy, Ezechiell,
Hosea, and Joel: denounce judgments from Zacharia, Amos, Jonas, Michaiah:
teach your selves from Titus, and Timothy. This is all your task, and to live
well, and go before the people like the fiery Pillar in the night, and the
Cloud in the day, to guide them, and to preserve them from Schism and Heresy.
Do not spend your time in inventing Rhethoricke to admiration, critticke
Methods for emulation, unprofitable Questions breeding Controversies: Feed not
the itching ears of the humerous people with Novelties, needless questions,
and unhandsomely borrowed Similies. In touching and taxing your Adversaries in
Pulpits, (which would to God you did more seldom) do not so much endeavor to
make them odious to your people, as to make your hearers commiserate their
estate, for whom Christ died; and to move your Auditorie to pray for their
conversion, and not for their confusion. Our prayer to God should be to suspend
his Judgments, and to help us with grace, as he pleases to give it for
measure, and when he pleases to give it for time. Prayer should be Optatiue,
desiring and wishing with fear and humility, no ways Imperative, enioyning
substance and circumstance to God, that he would inflict such punishment, at
such time, and in such place, upon such and such persons. Popish curses and
Exco^munications, (the Sword which untie the Gordian knot of the Church, the
Hammer which broake the wall in the mids, the noise which must not be heard at
the rebuilding of the Temple.) I abhor with my soul, since the peremptory
and rash Excommunications, the drawing of the Sword of God upon every idle
occasion scandalously, and many times in derision of God and his Church, the
cutting off men from the Communion for little causes, for no causes; yea for
virtuous actions, and reproouing of sins offensive to God, and opprobrious to
man, have occasioned, bred, brought to light, nourished, and yet still foster
the rent of the Church. Lord give us affections to love peace, hearts to
bewail the Schism, and then will we hope for Union. Which (O Lord) in thy due
time perform to thy glory, the honor of thy Son, and the comfort of those
who shall persevere in thy grace to the end. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, I. R.

THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE Eastern and Western CHVRCHES.
THe causes of this lamentable Schism, which divided the affections of
Christians, and brought upon them the yoke of Turkish servitude, as I can
gather them from Petrus Stewartius Leodius, (a man by descent of the Scottish
blood, for Religion a Romish Catholic, remarkable for his dignity,
Vice-Chauncelour, and professor of Divinity in Ingolstade famous for the
Jesuits renowned School there) neither adding, nor diminishing from his words
(as they are set down in his notes upon Caleca, who being a Greek, wrote
against the Oriental Churches in defense of the Ceremonies of the Occidentall
Churches) you shall have faithfully translated, as here follows.

Petrus Stewartius in Calecam Page 407. editione Ingolstadiensi 1608. Ex varijs
Graecorum monumentis.
WE think that the causes, or rather the excuses of the Schism, are four.

1. First, the division of the Empire: for albeit the Emperors who did reign
at Constantinople, after Constantines departure from the City of Rome ( He
touches the forged donation of Constantine which I would wish no man to
believe, since it is refuted inuincibly by the learned of this Age. Reynolds
with Heart. History of Magdenburge, and the Book entitled Constantines defense.
because they had by a donation bestowed it all, (as we spoke before) upon the
Church) had not right it Italy, yet not withstanding sometimes they ruled This
indeed is not probable that they had no right at all in Rome, and yet should
rule every where. Judge indifferent Reader.
every where. But when a barbarous Nation had rushed Infra pro in videtur poni.
into Italy, even to Rome, and the Lo. 3.
Pope had required the aid of Leo Emperor then at Constantinople, who
negligently refused aid to the Church, the Pope was forced to recall Anno Dom.
800.
Charles-maine from the French Territories, and make him Emperor in Italy, and
defender of the Church: For this Pope Leo was a man much given to
voluptuousness, (as we read) and therefore too too remiss in his government
of the Empire, whence it came to pass, that in his time the Sarazens took
Syria, and the Turks, Capadocia; and so the Roman Empire was divided.

2. The second cause of the division was, because they were not called to the
Counsel Vltra montanum seu Lugdunense lib. Greg. x.
beyond the hills, when the word ( filioque, and from the son) was added.

3. The third occasion was (which they themselves sometimes in familiar
conference did show unto us) the too great and extraordinary exaction of the
Popes Legates; for when they brought yearly the Chrisme from the Apostolic
Sea to Constantinople, they would not depart from thence, unless they had
eighty pound weight of gold, besides other gifts bestowed upon them. I will be
silent of the pomp and pride (whereof they spoke) which the Legates show there.

4. The fourth and chiefest cause upon the Clergies part was the deposition of
their Patriarch Photius, Et in the Latin multiplied sounds harshly.
the excommunicating of him with other Prelates and some Abbots.

Paulo infra.

These things were written in Constantinople, by the preaching Friars for the
edifying of the people and for the profiting of souls, in the year of our
Lord 1252. to the praise and glory of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

The Articles controuerted.
Caleca writes copiously in his first three Books.

filioque and from the Son) to the Creed.



that they are suspended until the day of general resurrection: So they hold
that the souls of Reprobates which die in their sins without repentance, are
not tormented in the highest measure before the day of Doom.

Vulcanius, in which they refute Purgatory, and answer to the Testimonies of
Scripture and Fathers objected against them for the defense of it.



Leo Isaurus, called by others, Iconomachus (because he destroyed Images) the
Council holden at Ephesus did condemn Image Worship; and thereafter followed
the breaking of them in pieces after a rude and scandalous manner indeed, for
which Gregorius 2. did excommunicate Leo and all his adherents, anno 716. and
did free the Subjects of Leo from their oath of Obedience; which as In Epitoma
Historiarum.
Turselme the Jesuit relates, made the Romans, with those of Pentapolis,
Rauenna, and Campania, to reject Leo their Emperor, and to rebel against him.
The Pope in a Council at Rome decreed, That Images should be kept to help
the rude multitude, and to be worshipped by them, who could not read
Scripture. And so the Pope and the Emperor running upon two extremities; the
one too extreme in defacing and demolishing the Images barbarously; the other
in erecting and honoring them too much. The Council assembled at Franckford,
which did consist of Germane, English, French, and Italian Bishops, condemned
the breaking and defacing of Images, and rejected the worship of them, by
reason of the Canon of the Council of Eliberis, Ne quod colitur in parietibus
pingatur, Let not that be worshipped which is painted on walls. And here I
must add the words of Carolus, lib. 4. contra Graecorum Synodum, Cap. 9.
Imagines nil si non habentur derogant, nil si habentur praerogant, cum tamen
abdicatae quandam incautam leuitatem afferant, adoratae vero culpam inurant:
Images derogate nothing from Christianity if they be not at all; they help
it nothing if they be; but to reject them rashly, it argues a certain
foolish lightness; and the worshipping of them does make men faulty. But that
famous Writer, G. Cassander lib. Consult. cap. de Imaginibus, shows, that in
the days next the Apostolic times, for many ages, there was no use of Images
in the Basilickes and Churches. But to speak of the opinion of the Grecians
now adays concerning Images, the Controversy between them and the Romish
Church stands in two points.



This distinction the Latins hold to be foolish, saying, That the Grecians
may as well gather out of that Commandment, that there should be no Pictures
of Christ or the Saints, Seeing that the Commandment says, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image, nor the similitude of any thing that is in
heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the waters under the earth.
Possevinus in sua Muscouia, writes thus, and shows that the Rutheni worship
the Images of Christ and Saints, when they are painted.

Rutheni) but that which has the Name of Christ and the Saints designing the
Image, the Type, viz. carrying the name of the Prototype. And if the name of
Christ be written in Greek letters, they like the Picture; if in Latin, they
reject it. Of those Poss^vinus, Ibidem. Quod Rutheni tui mirantur, etc. Whereas
the Russians wonder that we add not the names to the Images, as they do.
Understand thou, that if the addition of the names be only necessary that the
Saints may be known, then the names are not needful to those that know the
Images without names, etc. And if they will say that in the very name there is
some virtue, thou shall do well not to conceive any virtue to be in these
notes; but that in a lively faith only stands all the vigor and strength of
this business, etc.

other, then they begin at the right hand, as Caleca writes, Lib. 4. de Crucis
signo, wherein he plainly wondreth, and shows the wondering of some of the
Latins at the rusticall humor of the Grecians, who would have rent the Unity
of the Church for such an indifferent point of Ceremony, as for making the
Sign, either this way, or that way.

It may be demanded, Object. 1.
Why the reformed Churches reject the use of the Cross, and refuse to carry it
about their necks, and to make the sign of it daily upon their bodies, seeing
that both the Latin Church, and a great part of the Greekish Church use the
same frequently, especially the Russians, which in this Ceremony are become
(pardon the word) supersubstantiall, and foolish in using of it.

I answer, Answ.
That as the Cross was one of the Instruments of man's salvation, in the eye of
the world it was disgraceful and odious; so that Jews, Pagans, and Infidels
did object it to Christians as a matter of infamy, and made the sign thereof
in derision of Christianity; Christians therefore to show that they were not
ashamed of Christ's death, or of the manner of it, they used the sign of it in
their actions and doings, both in their religious Service, and in any civil
business. In the Wars they carried the Cross upon their breasts, or about
their necks; the Standard of Christians oftentimes was made in form of a
Cross, and now seeing that the Grecians are daily conversant with Mahumetans,
Infidells and others, who never acknowledged Christ as the Messiah; but mock
Christians for believing in one who was hanged upon a Cross: the moderate use
of the sign with the carrying of it about their necks or after any other
manner cannot be rebuked. As for the Protestant and reformed Churches, there is
no such necessity of wearing it and using it on all occasions, seeing they dwell
amongst Christians, who take no exceptions at the manner of Christ's death: as
for those of the Roman Church, they have thought it (being of it self a mere
indifferent thing) so necessary in all their religious duties, that they have
too too much abused it, holding almost nothing sanctified but that which is
clogged and ouer-burdened (that I may say so) with crossing. Therefore
Protestants to shun the inconvenience upon the popish side, and not having
occasion of the other motives upon the Greatians side, they press not the
people with this Ceremony: though after baptism, as an ancient custom
derived from the Primitive Ages in the Church of England, they use the Sign of
the Cross; and that after Baptism, (I say) the Roman Church having it before
it, to show that they put no virtue in the sign to banish Devils out of the
body or soul of the Child, as Popish Priests do; but only use it as a decent
and religious custom, when the Child is sanctified and cleansed by the water
of Baptism.

ieiunium sabbati, of which Cardinal Baronius, Anno Christi 57. numero. 202.
disputes after this manner: The sum of whose speeches being conferred with
other writers of that kind, is this.

Baronius. Vetus est illa quaestio, etc. That is an ancient question (of which
Hierom. to Lucinius) concerning which, Thippolitus Martyr, and many famous
Writers set out their Commentaries: to wit, wherefore Saturday should be added
to the Fasts in the Western Churches: on which if a man fast in the Oriental
Churches he is accounted execrable, and it has been so in the Orient from
the very beginning of Christianity, as Ignatius writing to the Philippians
shows, Si quis dominicum diem etc. If any man fast on Sunday or on the
Sabbath ( Saturday before Easter, for Christ's lying in the grave that day.
one being excepted) he is a murderer of Christ. Again, there is an
Apostolic Canon concerning the same, Can. 65. and repeated in the 6. Synod
Which Baronius holds to be a bastard Canon.
Can. 55. The reason wherefore Ignatius did hold it to be such an execrable
crime was this: two sorts of Heretics were motives and causes of it; the
first were those who denied Christ's resurrection, and so when Christians
rejoiced on the Lords day, those Heretics passed it over in mourning and
fasting.

The second were those, which affirmed that the God of the Hebrews who made
the World and the Law, was evil, and that Christ came to destroy the Law. And
because that the God of the Hebrews rested the seventh day, and the Hebrews
did honor God, and keep that day because of his ordinance, as a feastiuall
and not a fasting day: therefore these Heretics, in disgrace of the Hebrews
God, and their Sabbath, did fast and not feast on it. Simon Magus was Author
of this heresy: Menander, Saturninus, Basilides, Cerinthus and Carpocrates,
were defenders of it, of which Irenaeus, Epiphanius, etc.

All these lived with Ignatius, he wrote against them and hated the Ceremony
for the Heretics use of it: Cerdon and Marcion followed this point. And though
these Heretics had many differing errors, yet they all agreed in this, that
they made God the Creator, author of evil, and contumeliously fasted on that
day; as it were, to oppose themselves to his constitution. This was the reason
that not only they abstained in the Orient from fasting on Saturdayes, because
Heretics did fast on those days; but also they used to spend the day in great
cheerfulness: and they assemble themselves unto their holy exercises, as
frequent on the Saturday, as on the Lords day. Many of the ancients bear
witness to this, especially Clement, who in the Apostolic constitutions
says, Which book of his is judged by the learned to be suppositions.
Sabatum and dominicum diem festum agimus, etc. We make both the Saturday and
the Sunday holy days: because the first is a monument of Natures
accomplishment; the second of Christ's resurrection. We keep our Sabbath in
the year on which we fast and not feast, for our Lords burial, etc. Thus
Clement, with whom agree Socrates, Gregorius, N^issenus, Anastasius, Nicaenus;
And this the Orient did out of religious hearts and full of piety, in
opposition to Heresy, and not in a Iudaizing humor.

The reason wherefore the Western Churches fast on Saturday, is first, If that
story of that disputation be not fabulous.
as S. Augustine to Casulanus writes, because that Peter being upon the Lords
day to dispute with Simon Magus, on the Saturday before he fasted with the
whole Church; and therefore for the prosperous success which Peter had in that
business, the Occidentall Churches ever since honored that day with fasting.

The second reason, which is more probable, is the reason of Pope Innocentius
writing to Decentius Eugubinus Bishop, which is, that because Saturday was a
time wherein the Disciples, and the blessed Virgin, fasted and mourned for our
blessed Savior whilst he was in the grave: therefore as the fourth day being
Wednesday, and the sixth being Friday, were consecrated to fasting by the
Western Churches: so likewise in remembrance of our Saviors abode in the
grave, they appointed Saturday to be a fasting day.

Therefore Barnious desires, that no man should take exception against the
custom of the Latin Church, in which the former heresies did not arise, for
which she needed not to forbear her fasting days, not being troubled with any
such Heretics; and which did not condemn but rather justified the Greekish
Church for keeping no company with Heretics in this point.

The tenth Controversy, is because the Latins are not so strict in their
fasting, when they do fast, neither fast they so frequently as the Grecians
do. The heads of this tenth Controversy are reduced to eight branches, as
they are rehearsed and gathered by sundry men out of the Bauarian bibliothecke
in the Index, which is called Index errorum Romanae Ecclesiae olim
Constantinopoli grace scripta nunc Latin per etc.

The first branch of Heresy laid to the charge of the Latin Church, is because
the Latins do not observe the chief eating week (called Hebdomas (...)) but
in that week eat flesh, as also on two days of the first week of Lent. They
begin their fasting upon the fourth day of the week, (called Wednesday by us)
giving a reason, forsooth, because from this day of the first week, to the
week of Palms the forty days are accomplished; so strict are these fasters
in keeping exactly the number of forty.

The second branch is, because the Latins once a day quickly eating, at night
they eat fish their bellies full, and some bcome drunk; and they make no
conscience to drink all the day long; and yet with this one refreshment of
theirs, they will have their fast unblameable and vnreprehensibly kept.

The third is, because on every Saturday and Lords day of the Lent, they give
their children cheese and eggs to eat, and they themselves eat the same
without any scruple at all upon the fish day of the great Feastiuitie, that is,
upon holy Thursday.

The fourth is, because all the year long upon any fourth or sixth day, they
eat either fish or flesh; all eat flesh upon the fourth day, some also upon
the sixth.

The fifth, as they fast every sixth day eating at night, so though the day of
the Nativity or Circumsition, or any of the great Feasts fall upon Saturday,
they will not lose the Fast for it.

The sixth, they eat with dogs and tame bears, to which they throw the
platters and dishes that they may lick them, out of which, they themselves
afterward eat meat.

The seventh, their Monks eat fat of Hogs growing fast to the flesh, which
is called Lard, and upon any suspicion of sickness (though it be never so
little) both Monks and Laics eat flesh in the Lent. But if it fall out that
any Monk be ordained a Bishop, then safely without any controulement he
eats flesh.

The eight, the Latins are not uniform in their fasting in the Lent time,
(...), fast 9. weeks: the Italians 6. others 8. others fewer.

Sentina malorum est.
supremacy; the Romish Church challenges Supremacy to the Pope from Peter by
all Ecclesiastical Canons, as she alleges. The Grecians strongly deny all
the allegations of the Latin Churches, and leaning to the fourth general Synod
at Chalcedon; at last they attribute the Superiority to Sea of Constantinople,
and that by two Canons, in which it is said, if controversies cannot be ended
by Bishops in Provincial, or National Synods, then Ibi terminentur. Can. 9.
let them be determined by the Bishop of the Princely City Constantinople.
This is repeated again in the same Synod in another Canon, and therefore I
will here set down the words of Hugo Aetherianus, who delivers the Grecians
mind after this manner. Romanus Pontifex, and omnes partium occidentalium
Christiani sacerdotes and Laici praeter Calabros, ante multa tempora extra
Catholicam Ecclesiam peruagantur, Euangelicarum and Apostolicarum traditionum
ignari and a fide alieni. The Roman Bishop, and all the Christian Priests of
the Western parts and Laics, except the Calabrians, this long time have gone
astray from the Catholic Church, being ignorant of the Evangelical and
Apostolic troditions, and Aliens from the faith. And a little after, Etinim
sua concimantes and alienis adhaerentes, neque diuinis Scripturis
redarguentibus ipsorum errores, neque illis qui ipsos miserunt volunt morem
gerere, for making up their own conceits, and adhering to strange opinions,
they will neither obey the Scripture rebuking their error, nor yet those men
who ordained them.

The Princes of their Priests go to war with Laics in Arms, and they fight
in the Battle marching before others.

Ex iudice de missae sacrificio in Bibliotheca Bauarica, we find these notes
gathered by Petrus Stewartius as errors of Grecians, and yet imputing them to
the Latins: but how justly, let the Reader judge, seeing my intent goes no
farther then to translate the words without any gloss or censure of mine.

Titulo 5. This is more than truly alleged against the Church of Rome which
forbids reading of Scripture.
Sacros canones and Sacras Literas etc. Scarce read they the sacred rules and
holy Scriptures; they say, that the Popes Commandments, who for the time
sits in the Sea of Rome, are their Canons and Laws. They hold that the
precepts of those who are dead, whether Apostles or Fathers, are dead with them.

Tittulo 7. They make not much account of perjury; yea, the Pope freeth them of
all perjury, whenever they intend to break any bargain or covenant made
with any man.

Titulo 30. The Pope and his Priestly train remit slaughter, perjury, and all
kind of crimes past, or to come, by which remission there is a gate opened to
all sort of villainy. And that which is most foolish and ridiculous, for the
future time, they will remit to a prefined and determinated time of two three,
more or fewer months or years. They sport after the same manner with bypast
of fences, forgiving the sins of days, months, or years: And yet they
cannot tell by what authority, and upon what grounds, or by what
Ecclesiastical Canon they do this.

Titulo 45. The Latin Bishops are accessarie to the death of Christian people,
the Pope especially, who pronounces the killers of Christians, such as resist
the Papacy, blessed and happy.



1. They use unleavened bread for leauened, belying Peter and his Successors,
as if they had this by tradition from them. 2. They take not bread of any
quantity, they break not the bread, they distribute it not, as the Lord
delivered it in his mystical Supper; only the Priest swalloweth up a morsel
of unleavened bread, of the bigness of a farthing. 3. Only he that sacrifices
is partaker of the sacrifice; as for the rest, whether they be of the Clergy
or of the Laity, they are made partakers of it by a kiss. Neither has that
saying any place with them, Calumny.
who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal: seeing they are
not pertakers of the body and blood of Christ: they communicate never but in
the Preparation to the Passover.
parascene, and the hour of death* and then they receive no Unleavened bread,
Azymes consecrated, but only a bitte of another bread, common, and not
blessed: and they render a reason of it so, because they know not who is worteh
of it; which excuse does bewray another fault worthy of blame, to wit, that
they use no Confessors: for if they had use of those, they would not be
ignorant of this point. 4. Whosoever are partakers of the sanctification, that
is of the Eucharist washing their mouths, Calumny.
they put out the water out of their mouths upon the earth and trample it
under their feet. If therefore these mysteries be Christ's, why are they so
dishonored? and if they be dishonored, how are they Christ's? 5. They
celebrate Mass in the morning, a time not appointed by the Catholic Church.
6. One and the same Priest celebrateth Mass twice or thrice a day; either on
the same Altar or on another; and again many Priests successively upon the
same Altar. 7. They contemn the Liturgy made by Saint Chrysostom. 8. In the
Lent they say Mass every day.




months on the fourth day they ordain Priests and Deacons, with others of the
Clergy; but upon Saturday they ordain Bishops, and others of the higher Orders.

The Successor of the dead Pope is chosen after this manner: The Synod
chooses him, and brings him to the dead, the The living is the whole, the
dead the half, viz, a carkase. Calumny.
whole to the half; and taking the dead Popes hand, they put it upon the neck
of the living Pope; and this they think to be the Unction and Consecration of
the Successor, who incontinent offers sacrifice for the safety of the dead
Pope; and thereafter he stoutly and courageously takes the pontifical
Offices upon him, as if he were lawfully anointed.

Consoceri.
that is Father in Law to his Daughter for his Son, brother or kinsman.

2. They shut up all Priests and Deacons from marriage by their Laws, and they
hold it an abomination to receive the Sacrament from a married Priest.

2. If any married man be initiated in Priesthood or Deaconship, he must quit
his wife and leave her; and this by a very strict Law, they command to be kept
in all the provinces subject unto them: but many were amongst them, who
vilipended this Law, and married a second wife after the death of the first,
and so some married the third, and yet they remained still in their sacred
Office.

4. There are many Churchmen amongst them, who commit whordome, and all kind of
uncleanness most securely without punishment, taking their whores in the night
time to their chambers, and letting them again depart being veiled; neither
do they account this to be an act of uncleanness, but only an idle dream or
apparition.

Thus far they accuse the Latins doctrine and Sacraments; now follow the
errors which they impute to them in their manners.

1. The first error in manners and ceremonies, not so essential to the
substance of Religion as they hold the rest, is this; Their Priests use a
certain purging and washing, which serves, as they say, for remission of
sins, and yet it is merely Iudaisme.

2. Their principal Bishops entering to their Mass in a Procession, have
little naked children going before them, whom they sprinckle with water,
affirming that this makes them inuincibly strong in wars.

3. They use the holy Eucharist most negligently, Here there is some Calumny.
for going to the fields or country, they carry it without light, and give it
to the people without light; and those fellows that follow the wars carry it
in their burse, or put it up after such a fashion.

4. In the summer solstice they gather the bones of impure beasts; as Asses,
Dogs, and such like; they burn them and put the ashes of them in water,
affirming that they serve for the purging and expiation of those persons whom
they sprinckle with them.

In the beginning of Lent, which is the fourth day called Wednesday, with these
ashes mingled with water, they sprinckle all the Priests that come, on the
forehead and face, thinking thereby to give aid and help to their fast. It is
reported that they mingle these ashes with the bread that they eat. O how
great and how strange an abomination is this!

5. Upon Easter day, being the Lords day, they kill a Lamb and roast it, they
bring it unto the Altar, and then to their Table. Which Ceremonies being
finished, they eat the flesh of the Lamb and burn the bones, and keep the
ashes all the year long, to sprinckle those whom they would have to be
blessed. They kill and are killed, they commit murder, how then can their
Priests with those bloody hands, offer the mystical body and blood of Christ.

6. Upon the Lords passion day, they build the Lords Tomb within the Church,
with common and base clothes ordained for quotidian use, and running to this
Tomb they worship it no less, than if it were that same Tomb wherein the
Lords body was laid. Afterward every man pulls to him his own clothes
again, and uses them for covering of his body, sanctifying a profane thing,
and profaning that which is holy, and so pull down that Tomb like a profane
Stage, which a little before was so worshipped by them; sporting with things
which are not matters of ieasting: like little children building cabinets of
straw, which a little after they beat down.

7. They use the Altar in stead of their common Table, and the linen belonging
to the same; which from the sacrifice they bring to their supper, and from
their supper to the Sacrifice again.

8. Any man that pleases may approach to the Altar, yea when the action is in
hand, and that without regard of Sex, Age, or Order; and Layicks sit with
Priests and other holy Orders: yea, they plead Actions at the Altar. Sometimes
the same Layicks carry Spurs upon their heels, and carrying rods in their
hands, they keep a foul noise. Yea, before the Altar they are bold even to
do those things which they do in the commonest Court in all the Country.
Sometimes women sit in the Chair of a Bishop, for those that among the Latins
are most eminent in piety, can no bettter discern holy things from profane.
Yea, which is worse, they suffer Dogs to enter into the Church; and when the
Priest is a sacrificing and celebrating the Host, which they hold to be life
giving bread; they suffer the Dogs sitting at the Priests feet, to bark at
all those that come in, and to fawn upon the Priests and others that stand by.
They suffer Bears and Hogs also to enter into the Church.

9. When the Gospel is a reading, and Mass a singing; yea, when the very
sacred gifts are taking out, all men who please sit, and yet they are never
blamed by their Leaders. When we ask the cause of this irreuerent and
indecent gesture, they answer, that they sit, that no tumult be raised,
whereby God may be offended; as if that unseemly and irreligious sitting were
not injurious to God, but rather tending to his honor.

10. After Table, they take not the Panagia, or blessing in honor of the most
holy Mother of God, but they mock at us for the same, as if we Grecians only
took the blessing when our bellies are full of meat and drink: and so they
esteem a thing holy of it self, profane. These forsooth, are the men that
are bold to say, that they are most religiously minded toward the most holy
Mother of God.

11. They nickname the Grecians which are most pious in their actions, calling
them Bogomili: they say that the Armenians are more religious then the Greeks,
whom they call Brethren, and whom they love as brethren; yea, they hate us more
cruelly then Jews and Saracens: for they honor and embrace Jews, which
amongst them may carry the old Testament in their hands.

12. If any man amongst them die by the sword, he is thought to be blessed,
and to go straight to Paradise, though he be killed fighting out of avarice,
or for murder, or for any other wicked deed.

13. Whatsoever death any man dies amongst them, they ever blame (...), I
think to be (...); for in the Western parts they use to blame Fortune much.
(...), for so after a barbarous manner they name Fortune or Destiny.

14. They shave their beards, and all the hairs of their body, holding this in
a manner for expiation, which is mere Iudaisme.

15. They eat dead things and strangled, things taken from wild beasts, blood,
unclean things, as Hogs, Bears, Conies, Hares, Snailes, Water-dogs, Mice,
Crows, Ravens, Dolphins, and such like unclean beasts.

And so much for that which the Grecians tax in the Doctrines and Ceremonies
of the Latins; now follows that which they tax, some things justly, and
some things unjustly, in their habit.



Tanquam ex nube, and upon the left, Agnus Dei.



Gloria enim eorum inconfusione, for their glory is their shame: their ordinary
clothing is of hair; the vesture for holy days is all silk, directly
repugnant to the Constitutions of the Catholic Church. Some Monks always use
white robes, a token (as they say) of virtue and cleanliness in them.

A Supplement.






Chrysostom, Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen, the lights of the Church. There are
some calumnies here.
They contemn the Epistles of Saint Paul, saying, that he was not one of the
twelve, and that he did not see Christ, regarding nothing that vision which
he saw going to Damascus, when it was said, Vas electionis eris; neither
regard they his stripes, travails, and conversion of Gentiles. Herein, as in
some other, the Greeks falsely charge the Latins.

Cerularius, Archbishop Patriarch of Constantinople in his Epistle to Peter,
Patriarch of Antioch, in brief terms and short words gathers all these
long points, and concludes out of his narration, that since the Latins are
such men and so given, it is impossible that they should have any union with
them, or hold them to be true and Orthodox Christians; or suffer and endure
them to be numbered with them. And that which he holds to be most grievous
and intolerable, is the Supremacy challenged by the Latin Church, to teach
all, and to be taught of none, and Dictator-like to give Laws to bind other
Churches, whereas she does those things which others mislike in her. This
(gentle Reader) thou shall find in Baronius his Annals, Tomo XI. anno Christi,
1054. number. 33. where Baronius strives to excuse the true things laid to their
charge, to refute the untruths, and to cloak the errors of this Western
Church in things rebukeable. Yea, he brings in Petrus Antiochenus writing an
answer to Cerularius, and doing it with greater credit to the cause, (if he
wrote such an answer) and in more modest and Christian terms then any
Sides-man could have done: seeing that prejudice oftentimes leads the best
man that is, either in answering to be Satyricke and invectiue, or else to
defend the absurdest and most erroneous things that can be; And therefore I
will set down his Epistle, because it is profitable for these times in which
we live, wherein every man would draw another to his opinion and practice in
all things; in things of themselves merely indifferent, in things touching
Verity, Schism, or Heresy: for Nature has made man (...), a civil creature
and sociable, delighting in the company of those that are of his own Species,
and desiring all those that are of his own kind to sympathize with his mind
and affection. But Christian Charity suffers many things, tolerating that in
the weak, which in the stronger it would whip with a scourge, before it should
come to be Schismatic, either in action or affection. The Lord join the
Christian Church in unity of faith, and Communion in Charity. Amen.

The Letter of PETRVS ANTIOCHENVS to CERVLARIVS.
WHat is it to us that their Priests shave their beards? And what although they
carry a Ring as a Badge of their Marriage with the holy and blessed Church?
This place seems to be forged; for it was Christ that was crowned
disgracefully with thorns, and not Peter; or else Peter is put for Christ: for
few are so mad to ascribe so much honor to Peter: but no Grecian of Antiochia
I am sure.
We also bear a Crown on our heads, for the honor (without doubt) of Peter
Prince of the Apostles, upon whom the Church was built: for what those wicked
men invented to the reproach of that holy One, we do piously to his glory and
honor; the Romans shauing their beards, we bearing our Crown upon our
heads: To wit, Antiochians.
We also are adorned with gold; our Gloves, our Handkerchiefes, and our Stoles
are imbroydered with gold. Whereas they eat unclean things, and their Monks
eat flesh and hogs grease, if thou will enquire diligently, thou shall find
that some of us do the like; for the Bethinians, Lydes, and Thracians eat the
Pie, little Crows, Turtles, and earth. Conies, the use of which our Fathers
left to us as indifferent: for there is none of Gods creatures to be rejected,
but all are to be received with thanksgiving, which we learn of that great
vessel of linen which came down from heaven: for as Basil says, In herbs
and roots, that which is hurtful we separate from the rest: so in flesh we
make distinction between profitable and hurtful, for Hemlocke is an herb as
the Raven is flesh, etc. Whereas they eat strangled, and two Brethren marry
two Sisters, I believe these things are done without the Popes permission, etc.
In Constantinople, and with us also thou shall find many such things done,
etc. See therefore, my very venerable Lord, how we neglecting many things
which are done amiss amongst our selves, are too curious to pry into other
men's business, whilst we should be reforming our own Errors.


I will not dispute now, whether Petrus ever wrote such a Letter; but surely
this I must speak, (Cum omnium piorum bona venia) the Letter smells of
Mildness and Charity: and would to God the Roman Church and Baronius would
use the advice of this Writer, in dealing with the rest of the Churches of
Europe, it would save much Christian blood from being shed in Europe now adays.

And as we have seen the strictness of the Greekish humors, against all the
Western Churches, and seeing the Reformed Churches now adays, are in many of
these points culpable also by their judgment; so now let us hear what things
the Latins do object against them on the other side, and that, as they are
collected by Master Hugo Aetherianus, so near as we can.

1. The Latins object to them their capricious pride, who would draw all the
world to Greekish Ceremonies. Caleca lib. 4. rebukes this in them.

2. They eat leauened bread in the Eucharist.

3. Upon Easter day, when the people is to communicate, their preparation is
cold, they consecrate too much, and which is not tolerable, they burn the
relics.

4. They dippe the Bread in Wine, and give it to the Communicants in a spone.

5. Their Deacons being promoued, take wives for fear they lose their
dignity, which is against the tenth Canon of the Nycen Synod.

6. Their Priests are men of blood for the most part, which we our selves did
see following the Emperor through Capadocia and the Persian Regions.

7. Their Princes make the Priests stand by them at their banquets, taking
their due honor from them.

8. For little or very light causes they whippe their Clergy with ropes, as if
they were Pagans.

9. Their Bishops are right in Simon Magus estate, for they give no Churches
without money, no Orders without their hands be full, no Christian burial
without money.

10. Their Patriarchs, Archbishops and Priests (as it was in the Primitive
Church with heretics) are all promoued by Layicks. Also the third Canon of the
Synod, which the Grecians call the seventh great Council makes all such
promotion of none effect.

11. They deny the procession of the holy spirit from the Son. They fast but
one Saturday in the whole year. Saturday before Easter called Sanctu^ Sabbatum.
Man's nature from the beginning is set on evil, but the Grecians gut
contendeth with its ruin; they keep no diet in eating. They scarsely fast
seven days in the whole Lent; yea in the whole year: for in all their fasting
they eat their Supper, except on five days in Lent, and that in the beginning
of their week, and on the holy Sabbath, and on the Eve of the Epiphanie. They
cut away the great week from the Lent, so their fast is but six weeks; from
the which six weeks, if thou take the six Sundays with the six
Saturdayes, scarce is their fast but thirty days; for on Sundays and
Saturdayes they fast not.

12. Their Monks living without the Monastaries, like beasts are found in the
streets eating fruit or any meat, drawing it out of their bosom as out of a
chest or coffin. They go to Tauernes, they have not all common in one bursse,
but every one has his own, none of their Monks shave, which is directly
against the Apostle, who says, 1 Cor. 11.14.
Si comam nutriat etc. If a man use long hair it is a reproach unto him: they
divide their hair on their foreheads like women.

13. Women leaving their natural ornament, adorn themselves with the hairs
of the dead, which is directly against the words of Peter in his first Epistle
3. Chap. 3. verse. Let no women use imbrodered hair or borrowed, etc. Women
paint themselves with purpure and white fard or painting; and when the Husband
displeases the Wife, or the Wife the Husband, they go before the Praetor of
the City; and so laying down their Instruments and cutting their girdles, they
choose where they list other Mates against Christ's own Canon: quod Deus
coniunxit, etc. That which God has joined let no man separate.

14. In their houses they have little Cabbines, in which they place the Images
of Saints; they give them all worship with Lamps, Wax, Incense, and they
suffer the Synod at Churches no become a wilderness; they celebrate Mass in
their bed-Chambers for the most part.

15. The Priest says Mass at three of the Clock, having almost no Auditors
except his wife or his Child; and so when he says pax vobis, he says it
commonly to the bare walls.

16. The Priests wives come to the Altar, and do the office of a Deacon; they
take the bread from the Altar, or any other thing, even to their ordinary use.

17. On all Sundays and Sabbaths of Lent they say Mass, and make the Lords
body; but on the rest of the days they regard it not, except upon an urgent
occasion; using only prae sanctificatis: in the Lent they altogether omit Deus
Dominus and illuxit nobis, which they sing in the rest of the year.

18. The Priests have long beards after the manner of the Jews, which when
they drink the Lords blood are drenched with it. They eat strangled blood,
they feed Hogs with man's blood.

19. When they assemble themselves to bury the dead, every friend and kinsman
gives the dead a kiss after a Pagan rite; for the Pagans were wont to speak
these words to the dead, Vade cum natura te vocauerit; sequemur te.

20. They say, (...), Christ, cannot do so much as (...), Lord; therefore they
say often (...) but never (...) in their service.

21. The Monks as (it seems) only have power to bind and loose, which Christ
gave to Peter and his Successors; wherefore Priests for Lucre take upon them
most filthy Monastique habit and remit sins, only that they may gain money.

22. They aver that the Latins have no Sacrament, because they consecrate
unleavened bread; for which damnable opinion they must be Heretics says
Aetherianus.

23. If a Latin Priest offer upon their Altar (which scarce is permitted) they
wash the Alter with water before they offer any thing upon it again. And if a
Latin woman be married to a Greek Husband, she is compelled to abjure the
Latin Communion, her Baptism, and the Lords Body which she did eat in the
Latin Church, her confession, and her fast upon Saterdayes. Likewise if a
Latin man marry a woman in the City of Constantinople, he must renounce and
abjure the Latin Church: the Greekish Priests promise much, but they perform
nothing: they rebaptize those that come from the Latin Church to them.

The rest of the things which are objected to them, are even the same which
they object to the Latins. So we see the fruit of their Schism to be the
malicious imputation of many infamous lies and damnable calumnies, worthy to be
buried in the gulf of oblivion: for though some of these imputations be true,
yet most of them are Calumnies on both sides, or at least, things not worthy of
rebuke.

The names of the Authors which have written for Grecians against the Latins.
1 Photius Patriarcha Constan. objected the procession of the Holy Ghost from
the Son, as an Heresy to the Latin Church, anno 876. Baron. annal. He wrote a
Book De processione S. Sancti; it is in the Bauarian Biblioth. number. 115. 2
Nicolaus Episcopus Methonae, wrote a Book de processione S. Sancti Biblioth.
Bavar. number. 116. He wrote also another of all the Controversies of Fasting, of
Lent, and of the Marriage of Priests, numero 101. 3 Nicetas Pectoratus, refuted
by Humbertus. His positions are in Bibliot. Bav. numero 120. 4 Metropolita
Nicaenus, hoc est Eustratius. 5 Michael Cerularius, of whom we spoke. 6
Theophylactus Bulgariae Episcopus. His Book is in Bibl. Bav. numero 116. vixit
anno 1073. 7 Maximus Planudes Bav. number. 115. He lived under Andronicus
Palaeologus the elder. 8 Nicolaus Cabasilas, qui scripsit contra Aquinatem. 9
Germadius Bulgariae Episcopus, Bav. numero 118. 10 Job Monabus wrote an
Apology against the Popes Supremacy, exstat in Bav. He lived under Michael and
Theodora, Emperors. 11 Nilus Archiepiscopus Thessalon. wrote 49 Books against
the Latins; chiefly he wrote against the Procession of the holy Ghost, and
the Popes Supremacy. His book is in Bibl. Bav. number. 124. 12 Marcus
Metropolita Ephesi, was in the Florentine Council a deadly enemy to the Latin
Church; returning to the Orient, he broke all concord, and wrote many books
against the Latins, Bav. number. 102. and 115. 13 Metropolitani Achrideni prima
and secunda congressio, number. 116. 14 Palamas contra Beccum. 15 Michael
Patriarcha. Possevinus in fine apparatus. 16 Germanus Patriarcha Constantinop.
Possev. appar. 17 Metrophanes Episcopus Smyrnensis. Heidelb. 216. 18 Hieremias
Patriarcha Constable. 19 Maximus Margunius Episcopus Cytherorum.
The names of Authors which have written against the Grecians for the Latins,
whereof some were Grecians.
1 Emanuel Caleca, Bib. Bav. 2 Demetrius Cydonius contra Cabasilam. Poss.
appar. 3 Beccus pat. Constable. Bav. number. 115. 4 Bessarion Cardinalis plurima
scripsit. 5 Gennadius Pat. Constable. for defense of the Council of Florence. 6
Gregorius Pat. Constable. Bib. Bav. number. 115. 7 Georgius Trapezuntius ad Monachos,
ibidem. 8 Iulianus Cardinalis Possev. 9 F. Johannes ord. praedicat. and F.
Franciscus. 10 Nichephorus Blemmida Grecian. Call. lib. 4. cap. 10. 11 Andreas
Scocares. Possev. cites him. 12 Andreas Episcopus Megerensis, Possev. Catal.
Sirleti. 13 Fautinus Vallarensis Cretensis Archiep. wrote against the hinderers
of the Union with the Latins, Catal. Sirleti. 14 Leo X. Papa. 15 Humbertus
Cardinalis Tomo XI. Baron. against Archidrenus Bulgariae Episc. and Nicetas
Pectoratus. 16 Thomas contra Graecorum errores. 17 Barlaam de Seminaria wrote
Epistles against the Grecians, Tom. 5. antiq, Lect. D. Henrici Canisij. 18 S.
Anselmus wrote De processione S. Sancti cont. Grecos. 19 Hugo Aetherianus wrote
3. Books de proc. S. Sancti cont. Grecos, Tom. 9. Biliot. SS.PP. 20 Antonius
Messana cont. errores Graec. 21 Latinus quidem demorans in suburbiis Parisiorum
ad Palaeologum Imperatorem peregrinum in Gallia, Catal. Vatican. Possevini. 22
Disputatio qua duo Theologi disserunt de processione S. Sancti, viz. Manuel
Chrysolora cum Georgio Palama Metrop. Thessalonic. Possevinus holds this to
be a Dialogue only. 23 Lastly, all the Counsels which confirm the Procession
of the holy Spirit, especially Florence, published both in Greek and Latin,
in which the Procession of the holy Spirit is most evidently shown.
FINIS.
Here faults escaped I have amended,
Therefore Reader be not offended;
But if thou will: then whose to blame
Thy fostred faults if others name?
In the Preface. For rigorous, read vigorous. In C. read magis diligentiam. for
Crow, r. Crane. for Iekan, r. Iehan. for critticke, r. crypticke, for untie, r.
untied. Page 3. in marg. for Lo, r. Leo. for lib. r. sub. p. 8. line 11. for
the, r. thy. p. 13. l. 14. for our, r. one. p. 14. l. 12. for Barnious, r.
Baronius, pa 15. l. 3. for chief, r. chief. l. 26. for fish, r. fist. page
17. l. 3. r. to the Sea. lin 24. for concimantes, r. concinnantes page 18. li.
4. for iudice, r. i^dice. p. 20. l. 10. for worteh, r. wotthy. p. 36. l. 5. for
coffin, r. coffer. pa. 37. l. 1. for Synod at, r. Synodall. for no, r. to.


