LIFE AFTER DEATH.

CONTAINING many religious instructions and godly exhortations, for all those
that mean to live holy, and dye blessedly.

With the manner of disposing ones self to God, before, and at the time of his
departure out of this world.

With many Prayers for the same purpose.

By FRANCIS RODES.

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS DEW, in St Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet.
1622.

To the Reader.
IT is a common custom, to entreat favor from courteous Readers. If the
matter be good, or the men courteous, the suite of favor will be easily
granted: if otherwise, it is but a needless shame, to beg a commendation,
where none is deserved. And therefore I leave to every man the liberty of his
judgment, and do expose this Tract to general censure.

F.R.

A Table of the chief points contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. 1. THE several sorts of Death. CHAP. 2 To learn to die well, ought to
be the chief study of our life. CHAP. 3 Why men do so seldom enter into a
serious remembrance of their end. CHAP. 4 The necessity of our continual
meditating upon Death. CHAP. 5. Necessary observations in our meditating of
Death. CHAP. 6. Against the fear of Death. CHAP. 7 How to carry our selves
concerning Death. CHAP. 8 This life is but a prison, a pilgrimage, etc. CHAP. 9
The vulgar remedy against Death. CHAP. 10 Grieuances and excuses of fearful
men to cover their complaints of Death. CHAP. 11 How Death is to be desired.
CHAP. 12 The miserable state and condition of this present life. CHAP. 13
Against the love of the world. CHAP. 14 Against procrastination. CHAP. 15
Against mistrust in Gods mercy. CHAP. 16 Gods promises to sinners that repent,
are manifold, absolute, and universal. CHAP. 17 How one should demean
himself when sickness begins. CHAP. 18 How the sick should dispose his
worldly goods. CHAP. 19 How he is to apply himself to Prayer and Meditation.
CHAP. 20 Whom the duty of visiting the sick, specially concerns. CHAP. 21 A
Prayer at the first visiting of the Sick. CHAP. 22 A confession to be used of
the sick by himself. CHAP. 23 A Prayer of the sick party against the fear of
death. CHAP. 24 A Prayer for the sick. CHAP. 25 A form of leaving the sick to
Gods protection. CHAP. 26 The manner of commending the sick, into the hands of
God, at the hour of Death. CHAP. 27 A Prayer for the sick, at his departing
out of this life. CHAP. 28 The blessing of the sick, when he is giving up the
ghost. CHAP. 29 A Prayer to be used by the assembly, after the sick party
departed. CHAP. 30 Consolation against immoderate grief for the loss of
friends. CHAP. 31 The custom of Funerals.
A TREATISE OF LIFE AND DEATH.
CHAP. 1.
THere are three sorts of Death: The first is, a dying in sin: that is, 1.
Dying in Sin.
when we do give our selves over to the delights and pleasures of this life;
and do never think of death, till it comes: and when it is come, we do then
recoyle and draw back, as being unwilling to dye: thereby making our departure
unhappy; because none dies well, that dies unwillingly: neither can any hope
for Heaven, that approches thereunto, only by compulsion.

2. Dying to sin.
The second is, a dying to Sin, that is, when our sins die before our selves;
namely, when we do retire our selves from sin; and from the desires and
allurements of the world, and do die to all carnal delights; as that Apostle
did, which said, The world is crucified to me, and I unto the world: thus to
die to sin, is to be delivered from sin, and to live with Christ.

The third is, 3. A natural dying; which is, the dissolution of the Soul from
the body.
the loosing of the Soul from the body: which is employed by Saint Paul,
saying, I desire to be dissolved: namely, by the dis-iunction of the body from
the Soul. This dissolution is a delivery out of the prison of this life, with
the stink and filth whereof we are infected and defiled: but by death the bands
are loosed, and the prison set open, where out we fly freely unto Heaven,
where we are received pure and clean washen, by the blood of the immaculate
Lamb: and being clothed with his white garment of innocence, we are filled
with delights, and with the fruition of the light inaccessible.

CHAP. 2. To learn to die well, ought to be the chief study and labor of our
life.
LIfe is a debt to Death: and Death a debt to Nature; or rather natures
servant: for if death were not, what complaints and murmurings would there be
against Nature, if here, against our wills, we should still live, and not
have our lives freed by death? If death were quite taken from us, no doubt, we
should more desire it, then now we fear it, and thirst more after it, then
after life it self. Of all lessons, and of all learnings, none is more
weighty, none more divine, then to learn to die well, which is, to die
willingly, and to die in the faith, fear, and favor of God. In learning to
dye well, consists our eternal welfare.
To learn to die well, is the chiefest thing, and duty of life; and a lesson
worthy our best and chiefest labors; for therein consists our eternal
welfare. Therefore there is nothing, that ought so often, and so much to be
thought upon, as Death: insomuch, as if it were possible, the the whole moments
of our life should be nothing else, but a learning or taking out of some new
lesson of death.

What is it with the Historian, to know what others have done, and to neglect
the true knowledge of our selves? with the Lawyer, to learn the common Laws
of the Realm, and to forget the common Law of Nature, which is, that all must
die? What is it, for the greatest Politicians, by their reaching wits, to
compass great and high matters, and in the end, to die like simple men? True
wisdom is to be wise unto a man's own soul.
True wisdom is to be wise unto a man's own soul: and they only are wise,
and they only live, which find time and leisure, wherein to learn to die
well: for no part of our life is worthy the name of a life, but what is spent
in the study of wisdom: and the greatest part of true wisdom, is to learn
to die well.

The perfection of our knowledge, is to know God and our selves: our selves we
best know, when we do well consider our mortal being: for man is never so
divine, as when he considers well of his mortal nature, and conceiues he
was borne to die.

As men we die naturally; as Christians we die religiously: By mortifying the
old man, we endeavor to die to the world: By a virtuous disposing of our selves
for the day of our departure, we learn to die in the world: By our dying to
the world, Christ is said, to come and live in us: By our dying in the world,
we are said, to go and live with Christ. Seeing therefore to die, is so
necessary, and to die well, is so Christianly: let every one apply himself
diligently to this learning, as the greatest part of true wisdom, which
aymeth wholly at this end.

In this life to sequester ones self, Vac^re Deo, to be at leisure for God,
and to prepare for a peaceable passage out of this life, in such sort, that at
that hour we may have nothing else to do, but to die, and quietly and
contentedly to depart this life, is a most excellent and happy thing: Nihil
suauius in hac vita, quam vt quietus fiat exitus ex eadem.

Martha combred her self about many things, but Mary chose the good part: let
us therefore lean to Martha, to be sollicita circa multa, and to believe with
Mary, vnu^ est necessarium: which is, to learn to die well.

CHAP. 3. Why men do seldom enter into a serious remembrance of their end.
THE cause why men do so seldom remember their end, is, because they are
persuaded by the old enemy of mankind, that they shall not die, saying
(Nequaquam moriemini:) and therefore in his subtilty and cunning he persuades
them, that the remembrance of death is but a melancholy conceit: lest it should
make, in their hearts, too deep an impression of the fear of God; therefore
to drive away all, he says, Eritis vt dij: whereas the Prophet Esaias tells us,
Moriere. Constitutum est omnibus semel mori; it is enacted, that All must die.
And this, the daily instances of death do continually confirm unto us: the
consideration whereof may justly move us, to shake off this strange
forgetfulness of our end, unless we will verify that complaint of Cyprian:
Nolumus agnoscere, quod ignorare non possumus: We will not know that, which we
cannot but know. How often do we hear the solemn knell, when ourselves ca^
say, well, some body is dying? Do we not pass by the graves of many, who, for
age and strength, might rather have seen us lead the way? and yet for all this,
we live as if we had nothing to do with Death: but howsoever, sure we are, we
shall one day find, that Death will have to do with us, when he shall strip
us into a shrowding sheet, bind us hand and foot, and make our last bed, to
be the hard Grave.

The daily instances of Death do evidently show, what shall shortly after
betide our selves: and they that are not moved with these sad spectacles, are
in a dangerous Lethargy of the soul. Of which sort of men, that moan of
Moses may justly be renewed: O that this people were wise, and would remember
the latter things: That they would call to mind, The days will come (and GOD
knows how soon) when the keepers of the house shall tremble, (which are the
hands:) when the strong men shall bow themselves (to wit, the legs) when they
shall wax dark, that look out of the window (that is, the eyes:) when the
ears and daughters of Music shall be abased: when the Grasshoppers or bended
shoulders shall be a burden: when the wheel shall be broken at the Cesterne
(that is the heart, whence the head draws the powers of life:) in a word,
when dust shall turn to dust again; the joints stifned, the senses benumbed,
the countenance pale, the blood cold, the eyes clozed, the brows hardened, the
whole body all in a faint sweat, wearied, nature being now spent.

O earth, earth, earth, says the Prophet, Jeremy 22.29. The first earth
shows whence we were: the second, what we are: the third, what we shall be.
Whereupon the Wise man could not but wonder, why any should be puffed up with
pride, considering he was but earth, saying, Quid superbis, terra? O earth, why
art thou proud, since all thy pomp, and thy self, is no better then the
ground thou treadest upon? Our first Parents were at first clothed with the
skins of dead beasts, that they might remember the reason thereof, which was
sin; and what should likewise become of our selves. Let the rich and most
glorious amongst men (says the Prophet) remember themselves to be but men:
that they shall carry nothing away with them: that all their pomp shall leave
them: and they follow the generation of their Fathers: yet for all this, they
think they shall continue for ever, and that their houses shall endure from
generation to generation, calling their lands after their own names: this is
their foolishness.

One of the greatest evils in the life of man, is a careless neglect of Gods
worship: and one of the greatest causes of this neglect, is the forgetfulness
of his end: therefore (says Gregory) do so many cast off all care of Christian
piety, because they never remember their end: for, for the most part, we are
even out of the world, before we ever consider our frail condition in the
same; and begin then to direct our course aright, when the time is come, rather
to make an end: Whereas these are no days to live securely in but rather high
time for every one to amend one that God may have mercy upon all. To let all
alone until it be too late, was their folly, who long since were drowned in
the flood: to cast only for wealth and ease, was his worldly wisdom, that
made a sudden farewell from both, and was forced that very night to make his
end, when he thought to begin to take his ease. Satan has not a more dangerous
device, whereby to draw men from God, then by stealing from their hearts a
remembrance of their end: and there cannot be a more effectual mean, whereby
to shake off the allurements of this life (as Paul did the Viper into the fire)
then by a religious meditation of our end.

There is nothing more like to the grave, then our beds: to the winding sheet,
then the sheets of our beds: to the Worms, then the Fleas: to the sound of the
Archangels Trumpet, then the crowing of the Cock, or morning wakener. To
meditate of our end at our lying down; and at rising up, to call to mind our
joyful Resurrection: to make this remembrance, the key to open the day, and to
shut in the night, is an excellent and necessary practice. Let us therefore,
every hour of the day, remember that so much of our life is spent: every
evening remember death: every night go to bed, as we would to our graves;
lap us in our sheets, as in our winding sheets; and rest attending for that
wakener, that shall summon us to Judgment.

Thus is Death often to be thought upon; not only for that it comes
uncertainly; but because it helps much to the contempt of this world: for he
easily contemnes the things of this life, who resolves himself continually for
death: and as Saint Jerome says, Qui quotidie recordatur se esse moriturum,
contemnit praesentia, and ad futura festinat: he that does remember, that die
he must, little regards things present, and hastes toward things to come. All
which, the old enemy of mankind perceiving, how necessary it is, for man to
remember his end, seeks by his pleasant allurements of intising vanities, to
draw him from this frequent meditation of Death: whereas in deed, there is
nothing, wherein ordinary meditation is so necessary, as in the daily
meditating upon Death.

CHAP. 4. The necessity of our daily meditating upon Death.
NAture it self teaches, and experience shows it daily, that we must leave the
vanities and delights of this world, and they us, with how great a lust and
pleasure so ever we be carried after them: for death is the common and
inevitable Law of Nature: it is the condition of all mankind, and the way of
all flesh. In this way, Adam first entered and continued 930. years, and yet
dyed: so did Methusalem, and continued 969. years, and yet dyed: so did the
rest of the Fathers of the first age, every one many hundred years, and yet
dyed: and so did the Fathers in all ages unto this hour: neither have they,
nor can we, pass any other way unto eternal happiness: for Christ himself,
went not up into glory, but by passing first through death: for there is no
other passage to immortality, then only by Death. Therefore to learn to die,
and to learn to die betimes, is an excellent, and a necessary thing; and a
thing, that we can but once put in practice: and it is the end that crowns
the work, and a good death that honors a man's whole life: therefore with the
greater reason, we ought the more carefully to meditate thereon continually.
both in regard of the incertainty of our departure hence, which, happily may be,
at the very instant of our thought: as also, for that he which foresees his
own Death, dies more willingly, Many torments attend an unexpected death.
then he whom death surpriseth of a sudden (for many torments attend an
unexpected death:) therefore that our departure may be the more cheereful, when
that inevitable hour comes, it is necessary, that we should meditate of it
long before it do come: for the more we do meditate of Death, the less we
fear it, and the less we fear it, the greater is our faith.

Here we have no certain heritage, but are only tenants at will, in a poor
clay cottage, the foundation and strength of which building, is but a few bones
tied together, with strings or sinews: and the chief pillar, whereupon the
whole frame stays, is only the drawing of a little breath, which being once
stopped, causes the whole building to fall in manus Domini: therefore we ought
ever to be ready to flit, whenever death commands, since flit we must: and
the last day of life, is unknown unto us, to the end we may every day be
prepared for Death: Let us then expect this definitive hour without fear: so
shall the day which we fear to be our last, be our nativity unto an eternal
life. That then which necessarily must befall us, it is necessary, that we
should continually think of; so shall we accomplish our life, before our
death. This moved Joseph of Arimathea, to prepare a sepulcher for himself in
a garden, at the which, he might daily meditate upon Death. This moved the
Noble men of Aethiopia, to keep their custom, that whenever they went forth
to the field to recreate themselves, they caused to be carried before them, a
golden basin full of earth, together with the sign of the Cross, to remember
them, that they were but earth, and to earth they should return: and that only
in the death of Christ crucified, they had comfort against death, and assured
hope of life. This moved Philip of Macedon to command his Page, every morning,
to cry thrice in his ear, Remember, Philip, thou art but a mortal man. This
moved also the ancient Egyptians at all their banquets, to have placed in the
sight of the banquetters, the image and picture of death, to make them in the
midst of their pleasures, to remember the end; and so to moderate themselves
from falling into such vices, as easily arise of intemperancy. And finally,
this moved the godly Father Jerome, whether he did eat or drink, or
whatsoever else he did, strongly to imagine the sounding of the Trumpet,
summoning him to Judgment: therefore this warning that the Wiseman gives to
the youth, that think their lusty age will never be spent, and therefore give
themselves to all licentious sensuality, ought to be well remembered of all:
For all these things (says the Preacher) GOD will bring thee to Judgment:
therefore, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the days
come, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. One generation
comes, and another goes, but the earth stands still; even as a Stage,
whereon every one has his part to play for a time, and then to put off his
Mask; and leaving the vanities of this life, to retire himself to his dust.
It stands with life, as with a Stage Play, it is no matter how long it lasts,
but how well it is acted: wheresoever thou endest, it is all one: end where thou will, so thou concludest with a good period.

CHAP. 5. Necessary observations in our meditation of Death.
1. IN our meditation of Death, we should remember, that the wages of sin, is
death; to the end it should strike to our heart, with a terror of sin, to
make us the more earnestly to repent our sins, and to redeem the time, that
God spares us with a rich amendment of our life: and to thirst after the
remedy, which is, the mercy of God offered unto us, in the merits and Death of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that we may make a happy change, from misery
temporal, to everlasting felicity.

2 Secondly, that this vile, brickle, weak estate of our life is to be
weighed: to make us eschew pride, ambition, lechery, drunkenness, gluttony,
delicate feeding, pampering, decking of this filthy clay, and such other vices
of the flesh.

3 Thirdly, in that we brought nothing with us into this world, so must we
carry away nothing with us at our death; whereby we are to learn, to eschew
avarice, coveting of others lands and goods, Usury, Oppression, and all other
unlawful means, commonly used, for attaining to riches and honor in this
world: and as the Apostle counsels, having meat and raiment be content, and so
to use things temporal, as by them we may come to things eternal. For we
came not into this world, to build houses, or to purchase lands, to join house
to house, but rather by this our short continuance, we are put in mind, to
have temporalia in vsu, aeterna in desiderio: and to use this world, as if we
used it not, 1. Cor. 7.31.
and so be gone.

4 Lastly, insomuch as death indifferently and without respect, knocks as well
at the gates of princely Palaces, as at the doors of poor Cottages: and takes
pleasure to vvound, as well the flourishing youth, as the decayed Age:
shooting his darts continually, by Land, by Sea, by day, by night, at home, and
abroad (and never missing:) let all estates at all times, and in all places, be
always ready armed, against the assaults of Death.

CHAP. 6. Against the fear of Death.
DEath is the inevitable Law of nature: therefore to fear that which cannot
be avoided, is mere folly. But our fear of death proceeds from doubt: and
doubt from unbelief; and our unbelief chiefly from ignorance; because we
know not the good that is elsewhere; and do not believe that our part is in
it: so that, true knowledge, and true faith, drives away all fear of death.
Assurance of heavenly things, makes us willing to part with earthly. He cannot
contemn this life, that knows not the other: and he is not worthy to live in
the other, that is unwilling to die in this: to despise this life, is to think
of heaven: and not to fear Death, is to think of that glorious life that
follows it. If we can endure pain for health, much more ought we (at our
last) to abide a few pangs (that cannot last) for an everlasting glory.

How fondly do we fear a vanquished enemy, over whom Christ has already
triumphed: by whose death, death is swallowed up in victory, and we thereby
delivered from the tyranny thereof? It is enough to us, that Christ died for
us, who had not died neither, but that we might die the more willingly, and
with greater safety.

Death is necessarily annexed to nature; and life is given us, with a condition
to die; and our Creator, in his mercy continues the use of our life, to this
end only, that we may learn rightly to die. There is but one common rode to
all flesh: and there are no bypath of any fayrer or nearer way; no not for
Princes. Have we bin at so many graves, and so often seen our selves die in our
friends; and do we shrink when our course comes? Imagine thou were exempt
from the common Law of mankind; yet assure thy self, death is not now so
fearful, as thy life would then be wearisome.

Think not so much what Death is, as from whom he comes, and for what. We
receive even homely Messengers from great persons, not without respect to their
Masters: and what matters it who he be, so he bring us good news? and what
better news can there be then this, That God sends for thee, to take
possession of a Kingdom. Let them then fear Death, that knows not Death, to
be the messenger of Gods justice and mercy.

To die is a thing natural, necessary, and reasonable. Natural, Natural.
for it is the general Law of the whole world, that all must die: and our very
essence is equally parted into life and death: for the first day of our birth,
sets us as well in the way to death as to life.

Death is the condition of our creation: and life is given us with an exception
of death: to die therefore, is as natural as to be borne: and as foolish is he
that fears to die, as to be old. To be unwilling to die, is to be unwilling
to be a man: for all men are mortal.

Death being then a thing so natural, why should it be feared? The fear of
grief and pain is natural, but not of death. Children and mad men fear not
death: why should not reason then be as able to furnish us with security, as
they are fortified by their simplicity and idiotisme? Beasts fear not death:
therefore it is not nature that teaches us to fear death, but rather to
attend and receive it, as sent by her whose servant it is. Fools fear death,
and wise men attend it. It is folly to grieve at that, which cannot be amended:
therefore when David understood of the death of his child, he ceased to sorrow
any longer for him, saying: While he lived, there was hope: but being dead,
there was no remedy, and so his care ended.

Death is a debt of nature, which must be paid whenever it is demanded. It is
no taking day with God, when his will is to call for it. Therefore it is in
vain to fly from that, which we cannot shun: and those things which of
necessity must be performed of us, ought to be done cheerfully, and not by
compulsion: as Chrysostom says, Let us make that voluntary, which is
necessary, and yield it to God as a gift, which we stand bound to pay, as a
due debt.

Death is a happiness to the faithful, because it is a deliverance both of
soul and body, from all misery and sin. By death the world was redeemed: to
such therefore as do believe in Christ their Redeemer, death is to them an
advantage, and a thing rather to be desired then feared: for they only are
affrighted and daunted with the fear of death, that are destitute of faith and
hope. If thou beleeuest in God, why art thou not forward to go to Christ, who
died for thee? There cannot be a more happy thing, then devoutly to render thy
life into his hands, who to spare thee, spared not himself, but gave his life
for thee. Christ (says Saint Paul) is gain to me, both in life and death:
holding it for a wonderful gain, to be no more subject to sin. It is a more
grievous thing to live in sin, then to die: for as long as a wicked man
lives, his iniquity increases: if he die, his sin cease: the evil
therefore of death, is only in sin.

Necessary.
Death brings an equal, and an inevitable necessity over all: therefore did
nature make that common to all, which commonly was feared of all: to the end,
that such an equality might assuage the rigor and severity of death, and that
none might justly complain of death, from which, none was ever exempted. 1 Two
causes that lets men from dying willingly. Lack of faith.
But one chief cause that lets us from dying willingly, is lack of faith: for
had we faith, we would night and day desire this messenger of the Lords Justice
and Mercy, to deliver us out of this miserable life, that we might enter into
the fruition of eternal felicity: for having confidence in GOD, we shall
find death to be as a guide, to bring us to our everlasting home. 2 Love of
the world.
Another cause of the fear of death, is the love of the world: for they fear
death most, that most loves the world, and gives themselves most to the
pleasures and delights of this life, which they fear to be deprived of by
death. To fear death, is for a man to be enemy to himself, and to his own
life: for he can never live at ease and contentedly, that fears to die:
therefore to contemn death, is a thing one should learn betimes: for without
this meditation, none ca^ have any repose in mind, seeing it is most certain,
that die we must, not knowing when; and it may be, at the very instant of our
thought; how then can any enjoy a peaceable soul, who fears death,
Improuidence ads terror unto death.
which threatens him every minute of this life? There is not a more dangerous
enemy against a man's self, then himself, by his follies, his fantasies, his
vanities, his surfeiting and excess; his lust, his anger, his fears, and the
rest of his affections; whereof within his breast he fosters a Forest full.
That man is only a free man, which fears not death; and contrarily, life is
but a slavery, if it were not made free by death: for death is the only stay
of our liberty, and the common and ready remedy against all evils, and the
only mean to all good. It is then a misery, (and miserable are all that do
it) to trouble their lives with the fear of death: and their death, with the
desire of life.

For a man to torment himself with the fear of death is great weakness and
cowardlinesse: for there is no passion in the mind of man so weak, but can
master the fear of Death: and therefore death is no such enemy, when a man
has so many followers about him, that can conquer him: revenge triumphs over
death: love esteems it not: honor aspireth to it: delivery from ignominy
chooses it: grief flies to it: fear preoccupyeth it: what an extreme madness
is it then, for a man to torment himself for nothing, and that willingly?
Scienter frustra niti, extremae dementiae est. Death being then so necessary
and inevitable; it is to no purpose to fear it; for such things as are certain
as Death, we must attend; and in things past remedy, we must be resolute:
therefore making of necessity a virtue, we must welcome it, and receive it
kindly (for where there is not virtue and willingness to death, life is but a
servitude:) and to be truly free from the fear of death, is to think
continually on death: so shall we thereby be the more courageous against the
necessity of our departure.

Reasonable and just.
To dye is a thing reasonable and just: for it is but reason, that we give place
to others, since others have given place to us: and since we have enjoyed the
places, offices, and heritages of them that were before us: it is but equal,
that those that do come after us, should likewise possess the^ accordingly.

It is a thing general and common to al, to die: Why should then any fear to
go, whither all the world goes: where so many millions have gone before, and
so many millions are to follow after? They whom we suppose to be dead, do not
perish, but precede; they are only sent before, whom we must presently follow
after: in which mean time, notwithstanding, there is no long time between
their meeting, and ours: for every moment of this life, is the death of the
other: the time past is lost and gone, death is already possessed thereof:
only the time present, we have share with death: so that every day, we die by
little and little: why then should any fear that once, which is acted every
day? The death which we so much fear and fly, takes not from us life, but
only gives it a truce, and intermission for a little time: and as for our
bodies, they have no more damage by death, then has the seed, for having a
little earth harrowed over it. Let every one therefore endeavor to make every
day, as it were, his last day: for to spurn against death, is to strive
against nature, against our faith, and against all duty. Yet every one hurries
on his life, and travels in the desire of future things, and weariness of
present times; but he which bestows his whole time, to learn how to die
well, neither desires, nor fears, what may happen the day after: for what can
he justly fear, that hopes to die? according to that answer of the
Lacedaemonians unto Antipater, who threatened them cruelly, if they yielded not
to his demand: It is not (said they) in thy power, O Antipater, to threaten us
with any thing, that is worse then death, and death is welcome to us.

CHAP. 7. How to carry our selves concerning Death.
TO fear and fly death as an evil, is a thing not approved by men of
understanding, though by the greater party it be practiced: to desire death,
argues we are out of charity with the world: to contemn life, is
unthankfulness to nature; to attend death, is good: but to fly and fear
death, is against nature, reason, justice, and all duty. If we consider
death, as in it self, then naturally we fear it: but if we consider it, as a
mean to bring us to Christ, then ought we to embrace it. The fear of death,
in contemplation of the cause of it, and the issue of it, is religious: but the
fear of it for it self, is a testimony of great weakness. Men fear death,
as children fear to go in the dark: and as that natural fear in children,
is increased with tales, so is the other. There is not a thing, that men fear
more then death: and there is nothing, that has less occasion or matter of
fear, then death: or that contrarily, yields greater reasons to persuade us
with resolution to accept of it: for if it be an evil, it is of all evils the
least evil, and the evil that does least harm: nay, it is so far from
being an evil, that it is the only remedy against all evils: for in this
life, evils and dangers attend us continually: whereas by death, our life is
exempted from all evils, and filled with eternal joys. Moreover, if it be
an enemy, it is of all enemies the least, or rather of all friends the best:
for he brings us out of all danger of enemies, into the protection and safeguard
of our best and most assured friend for ever, Jesus Christ our only Savior
and Redeemer. We must then think, that it is a mere opinion, and a vulgar
error, that has won the world to conceit so hardly of death. It is not
death it self, that men are afraid of, but the opinion and apprehension of
death, that only terrifies: now this terrible apprehension is grounded upon a
precedent opinion of our infirmity, and contrary to truth; for verity
incourageth, opinion danteth us. Opinion bands it self against reason, and
seeks to deface her, with the mask of death: it may be, the spectacle of
death displeases, because they that die, look ghastly: but this is not death,
but the mask of death: that which is hid under it, is beautiful; for, death
has nothing in it that is fearful. Death then, in it self is not evil,
therefore not to be feared.

CHAP. 8. This life is but a prison, a pilgrimage, a warfare, and as a voyage
upon a tempestuous Sea.
DEath is the soueraign good of Nature: and the only pillar of our liberty:
whereas this life is but a prison, a pilgrimage, a warfare, and as a voyage
upon a tempestuous Sea.

In this life we are always in prison, and our Soul enclosed in the body, as
in a prison, which desires releasement, as the thirsty do cool and fresh
waters.

Our life is but a Jacobs pilgrimage, Pilgrimage.
the days whereof are in number few, and in condition evil: as Jacob said, The
days of my peregrination are few and evil: and as they are few and evil: so
is the time of our change most uncertain: of which certainty, we are put in
mind in the Lords Prayer, saying, Give us this day, etc. we say, this day, as
uncertain of to morrow. Saint Peter's argument to draw the Jews from carnal
desires, was, Obsecro vos tanquam aduenas and peregrinos; I beseech you
brethren, as Pilgrims and strangers; as if he should have said, Seeing you are
in this world, but as wayfaring men, stay not your selves upon carnal desires
(the baits of Satan, and the bane of your souls) but abstain from them. The
holy Ghost does resemble the state of man, to grass, to a shadow, to smoke,
to a vapor, to a flower, things of no continuance, thereby to intimate unto
us, a consideration of our unconstant and variable estate. Let us therefore in
this life, meditate of nothing more, then of our pilgrimage: for here we shall
not always be; and let us by living well, prepare us there a place from whence
we shall never depart: and since Christ has prepared Heaven for us; let us
prepare our selves for Heaven.

The life of man is a warfare: Warfare.
therefore we ought to be ever looking for our change, for men in war
hourly expect their change, as Job said, All the days of this my warfare do
I wait, till my change do come: whose course if we would follow, then should
we be out of the danger of time, to wish to live one hour longer: for then
should we be so armed against the assaults of death, as that, nothing could
happen, that should light upon us suddenly, or unlooked for! therefore well did
one counsel, saying, Think to live but for an hour, and account every day a
new life: for he who every day puts an end to his life, has no need of time:
and live those few days that remain, to the Lord, whom thou ought to have
served all days of thy life.

To the wayfaring man, it is no little comfort, to talk of his iourneys end:
joyfully does the bondsman reckon of the year of Iubile: this wearisome
pilgrimage, this burdensome bondage of ours, may justly move us, often to
remember our end: for as Saint Augustine says, Quid est diu viuere, nisi diu
tor queri? what is it to live long, but to be long tormented?

Death is like to sailing on the Sea: Death is like a voyage upon a tempestuous
Sea
for whether we sleep, or wake, still we are making toward the haven: so
whether we direct our course toward death or no, sure we are, we cannot
possibly alter our course from death. This life cannot be more fitly compared
to any thing, then to a Ship in the midst of a tempestuous Sea: for, there it
is in danger of tempests; here of quicksands: on this side of Pirates: on the
other, of Rocks: so in this life; here is the Devil; there the world: on this
side the flesh, on that side, sin, which never forsakes us, so long as life
lasts. So that in this vast Sea, subject to all storms and tempests, we that
sail therein, are ever in fear and danger, and are never glad, but when we
approach to the Haven: even so should we be, when we draw nigh unto death; which
is, the Port, which brings us to eternal security. If some bitterness were not
mingled with death, doubtless men would run unto it, with great desire and
indiscretion. To keep therefore a moderation, that is, that men neither love
life, nor fear death too much, sweetness and sharpness, are therein tempered
together.

CHAP. 9. The vulgar remedy against Death.
THe remedy that the vulgar sort do give herein, is too simple, and that is,
never to think or speak of death: but such a kind of carelessness can not
lodge in the head of a man of understanding; for at the last it would cost him
too dear: Many torments attend an unexpected death.
for death coming unawares and unexpected, what torments, outcries, furies
and despaires are there commonly seen? wisdom advises much better, that is,
to attend and expect death with a constant foot, and to encounter it: and the
better to do this, it gives us contrary counsel to the vulgar sort, that is,
to have it always in our thoughts (so shall we never fear it:) to accustom
our selves unto it, and to be familiar with it (for familiarity cannot stand
with fear:) to present it unto us at al hours, and to expect it: not only in
places suspected and dangerous, but in the midst of feasts and sports;
following herein the custom of the Egyptians, who in their solemn banquets,
placed the image of death before their eyes: and of the Christians, who have
their Churchyards near their Temples and other public and frequented places,
that men might always be put in mind of Death: and that others are dead,
that thought to have lived as long as our selves: and that, that which happened
then to them, may happen now to us. It is uncertain in what place death
attends us, and therefore let us attend death in all places, and be always
ready to receive it.

Omnem creed diem,
tibi diluxisse supremum,
Grata superueniet,
quae non sperabitur hora.
CHAP. 10. Grieuances and excuses of fearful men to cover and color their
complaints of Death.
1. IT grieves them to die young, and they complain that death preuents them,
and cuts them off, in the flower and strength of their years: this is the
complaint of the vulgar sort, who measure all by the ell: as though whom God
loved best, he did not soonest take from hence. Enoch walked according to God,
and was no more seen: for God took him up; so that to please God, is to be
taken quickly from the corruptions of the world: So did he by Josias, his soul
pleased the Lord; therefore he made haste, to take him out of the midst of
iniquity.

As Parents contain their children within their duties, by a severe and sharp
discipline: so God will not suffer those he loves, to have the head; but
proves them, tryes them, and prepares them for his service; laying the bridle
on those he loves not: for those he does but weaken and effeminate for evils to
come. Great virtue and long life, do seldom or never meet together: a a
little man is as perfect a man, as a greater: and neither men, nor their lives,
are measured by the ell.

friends: as though, whither they go, they shall not find more: and those,
they leave behind them, should not shortly follow after them.

But what shall become of their small Children and Orphans, left without
guide, without support? as if those their children, were more theirs then Gods:
or as if they could love them more, then he that is their first, and truest
Father: and how many such, so left, have risen to higher place, and greater
ability then other men? Why are they offended with death, since it quits them
of all grief? To return from whence thou came, what burden, what grief is
it?



These are their weightiest objections: where unto we may answer in a word:
That death being the inevitable Law of Nature, it is a folly, to fear that,
which a man can not avoid: and to fear death, is a mere folly, because things
certain, are expected; doubtful things only feared: These people make not
their count well: for in stead of taking any thing from us, it gives us all: in
stead of bringing us into darkness, it takes it from us, and puts us into the
light.

CHAP. 10. How we may desire Death.
TO desire death, as the retrait and only haven, from the torments of this
life: as the sovereign good of nature, and as the only stay and pillar of our
liberty; is besitting a good and a settled soul. It is imbecility to yield
unto evil: but it is folly, to nourish it. It is a good time to die, when to
live, is rather a burden, then a blessing. There is more ill in life, then
good: and to increase our torment, is against nature. Wilfully to hinder our
own health, is, not only against the course of nature, but also a tempting of
the God of nature. To wish to die sooner, or to live longer, then it shall
seem good unto the Giver of life, is a great ingratitude. A lively
apprehension and desire of the life to come, makes a man to thirst after death,
as after a great gain: as after the seed of a better life: as the bridge unto
Paradise: as the way to all good; and as an earnest penny of the Resurrection.
A firm belief and hope of these things, is incompatible, with the fear and
horror of death: it persuades rather to be weary of this life, and to desire
death, Vitam habere in patientia, and morte^ in desiderio. Therefore have
Philosophers and others bin justly reproched, that play the public
dissemblers, and do not in verity believe that, which they do so much talk
of, and so highly commend, touching that happy immortality, and those
unspeakable pleasures in the second life: since they doubt and fear death so
much the necessary passage unto immortality.

CHAP. 12. The miserable state and condition of this present life.
BEhold the miserable estate of this brickle body, subject to all injuries of
fortune, that is, of such miseries and mischiefs, as GOD by his providence
sendes, and sowes through the world for sin. Then consider whereabout this
life is occupied, how vainly, how dangerously, how painefully, how grievously:
and in what fear, care, grief, sadness, sorrow, and vexation it lives in:
together with the infinite discontents and discomforts of the mind. Now the
only rest and relief from all this, is in, and by death, whereby we shall
change these pains into pleasures, these dangers into safety, this wicked and
evil company, with that most happy society of the blessed and glorious
Trinity. If we run through the ages and occupations of this life, it will be
thought worthier the name of death, then life.

Vita mihi haec mors est,
mors haec mihi vita perennis:
In vita exilium,
patria est in morte propinqua.
Thus is the perfect age of man consumed, in vanity, vexation, mourning, and
mischief, till heavy and burdensome age overtake him, wherein he can have
pleasure of nothing; wherein the poor conscience is bitten, and pined with
remembrance and remorse of bypast sins, the carcass it self fraught with
surfets; insomuch as there is nothing now, but oasting in the bowels, aching in
the bones, gowt, grauel, stone and infinite other maladies tormenting him, till
he have brought his miserable life to end. Solomon sought out carefully
whatsoever seemed profitable or pleasant, or might any ways bring comfort or
contentment, to the mind of man in this life: so that none could be able to
match him since, in respect of his means and wisdom; and yet he found
nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit. What vanity and vexation is in every
estate of life, by this one thing is most evident, that none is content with
his own estate: but every one esteems his neighbors better, because he
knows it not so well as his own; and conferres the bitterness of his, with the
pleasures of his neighbors: so that the only ignorance of the things of this
world, makes the estimation of them: and when they are proved by experience
what they are, they are found to be nothing less, then what they were supposed
to be: so that, how much the more me^ lusted after them, so much sooner do
they loath them, and must confess in the end, all to be but vanity, labor and
grief.

To the shortness of life, may be added the miseries of the same, for all is not
life, we here live. The years of man's life are few, but the miseries thereof
are infinite: therefore by the Grecians, the first day of the life of man, is
called a beginning of conflicts. And S. Augustine says, of man's first entrance
into the world, Nondum loquitur, et tamen Prophetat; an Infant not able to
speak, does yet by tears prophecy of the sorrows incident to the life of
man: so that the old saying may well be verified: Humana vita, non est vita,
sed calamitas, The life of man is rather calamity then life. All the days of
this life, must we eat our bread in labor and sorrow, until we return to
the earth, out of which we were taken: so that the days of man, by reason of
sin, are no other but the days of sorrow: for every day has suam malitiam,
and every night suum terrorem. Thus is the estate and condition of life found
troublesome, even of him to whom Abraham said, Tu in vita, thou in thy life
receiuedst thy joy: for the voluptuous, in seeking his pleasure, the ambitious
his glory, the covetous his gain, endure in this world a very servitude and
thraldom of life: wherefore, for the transitory delights of this sinful
world, happy are they that do but see them, more happy that shun them, and
most happy that are quite taken from them; whereby they are delivered from this
irksome necessity of sinning, and so shall grieve the holy Spirit no more.

They only are wise, and they only live, which find time and leisure, wherein
to learn to die well: for without this knowledge, there is no more pleasure in
life, then in the fruition of that thing, which a man fears always to lose.
He has spent his life well, that has learned to die well: and he has lost his
whole time, that knows not well how to end it. He shootes not well, that
looks not on the mark: and he cannot live well, that has not an eye to his
death.

The happiness of this life, consists not in the length of time, but in the
well using of time: for the unprofitable part of man's life, is death. Our life
is not to be measured according to the time, but according to our actions: it
imports not how long we live, but how well. Non quam diu, sed quam been: Life
is long enough, if we can but tell how to use it. In the longest life of all,
the time which we do truly live, is the least of all: considering how much of
our life is spent in grief, how much in cares, how much in sickness, how much
in fears, how much in our young and unprofitable years; and briefly, how much
in sleep, wherein in a manner we spend a moity of our lives. We received not a
little short life, but have made it so our selves: even as great wealth, when
it comes into the hands of an unthrift, is wasted in a moment: and mean riches
on the contrary, increase by the good employment of one that is thrifty: even
so, this our age is wonderfully extended by him, that can dispose well of it.

The swiftness of time is incomprehensible; and so it appears principally, to
those that look backward to it: and considering the swift and violent course
of time, it is most strange, that the greatest part thereof should be employed
so much, in superfluous things of pleasure or delight. So swift is the flight
of time, as that the time we live, is, but as it were a minute, and less then
a minute if it were possible: and yet notwithstanding, as little as it is,
Nature has distributed and divided it into many degrees: whereof part, she
has allotted unto Infancy, part to Adolescencie, part to middle age, and part
to old age (the next neighbor age to death.) Infancy is scarcely perceived,
youth is quickly ouer-blowne; middle age stays not, and old age is not long.
Of all ages of our life, only old age is not limited: but all the exercises of
precedent times, and the delights and pleasures of youth, do end and vanish in
old age: why then should any thirst after this life, which in effect is no
better then a laborers work, spent in toil and travel, consuming it self
in vanities, ebbing away in words, having a mansion place in dust, and a life
in slime and clay, without resolution or constancy? What pleasure then can
there be in this life, when the pleasures thereof are nothing but vanities: and
all the felicity thereof only splendida miseria, a shining misery; nay, which
is worse, affliction of spirit? for where the love of this world enters, there
is no longer rest or quiet of mind; but war of desires, vexatio^ of
thoughts, fears, cares, and unquietness of soul, which in deed, is a most
miserable and pitiful affliction of spirit. All the commodities of this
world, are mixed with discommodities (lest we should love them too much) and
all the delights thereof are counterpoized with discontentments: the grievous
counterpoize whereof, makes the miseries of this world most intolerable: which
made Job to detest the very day of his birth, saying; Let the day wherein I was
borne, perish: and made Solomon to commend the condition of the dead, before
the living: and to hold him better then them both, that never was borne, by
reason he never walked in the vanities of this life, nor ever saw the wicked
works, that are committed under the Sun. O miserable and most deceitful
world, whose miseries are void of all consolation, and whose happiness is
mingled with all kind of misery! It deceiues them that trust it, afflicts them
that serve it, damnes them that follow it: and soonest of all, forgets them,
that labor most of all for it. It is a very Judas: for whom it kisseth, it
betrayeth unto Satan.

The delights of sin go down pleasantly, as wine does at first; but at
last, they bite like a serpent: Oblectant sensum, sed interficiunt spiritum:
they delight the sense, but slay the soul.

If we be not moved to leave this life, in respect of the miseries (whereof it
is full:) yet ought we to be willing to forgo it, in regard of the infinite
happiness, which death brings us unto, in the world to come. Here we are but
members of the Church militant, where is nothing but co^bating: there we shall
be parts of the Church triumphant, where is nothing but rejoicing. Here we
sow in tears, but there we shall reap in joy. All the riches and pleasures
of this life, are nothing in comparison of eternal felicity: for no tongue
created, either of Man or Angel, can express the joys of heaven; no
imagination conceive, nor understanding comprehend them: for Christ himself
says, Nemo scit, nisi qui accipiet; No man knows them, but he that enioyes
them; such is the infinite value, glory, and majesty, of the felicity prepared
for us in heaven, (which is the accomplishment of all our hope.) Thus
recounting the vanity of this world, the miserable state of this life, and the
inestimable blessedness of the life to come, let us with the Apostles and
Prophets cry: O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death?

My soul thirsts for thee, O God, when shall I go, and appear before the
presence of the living God?

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Come quickly, Lord Jesus, come quickly.



The GOD of all power and mercy, increase in our hearts a desire of this
learning, that we may live in his fear, and die in his favor, whereby we
may live for ever, Amen.

CHAP. 13. Against the love of the world, which is the second cause that lets
us from dying willingly.
THe love and respect man bears to the pleasures and vanities of this world,
is not only of it self a strong impediment and let to our willingness to
death, and to the service of God; but a general cause also, and as it were, a
common ground to all other impediments; whatsoever other excuses are pretended:
for when the Noble men of Iewry refused to confess Christ openly, Saint John
utters the true cause thereof to be, for that they loved the glory of man,
more then the glory of GOD, John chap. 12.

This may be confirmed by that most excellent Parable of the Seed, The
exposition of the Parable of the Seed.
which concerns three sorts of persons: 1. Highway.
the first sort of which, our Savior compares to a Highway, wherein all
seed of life that is sown, either withers presently, or else is eaten up by
the birds of the Air; that is, by the Devils, in such careless men, as
contemn whatsoever is said unto them.

2 Rocky ground.
The second sort, are compared to Rockie grounds, in which, for lack of deep
root, the seed that falls, continues not: whereby are signified light and
unconstant persons; that now chop in, and now run out: now are fervent, and
by and by, key-cold again; and so in time of temptation they are gone.

3 Good ground, but full of thorns.
The third sort are compared to a Field, wherein the seed of life grows up,
but yet there are so many thorns about the same (which be the cares, troubles,
miseries, and deceivable vanities of this life) as the good corn is choked
up, and brings forth no fruit. Where the Gospel is preached, received and
professed, and does not fructify in our hearts, to bring forth a virtuous
life, there the seed is choked with the love and care of this world: so that
the fault is neither in the sower, nor in the seed, but only in the ground.

This Parable contains six points.

1 How this world, and the commodities thereof, are mere vanities.
First, how, and in what sense, this world, and the vanities thereof, are mere
vanities in themselves, and of no value: and therefore ought not to let us from
serving of God, and from so great a matter, as is the Kingdom of Heaven.

2 Deceptions.
Secondly, how they are not only vanities and trifles; but also Deceptions,
deceits, and fallacies, not performing those trifles, which they do promise.

3 Pricking thorns.
Thirdly, how they are spinae, that is, pricking thorns, albeit to worldly men,
they seem to be most sweet and pleasant things.

Fourthly, 4. Miseries and afflictions.
how they are Aerumnae, miseries and afflictions.

Fifthly, quomodo suffocant, 5. How they do strangle the possessor.
how they strangle or choke their possessors.

Sixthly, 6. How they are to be used without danger.
how we may use them notwithstanding without these dangers and evils, to our
great comfort, gain, and preferment.

That all the pleasures, How all the pleasures of the world are mere vanities.
delights, and goodly shows of this world are mere vanities, is proved by the
testimony of King Solomon, who tasted and proved them all, of his own
experience and practice: yet after all this, he pronounced at last, this
sentence of it all, Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas: by vanity of
vanities, meaning the greatness of this vanity, above al other vanities, that
may be devised.

Saint John makes an earnest exhortation to all wise men, never to entangle
themselves with the love of worldly affairs: for, Mundus transit and
concupiscentia eius: the world is transitory, and all that is to be desired
therein, is vain, uncertain, and not permanent.

This transitory vanity, The general branches of worldly vanities.
he reduces to three general heads or branches, saying, Whatsoever is in the
world, is either, Concupiscence of the flesh, or concupiscence of the eyes, or
pride of life.

Under concupiscence of the flesh, Concupiscence of the flesh.
he comprehends all sensual pleasures, used in cherishing and pampering of
the flesh.

Under the second, 2 Concupiscence of the eyes.
all beauty and bravery of riches.

Under the third, 3 Pride of life.
is signified the vanity of Ambition, in worldly honor and estimation.

Three principal vanities.
These are three general and most principal vanities of this life, wherein
worldly men do weary out their brains: to wit, Ambition, Ambition,
covetousness, carnal pleasures.
Covetousness, and carnal pleasures: Whereunto all lesser vanities are
addressed, as to their Superiors.

To Ambition belong these six members.
To Ambition and pride of life, belong these six members.

First, Vainglory, which is a certain disordinate desire, 1. Vainglory.
to be well thought of, well spoken of, praised, and glorified of men.

What a vanity, what a misery is this, to depend on other men's mouths: to cast
thy travels into the wind of men's mouths, where every flatterer may rob thee
of them?

It is a miserable thing, for a man to be a windmill, which grindeth not but
as the blast endures: so praise the vainglorious man, and ye make him run;
if he feel not the gale blow, he is out of heart. How many have we seen
puffed up with men's praises, and almost put besides themselves for joy thereof?
who afterward being brought down with a contrary wind, have been driven in
a manner to desperation by contempt.

1 Worldly honor and promotion.
The second vanity that belongs to ambition, is desire of worldly honor,
dignity, and promotion. This is a great matter in the sight of a worldly man:
this is a jewel of rare price, and worthy to be bought with any labor,
travel, or peril whatsoever: the love of this, lets infinite men daily,
from embracing the means of their salvation.

Nolite esse puert sensibus: Be you not children in understanding. It is the
fashion of children, to esteem more of a painted babble, then of a rich jewel.
And such is the painted dignity of this world, gotten with much labor,
maintained with great expenses, and lost with intolerable grief and sorrow.
For better conceiving whereof, ponder with thy self any state of dignity, that
thou would desire, and think how many have had that before thee: and what
are now become of all those great Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Prelates,
which rejoiced so much at their advancement? Who talks, or thinks of them
now? Are they not forgotten, and cast into their graves long ago? And do not
men walk boldly over their heads now, whose faces might not be looked on,
without fear in their life? What then, have their dignities done them good?

Saint Paul so much despised worldly honor in this life, as that he made
less account thereof, then of common dung.

Most vain then, is the pursuit of this worldly honor, which neither
contenteth the mind, nor eases the pained body, nor continues with the
possessour, nor leaves behind it, any benefit or contentation.

The third vanity that belongs to Ambition or pride of life, 3 The vanity of
worldly Nobility.
is Nobility of flesh and blood: a great pearl in the eye of the world, but in
deed, and in it self, and in the sight of God, a mere trifle and vanity.
Which Job well understood, when he said, I said unto rottennes, Thou art my
father; and unto worms, You are my mother and sisters. He that will behold
the Gentry of his ancestors, let him look into their graves, and see whether
Job says true or no.

True Nobility was never begun but by virtue, and therefore as it is a
testimony of virtue in the predecessors: so ought it to be a spur to virtue
in the successors: And he which holds the name thereof by descent only,
without virtue, is a mere monster in respect of his ancestors: for that he
breaks the limits and nature of Nobility: such have their glory only from
their nativity, from the belly, and from their conception.

It is a miserable vanity to beg credit of dead men, whereas we deserve none
our selves: to seek up old titles of honor from our ancestors, we being
utterly incapable thereof, by our own base manners and behauiours: to seek up
this and that old title of honor, to furnish his style withal, is very idle
and base.

4. The vanity of worldly wisdom.
The fourth vanity to Ambition or pride of life, is worldly wisdom: whereof the
Apostle says, The wisdom of this world is folly with God. If it be folly,
then great vanity, to delight and boast so much in it, as men do.

The fashion of worldly wise men, is, to condemn the wisdom of God, till
against their wills they be forced to cry: Nos insensati vitam illorum
estimabamus insaniam: We fond men esteemed the lives of Saints, as madness.
Vain then and of no account, is the wisdom of this world, except it be
subject to the Wisdom of God.

The fifth vanity belonging to pride of life, 5. The vanity of beauty.
is corporal beauty, whereof the wise man says, Vain is beauty, and
deceivable is the grace of a fair countenance. Which David understood well
enough, when he said, Turn away my eyes, O Lord, that they behold not vanity.
This is a singular great vanity, dangerous and deceitful: but yet greatly
esteemed of the children of men, whose property is to love vanity: but he that
remembers what foul dross lies under a fair skin, will be little in love
therewith.

GOD has imparted certain sparkles of beauty unto his creatures, thereby to
draw us to the consideration and love of his own beauty, whereof the other is
but a shadow: from whence in deed all creatures do derive their beauty.

What can be more vanity then this? what more madness, then either to take a
pride thereof, if we have it our selves, or to endanger our souls for the
same, if we behold it in others?

The sixth vanity belonging to pride of life, 6 Vanity of Apparel.
is the glory of fine apparel: against which the Scripture says, In vestitu
ne gloriaris vnquam. Never take pride and glory in apparel: for that is, as if
a beggar should glory and take pride of the old clouts, that do cover his
sores.

The second general head of worldly vanities, Concupiscence of the eyes.
is, Concupiscence of the eyes, whereunto are referred all vanities of riches
and wealth of this world.

Of this, Saint Paul writes to Timothy: Give commandment to the rich men of
this world, not to be high-minded, nor to put confidence in the uncertainty of
their riches; for, riches shall not profit a man in the day of revenge, that
is, at the day of death and Judgment. Which does evidently declare the great
vanity of worldly riches, which ca^ do the possessor no good at al, when he
has most need of their help.

Rich men have slept their sleep, and have found nothing in their hands: that
is, rich men have passed over this life, as men do a sleep, imagining
themselves to have golden mountains and treasures, wherewith to help
themselves, in all needs that shall occur: and when they awake (at the day
of their death) they find themselves to have nothing in their hands that can
do them good.

In respect whereof, the Prophet Baruch asks this question, Where are they
now, which heaped together gold and silver, and which made no end of their
scraping together? and he answers himself immediately* Exterminati sunt et ad
inferos descenderunt, they are now rooted out, and are gone down unto hell. To
like effect says Saint James, Now ye rich men, do you weep and wayle, and
howl in your miseries that come upon you: your riches are rotten, and your
gold and silver is rustie: and the rust thereof shall be in testimony against
you; it shall feed upon your own flesh, as if it were fire: you have hoorded
up wrath to your own selves in the last day.

If wealth then be not only so vain, but also so perilous, what vanity is
it for men, to set their minds so upon it? which S. Paul esteemed no better,
then as the dung of the earth. What a base thing is it for a man, to tie his
love thereunto: and to glue his heart and soul unto a piece of earth?

We came naked into the world, and naked we must go forth again: when the
rich man dies, he shall take nothing with him: but shall cloze up his eyes and
find nothing: neither shall his glory descend to the place, whither he goes.
Dangerous then is the vanity of worldly wealth, and great is the folly of those
men, which labor so much to procure the same, with the eternal perils of
their souls. Qui diligit aurum, non iustificabitur: Woe be to you rich men,
for you have received your consolation in this life. Saint Paul says generally
of all, and to all, They which will be rich, do fall into temptations; and
into the snares of Satan, and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires,
which do drown them in everlasting destruction and perdition. What can be
more effectually spoken, to dissuade from the love of riches?

Many excuse themselves by the pretense of Wife and Children, The pretense of
Wife and Children refuted.
and that they do but provide for their sufficiency. As if where Gods service
and their own salvation comes in question, Christ would admit any such
excuse? Ought we to love wife or children so much, as to endanger our souls
for them? What comfort can it be to an afflicted father in Hell, to remember
that by his means, his wife and children live wealthily in earth, and that for
his eternal woe, they enjoy some few years pleasure. This is a vanity and a
mere deceit of our spiritual enemy: for within one moment after we are dead,
we shall no more care for Wife and Children, the^ for a mere stranger. When
death comes, then are we to depart to that place where flesh and blood holds
no more privilege, nor riches have any power to deliver.

3 Concupiscence of the flesh.
The third Branch of worldly vanities, is, Concupiscence of the flesh, which
contains all worldly pleasures, and carnal recreations of this life.

Woe be unto you, that now live in fill and sacietie; for the time shall come,
when you shall suffer hunger. Christ speaking to the Apostles, and by them to
all other, says, You shall weep and mourn, but the world shall rejoice,
making it a sign disjunctive, between the good and the bad: that the one
shall mourn in this life, and the other rejoice and make themselves merry. In
respect whereof, we are willed to pass over this life in carfulness,
watchfulness, fear and trembling. Sollicitum ambulare cum Deo. To walk
carefully, and diligently with God. Beatus homo qui semper est pauidus: happy
is the man, which is always fearful. Risus dolor miscebitur, and extrema
gaudii luctus occupat^; laughter shall be mingled with sorrow, and mourning
shall ensue at the latter end of mirth.

Vniuersa vanitas, omnis homo viuens: the life of such worldly-minded me^,
contains all kind of vanity: that is to say, vanity in Ambition; vanity in
riches; vanity in pleasures; vanity in all things they most esteem: therefore
Vae vobis, qui trahitis iniquitatem in funiculis vanitatis: Woe unto you that
do draw iniquity in the ropes of vanity. These ropes, are those vanities of
vainglory, Promotion, Dignity, Nobility, Beauty, riches and delights, which
always draw with them some iniquity and sin. Beatus vir qui non respexit in
vanitates and insanias falsas. Blessed is the man, that has not respected
vanities, and the false madness of this world.

The second part of the Parable shows, How worldly vanities are deceits.
how this world, with the commodities thereof, are not only vanities, but also
deceits: for that indeed they do not perform unto their followers, those idle
vanities and trifles, which they do promise.

Can there be a greater deceit, then to promise renown (as the world does to
her followers) and to forget them as soon as they are dead? Who now remembers
one of 10000. jolly fellows, that have been in this world? who once thinks or
speaks of them now? has not their memory perished with their sound, as the
Prophet foretold? Did not Job promise truly, that, their remembrance should
be, as ashes trodden under foot? and David, that they should be as dust,
blown abroad with the wind?

Infinite are the deceits and dissimulations of the world. It seems goodly,
fair and gorgeous in outward show: but when it comes to handling, it is
nothing but a feather: when it comes to sight, it is nothing but a shadow:
when it comes to weight, it is nothing but smoke: when it comes to
opening, it is nothing but an Image of plaister-worke; full of old rags and
patches within. O miserable and most deceitful world, says Saint Augustine!
whose sorrows are certain, and pleasures uncertain: whose pains are
permanent, and repose transitory: whose toils are intolerable, and rewards
most contemptible: whose promises are princely, and paiments beggarly: whose
miseries are void of all consolation, and whose happiness is mingled with all
kind of misery. It hates them, that love it: deceiues them that trust it:
afflicts them, that serve it: reproacheth them, that honor it: damnes them,
that follow it: and soonest of all forgets them, that labor most of all for
it: upon great cause then said the Prophet David, O you children of men, how
long will ye be so dull hearted! Why do you love vanity, and seek after a
lie? He calls the world, not a liar, but a lie it self, for the exceeding
great fraud and deciet which it uses. How pleasures of the world are thorns


How pleasures of the world, are Thorns, for that, with the pricks of their
careful cogitations, they tear and make bloody the minds of worldly men: for
even as a man's naked body, tossed and tumbled among Thorns, cannot but be
torn and made bloody with the pricks thereof: so a worldly man's soul, beaten
with the cares and cogitations of this life, cannot but be vexed with
restless pricking of the same, and wounded also with many temptations of sin
which do occur. This does Solomon signify, when he does not only call the
riches and pleasures of this world, Vanity of vanities, that is, the greatest
of all other vanities: but also affliction of spirit.

Of all the miseries and vexations that God lays upon worldlings, this is not
the least, to be tormented with the cares of that thing, which they esteem
their greatest felicity. Which notwithstanding like an unmerciful tyrant,
gives them no rest either by day or by night.

The fourth point of the Parable: how this word, Misery and calamity.
Aerumna, that is, misery and calamity, may be verified of the world, and of
the felicity thereof.

Among many other miseries, the first, and one of the greatest, 1. Brevity.
is the brevity and uncertainty of all worldly prosperity. O how great a
misery is this unto a worldly man, that would have his pleasures constant, and
perpetual! O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, unto a man that
has peace in his riches!

2 Coffeehouse.
Another misery joined to the prosperity of this world, is the grievous
counterpoise of discontentments, that every worldly pleasure has with it.

The possession of riches, Riches.
is accompanied with infinite fears and cares.

The advancement of honors, Honor.
is subject to all miserable servitude, that may be devised.

The pleasure of the flesh, Pleasure.
though it be lawful and honest, is yet accompanied with tribulation of the
flesh: but if it be with sin, a thousand times more it is environed with all
kind of miseries: 3 Miseries of body.
who can reckon up the calamities of our body? so many diseases, so many
infirmities, so many mischances, so many dangers?

Of mind.
Who can tell the passions of our mind, that do afflict us; now with sorrow,
now with envy, now with fury?

Of goods.
Who can recount the adversities and misfortunes that come by our goods?

Of neighbors.
Who can number the hurts and discontentations, that daily ensue upon us from
our neighbors? one calls us into Law for our goods: another pursues us for
our life: a third by slander impugneth our good name: so that, there are not so
many days, nor hours in our lives, as there are miseries and contrarieties in
the same. And more then this; The prerogative of evil.
the evil has this prerogative above the good in our life, that one defect
only ouerwhelmeth and drowneth a great number of pleasures together: As if a
man had all the felicities heaped together, which this world could yield, and
yet had but one tooth out of tune, all the other pleasures would not make him
merry. GOD shall rain snares upon sinful men, Pluet super eos laqueos: that
is, God shall permit wicked men to fall into snares, which are as plentiful in
the world, as drops of rain from heaven.

Temptations and dangers.
Every man almost is a deadly snare unto a carnal and loose-hearted man: every
sight that he sees: every word that he hears: every thought that he
conceiueth, etc. all are snares to draw him to destruction, that is not
watchful.

Facility of sinning.
The last, and greatest misery of all others in this life, is, the facility,
whereby worldly men do run into sin, and make no scruple of the matter, as
Job says, Bibit quasi aquam, iniquitatem, he suppeth up sin, as it were
water, that is, with great facility, custom and ease, aduentureth he upon any
kind of sin that is offered him, as a man drinks water when he is a
thirst.

The fifth point of the Parable: How the world choketh and strangleth us.
how the love of the world choketh and strangleth every man whom it possesses,
from all celestial and spiritual life: for that it fills him with a plain
contrary spirit, to the Spirit of God. Si quis Spiritum Christi non habet, hic
non est eius: If any have not the Spirit of Christ, that man belongs not unto
him. The effects of the Spirit, are Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, etc. The
effects of the spirit of the world, are fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, etc.

Whosoever desires to be a friend of this world, is thereby made an enemy to God:
therefore, nolite conformari huic seculo: nolite diligere mundum, neque ea quae
in mundo sunt: so that we may neither love it, nor conform our selves unto
it, under the pain of the enmity of God, and of eternal damnation. Seeing
then this world is such a thing as it is; so vain, so deceitful, so
troublesome, so dangerous; who would be deceived, or allured with the vanity
thereof, or be stayed from the noble service of God, by the love of so fond a
trifle as is this world? How we may avoid the dangers of the world.


The sixth point of this Parable, how we may avoid the dangers of the world,
and use them to our own gain and commodity. The only way, is, to use the
refuge of birds, in avoiding the dangerous snares of Fowlers, that is, to mount
up into the air, and so to fly over them al: Frustra iacitur rete, ante oculos
pennatorum, the net is laid in vain, before the eyes of such as have wings and
can fly. And as the Fowler has no hope to catch the bird, except he can
allure her to pitch and to come down: so has the Devil no way to entangle
us, but to say, as he said to Christ, Mitte te deorsum, throw thy self down
upon the baits which I have laid: eat and devour them, enamour thy self with
them, tie thine appetite unto them, and the like: which gross and open
temptation, he that will avoid, by contemning the allurements of these baits,
by flying over them, by placing his love and cogitations in the mountains of
heavenly joys and eternity: he shall easily escape all dangers and perils. S.
Paul past over these dangers, when he said, that he was now crucified to the
world, and the world unto him; and that he esteemed all the wealth of this
world, as mere dung: and albeit he lived in the flesh, yet lived he not
according to the flesh. Which glorious example if we would follow, in
contemning and despising the vanities of this world, and fixing our minds on
the noble riches of Gods eternal Kingdom to come: the snares of the Devil
would prevail nothing at all against us in this life. Now how to use the
riches and commodities of this world to our advantage, Christ has plainly
laid down the means, saying, Facite vobis amicos de Mammona iniquitatis: Make
unto you friends of the riches of iniquity. How easily then, may rich men be
happy, if they will? and what a plentiful harvest may they reap to
themselves, if they were wise, having such store of seed by them, and so much
ground offered them daily to sow it in? O you rich men, therefore, deceive not
your selves; for what a man sows, that shall he reap, Romans

CHAP. 14. 14 Against procrastination.
Our conversion is made harder by delay.
LEt us turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for many
inconveniences ensue procrastination. If we do sleep in security, and
accustom our selves with sinning, our custom will wax to be our nature, and
hard will it be to rise from sin, in which we have been so long and so
deeply buried: for continuance of sin brings custom, which having gotten
root in us, will hardly be rooted out of us.



more infected: our judgment more weakened: our good desires extinguished: our
passions confirmed: our body corrupted: our strength diminished, and all our
whole Commonwealth the more perverted.



hour, we shall find hard time then to turn unto God: for sickness will sore
disquiet us: Satan will extremely tempt us: Friends with talking and craving
will molest us: the terror of our ugly conscience will astonish us: so that it
will be very hard to be rightly mindful of our end, and in our extremity to
call to God for mercy.

Miserable is that soul, which places the ankor of his eternal wealth or
woe, upon so tickle a point, as is his conversion at the very last hour. It is
said to be tickle, in regard all Divines speak very doubtfully of it: and
albeit they do not absolutely condemn it in all, but do leave it as
uncertain unto Gods secret judgment: yet do they incline unto the negative
part, and do allege four reasons.

conversion and salvation: for scarcely can any fix his mind earnestly upon
heavenly cogitations at such time, as he is but troubled with the passions of
Chollick or Stone, or other sharp diseases: how much less in the anguishes of
death.



now (as it were) into nature it self: for which cause God says to evil men
by the Prophet Jeremy: If an Ethiopian can change his black skin, or a
Leopard his spots, then can you also do well, having learned all days of your
life to do evil?

no more? To give thy goods away, when thou can enjoy them no longer? To
abandon thy Concubine, when of force thou must forsake her? To leave to sin,
when sin leaves thee? He is a careless and a graceless man, who knowing
all this, will venture notwithstanding the eternity of his salvation and
damnation, upon the doubtful event of his final repentance. But what
ingratitude and injustice is this toward Almighty God, having received so many
benefits from him already, and expecting so great a matter hereafter, as is the
Kingdom of Heaven: to appoint out the least, last, and worst part of thy life
unto his service: and that whereof thou art most uncertain, whether it shall
ever be or never; or whether God will accept it or no. What Law, justice, or
equity is this, that after thou have served the World, Flesh and Devil, all
thy youth and best days; in the end to come and thrust thine old bones,
defiled and worn out with sin, into the dish of thy Creator: his enemies to
have the best, and he the leauings? The only way therefore to escape this
dangerous and uncertain point, is, Esaias 55.
to convert in time: to seek unto GOD while he may be found; to call upon
him, while he is near at hand.

CHAP. 15. Against mistrust in Gods mercy.
THis is that great and maine impediment, that stops the conduits (...) Gods
holy grace, from flowing into the Soul of a sinful man: for there cannot be
a greater dishonor to GOD, nor any thing more displeasing to him, then to
doubt of his mercy, whose heart is more tender toward us, then the heart of
any mother can be to the only child and infant of her womb: for thus he
says to Sion, which for her sins began to doubt, least he had forsaken
her: Can the mother forget her own infant? or can she not be merciful to
the child of her own womb? If she could, yet can I not forget or reject
thee: behold, I have written thee in the flesh of mine own hands.

As the Father pittieth his own children, so does the Lord take mercy upon us:
he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust.

God will not despise the work of his own hands.

I am he, I am he (says the LORD) that for mine own sake will do away thine
offenses, and will no more think of thy sins, Esaias 43.

As surely as I live, I will not thy death, but rather that thou shall be
converted and live, Ezech. 33.

Nunquid voluntatis meae est, mors impit? Have I any pleasure in the death of a
sinner? says the Lord. GOD, by his Prophet Jeremy, complains grievously,
Esaias 1. that men will not accept of his mercy offered, saying, Turn from your
wicked ways, why will ye dye, O you house of Israel? GOD so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son to the death to redeem us, Special
arguments of Gods exceeding love.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting:
The sum of the Gospel.
hereunto all the Prophets bear witness, that whosoever shall believe in him,
by his name, he shall have remission of sins, and withal eternal life.

God gave his Son to redeem us, even then when we were his enemies: and if
when we were his enemies, we were reconciled unto GOD, by the death of his
Son; much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.

Christ came not into the world, to condemn the world, but to save it: he
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

CHAP. 16. The promises of God to sinners that repent, are manifold, absolute,
and universal.
Whosoever shall depart from his evil ways, and turn unto me (says the
Lord) I will receive him. Behold here the the universality of all people and
persons, without excluding any.

At what time soever a sinner, does repent him of his sin, from the bottom
of his heart, I will put away all his wickedness out of my remembrance (says
the Lord:) see the universality of all times and seasons without exception.

Leave off to do peruersly, and then do you come and find fault with me, if
you can: For if your sins were as red as Scarlet, they shall be made as white
as Snow. Consider here the universality of all kind of sins, be they never
so grievous, so horrible, or heinous.

As nothing does more exasperate their of God, then the depriving of his
Majesty of that most excellent property, wherein he chiefly delights and
gloryeth, which is, his infinite and unspeakable mercy: so nothing does more
assure us of Gods mercy and favor toward us, then that he is our Creator and
Father: which two words, the one of love, the other of power, takes away all
doubt of being denied any thing, that we shall ask in his name, with Faith.

This blessed name of Father (in God) does import unto us, by his own
testimony, all sweetness, all love, all comfort, all fatherly providence,
care and protection: all certainty of favor, all assurance of grace, all
security of mercy, pardon and remission of our sins, whenever unfeignedly we
turn unto him: for never sinner repented, that was not pardoned; never any that
returned unfeignedly, that was not mercifully accepted.

Three things there are (says S. Bernard) wherein my hope consists, and
whereby it is made invincible. 1 Charitas vocationis.
First, in the exceeding love and charity of him, that calls us to him by
repentance. 2 Veritas promissionis.
Secondly, the infallible truth and certainty of his promise, which he makes
to us of pardon and mercy. 3. Potestas redditionis.
Thirdly, the endless power and ability he has, to perform whatsoever he
promises. Therefore if thou be ready to breathe out thy soul and Spirit,
fear not to repent: for Gods mercy is not restrained, by the shortness of
time.

CHAP. 17. How one should demean himself, when sickness begins.
THe first and principal thing religiously to be remembered in the beginning
of sickness, is, that the soul do call her self to a serious account of
sins passed, of the evil committed, and the good omitted, remembering that of
the Prophet, Psalm. 32.9. I will confess against my self mine own
unrighteousness.

In all extremities, our chiefest care ought to be, by Prayer to call upon God
for help, and religiously to commend our selves and souls unto God.

A joyful lifting up of the heart to the Throne of grace, makes us willing to
renounce the world; and to resign our selves over unto his divine pleasure, to
whose will we ought with patience, meekely to submit our selves, both for our
continuance in this life, and for our deliverance out of this life.

CHAP. 18. The disposing of blessings temporal.
HIs sins by the sick party confessed: his soul religiously commended to
GOD: his desire to live or die, referred to the divine providence: an orderly
disposing of those temporal blessings, which God has lent us, is very
convenient for every Christian (specially in time of health:) and nothing
ominous, as some have timorously doubted. This disposing of blessings temporal,
makes us not to dye the more quickly, but the more quietly.

We show our thankfulness to God, and charity to men, when we become
beneficial unto others, remembering whose saying it was: It is a blessed thing
to give, Acts 20. Then is he with a free and willing mind to yield and render
his soul into the hands of Almighty God his Creator, who of his infinite
mercy redeemed him by the death and Passion of his dear Son Jesus Christ our
only Savior and Redeemer: in whose only merits is his last repose at
parting. And so, laying aside all earthly respects, as having now no more to
do with the things under the Sun, to commend his body to Christian burial,
and his soul to his merciful Redeemer.

CHAP. 19. It is necessary for the sick, after an orderly disposing of his
worldly goods, and leaving all worldly thoughts, to apply his mind to Prayer
and godly Meditations.
Prayer.
THe sweetest incense we can offer, is our devotion by Prayer.

The lifting up of our hands, will be as an evening sacrifice: he heals our
sicknesses, and forgiueth all our sins, Psalm. 103.

God looks that we should send up our prayers to him, that he might send
down his mercy to us.

Prayer in time of trouble, is commanded with a promise: Call upon me says
the Lord, in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
glorify me, Psalm. 50.15.

Psalms in time of affliction, have a special and peculiar grace to move
devotion.

Proper and peculiar Psalms for the sick.

Put me not to rebuke, O Lord, Psalm. 38.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, Psalm. 51.

Have thee to deliver me, O God, Psalm. 70.

In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, Psalm. 71.

I will cry unto the Lord with my voice, Psalm. 77.

Out of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord, Lord, hear my voice, Psalm.
130.

Meditations.
touching which, no tongue created either of Man or Angel can express them, no
imagination conceive, nor understanding comprehend them: for Christ himself
says, Nemo scit, nisi qui accipiet: No man knows them, but he that enioyes
them; such is the infinite value, glory, and Majesty of the felicity prepared
for us in heaven.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son to the death,
to redeem us, even then, when we were his enemies: and if when we were his
enemies we were reconciled unto God, by the Death of his Son; much more being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.



fear not thy sins, for I am the remission of sins: fear not darkness, I
am the light: fear not death, I am the life: whosoever comes to me, shall
never see death.



and so by his Resurrection, he triumphed over Death, clothed us with his
Righteousness, reconciled us to his Father, and made us heirs of his
everlasting Kingdom.



It is nothing that we do suffer, in respect of that, which Christ suffered
for us: for whatsoever we suffer, Christ suffered more for us: therefore there
is nothing, that can be too much or too dear, for us to bestow upon Christ.

CHAP. 20. To visit the sick, is a high work of mercy.
THat care is thought of greatest importance, which is employed in helping
those, who are least able to help themselves: and yet have most need of
ghostly direction: this duty specially concerns them, to whom God has
committed the charge of souls: therefore it is greatly to be wished, that
like as the Serpent, that old enemy of mankind, who the shorter his time is,
the fiercer his wrath is, and himself the more busy: so those who should feed
Christ's Lambs, would now be the more careful to keep them from this
devouring Lion: and to present them sound in Faith, and joyful in hope, unto
the great Shepherd of their souls: which is done, partly by exhortation,
partly by Prayer.

Tediousness of discourse, may soon weary the weak party: In exhortation
these things are to be observed.
few words well ordered, avail most: impertinent speeches are very unfit: a
premeditated exhortation, after information taken of the disposition of the
sick, is very behoouefull.

CHAP. 21. A Prayer at the first visiting of the Sick.
Prayer.
MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, to look upon this thy Servant with
the eyes of thy mercy: to grant him patience in his troubles, comfort in his
afflictions, and strength in thy mercies: Defend him, O Lord, from the danger
of the enemy: keep him in thy protection and sauegard: and send him deliverance
at thy good will and pleasure, through Jesus Christ, our only Savior and
Redeemer. Amen.

CHAP. 22. A confession to be used of the sick by himself.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, I acknowledge my great and grievous
offenses committed against thy Divine Majesty. I have not (as I ought) loved
thee above all things: I have not sincerely worshipped thee: I have not
honored thy Sacred name: I have not sanctified thy Sabbath: I have not done
due reverence to my Parents and Governors: I have borne deadly hatred: I have
lived vnchastely: I have taken my neighbors goods: I have depraved his good
name: I have coueted contrary to thy commandment: for all which, I humbly
crave mercy of thee: for these and all other my sins known and unknown,
which I have committed since the day of my birth, I do with an humble and
penitent heart, ask pardon and forgiveness of them, even for the merits of
thy dear Son Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer: in whose name I
pray, as he himself has taught us, saying: Our Father which, art in Heaven,
etc.

O Lord Jesus, who art the Resurrection and the life, in whom, whosoever
believes, shall not perish, but have life everlasting: I neither desire the
continuance of this life, nor a more speedy deliverance out of this world, then
shall stand with thy good will and pleasure, to which I humbly refer my
self: do with me (most merciful Savior) according to the riches of thy
goodness: through thee, have I been helped, ever since I was borne: thou art
he that tookest me out of my mothers womb, and have preserved me to this
hour: it grieueth me, that I have so often offended thee: and I am the more
grieved, that I can grieve no more then I do, considering the grieuousnesse of
my offenses toward thee.

CHAP. 23. A Prayer by the sick party against the fear of death.
O Lord, Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, hear me thy distressed
creature: the fear of death is fallen upon me; I fear, I faint, Lord, be
thou my helper. I find that death is dreadful to nature, shield me under the
shadow of thy wings: strengthen my weakness, by thy power; my wavering, by
thy promises; which art wont to hear and help them that call upon thee in the
day of trouble: the day of trouble and heaviness is come upon me: to thee I
call, in thee I trust: though frail flesh begin to shrink; yet grant, most
merciful Lord, that faith in thy most blessed Passion may never decay in me:
that hope may never fail me, but that the comfortable expectation of a better
life to come, may revive and raise up my pensive soul: when strength fails
me, and the light of mine eyes is gone: grant, Lord, that my heart may call
upon thee, and say, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, which live and reignest
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God world without end, Amen.

CHAP. 24. A Prayer for the sick.
O Eternal God, and most gracious and merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee,
to look upon this thy servant with the eyes of mercy: show him thy mercy, and
grant him thy salvation: g^^^ him comfort and confidence in thee, and in thy
Word: stablish his heart, that his trust may be ever in thee: impute not unto
him, his former sins and offenses, but cover his iniquities with the
righteousness of thy dear Son: defend and strengthen his soul against all the assaults and deadly subtilties of our restless enemy: deliver him from
his tyranny, and keep him in thy protection and sauegard: draw nigh unto his
soul, and save it: show him the light of thy countenance, and be merciful
unto him, and save him, for thy mercies sake: and since, O heavenly Father,
thou did in thy love toward us (even when we were thine enemies) give thy
most dearly beloved Son to the Death to redeem us: power into his heart, I
humbly beseech thee, a true and lively faith, whereby he may take hold upon our
perfect righteousness which is in Christ, and so be made partaker of the merit
of his Death and Resurrection: suffer not the apprehension of death to
discourage him: but give him grace and courage, cheerfully to attend his
death; willingly to obey thy will; and patiently to endure this thy visitation:
that after this painful life ended, he may dwell with thee in life
everlasting, through the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ our only Savior and
Redeemer. Amen.

CHAP. 25. A form of leaving the sick to Gods protection.
Psalm 20.1. The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of
Jacob defend thee, send thee help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out
of Sion: grant thee thy hearts desire, and fulfill all thy mind. Save (Lord)
and hear us, O King of Heaven, when we call upon thee. Jesus the Son of the
living God, put his Passion between thy sins, and the Judgment to come.
Amen.

CHAP. 26. The manner of commending the sick, into the hands of God, at the
hour of Death.
GOd the Father, who has created thee, preserve and keep thee: God the Son,
who has redeemed thee, aid and strengthen thee: God the Holy Ghost, who has
sanctified thee, assist thee in all thy trials, and lead thee the way into
everlasting peace. Amen.

Christ that dyed for thee, keep thee from all evil.

Christ that redeemed thee, strengthen thee in all temptations.

Christ Jesus, that rose from the dead, raise thy body and soul in the
resurrection of the just.

Christ that sits at the right hand of God in heaven, bring thee into
everlasting joy. Amen.

CHAP. 27. A Prayer for the sick, at his departing out of this life.
MOst merciful Father, we commend unto thee, this thy Servant the work of thine
own hands: we commend unto thee his soul, in the merits of Christ Jesus his
Redeemer: accept, O Lord, thine own creature: forgive, we beseech thee,
whatsoever has bin committed by humane frailety: and command thine Angels to
conduct him to the land of everlasting peace: preserve, O Lord, the soul of
thy servant, as thou did Lot from the fire of Sodom preserve, O Lord, the
soul of thy servant; as thou did Daniel from the mouth of the Lions. Into
thy merciful hands, O heavenly Father, we commend the soul of thy servant now
departing: acknowledge him, we beseech thee, for a Sheep of thine own fold,
and for a Lamb of thine own flock: receive him into the arms of thy mercy,
knowing that the thing cannot perish, which is committed to thy charge. O most
merciful Jesus, receive, we beseech thee, his Spirit in peace. Amen.

CHAP. 28. The blessing of the sick, when he is giving up the Ghost.
CHrist Jesus absolve thee from all thy sins.

Christ Jesus, remit all the evil, that thou have any ways committed.

Christ Jesus that dyed for thee, blot out all thy offenses.

Christ Jesus that now calls thee, receive thee into his heavenly Kingdom.

The Lord bless thee and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee: the Lord lift up his countenance over thee, and give thee a joyful
Resurrection. Amen.

Depart, O Christian Soul, in the name of God the Father, who created thee: of
God the Son, who redeemed thee: of God the Holy Ghost, who sanctified thee,
one living and immortal God, to whom be all honor and glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

CHAP. 29. A Prayer to be used by the assembly, after the sick man's departure.
O Almighty and everlasting God, seeing it has pleased thee to take this thy
servant out of the miseries of a sinful world, unto thy heavenly Kingdom:
blessed be thy name both now and evermore: and we beseech thee, O Lord, make
us that yet remain, to be mindful of our mortality, that we may walk
before thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life: and when
the time of our departure shall come, we may rest in thee, as our hope is,
that this thy servant now does: and that we with him, and al others departed in
the faith of thy holy Name, may rejoice together in thy eternal and
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. 30. Consolation against immoderate grief for the loss of friends.
TO sorrow for the death of friends, is a duty, by which, we give testimony
of our natural affection: which duty, both Christianity does allow, and
examples in holy Scripture do approve. Abraham mourned for Sara his wife: all
Israel, for Samuel the Prophet: the people in the Wilderness, for Aaron their
High Priest: the inhabitants of Bethulia, for Judith that Honorable Widow:
Martha and Mary for Lazarus: the twelve Patriarchs, for Jacob their aged
Father: David, for Jonathan his trusty and faithful friend: Christ himself
(says Jeremy) went not to his Sepulcher without weeping eyes: so that to
mourn for the dead, is a thing natural; but not to mourn at all, is against
Nature, against Christianity, against all duty. When the Apostle forbade the
Thessalonians to sorrow, he did not absolutely forbid all sorrow, but
sorrowing after the manner of the Gentiles; saying, Brethren, I would not have
you ignorant, concerning those that sleep, to the end you may not lament, like
those that have no hope. To sorrow as men without hope, is far from the rule
of Faith. Which teaches us, that if we believe, that Jesus Christ dyed, and
was raised again: in like manner, they that sleep in Jesus, God will bring
them unto him. Saint Augustine says, Contristamur, sed non sicut caetert, in
deed we are sorrowful, but not as others without hope. Non culpamus affectum
(says S. Bernard) sed excessum: we blame not the affection it self, but the
excess or want of moderation: and Christians, of all others, who believe the
Resurrection unto a better life, should raise up themselves from ouer-dolefull
passions. Our Savior before his passion, seeing his Disciples sorrowful for
his departure, says unto them, If you loved me, you would rejoice, because I
said, I go unto the Father, Ioh. 14.29. So it may be said to those that
mourn, for the miss of their friends, let not your minds be too much
troubled, or plunged in sorrow, because they are dead, for whom you thus
lament: God has taken them unto himself: they are gone unto their merciful
Redeemer. Therefore as in all other things, so in this, a moderation should be
had: yet in the best of Gods Children, mourning has not been a light passion
only: for great was the lamentatio^, that Jacob made at the supposed death of
his Son Joseph, when he said, I will go unto the grave to my Son sorrowing,
Genesis 50.14. Great was the lamentation that David made, when news was brought
him of Absaloms end, saying, O Absalom, Absalom, my son Absalom, I would to
God I had dyed for thee, 2. Sam. 1.17. Therefore he that said, My son, power
forth thy tears over the dead, said also, Comfort thy self.

Does God only lend us one another, and shall we grudge when he calls for his
own? shall we think much to follow the example of our Savior, who dyed, and
dyed for us? Who can be a Christian, and would not be like him? or who can be
like him, that would not dye after him? Can we love our friend, and not wish
he might be happy? and can he be happy, and not dye? Nature knows not what she
would have: we can neither abide our friends miserable in their stay, nor happy
in their departure: we love our selves so well, that we cannot be content,
they should gain by our loss. If their gain exceed our loss, then our
mourning for them, shows that we did only love our selves in them: whereby
our love proves injurious. That death is never to be deplored, that is
seconded by immortality. Since God then has taken them unto himself, with
whom they are now happy; let him have the^ with cheerfulness: so shall we
happily with them, enjoy God also in glory.

CHAP. 31. The custom of Funerals.
THe custom of Funerals, as it is ancient, so is it commendable. Abraham the
father of our faith, purchased a piece of ground to bury his dead in: and in
that place he himself, Sara, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph were buried with great
solemnity and much mourning. Tobias is commended for burying the dead; so is
Mary Magdalen for preparing of ointment for the burying of our Savior: so is
Joseph and Nichodemus, for the care that they had about Christ's Funeral. My
Son (says the Wiseman) power forth thy tears over the dead, and neglect not
his burial. Whence we may gather, that Funeral Rites, decent interring of the
corpse, exequies and seemly mourning, are with decency to be performed, as
the last duties of love in this world amongst friends.

The causes of solemnizing of Funerals, are three: Three causes of Funerals.


Toby and others, and religiously observed of the very heathen.

very seemly and convenient, with reverence to lay the corpse in grave, because
our bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which at the Day of Doom shall
be changed into a condition of glory: and by which, as by lively instruments,
both God has been glorified, and his people have received good: that then,
which has been so notable an instrument, ought not to be irreverently
entreated, though dead.

for we lay down the body in the earth, under hope, that this mortal must put
on immortality, 1. Cor. 15.

But Funerals are not to be used, thereby to relieve or benefit the the dead:
for they are rather comforts to the living, then helps to the dead. There
comes no part of blessedness to the dead by Funerals; but blessed are they
that die in the Lord. Lazarus wanted his Funeral, but the want thereof,
bereaved him not of his happy estate: he dyed in the Lord, and so was blessed.
Let us therefore live, as we will dye; and dye, as they that hope to rise
again, and live with Christ hereafter: for after this life, there is no help
remaining to the dead: to the living, there is mercy offered: but to the dead,
there remains only judgment.

FINIS.

