THE ADMIRABLE LIFE OF S. WENEFRIDE, VIRGIN, MARTYR, Abbess, and Patroness of
Wales.

Permissu Superiorum Anno 1635. (...)



THE ADMIRABLE LIFE OF SAINT VVENEFRIDE Virgin, Martyr, Abbess.

Written in Latin above ^00. years ago, by ROBERT, Monk and Priour of
Shrewsbury, of the Ven. Order of S. BENEDICT.

Divided into two Books.

And now translated into English, out of a very ancient and authentical
Manuscript, for the edification and comfort of Catholics.

By I. F. of the Society of JESUS.

Her memory is worthily honored among Men, whose Soul is passed to the joys
of Angels. S. Max. hom. in S. Eusebius.

Permissu Superioru^ M.DC. XXXV.

Noble and Princely Ladies, have made You a Stranger to Wales for the greatest
part of your life; yet your Marriage since, with a chief Gentleman of that
Country, and many Children borne there ( living parts of your self, as that
great Prince of Philosophers calls them) may vvorthily make me repute you S.
Wenefrides Countrey-vvoman.

Your singular Devotion besides, to that renowned Saint, and great Patroness
of WALES* which lately caused you ( as I have heard) to measure, with no fevv
Attendants of friends and servants about you, the whole length of that
Country, to visit the devout and memorable Plac^ of her Martyrdom, added to
that former Respect, and a constant desire vvithall in my self, to honor, in
what I may, and serve you; have povverfully prevailed, and moved (...) to
present this transla^ed Life of that glorious VIRGIN, ABBESS and MARTYR,
especially unto you.

Who as a bright morning star cease not even now, to shine, in her own
known Graces, and daily Honors done by devout people unto her; when as
other Stars, in this late darkness, ouervvhelming our Country, are quite
vanished out of living men's sights: I mean, innumerable Men, and Women of
Wales, very conspicuous in times past, for their admired Sanctity, and honored
in Churches dedicated particularly unto them, are now utterly forgotten, and
never again, as known Saints, to be honored by us, until in glory we shall
(...) ly Light has scarsly ever been obscured, in your own, or your
Husbands ancient Families.

A rare Happiness in these times, and to fevv Houses of Noble note, so
graciously affoarded by the Author of all Graces, whereby, their earthly
Worth, has with heavenly Graces ben happily matched; and are so eminently
now graced, by Your own particular Virtues, as S. Wen fride will gladly
accepe such a Patroness of heart Life printed, who so holily imitateth the
same, as it was acted by her. VVherin her Blessed Intercession has already,
and will I doubt not, perseuerantly assiste you, by obteyning of her Divine
Spouse, Temporal Blessings, and Eternal Graces, for you and yours; which I
daily vvish, and heartily pray for, as your ever devoted friend, and servant,

In Christ JESUS, I. F.

THE TRANSLATOVRS PREFACE TO HIS READER.

AMongst many people Apostolically converted to the Faith of Christ, the
Britans or ancient Inhabitants of England, are undoubtedly to be numbered, as
Origin 4. in Ezechielem, Tertullian contra Iudaeos, Dorotheus in his Synopsis,
Theodoret, and others have expressly affirmed, besides many home proofs, and
pregnant testimonies of that their so timely conversion. Which primitive Faith
of theirs having been, by a continual mixture of Romans, and other Infidells
living amongst them, and persecuting them for the same, exceedingly decayed;
was again cultiuated by Fugatius, and Damianus Apostolical Preachers, sent
for that purpose by Pope Elutherius unto them, the very next age after the
Apostles.

Since which time albeit they lost to the Saxons, the greatest, and
fruitefullest part of their Country, and were enforced to betake themselves to
the mountanous places of Wales (as now it is called) and Cornwall; yet have
they still until this last age, vnalteredly maintained their primitive Faith,
and Religion, as in the first two Chapters of the Protestants Apology for the
Roman Church, written by that learned man M. Brerely, is most clearly proved,
and demonstrated.

And to recompense perhaps, their Constancy therein, and sufferings for it,
they were blessed from time to time with great numbers of Saints, flourishing
amongst them; so as many Parishes in Wales and Cornwall, retain no other
names at this day, then such as anciently they received from holy Men and Women
living in them. Amongst all which no one was for sanctity and miraculous
testimonies thereof, more then S. Wenefride famously renowned; and her
Monuments now after a general vastation of Monasteries, and Saints memories
in our Country, remain undefaced, and no less glorious in Wales and England,
then S. Catherines Tomb on Mount Sinai, amongst fierce Mahometans and Paynims,
is straungely, yet conserved.

And as the Sepulcher of that renowned Saint, is by faithful people in those
Eastern parts of the world Religiously visited: so in like manner do
multitudes of holy Pilgrims frequently now resort unto the place of S.
Wenefrids martyrdom, and wonder to see such a flood of Cristall pure Wate^r
gushing there at once, out of the Earth, and a most sumptuous Chapel standing
yet over it. So that the three Fountaynes near Rome, which issued miraculously
out of the ground, where S. Paul was martyred, are not by much so curiously
with building covered.

Moreover, the waters of this holy Well, seem to have in the^ more then
natural virtues, by giving a musky, and most delightful sweetness to the
green moss growing on the walls of this stately enclosure, and coloring all
the stones which lie in the bottom thereof, with spots, as it were, of pure
blood, in them strangly appearing. Many miracles also have been done heretofore
to manifest the sanctity of this place; which because they have not ben by
depositions of persons sworn, and public Instruments authentically approved,
I forbear here further to mention, then as my Author does afterward recount
them; and will only say, that this Venerable and Costly monument, is the more
to be admired, for that it stands in so hilly, poor, and barten a Country,
which has scarsly any thing, but this fair building remarkable in it, exactly
therefore drawn out by M. Speed in his Table of Flint-shyre, and in his
Comment historically declared; yet with this tale ridiculously added, that
Catholics visiting the Well, do really believe the rednes of the stones to be
the Martyrs very blood, and the Moss growing therein her hair, like to one of
Ouids Metamorphosing Fables.

The Life of this Noble Virgin and Martyr, was diligently and authentically
gathered (as himself in his Prologue professes) by Robertus Salopiensis, a
learned Monk and Priour of Shrewsbury, of the holy order of S. Benedict,
living in King Stephens time, and for his great sincerity, by Cardinal
Baronius, Surius, Capgraue, Pits, Posseuinus, and others, worthily commended.
Whose book coppied truly out of an old authentical Manuscript, I have here
in sense faithfully translated, and done no otherwise in altering the Authors
old phrases, scarsely expressible in good English, then as if I had stripped
some body out of Welsh course frize, and put him into a suite of English plain
Karesay.

And if the matter of the Book, containing in it sundry strange and miraculous
passages, shall seem ridiculous to Protestants chancing to read them, it is
not much to be wondered at, sithence they will be their own choosers, even in
the very belief of sacred Verities themselves, divinely revealed; and slight,
as fabulous Legends, the Lives of Saints, written by S. Athanasius, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Climachus, S. Gregory, and other holy Fathers.

It sufficed my Author, and so it shall me, that devout Catholics for whose
instruction and comfort he penned first his History, will piously and probably
assent to that, which here is credibly proposed unto them, avoiding two
extremes therein; the one is of believing things ouerlightly, and the other of
believing nothing at all but as fancies, and selfe-opinions do guide them. The
which, in Sectaries following commonly this latter extreme in their iudg-ment
of Catholic writings, is a kind of Infidelity, and Impiety mixed together:
for if God be wonderful in his Saints (as the Royal Prophet tells us,
Psalm. 67.) and Christ in his Ascension toward heaven did so expressly promise,
that these signs should follow such as did believe in him, In my name (said
he) they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues etc. why
should we upon probable testimonies refuse to believe, such wonders to have been
done by Saints, as divine testifications of their true Faith, and great graces
here obtained?

The sacred body of this Virginal Blessed Saint, was solemnly translated to
Shrewsbury in this Authors time in the year of our Lord 1138. and reign of K.
Stephen, and there, in his own Abbey magnificently interred, that greater
honor and veneration, in so populous, and Religious a City (as that was then)
might be yielded unto it; where it continued, for above 400. years, till
Heresy prevailed utterly to overthrow in our Country the public profession
of Catholic Religion, and deface the Venerable monuments thereof every where
almost then extant. In which common ruin and calamity happening, the shrine of
this great Saint with numbers of others became sacrilegiously defaced, and her
sacred Relics lie since dispersed God knows where or how, until by his
omnipotency, they shall come to be united again, and most gloriously raised,
For God (says the same holy Prophet Psalm. 33.) does conserve all the bones of
his servants: and it has increased I doubt not their joys accidental in
heaven, to have had here on earth for his sake, their Relics by the Churches
enemies, and haters of true Religion contemptuously abused, after due Reverence
yielded by devout people unto them, and singular blessings received from
Almighty God by their powerful intercession.

Neither have modern Sectaries showed in any one act more, the little
Communion, which they have in this world, or are likely to have in the other,
with the Saints of Christ's Church, then in contemning, scattering, and
destroying their Relics, of which in general S. Ambrose writes thus, Sermon.
93. de Sanctis Nazario and Celso. If thou ask me what I honor in their flesh
and bones now dissolved and consumed? I honor in the Martyrs flesh, the
scarres of those wounds, which for Christ he sustained; I honor the memory of
his virtue still living; I honor in his ashes the seeds of Eternity; I honor
the body that taught me to love Christ, and not to fear the cruellest death
for him. Why should not faithful souls honor that body, which Devils
tremble at? etc. quod Christum honorauit in gladio, quod cum Christo regnabit
in caelo: that body, I say, which honored Christ in the sword, and which shall
reign with him in Heaven. These (says S. Basil speaking of the 40. Martyrs
Relics) are those who protect our Country, and like strong Towers guard us
from our enemies.

Wherefore I may use, of such as scattered, and destroyed the holy relics of
S.Wenefride, and many other Saints in our Country, S. Gregory Nazianzens words
in his first Oration against Julian the Apostata; Thou have not reverenced the
Hoastes slain for Christ, whose bodies, yea very drops of their blood, or
other small signs of their passions, can work the same effects which their
souls themselves can do; to wit such sudaine cures of infirmities and
diseases, as S. Austin lib. 22. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 8. affirms by S.
Stephens Relics, as they passed through Afrique toward Rome, to have been
done in his presence: which Protestants will as little believe, as they do the
miraculous passages of S. Wenefride recounted in this History, amongst whom
there is no one so strange, but the like may be found in other Saints lives,
by holy and ancient Fathers authentically written; and in some of them far more
strange: which piously read, and probably believed by faithful souls for
1400. years since, cannot but temerariously be rejected now, and contemned by
Protestants; whose corrupt Judgment, as I regard not in this my translation: so
I hope good Catholics will read it with edification and comfort. For it may
well delight them, as it does me, to think that we have anciently had such
store of renowned Saints living in our Country, as, besides this life, D.
Harpsfeld, the English Martyrologe, Prudentiall Balance, M. Broughton, and
other ancienter historians do witness, though the Names, and lives of the
greatest part of them are only in the book of life registered, and will in the
general Judgment be gloriously revealed.

That S. Wenefride likewise, should live again, after her head cut off, and do
the things which here are written of her in her History (the chief block
which incredulous Readers perhaps will stumble at) is no more hard to be
believed, then that Lazarus after he had been dead, and stinking in his grave,
should live again, sit at table with Christ, and be Bishop of Marsills in
France many years after. And if it be objected that Christ himself, did work
that miracle, able to do all things: I may well answer, that he promised his
own power, and far greater wonders then himself had wrought, to be done by
his servants, extant now in authentical Histories as certainly since
performed.

Lastly, I entreat my courteous Reader, for a Conclusion of this my Preface, to
note and mend with his pen, these ensuing errors of my Translation,
committed in the printing by strangers, wholly ignorant of our English tongue.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 24. lin. 7. dele that Page 45. lin. 9. where read which Page 75. lin. 1.
as read or Page 82. lin. 9. their read his Page 88. lin. 5. dele so Page 94.
lin. vlt. his read this Page 103. lin. 11. dele most Page 109. lin. 16. saying
read said Page 119. lin. vlt. noble Virginity, read Martyrdom for your
Virginity. Page 120. lin. 1. dele of your Martyrdom. Page 121. lin. 14. dele
he Page 128. lin. 5. Charity read Clarity Page 146. lin. 16. in, read in a
sudden Page 148. lin. 14. and to be, dele to Page 165. lin. 3. fall read fell
Page 173. lin. 10. Wales, read that Country. Page 204. lin. 7. streams read
stream Page 225. lin. 2. has read had Page 251. lin. 9. was read he was Page
269. lin. vlt. little read so little.
The Prayer, and Sequence of S. Wenefride, taken forth of the ancient Missall
of England, according to the use of SARVM.
Oration.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui beatam Wenefredam Virginitatis praemio
decorasti: fac nos quaesumus eius pia intercessione, mundi huius blandimenta
postponere, and cum ipsa perennis gloriae sedem obtinere. Per Dominum nostrum
etc.

The Prayer.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who have adorned Blessed Wenefride with the
reward of Virginity; grant us we beseech thee, through her poius intercession,
to set afide the delights of this world, and obtain with her, the throne of
everlasting glory. Through our Lord Jesus Christ etc.

SEQVENTIA.
VIrgo vernans velut Rosa,
Agni Sponsa speciosa,
Martyr Christi pretiosa,
Wenefreda floruit.
Ex Britannis oriunda,
Fide firma, spe iocunda,
Actu sancta, mente munda,
Mundi menda caruit.
Hanc occidit Carodocus,
Quem mox sorbet Orci focus,
Qui prauorum extat locus,
Quo Satan exuitur.
Huius argumento rei,
Fons ebullit nutu Dei,
Rubricatae speciei,
Quo caput praeciditur.
Mira multa hic patrantur,
Caeci vident, muti fantur,
Morbi omnes effugantur.
Cum fide petentium.
Gloriosa Wenefreda,
Maris fluctus nobis seda,
Ne fiamus hosti praeda,
Pia fer praesidium* Amen.
The same in old English.
As a sweet Rose in pleasant spring,
Of heavenly Lamb Spouse lovely fair
And Martyr dear of Christ our King
S. Wenefrede did flourish here.
Descended well of British race,
In Faith now firm, and Hope secure,
With works Holy, and Soul in Grace,
From worldly filth perseuered pure.
This sacred Maid did Cradocke kill,
And him Hell swallowed presently,
Where tears in vain do run down still
And Satan burns incessantly.
A Token sure of this strange thing,
Bespotted all with blouddy red,
A Well by Gods command does spring
Where Tyrant fierce cut off her head.
Here wonders great Gods hand does work
The blind do see, the dumb do speak,
Diseases which in bodies lurk
Are cured, when Faith is not weak.
O glorious Virgin Wenefrede,
To us the raging sea appease,
And free us so from Satan's dread
That he on us may never seize. Amen.
THE AVTHORS OWN PROLOGVE TO THE LIFE OF S. WENEFRIDE.
To the right Reverend Father, Guarinus Prior of Worcester, Robert, his
spiritual Son, Prior also unworthy of Shrewsbury, wishes Grace to walk
uprightly in the way of Gods Commandments.
SINCE he who has received the least talent at Gods hands, is bound charitably
to employ the same, in the service of him who freely bestowed it, and to the
good of such as may be edified and benefitted spiritually by it; not hiding the
same under a bushel, or reserving it to himself alone, which will become the
more his own by being charitably communicated to others in a holy imitation of
our Redeemers bounties, and graces upon us universally bestowed: I have justly
feared, out of this respect, to conceal from others, united in the same band
of Christian Faith, and Charity with me, and particularly from your Venerable
self, much respected by me, the Collection which I have lately made of the
Blessed Virgin S. Wenefrides life: the reading whereof, will, I doubt not, help
much to increase and perfect heavenly piety, and love eminently already, and
exemplarly to many shining in You; delighted also to dilate the glory of God,
and his Saints by works like to this, which you have by frequent letters, and
earnest entreaties required of me.

I have gathered the same, partly from the Ancient, and undoubted Monuments of
such Monasteries, and Churches as this Blessed Virgin is known to have lived
in, and partly from the relation of sundry Ancient Priests, for their great
learning sanctity of life, and Religious profession, made Venerable, and worthy
of all credit, in their assertions, and depositions unto me.

Three causes have moved me to publish the true knowledge of this Saints life,
so by me attained unto. The first, was a wholesome fear (as I have said) to be
reproved by my Eternal Judge, for hiding under ground, and not employing
profitably as I ought the talent which he has lent me. The second, was my
especial love, and devotion to this most renowned Virgin and Martyr of our
Country, that by her sanctity, and great merits here by me declared, she
might by faithful souls be the more deuoutely honored, served, and prayed
unto. The third, was a particular desire which I have charitably had to edify
my own Brethren, humbly in their devotions, and instantly entreating this
labor of me.

As for S. Wenefrides pretended journey to Rome, and other particulars vulgarly
only, and by persons of no credit fabulously reported, I have wholly omitted
them; and for borne likewise to set down some other certain, and undoubted
relations, concerning her life, because I would not be tedious, and ouerlarge
in my manner of writing: this which I have here gathered being sufficient, in
my opinion, and yours also I hope, to declare the eminent sanctity and graces
of this most sacred Virgin, by whose powerful intercession, and your holy
prayers, I hope to receive, at her heavenly spouses hands, some small reward of
my labors, and pains in this work undertaken.

THE FIRST BOOK, containing the History of S. Wenefrids Life.
CHAPTER I.
Of S. Beuno his great sanctity; how he was inspired by God to go to S.
Wenefrids Father; how liberally he was entertained by him, and had his only
child commended for her Education unto him.

IN the Western part of great Britanny, called Wales, co^ioyned Eastwards in
the same continent, with England, and rounded on all other sides with Seuerne,
and the Ocean, flourished in times past innumerable Saints men and women of
singular sanctity and merit, as their several Shrines, and stately Monuments
yet remaining do testify; amongst who me, in King Eluith the second his time,
one S. Beuno was for his wonderful graces especially renowned; who having, out
of a holy desire to imitate the poverty of his heavenly Lord, and to become a
true Pilgrim here on earth, forsaken his own Country, and trodden under
foot such glorious pompes, and pleasures of the world as he might at home have
enjoyed, made himself first a Moncke, and soon after arrived to such
perfection and sanctity of life, that he became a common Father of Religious
persons.

For no sooner had he built a Church and Monastery in one place, and settled
there in regular discipline and great purity of life, a certain number of
Religions persons, but he traveled to another part of the Country, to do
there the like also, as Gods holy spirit for the benefit of many, peculiarly
directed him; so that at length he entered into the territory of a rich, and
potent Lord called Theuith son to a chief Counselor of the King, and a
principal gouerner of the Country, who equalled his Illustrious birth, by his
Noble, Religious, and exemplar demeanours.

When Venerable Beuno came to this Lords house, he was most respectfully by him
entertained, and after charitable salutatio^s passed between them, the Saint
told him, that he was sent by God to erect a Church in his Territory, as he
had done in other places: and I doubt not (said he) but that God has by a very
fervent and peculiar inspiration, drawn me hither from his other servants,
with whom I lived else where with great content, to perform some great good
particularly for you, and yours. Wherefore for his divine Majesty's service, I
humbly entreat a small part of your ample inheritance, to raise therein a
Church, where others with my self will daily pray for your safety.

The Noble man moved with the Saints Venerable aspect and speeches, resolved
forthwith, to grant what he asked, and yielded this wise answer unto him:
With good reason, holy Father, am I bound to give you a part of what Lands I
possess, for the service of him, who gave all unto me: and I conceive indeed
that you have pleasured me much, in asking this Charity of me, more profitable
to my self, then to you. Wherefore this very Manor which now I live in, I do
from this time forward wholly alienate from my self and all mine, yielding the
possession, and all right thereof most gladly unto you: and having no more then
one child, a tender Virgin, the greatest delight indeed, and worldly joy of my
heart, I will besides bequeath her to your holy instructions, and prayers, that
her life may be holy, and her conversation such, as may be pleasing to God, and
contentfull to me also.

And having put the Saint in possession of the place, and promised moreover to
help him in the building by him intended, for a convenient abode of Gods
Religious children and servants, he chose afterward a place for himself to
dwell in, upon a high hill over against it, that when he could not enjoy the
holy man's presence, he might a far of look at least toward him, and recreate
himself often in the day, by being with him holily and continually employed in
the service of God, spiritually conjoined.

CHAP. II.
How S. Wenefrides Parents did help the Saint in building his Monastery; become
also with their Daughter his devout Auditors and obedient children: How
likewise S. Wenefride upon hearing S. Beuno's exhortations, resolved to leave
the world, and conserve her virginity, entreating him to move also her Parents
thereunto.

When the Saint began to build his Church and monastery the Lord Theuith did
not fail with means liberally to further it; vouchsafing also many times to
put his own hands to this holy work for the example of others, and the sooner
to finish it, as a thing by him for the glory of God, and good of his own
scule, exceedingly desired. So as the Church was no sooner raised, and made fit
for the holy man to preach, and offer the divine Sacrifice in, but himself
with his Wife and VVenefride his Daughter, were daily and deuoutely present, at
such holy exercises, he observing still this Custom to place his Child at the
Saints feet whilst he preached, willing her to be attentive to his speeches.
Which became not fruitles in her soul, holily even then in her tender years,
and graciously prepared fervently to practice in her life, such heavenly
documents as from the Saints mouth she continually learned. And her delight in
hearing him was such, as with leave of her Parents she often visited him alone
by her self, to be enriched the more, with a profitable, and practical
knowledge of divine verities from him.

And albeit her Parents, as their most gracious and only child, dearly
affected her, and had placed (after a worldly manner) the only hope of their
posterity in her, by resolving with an ample dowry to marry her in due time, to
some Noble and chief person of the (...) in this doubtful conflict, between
humane and divine love passing in her thoghts, the powerful illuminator, and
best Directour of holy souls interiourly suggested this counsel unto her, that
by Saint Beuno, whose holy speeches had occasioned this pious resolution first
in her heart firmly then rooted, to propose it unto her Parents, whose power
and authority she wisely knew to be very great with them, by reason they
honored him much, and in all things he said, gladly obeyed him. Wherefore one
day finding him alone, after his manner holily retired, she humbly and boldly
manifested her purpose thus unto him.

Holy Father, I come here to make known unto you the holy fruits of your
speeches, and Gods graces together in my Soul, whereby I have been
effectually, and (I hope) happily moved to estrange my self wholly from Worldly
contentments, and to consecrate my Virginity purely to him, who liberally gave
me the being I have, and has hitherto co^serued this enriching Treasure
graciously in me; Humbly beseeching you, to obtain for me, my Parents good
leave and permission so to continue. The Saint forthwith as beyond all
expression delighted to know that the seeds of divine grace sown by his
speeches, were beginning to grow so happily in her, willingly undertook to
obtain of her Parents what she desired through the confidence which he had in
their singular piety toward God, and readiness to do what his divine Majesty
would have them.

CHAP. III.
S.Beuno proposes S. VVenefrides desire to her Parents, obteyneth their grant
therein; they give away in alms her intended dowry, and joy to see rare
beginninges of future sanctity, and solid virtues in their Daughter.

THe holy man, a powerful Orator with the^ who as Children reverently
respected, and desired to obey him, in a heavenly language imparted unto them
S. VVenefrids desires, and made them withal capable to know, that it would be
no ordinary act of their due love to God, gladly and freely to dedicate to his
service what in this world was dearest unto them. Their answer unto him, with
tears of joy and praising of Christ for his graces affoarded, so singularly,
to their child, was no other then a full, and free leave given to S. VVenefride
of forsaking the world to serve her heavenly Spouse, who by so high and holy a
vocation, had called her unto him.

And so wishing her a happy progress therein, they resolved also to draw out
of the same this benefitt to themselves, that giving away to the poor, her
ample dowry for a secular marriage by them prepared, and distributing in holy
uses besides, a very great part of their own princely wealth and possessions
as troublesome unto them, and (with poverty delighted) due to the king of
heaven, who by espousing their Child was grown to be heir as it were unto
them; they might run more lightly the way of his commandments, and in a holy
freedom from worldly solicitudes spend, and end the remainder of their life in
gayning to themselves heavenly treasures eternally to enrich them: wherein they
became animated afterward by the rare example of their daughters virtues; who
ouer-ioyed at first with their leave so obtained, and freed from former fears
of worldly entanglements, daily extended herself to courses of sanctity and
perfection by frequent and fervent practices of humility, and punctual
obedience to her holy Father, permitted by her Parents freely unto her.

So as now a corner near his Cell where she might frequently visit him, and
delightfully draw, through her ears to her soul, the vital breath of his
heavenly discourses, was in the day time her delightfullest ma^sion: and
watching whole nights in the Church, kneeling or prostrate before the Altar,
when extreme wearines and deadly sleep did not possess her, was to be as in
her spouses bed-cha^ber, raised by amourous thoghts of his wonderful
Perfections, and rapt with pure delights, freshly every day communicated unto
her. So as to hear him only named caused a iubily in her soul, by blushing
and tears to such as beheld her sweetly discovered.

And as internal gifts did wonderfully adorn her; so were not external
graces wanting unto her: for her face was matchles in bewty and by a rare
modesty exceedingly graced. Her speech was sweet, never but leasurely and
wisely uttered. The comely stature likewise and proportion of her body in all
parts thereof, though poorly clad served to grace her in the eyes of others;
so as the Devil emulating those high beginnings of sanctity in her, and
fearing withal what her example might work in time, for the drawing of others
to like courses of Perfection, he ceased not to lay many snares to intrappe
her, and with new temptations raised by others for her greater merit and glory
at last, incessantly to try her; the beginning of which shall in my next
Chapter be declared.

CHAP. IV.
How S. Wenefride was found alone by the Kings son in her Fathers house; and
in danger to have been violated by him, escaped toward the Church, and was in
the way cruelly beheaded for constantly refusing to yield her pure body unto
him.

S. Beuno having fully ended the fabrique of his Church, and consecrated the
same to Christ, was daily visited by great multitudes of such as dwelled in
places near him; and amongst them S. VVinefreds holy Parents, never failed in
his sacrifices and sermons to hear him; so as on a sunday whilst they were in
the Church, and their daughter by some needful, or charitable occasion,
contrary to her custom, detained at home, Prince Cradocus, king Alan his
son, with a lustful wicked purpose entered the house, pretending that he came
to speak with the Lord Theuith her Father.

The Holy Maid, suspecting no worse of him at first, after courteous
salutatio^s passed between them, and excuses by her humbly made, of being
alone, vnattired, and unable in her Parents absence fitly to intertayne him as
his Princely dignity required, entreated him with all, to repose himself in a
more convenient room of the house, till after divine service ended, her Father
should return, and be free to speak with him. To which simple candor and
plainenes of her speeches gracefully uttered, the Prince infuriated with love
of her fair person, and lustful desires presently to enjoy her, replied, that
he would willingly expect the return of her Parents, if herself in mean time
would be pleased to consent unto his will, so devoted unto her that for the
favor then expected from her, he would according to his Birth, and Power, ever
afterward be ready to honor and serve her: threatening withal, presently to
ravish her, if she yielded not willingly to his motion.

The holy Virgin though trembling for fear, and blushing at the immodesty of
his speeches, yet lost not her wits in so needful an occasion; but present
with herself, and divinely also at that instant assisted, she humbly and
patie^tly answered him, that she doubted not of enjoying honor, wealth, and
worldly contentment by being espowsed to so Princely a person: but because
(said she) the present poor attire wherein you have so on the sudden taken
me, suiteth not to so high a motion, or indeed beseems your presence, give me
leave, I beseech you, to enter my chamber here by, presently to alter it.

To which her request (albeit with some loathnes to be delayed in his purpose)
he yielded his consent: so that she now finding herself in her chamber, freed
out of his hands, and hopeles of any rescue or succor to be otherwise
affoarded her, ran out by a back way, as fast as she could, toward the
Church, where her Father and his people would, she doubted not, be able to save
her. But he impatient in his desires, and suspecting indeed that which
happened, brake into the room, and finding her not there, pursued her so
hastily in her flight, as on a hill side near the Church he furiously
apprehended her, vowing with his sword drawn in his hand, and a countenance
full of wrathful indignation that if forthwith she consented not to his will,
so full of honorable love toward her, he would strike of that head from her
body, and deforme that face therein, which formerly he had loved.

Whereunto the holy Virgin (as another. S. Agnes to her carnal Lover)
undauntedly replied, that she had holily espowsed herself, and that also with
her Parents consent, to the king of Heavens son, in power, beauty, and
goodness incomparably exceeding him; and upon his experienced love toward her,
she would ever remain to him so faithfully, constantly, and vnalteredly
devoted in the affections of her heart, as she would gladly loose her head and
life, for refusing to admit any corriuall together with him. Neither shall
your terrors (said she) or threats draw me from the sweetness of his Love, or
make me not go, as I have promised, purely unto him.

Whereupon he, in a furious scorn to be slighted so by her, and knowing
withal that whilst she lived the veheme^cy of his love could not be assuaged,
gave her with his sword so deadly a stroke on the neck, as her head thereby
and body became instantly parted; the body falling without the Church door, and
the head within it; so as the floor thereof being somewhat declining, as built
in the hanging of a hill, it tumbled toward the people, kneeling together
before the Altar, astonishing them with the sight thereof no less, the
afterward it made them worthily to wonder, in seeing a clear and plentiful
spring newly then beginning to run out of the ground in the same place, where
her head had first fallen upon; visited since that time by holy pilgrims from
places far and near, and by miraculous graces, and cures frequently
affoarded to sickely, and grieved persons, famously renowned.

CHAP. V.
The lamentations made at S. Wenefrids death, as well by the people as by her
Parents; how likewise S. Beuno procured by his prayers a dreadful revenge of
her death upon the Author thereof glorying in his cruelty: and then putting the
head and body together, sought to obtain of God, her return to life again.

THE people moved with so doleful a spectacle, as was the virgins head, blood,
and body, before them, ceased not with outcries to express their grief and
anger together toward him that committed so heinous an outrage. Her Parents
likewise called by their cries to the place, lamented the loss of their holy
sweet child, lying butchered so villainously, and unexpectedly before them,
with more then imaginable expressions of sorrow.

S. Beuno in like manner, now ready to celebrate, leaving the altar, and
approachinge to the door, was wholly dissolved into tears of compassion and
grief to behold his dear Pupil and child, lying so cruelly murdered, before
her consecration to Christ, solemnly soon after by him intended: and beholding
in this his grief, her Murderer standing proudly by, and wiping his bloody
sword on the grass, so far from repenting him of the deed, without fear of
God or man, as he gloried proudly therein, with the holy virgins head in his
hand he went toward him; and looking him in the face, said unto him.

Thou wicked man, for as much, as without regard of innocence or beauty, thou
have murdered a Princely Virgin, no less noble then thy self, and art not, as
thou ought to be, sorry as well for the horrible sacrilege, as foul murder
here committed detestably by thee; I do here beseech, my heavenly Lord, for
the example of others at least, to execute presently, his dreadful Judgment
against thee who have murdered his spouse, troubled his people, violated his
Saboath, and besprinkled with blood this holy House, to his honor and service
consecrated by me.

And the effect of his words, to the terror and wonder of all present, was
such, as the Prince fell dead sudaynely before him; and which increased the
astonishment of the people, his dead body was presently either swallowed up by
the earth, or taken away by Devils, so as no sign thereof afterward appeared.

This done, S. Beuno often kissing the virgins dead face, and bathing it with
his tears, put it to her body, and coueringe them with his cloak, after he
had breathed in her mouth, prepared himself to go to the Altar, warning the
people and her Parents especially, to cease their lamentations, and convert
the^ into prayers to the Creator of souls, and the sole rayser of bodies
after death, that he would be mercifully pleased, as he called Lazarus to a new
life rotten before, and stinking in his grave; so to raise this Princely
Spouse here butchered for her love toward him: and this chiefly for the glory
of himself, edification of his people, and comfort of her parents, who so
freely before had dedicated her, in purity of life perpetually to serve him.

CHAP. VI.
How S. Wenefride was raised from death to life, and her Head reunited to her
body by S. Beuno's prayers, with a small white circle remaining in the place of
her Neck where it was cut; and other wonders gracing still the place of her
Martyrdom.

AFter the holy man had ended his Mass, and the people their prayers, lifting
up his hands toward heaven, he prayed in this manner: O Lord Jesus Christ, for
whose sake this holy Virgin contemned the world, and coueted heavenly things;
vouchsafe by the tender bowels of thy mercy, love, and bounty, to grant us the
effect of our vows now made, and prayers offered here humbly unto thee: and
albeit we are fully persuaded, that this Godly Virgin who lived holily, and
dyed constantly for thee, be now highly exalted in heaven also with thee,
wanting no more the society of us mortal and miserable Creatures; yet to
manifest thine Omnipotency, and that supreme dominion which thou have over
souls and bodies, never dead to thy power of raising and reuniting them; for
the greater merit also of her soul, whose body here lies before us, we crave
a new life for her, and that she may return, after a long and plentiful
harvest, of new merits here gained, more enriched and divinely beautified unto
thee, the beloved of her Heart, and Eternal spouse, who with the Father and the
holy Ghost, do rule in earth, and reign in heaven, for ever and ever.

And when the people had cried with great devotion, Amen unto his prayer, the
Virgin as newly wakened from sleep, wiped her eyes and face, besmeared with
sweat and dust before, as having tumbled on the ground, filling all present,
and her Parents there amongst them, with joy and admiration; observing also, as
they more fixedly beheld her, a pure white circle, no bigger then a small
thread, to remain in her fair Neck, showing the place where it had been cut
off before, and was miraculously then to her body conjoined; which because it
ever afterward remained co^spicuously seen after the same manner, Brewa, her
name before, is said to have been changed by the peoples great veneration, and
love toward her, into VVenefride by Wen, which does signify white in the old
British tongue, added unto it, and 2. letters thereof, for better sound quite
altered. And in many apparitions of her to men, and women after her second
corporal death, authentically recounted, this white Circle in her neck
conspicuously appeared; to give worldly souls thereby to understand, the
particular glory which she had received of her heavenly spouse for suffering
that wound, so constantly for him.

And whereas the valley where she was martyred, had been called ever before a
dry or barren bottom, it was for the Crystal fountain of pure waters,
breaking miraculously out of the ground where her head first fell, called
afterward in memory of this miracle, Finhon, which in old Welsh does signify a
fountain or well: and indeed as this fountain was wonderful in the first
origin thereof, so did the same by miraculous cures of men and beasts, either
bathed in that water, or drinking thereof, become famously afterward, renowned.

In memory likewise, that store of the Virgins pure blood had been spilt in that
place, and to signify withal how sweet a Sacrifice was offered there by her;
the stones of the Well, are either dyed, or spotted all over with drops, as it
were, of blood; and the moss growing about it, is, as with musk yet to this
day sweetly perfumed.

The miracle of her raising from death to life diuulged in those parts, gained
to S. Beuno so great a fame of his singular sanctity, and power with God to
obtain any thing, that multitudes thereupon of Gentil people in those days,
for their instruction in the Christian faith and Baptism, repaired unto him:
whose famous acts, and S. VVenefrids holy life after her being raised, shall in
the rest of this book be briefly declared.

CHAP. VII.
How S. Wenefride was solemnly veyled by S. Beuno, and fully instructed in the
true knowledge and holy practice of a Religious life. How likewise he took his
leave afterward of her, prophetically fortelling the sanctity of her life, and
her gayning to Christ of many souls.

S. VVenefride, as another Lazarus restored to a new life, with a fresh fervor
of heavenly love and devotion, applied herself to learn from so great a
master as S. Beuno was, how to raise her already-illuminated soul to the
height of Religious Perfection, choosing for that purpose to sit at the Saints
feet, as S. Mary Magdalen did at the feet of our Savior, never satiated with
the delicacies, which fell from that heavenly Table unto her, by his most pious
speeches, and devout instructions; and within a small time out a restles and
most amorous desire, fully to be (...) what an height of sanctity and
perfection the spirit of God, for the glory of himself and good of others,
intended to raise her, sought more and more to illuminate her soul by heavenly
documents, and practical lessons, for the direction of herself, and others in
a spiritual and Religious life; which she as a very apt scholar did not only
learn, but practice also in such a manner, that the Saint was ouerioyed to
behold her.

And finally finding her fully enabled not only to guide herself, but others
also, in courses of Perfection, he called her Parents one day unto him, and
told them, that as they had liberally granted unto him a Church, and house
for the service of God, and help of his servants: so had his divine Majesty
liberally requited their Charity toward him, by singular graces affoarded to
them, and especially to their Child, whom now they might well choose, and
propose unto themselves, as a Mistress able to guide them in their Redeemers
service, and as a bright shining pattern of religious Perfection. Wherefore
being divinely called to another place, I must here (said he) leave you to the
helps of Heavenly Graces, which will not be wanting unto you, persisting as
now you do holily in Gods service, and to the careful direction of your
Daughter.

And then, converting himself to S. VVenefride: Our Lord (said he) dear
Child, has appointed you to succeed me here in my holy labors, and abiding
in these parts, to go onwards happily your self, and to guide others
fruitfully, in the way to eternal life, as hitherto I have taught you. And
doubt not, but by the moving example of your death for him already sustained,
and the holy conversation of your life, you will be able to perform what I have
said; and in this very place, gather together for your heavenly spouse, many
pure and devout Virgins, guided unto him holily by you.

But know withal, that you shall not here end your days, but that after
seven years, in prayer and penance spent in this place, to your own great
Merit, and singular edification of others, our gracious Lord will call you to
another, that strangers also may in the knowledge and true service of him be
illuminated by you: and know also that heerby your memory shall become glorious
in future ages, and your merits published to the whole world, by miraculous
cures, and helps affoarded unto sickly, and distressed persons praying unto
you.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is declared S. Wenefrides grief for her Holy Fathers departure, and
his comfortable speeches unto her, concerning particular Graces intended by God
toward herself, and others by her.

THe Godly Virgin being excessiuely grieved at her holy Fathers departure, he
to comfort her in so deep an affliction, took her by the right hand, and lead
her to the fountain which miraculously had risen in the time, and place of her
martyrdom, and sitting together upon a stone near to the side of the well,
called therefore to this day S. Beuno's stone: You see (said he) here the
monument of your sufferings, and behold also the stones therein steyned as with
your blood, shed for your Heavenly Spouses sake; be you therefore now attentive,
and mindful of what I shall foretell you concerning three especial (...) ter
my departure now from you, into a remote part of this ^land, God will give me a
Cell near the sea shore, and when you would send any letters, or tokens unto
me (as his divine Majesty would have you to do, and I also do entreat the same
of you once at least every year) cast them only in the stream of this
fountain, and they will, passing into the Ocean by many creekes, and
turning-shores, be divinely, and safely directed unto me: which graces likewise
to the worlds end shall be diuulged gloriously of you.

And having ended this his speech, he led her back again unto the Church, and
said then unto her: Behold here this Church, and lodgings about it, which
having been built by the charitable magnificence of your parents, and my
labors, I leave unto you, to be converted into a copious monastery of Chaste,
and Devout Virgins, who moved by your instruction, and holy example of life,
shall together with your self, meritoriously practice those heavenly
docume^ts, which, by a perfect contempt of the world, and a full abnegation of
themselves (the two maine grounds of Religious perfection) I have often
delivered by my speeches unto you.

Stupendous miracles also done for the temporal and eternal good of many,
repayring to this very place, shall hereafter be effected, to the praise of
their heavenly Maker, and even bruit beasts shall not want their share in such
blessings; strive therefore, dear Child to exhibit your self in all things, as
a lively pattern, and example to others of all Virtue. As for my poor self,
I shall go whither Gods spirit will guide me, and ever retain in my heart and
soul, a Fatherly and loving memory of you.

(...) presence, always edified by your example, and instructed by your
speeches. Which words of hers, together with her flowing tears so moved the
Saint himself, as also her loving Parents, and others that were present, as
not to have their own sorrow, by staying longer with her, increased, after he
had blessed her with his hand, (as having no tou^g through grief to speak a
word more unto her) hastened his pace faster then modesty would permit her to
follow him, until at length he was gone quite out of her sight, never more in
this world to behold him; so that returning with her companio^s homeward, for
many days after she remained in her sorrow, till time at length, and discret
thoughts having eased her heart, she wisely and maturely, began to reflect upon
his heavenly discourses and lessons formerly given unto her, both how she might
practice them herself, and draw others also to the exercise thereof.

Which in a short time, Gods grace and the force of her holy Example, did so
happily effect, that a great number of Noble and devout Virgins, trampling
worldly wealth, Honors and pleasures under their feet, for the glory and
service of Christ, betook themselves to her government, and lived in religious
discipline holily under her; commanding or teaching them nothing but what
herself practiced first amongst them, as a shining clear Light, in safe paths
of sanctity, to guide them; yea with such a sweet mildenes, and motherly love
toward them, that with equal merit, and contentment they obeyed her commands,
and observed such rules as she had established amongst them.

Her wholesome aduises also they received as heavenly oracles; and such remedies
as in their difficulties, and temptations she wisely and compassionably gave
them, had a heavenly kind of force presently to free them. Mi- (...) she dwelt,
but far and near against her will, began to be so diuulged, from very
remoteplaces of the kingdom; so as many flocked to see, and speak with her,
and were so edified by her Angelical behavior, and wise speeches unto them,
that they were very loath to leave her company, and accounted those people
blessed who lived, always near her.

But most of all the holy Virgins that were placed under her care, and
domestical government, reputed themselves happy, by having for their Guide, no
less tender a Mother in her dear love toward them, then a wise mistress by
instruction and example holily to direct them, as her holy Father had formerly
taught her; toward whom during her life, she ever retained a most grateful
memory of her present life, and a thousand blessings besides received from him.
In particular also she forgot not the yearly token she had promised to send
him.

Wherefore partly with her own hands, and partly by the help of her sisters,
she had imbrodered a fair vesteme^t to send unto him, and having in the
beginning of the month of May, almost a year after his departure, finished the
same, wrapping it up in a woollen cloth, she went with her sisters, and many
others to the welsside, where casting it into the water, she said; O holy
Father I send here according to your command and my promise, this small token
of my love unto you.

The which, to the great wonder of many viewing the same, as it passed by the
well stream down into the River, and so into the sea, remained dry, and no
whit moistened by the water: So that in a short time, being divinely directed,
it was cast on the shore 50. miles off hard by the Monastery, where the holy
man lived, and he casually going forth took it up, wo^dring at first what it
should be, till at length opening the bundle (...)

CHAP. XI.
Of the great Talents which Christ gave unto S. Wenefride for the good of
others; and how she yearly remembered to send her token to S. Beuno, until, to
her great grief, she had his holy end revealed unto her; soon after which,
she changed the place of her abode, as he had foretold her.

ALbeit many Graces were worthily admired in his holy Virgin, by those who
knew, and conuersed with her, as her high and lasting union with God in
extaticall prayer, her great austerity, her Angelical purity and innocence of
life, her powerful authority in commanding her subjects, with admirable
humility and sweetness conjoined; yet nothing was more wonderful in her, then
the deep knowledge of heavenly verityes, and ardentzeale of her Creatours
glory, still manifested in her exhortatio^s to her own subjects, and speeches
to strangers that came to visit her; so as she did fill their hearts more with
enflamed desires to serve Almighty God, then their ears with the sound of her
words: ever attributing the graces of her soul first to Christ, and next to
S. Beuno his Great servant and her Teacher, to whom she every year sent her
promised token, or present after the manner aforesaid, until his holy death,
and circumstances thereof were revealed unto her; whose loss she frequently
afterward deplored, albeit she had been divinely assured, that according to his
wonderful merits here on earth, he was in heavenly joys, highly exalted: the
particulars of whose holy life from his Childhood till his death, and great
miracles afterward, are authentically recorded in his yet extant and certain
monuments.

After whose glorious discease, she began to feel most perfect desires in her-
(...) that place, in a devout memory of her martyrdom there for him sustained;
the which effect of her prayer was by his divine Majesty accordingly granted
as has been testified since by numberless miracles wrought at that Well, or
Fountain, in curing the bodily and spiritual infirmities of all humble
Clients and suppliants in that place unto her.

CHAP. XII.
How S. Wenefrid was directed by God in her journey to a holy man called
Deifer, whose Counsel she was willed to follow: of whom many things are by the
Author occasionally here recounted; and how worthy he was to be chosen by God,
for S. Wenefrides Directour in the place of S. Beuno.

S. VVenefride having in earnest prayer recomme^ded her journey to God, was
inspired to go with her companion, to one Deifer a holy Man, living at
Botauar, who should further direct her. This man was indeed, for his Sanctity
in those days, and miraculous testimonies thereof, famously renowned; for by
his prayers he had raised out of the ground a goodly spring in a place that was
dry before, and obtained likewise of God, that the water thereof should have a
supernatural force to cure all soars and diseases of such as did drink
thereof, or wash their soars therewith.

And amongst many miracles besides recounted of him whilst he lived, this one
performed after his death is especially renowned, to wit, of two Thieves who
having stolen two horses out of his Churchyard, posted with them most speedily
out of the Country: but the next day the owners finding the^ gone, humbly
prostrated themselves before the Saints Altar, and presented thereat two
Candels for the (...) purposely here recounted, that my Reader may know the
merits and great sanctity of blessed Deifer, to whom S. VVenefride, for the
knowledge of her journey, was divinely directed.

CHAP. XIII.
How S. Wenefride came to the Holy man Deifer, and after she had bin charitably
welcomed, and entertained by him for one night, she was the next morning sent,
for a further direction, to another Saint called Saturnus, dwelling at
Henthlant.

THe holy Virgin after due inquiry made, where the Village Botauar stood, and
of her way unto it, committing to God her Monastery at Finhon, and friends
there about, began with her companion cherefully her journey toward Blessed
Deifers Cell, eight miles distant; where at her arrival, she was by the Saint
charitably welcomed; and having related the cause of her coming, and how she
had been divinely in her prayer, directed unto him, he told her that concerning
either herself, or her journey, God had not as then revealed any thing unto
him: But have patience (said he) a little this night, to stay here at my cell,
and his divine majesty the whilst will vouchsafe perchance to reveal his holy
pleasure unto me.

Whereunto she humbly and thankefully agreed, as being confidently assured,
that Almighty God had not vainly, and to no purpose, directed her unto him.

The Saint, as his manner was, praying the whole night, a heavenly voice
toward the morning saying thus unto him; Tell VVene- (...)

CHAP. XIV.
How Saturnus entertained S. Wenefride in his Cell, and telling her, how much
God should be honored by her, he directed her to a holy place called
Guitherin, where she should find one Elerius, a Blessed Abbot of religious men
to direct her, and a monastery of chaste Virgins, who would gladly submit
themselves unto her.

S. VVenefride much rejoicing at the direction which Blessed Deifer had given
her, and confirmed in her comfortable persuasion that Christ the Author of her
journey, would not in his care and protection be wanting unto her, humbly and
thanckfully took her leave of him, and went on forwards with her companion
toward Henthlant where Saturnus remained.

Coming thither she was most charitably received by him, as having bin,
concerning herself and her journey, before hand divinely instructed; and
causing her to remain that night in prayer, and holy conferences with him, he
gave unto her (to her great comfort) many heavenly and holy lessons, and
toward the morning he told her, that their was a place, not far off called
Guitherin, stored with the precious relics of many Saints who had formerly
lived there, in great holiness of life, and deerenes unto God, blessing the
place for them; and for that cause greatly reverenced by devout people
repayring unto it. This place (said he) is destined by God for your earthly
habitation, and to be sanctified more by you; where also you shall find a holy
Abbot called Elerius, of so great mortification, prayer, and union with God, as
the world, and all contentments thereof are wholly dead unto him.

To this Man then am I willed to send you, and to tell you with all, that you
shall find there a heavenly tranquillity of mind, and a Monastery of chaste
Virgins, trained up from their Infancy in virtue, living also now holily
together, yet ordained by God to be raised by your holy Example and
Instructions to higher and perfecter ways of gayning sanctity and religious
perfection; and they will in time, for that end, humbly and gladly be ready to
submit themselves unto you, as to a Mother and Abbess, sent by their Heavenly
spouse purposly unto them.

CHAP. XV.
How S. Wenefride going to Elerius, was in the way, saluted most charitably by
him; how also after they had spent a whole night in prayer together, she was
led by him to the monastery of Virgins, and there after high praises uttered of
her, she was commended as a companion divinely sent unto them.

S. VVenefride replenished with incredible joy at Saturnus speeches unto her,
especially in hearing how holy a place she was going unto, and that she should
find there a Monastery of chaste virgins to live withal, desired to know of him
the way thitherward, craving withal his holy blessing for the better speed of
her journey.

The Holy man, guiding her himself some part of the way, for the great
reverence he bare toward her, after he had given her his blessing, caused his
Deacon to accompany her throughout the whole journey to Elerius, who being
divinely forewarned of her coming, and all other particulars of her life, met
her for honors sake upon the way, and after he had led her into the Church,
and prayed a while with her, he embraced her in a fatherly loving manner,
bidding her be of good comfort: for, said he, (taking her a part from the
Deacon, and her Companion) I have already divinely understood of your noble
Virginity, with other graceful signs of your martyrdom, in the place thereof
yet remaining, and will be gladly ready to help you, in the cause of your
journey unto me.

Whereunto S. VVenefride replied, that she had nothing more concerning herself
to tell him, but that as she had been by Gods holy spirit guided unto him, so
would she be humbly ready to receive his further directions, and be in the
future course of her life an obedient Child, and Scholar unto him.

The Saint by this her humble and modest answer being exceedingly edified,
told her, that they would if she pleased, spend that night in holy prayer
together, for their surer direction, in so important an occasion: and he
having received toward the morning, new illuminatio^s from heaven about her,
replenished with excessive joy, he rose from his prayer, and heartily embracing
her, willed her to be confident, that God would not be wanting in the wonted
effects, and gracious increasing of his Fatherly love toward her; and so
leading her out of the Church to the Monastery of Virgins governed by him, he
made this speech unto them.

Dear Children of God, rejoice, for that your heavenly spouse has sent a new
star of wonderful brightness to shine here among you, and provided such a
companion for you, as will with new treasures of merited graces enrich her own
soul, and yours also by the many rare examples, and high practices of
religious Perfection, which from time to time she will exhibit profitably, and
holily unto you.

For this is VVenefride that renowned Virgin, whom you have heard to have
suffered a glorious death, for her virginity defended. This is she, whose
Triumphs are sung in Churches, and her Trophies do yet illustrate the whole
Province which she dwelled in. This is she (...)

CHAP. XVI.
Of the commendation which the Saint made of S. Wenefride to the old Abbess of
the Monastery; and how she quickly there deserved his praises by her eminent,
and heroical Virtues.

S. Elerius having spoken so much of her sanctity generally to all the sisters
of the Monastery together, converted his speech unto the Venerable old Abbess
called Theonia, a very holy woman, saying thus unto her.

To you, most dear Mother, I recommend especially the respectfull
entertaynement of this sacred and dear spouse of Christ, sent (as I say once
again) divinely unto you, whereby you may gather how highly she is to be
honored by you; and joy withal that the Author of all graces has in sending
her hither so lovingly regarded you: and with this he departed, leaving S.
VVenefrid amongst them, who suitably to his high praises, began to shine in her
wonderful perfections, and by heroical acts of virtue to infuse a new Charity
amongst the^, easily by all discerned, and by the Abbess especially, who was
no raw beginner in regular and holy courses.

Her abstinence (they noted) was admirable, her prayer continual when
charitable occasions interrupted not the same, and very often extaticall; a
profound Humility in all her gestures and speeches plainly appeared, never
praising herself, and sensibly troubled when others for any thing did extol
her. Patience the first fruit of Charity, as S Paul reckons it, seemed to
have possessed so fully her heart, and so firmly settled the affections thereof,
as all Anger, Envy, and other disordinate Passions of that kind were wholly dead
unto her.

Her Commands had ever such sweetness and discretion conjoined, as it delighted
all the other to do whatsoe- (...) ioyed in her devout scholar and the other
was no less pleased in having such a Mistress, so divinely prepared by
Christ, for her.

CHAP. XVII.
How S. Elerius experiencing S. Wenefrids great wisdom and Virtue in many
conferences with her, preached her sanctity to his Brethren; And of the many
people, who moved with the fame of her Martyrdom and holy life, came from
places far and near, to see, and speak with her.

S. Elerius living with his Monks, not far off, in a most retired, austere and
devout manner, delighted many times to visit the holy Virgin in her Monastery,
discoursing of heavenly mysteries and virtuous Practices with her; and found
her so clearly illuminated in the one, and so solidly grounded in the other,
that having admired her himself, and returning home to his brethren was wont
to utter wonderful praises of her unto them.

And her fame at length by the mouths of many became so diuulged, as from
places far and near, infinite numbers of all sorts of people flocked unto
her, some to know, and see so noble, lovely, and holy a Virgin, who had lost
her head to save her virginity, and after death for her Spouses greater honor
had been by a holy Man miraculously raised to life, accounting the place and
company she lived in, most blessed by her presence: Others, by their great
importunity and earnest prayers obtained to see the white pure circle still
remaining in her neck, denoting the wound which in her martyrdom she
received; the sight whereof caused them to shed many tears of love, and joy
that Christ had triumphed so gloriously in her first, and sent her afterward
so happily unto them.

S. VVenefrid herself would gladly out of her great and profou^d humility have
denied them that favor; but a charitable desire of their good, gained many
ways thereby, and the other Virgins entreaties, made her willing to affoard
that contentment unto them, as fearing not be made proud with their excessive
praises, or apt to assume unto herself any merit, of being so praised; the
high knowledge indeed which she had of Gods attributes and perfections,
compared with her own fraylties and nothing, being two sure grounds of solid
humility in her.

CHAP. XVIII.
How S. Wenefride prophetically foretold in order, the death of Theonia first;
next her own; and lastly the holy end of Elerius: How also after the death of
Theonia, she was made Abbess by Elerius, and governed that Monastery in all
sanctimony, till her dying day.

BLessed Elerius visiting on a time S. VVenefrid in her Monastery, to confer,
as his custom was, of holy things, told her, speaking occasionally of the
happiness to dye well, that he had often rejoiced to think, that he should have
her near him at his death, and afterward to pray for him. No Father (said she
prophetically unto him) it will not fall out so, Christ having ordained the
contrary.

For first, you shall live to bury holy Theonia our dear Mother, and me also
some few years after; which done, you shall in short (...) at Blessed Elerius
his hands for her viaticum toward heaven, and breathed out her pure, and holy
soul, gloriously by Angels accompanied thither. After whose exequies solemnly
and devoutly performed, holy Elerius ordained S. VVenefride Abbess in her
place, to govern the Monastery, which she, in her humility, for a time
resisted, till Obedience to the Saint, and Charity to the sisters instantly
beseeching her to undertake the charge, prevailed with her.

No sooner was this Office thus imposed on her, but she, like a Candle set on a
candlestick higher then before, began to cast out more brightly her clear
rays of Virtues, and to give a new light and life, as it were to the whole
Monastery, by her heavenly speeches and examples; so as her humility by the
dignity of her Office, with her Patience, Charity, and other Virtues, though
admirable before, seemed now to have been very much increased in her.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the high esteem that S. E. lerius himself, with other Religious, and
secular Per. sons made of S. Wenefride: And of the miracles which she wrought
in her Monastery, by curing all sorts of distressed, or sick people repayring
unto her.

S. VVenefride had not lived long Abbess of the Monastery, before the fame of
her sanctity and wisdom came to be, throughout that whole province, so
universally diuulged, as Principal persons both of the Clergy and Laity
repaired frequently unto her, never departing without singular edification, by
her behavior and speeches Yea even thieves, and robbers themselves, with other
notorious Malefactors, by her gracious aspect and effectual exhortations made
charitably unto them, were from their evil ways, oftentimes reclaymed. And
now, not only in private houses, but in (...) poor, as not the least
superfluity was admitted by her; yea want of needful things, when at any time
they happened, were most welcome unto her.

She suggested also no lesson, more often to her sisters, then that they should
have alwais their Redeemers example before their eyes, to imitate those
Virtues, which he exercised for the^, and to be careful to have a pure
intention in what they did, only to please him.

Fortitude and Patience she ever praised, and commended unto them, as needful,
and certain remedies, victoriously to ouercom all temptations, wherein their
merit more, then in not feeling of them, consisted; for that by this, and not
by the other they should come to be crowned.

Prayer, she was wont to tell them, well made, did dilate their souls to
receive plentiful graces; and holy actions did fill them, when they were
humbly and fervently performed.

CHAP. XX.
How S. Wenefride was forewarned of her death, and prepared herself for the
same; And how by acquainting S. Elerius and her sisters therewith, she filled
their hearts full of heaviness, and affliction.

S. VVenefride as a full Pomegranut of heavenly merits, and ripened to fall on
the ground, that she might rise in a new spring, more gloriously afterward,
was in the fervor of her course, and speedy running toward the goal of
religious Perfection, warned by her dear Lord, that he meant shortly to call
her unto him.

Which most welcome news, as of a happiness long before, and instantly
desired, raised the thoughts and affections of her soul to a more fervent
union with her Creator, in extaticall prayer for whole days and nights
together, in humble acts, and painful exercises of her Charity toward
others; in fasting likewise and other great austerities, even as those, who to
make a long journey in a short time, do redouble and widen their paces.

And that she might not leave her beloved friends vnwarned of her departure on
the sudden from them, she imparted first to S. Elerius himself, the Call she
had received from her Savior, and afterward to her sisters; whose sorrow
thereat was little inferior to the excessive joy, which herself, by the
comfortable thoughts of going to her Lord, continually received, and as well by
flowing tears as doleful speeches they expressed the same unto her. But she,
as with a face then wholly turned from the world toward heaven, entreated them
to conform their will to their Creatours pleasure therein, and not to doubt,
but that she should by her prayers in heaven, be more profitable, then by her
presence here on earth she could be, unto them.

For that (said she) is not a Country of ignorance, but of knowledge, clearly
revealed, whereby the Blessed understand their friends necessities here on
earth, and being united to the fountain of Charity it self, they will be no
less powerful, then ready to procure speedy helps and remedies for them;
which I do promise to do for you, my beloved dear Children, after Christ shall
take me unto him.

And whereas (said she) to other worldly souls unwilling to dye, and fearful
to behold the face of their high ludge, whom they are guilty in their lives,
grievously to have offended, Death comes as a cruel iaylor to break down
their mortery houses, and to drag them forcibly unto him: So, to holy Souls,
he ever comes as a welcome guest, and therefore finds the door of their heart
open to receive him; like unto men expecting the return of their Lord from his
hea- (...) she with a glad patience, to go to her heavenly Spouse, silently
sustained, often and earnestly beseeching him, not to let the infernal Enemy
be frightfull unto her in her last agony.

And finding by her much weakness, and forces decayed, that her dissolution
approached, she called for the Saint her Confessor, to receive the divine
Sacrament of him, as a safe protection in so dreadful a passage. And
behoulding her sisters kneeling round about her, and grieuing above measure to
loose her presence, no less comfortable then profitable unto them; Dear
Children (said she) grieve not so, I beseech you, at my happiness thus
approaching, but rejoice rather with me, that I shall fully now enjoy him in
heaven, whom in earth here, I have loved. Tread also, so nearly as you can,
my footesteps, by serving him as I have done, and contemning for his sake, such
baits, and base pleasures as the world can affoard you. Let your promised
faith to him be inuiolably observed, who by his mercyes and merits is only able
to bring you comfortably to this passage, and eternally to crown you. Conceive
your bodies, though youthful and fair, to be (as truly they are) but
loathsome prisons of your soul, and mortery houses, apt, if you take not heed,
to pollute, and defile you: and persuade your selves assuredly, that so
miserable a world as this is, and full of temptations, can yield no true
happiness or pleasures without dangers unto you.

To others also that came to visit her, she ceased not at times as her voice
would serve, to give profitable aduises, and above all, that they should be
ready, for that passage which herself then was entering into; and to spend
their lives in such sort, as they might receive comfort when that moment should
approach, on which Eternal weal, or woe depends.

(...) sweet manner, comforting herself and him also, by a certain hope, they
shey should meet again ere long, and live in heaven eternally together; she
afterward humbly besought him, that her body might be buried near unto
Theonia her holy Mother, which the Saint gladly promised. And soon after, in
an act of fervent prayer, upon the 3. day of November she breathed out her pure
soul into her Redeemers hands, ready to receive it.

Which being perceived by S. Elerius, and the sisters praying about her, they
fall into such new complaints, and sad expressions of their sorrow, that the
Saint was enforced, to smother his own grief, and to comfort them all he
could, by declaring, that she was only gone to Heaven before them, where
gloriously, united with God, she would be no less powerful and ready then when
she lived in earth, by her prayers to help them.

Her body nothing changed in the louelines thereof by death, was near unto
Theonia solemnly afterward interred, even in the ashes, as it were, of many
other great Saints, buried in that place before, amongst whom Cheb and Sennan,
the one lying at her head, and the other by her side, were for sanctity and
miracles in their days famously renowned, and had Churches therefore (even yet
remaining in that Province) to their memories erected; wherein by wondrous
signs their glory with God is now frequently testified.

And albeit these two, and other innumerable Saints have been interred in that
holy ground; yet was the same, for S. VVenefrides Sepulcher afterward
especially honored, and graced with numberles, and notorious miracles, by her
prayers there obtained.

S. Elerius also, soon after holily disceased, and was buried in a Church
erected to his Name and memory, in which at this very day Almighty God, through
his merits and prayers works miraculous cures upon persons either diseased,
or distressed.

The End of the first Book.
AN APPENDIX
Of the Translatour, concerning diverse particulars of S. Wenefrids History,
omitted by the Author.

MY Author (Courteous Reader) more careful to write plainly and truly his
History, then to observe the conditions of an exact Historian, speaks not of
the ty me wherein S. Wenefride lived, as he should have done; nor when her body
was to Shrewsbury translated; nor whether S. Elerius, or other Saints relics
mentioned in her life, were with it transferred. Wherefore, I will here add
what I have read, for your further satisfaction.

First therefore, I find in a learned collection which a friend of mine has
made of British and English Antiquities, either wholly omitted, or obscurely
expressed by other writers; that S. Wenefride lived about the year of Christ
660. And whereas S. Bid flourishing also at that time has made no mention of
her at all in his History, amongst the other Saints of our Country; it might
well happen, because the continual iarrs, and bloody quarrels between the
Britans and Saxons, did so hinder all commerce between these two Nations, as
that it seems the Acts of one Church became almost wholly unknown unto the
other, especially in Yorkeshyre, where S. Bid most commonly lived, far distant
from any part of Wales: so as his silence of her, and of S. Elerius (in the
Roman martyrologe acknowledged) as of many other British Saints gloriously
flourishing in those days, and before insinuated also by my Author, disproueth
nothing that is by him, or any other learned Anti quary affirmed.

Her body was in the year of our Lord 1138. translated to Shrewsbury,
together with the relics of many other Saints near (...) ruder parts of
the world then the others did, the histories of their holy lives have not been
by learned men's pens equally diuulged.

In so much, as M. Camden, no favorable reporter of such Catholic Acts and
Monuments, rarely now extant, speaking of the old british Monks of Glastenbury
Monastery from the first A postolicall times of that Church, has these words,
in his Britannia: Primis his temporibus viri san ctissimi etc. In these first
times (to wit of the British Church before the Saxons invasion of England, more
then 1100. years since) many most holy men night and day attending to the
service of God, lived in this place, maintained by the Kings liberality and
trayning up youth in piety and liberal sciences, embraced a solitary life, that
so with greater quiet and repose they might attend to the studies of Divinity,
and exercise themselves in all severity, to bear the Christ of Christ etc. Of
which sort of Monks so by him described, were very many Religious men,
dispersed in like manner though all parts of that Church, living either in holy
Communities as Monks, or else alone as Hermites in solitary places; of which
number were S. Beuno, S. Saturnus, S. Deifer, S. Elerius, S. Cheb, and S.
Sennan mentioned in this life of S. VVenefrid.

And, as Godly men, so Holy Virgins also, did live in houses religiously
together, like unto those mentioned by S. Hierome, who lived at Bethleem,
under S. Paula, and Eustochium her Daughter: and such was the house wherein
S.Wenefride lived, first at Finhon the place of her martyrdom, and afterward
at Guitherin (called in Latin Witheriacum by my Author) where she dyed happily,
and was honored 600. years together for a Saint, until her sollemne
translation, as is aforesaid, to Shrewsbury; where also she has been by God
glorified with many miracles even until our days, as she had been before both
at Finhon, and Guitherin, the places above mentioned.

THE SECOND BOOK, containing the miracles wrought at S. Wenefrides Well; as
also upon her Translation to Shrewsbury.
CHAP. I.
Of the great concourse of people to her Well, graced by miracles, no less
then before, after her departure from that place.

ALmighty God ceased not by wonderful miracles to grace the holy place of S.
VVenefrids martyrdom, after he had inspired her (as has been said) before her
death wholly to abandone it, to the end devout people, perchance, in other parts
of the Country might come to know the eminent sanctity of her life, and
herself perfect the graces of her soul, by living humbly, and obediently
amongst strangers, as she did for many years, until by her singular merits
and exemplar life, she was ordained against her will, to be a holy Mistress
and grateful Gouernesse of many Virgins

We may also conceive, that this humble Virgin, (who was wont to blush, yea and
shed tears, when she heard herself praised) desired, and obtained of her
heaueuly Spouse, to go out of the way, as it were, and absent herself from
that place, where she could not choose but be seen, and honored by multitudes
of people, daily visitting her Well, as the miraculous Trophy of her
martyrdom there sustained; wondering first, to see such a source of pure water
breaking out of the ground upon which her head first fell; next, to behold the
stones therein, as with drops of her blood strangly stained, or died rather;
and lastly to smell the green moss growing about the Well, with a musky
sweet odor more then naturally perfumed.

It was (I say) a pleasure no doubt, and much by the holy Virgin desired, to
live out of the noise of her own praises there daily resounded; especially
when to the wonders of the place it self, other miraculous Cures began to be
wrought upon leaprous, blind, and all kind of diseased persons, either by
drinking of the water, or bathing themselves in it: of which some few, in the
Chapters following shall be by me declared.

CHAP. II.
Of a blind maid restored to her sight, by washing her head in S. Wenefrids
Well, and praying in her Chapel.

A POOR Carpenter dwelling not far from S. VVenefrides Well, had a Daughter
borne blind, who having hard of the wonderful cures wrought there, by the
intercession and merits of that holy Virgin, ceased not to importune her Father
daily, that she might be ledd to that miraculous Well; and having finally
obtained the same, she first bathed her head in the water thereof, and then
being conducted to the Chapel near unto it, she spent the whole night
deuoutely in prayer, that God would be pleased through the merits and
intercession of the Saint, there martyred for his sake, to bestow upon her
corporal sight, the better to serve him afterward: and falling into a
slumber, toward the morning in a corner of the Chapel, she was no sooner
awaked, but she found herself to see perfectly; which being perceived by her
Father, he ceased not, together with his Daughter, joyfully to proclayme that
miraculous favor by S. VVenefrids powerful prayers, evidently obtained.

The fame of this miracle generally diuulged, bred a fresh devotion in others,
to repair in like manner to that place, for obteyning help, and comfort in
their corporal and spiritual distresses; and they were not frustrated of
their hopes, faithfully, and deuoutely so conceived: whereby the former great
Fame of the place, became more universally and gloriously diuulged, to the
honor of him, by whose omnipotency and gracious goodness these miraculous cures
were multiplied, delightfully glorified in the honors done to his Saints, and
in their glories eternally exalted.

(...) before the Altar, uttered his co^plaintes to the Saint of the injury,
and loss thereby sustained, beseeching her to punish, as they deserved the
wrongful Authors of that and other mischiefs, to the great harm of honest
people sinfully committed, and by some exemplar revenge taken upon them, to
warn, and deter others, from violating in like manner, the safety of her
Chapel, and reverence due unto it; and so departed onwards in his journey, not
frustrate afterward of what he had prayed for.

For Almighty God, in honor of S. VVenefrid and her Chapel, forthwith
afflicted the Thief that had unloosed, and taken away the horse, with such a
raging extremity of pain, throughout his whole body, that he often desired to
be freed by death from so intolerable a torment, daily increasing on him, till
the humors which caused the same, fell into his right arm, making it first to
swell, and afterward to rot in a most horrible, and loathesome manner, until
at length humbled by affliction, and hopeles of all ease otherwise he came in a
very penitent manner, to the Saints chapel, confessing his fault, and
demanding her pardon, with many tears, for so great a wrong and insolency
committed there by him.

Upon this his humiliation he became eased by degrees, and by little and little
cured of his paineful ulcer, praising God, and the holy Martyr for their
mercyes toward him, and remaining ever afterward whilst he lived, a dreadful
example, to warn others, from violating, as he had done, the sanctity of that
place, or wronging S. VVenefrids clients running for succor in their
distresses unto her.

The Fame also of this miracle diuulged abroad, increased much the peoples
opinion of the place, and their devotion toward the Saint, who had showed
herself so powerful a Patroness of her Chapel, and Defendresse of such, as
for their safety, and protection from injuries, repaired unto it.

CHAP. IV.
How certain Thieves who had stolen a Cow near to S. Wenefrids Chapel, and
driven her through Rocky ways, were notwithstanding traced by her footesteps
in the hard stones miraculously imprinted, and so enforced to leave her to the
Owners pursuing them.

ANother Miracle, no less wonderful then the former happened in this manner.
Certain Thieves having stolen a Cow, out of a pasture near to S. VVenefrids
Chapel, and driven her through Rocky high ways, that they might not by her
footing be traced, it fell out far otherwise: for the Cow trod not one step,
but as if she had gone in durty deep ways, whereby her footing, and the thieves
also themselves, so plainly appeared, that the owner and his Neighbors, the
next morning missing the beast, did very easily see which way she was driven.

Whereupon they following the tracke with all speed, came so near to overtake
the Thieves, that they were constreyned in great fear to fly away, and leave
the Cow behind them to their pursuers. Who at better leisure afterward
considering how the Cowes feet had miraculously made prints in the hard stones
as she was driven away, but not as she returned, percea ued it to be an evident
miracle, and for such, to the honor of S. VVenefride, by (...) king-trade, to
abstain likewise from theft, especially out of any place, near to the Saints
Chapels.

CHAP. V.
Of daily Cures done upon sick children thrown into the stream of S.
VVenefrids Well; and of others also cured miraculously of agues, and hot
feauers, by drinking of the same water.

IN process of time, this sacred Fountain, the Trophy, and triumphant sign
of S. VVenefrids Martyrdom, became so famously renowned, for miraculous cures
done by the waters thereof, that Mothers were usually wont to throw their young
children sick of any disease, into the stream running from the same, who
became presently cured, by the touch of those waters.

Such also as had Agues, or hot burning Feauers in any part of the Country,
were wont for a certain and present remedy thereof, either to drink a
draught of that pure fountaine-water, or if they had it not at hand, to put in
some one of the blouddy stones, taken out of the Well, into a draught of any
other water, and became thereby presently cured. In like manner such as had any
swelling or soar about them, were accustomed to bath the part affected, with
the said water, and found present remedy thereby.

The first use of which remedies, for all sorts of sores and diseases, is said
to have been taught by the holy Virgin-Martyr herself, who visibly after her
death (...)

CHAP. VI.
How diverse thefts from places near unto the Well, were by S. Wenefride
miraculously punished; and how the Authors became warned and penitent for the
same.

THE streams of water breaks out of Saint VVenefrides Well, in such
abundance together, as within one furlongs space it drives a mill, never
standing still for want of water even in the greatest drought of summer, nor is
ever hindered from grinding, by any freezing of the stream, by which it is
driven in winter.

This Mill^, by certain thieves, was upon a time robbed in the night, and the
Irons thereof were carried away to be put into another mill built not far from
thence by those that stole them: but through the merits of S. VVenefride a
strange event happened here about for the Mill into which these Irons were put,
could never be made to turn, or grind any thing therewith: so as the stealers
thereof moved at length by the miracle more the^ once experie^ced, brought them
back again, and confessed their fault penitently in the Saints Chapel;
warning others thereby not to commit the like theft in placesneere unto it for
fear of being, by her prayers, punished for it.

By this Miracle so diuulged, many people also were moved the more to glorify
God, in those wondrous things which he did, to testify, the great merits of
this holy Virgin S. VVenefride, joyfully relating to one another, how S Beuno's
prediction of the innumerable Cures which should be done by those miraculous
waters, and by the Virgins own prayers, began to be now fulfilled, when as
humbly prostrate on her knees before her departure from that place, she
besought her heavenly spouse, corporally to bless, and spiritually to
sanctify those who in (...) of his Court, called Roger, through his great
piety and zeal to mantayne Gods servants, built in Shrewsbury a sumptuous
fair Monastery, and endowed the same with sufficient revenues, to his own
great praise, and the benefit of that City; which Monastery being ended, and
Religious men with their Superior placed therein, they began, piously to
complain that they wa^ted relics in their Church, whereas that Country of
VValts in innumerable places was stored abundantly with them, by reason of so
many great Saints, men and women, who formerly had flourished in great
sanctity of life, and miraculous testifications thereof, throughout that whole
Kingdom.

Whereupon to have their Church hallowed, and their new Monastery guarded with
such sacred pledges, munifice^tly placed, and duly honored by the^, they began
to inquire after some special Saint, whose Relics might happily be gotten
for that purpose by them; during which deliberation of theirs, a Monk of this
their Monastery, fell very sick, in body, and so distracted in mind withal,
that not only his Brethren there, but in Chester and other places also, hearing
of his pitiful case, ceased not to pray most heartily for him.

And as in Chester-Abbey, the Subprior of that Monastery, a godly man, called
Radulphus, had one day ended his prayer for that end, he fell into an unusual
kind of sleep, to whom a woman, the mean while, in a very glorious habit
appeared, and said: If you desire the sick Monks health, let some one of you
go, and say a Mass in the Chapel, near S. VVenefrids Well for him, and he
shall presently recover; and so she vanished.

The Moncke heerewith awaked, durst not for some time impart this vision unto
any, as fearing little credit would be given unto it, until at length, the
(...) wise began to be singularly devoted unto her, and labouted by all means
possible to get some particle of her Virginal sacred Body unto them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the earnest desire which the Abbot and Monks of Shrewsbury had to get the
body of S. VVenefride unto them: And how finally after many years, and very
great difficulties, they obtained the same.

THe Abbot and Monks of Shrewsbury, for many years persisting in their holy
desires, of getting S. VVenefrides body, obtained at length in the peaceful
reign of King Henry the first a Grant thereof, but by reason of wars, and many
tumults happening in that Country after this Kings death, it was not effected
until the second year of King Stephens reign, when as the holy Abbot Herbert
in a consultation of his Monks, ordained Robert his Prior, together with one
Richard, a chief Monk of the same Monastery, to go into Wales about it.

Before whose going, the said Robert, more solicitous then others in the
business, directed diverse letters unto friends in Wales, best likely therein
to assist him, who promised gladly their help, and wished him to hasten his
coming amongst the^. Wherefore beginning his journey he first visitted the
Bishop of Bangor, in his way, and was by him directed to a Principal Lord who
ruled in that Country, and by him him very courteously received.

As soon as the Noble Man, had understood the (...) that told them, how the
Inhabitants therabout, having heard of their coming, were exceedingly
troubled thereat, and absolutely resolved to hinder them in their pretense, and
not to suffer the chief Saint, and Patroness of their Country, by strangers
to be carried away from them. And (said he) from this their resolution
generally taken, no favor or power of any man living, will be able to draw
them.

These words being plainly and sincerely uttered, very much troubled Prior
Robert and his companions all that night; but yet praying all together, and
humbly craving Gods direction and assistance in their intended business, they
nevertheless adventured, to prosecute their journey, and coming the next day
near to the place, Prior Robert thought good to remain himself in a Farmers
house, privately lodged that night, and to send the Prior of Chester and the
other Priest to Guitherine before him, as men well borne, and known in that
Country.

After they were gone, Prior Robert, rising as his custom was by night to say
his mattins, was certified by one of his company, a good devout man, that a
glorious Virgin had appeared that night to him, bidding him go to his Prior,
and tell him from her, that he should be of good comfort, because he should
joyfully and prosperously, effect the business which he came for, by the help of
her, whose honor he has so particularly sought; and having accepted of his
holy intention, will join also with him, in the performance thereof.

Prior full of good hope, to obtain that, which his speech imported; so as in
the morning, he comfortably declared to those who were with him the vision he
had also received, and willed them therefore to prepare presently for their
journey. But before they were ready, a messenger came from the other Prior
purposely sent, to hasten them forwards and to certify them withal, that
Almighty God, and the Saint herself had disposed all things, so prosperously,
for them, that they should not return without obteyning what they desired.

This joyful message received, they went on, and making what speed they
could, they came early in the morning to the Church where S. VVenefrides body
was certainly interred, and having for a while at her shrine deuoutely prayed,
the chief Priest of the Parish came in, and courteously saluted them, as they
did him likewise in a very humble manner, earnestly entreating him withal, to
be their charitable helper, in carrying away the Saints body with them, to a
place where it should be more magnificently interred then there it was, and
daily honored, by multitudes of people, desirous to have so sacred a Treasure
reposed amongst them.

CHAP. X.
How the Parish Priest courteously condescended to their desire, as having been
before hand divinely prepared, to deliver the body of S. Wenefride unto them.

THe good Priest patiently hard their request, and courteously told them, that
he for his part, would easily grant what they desired of him, as having had
for sometime before, the will of God, and of (...) Note this place well, and my
words also, whereby I do command thee, that if some months hence any persons
come to open this Sepulcher, and to carry away she Saints body with them,
hinder them not in their holy design, but assist them in all thou may, least
by doing contrary to what I here divinely foretell thee, some painful and
vnremediable sickness, to punish thy disobedience, do happen unto thee. And
having uttered these words, this Angel, as I think he was, vanished away. So
as I will not fail for my part, to help you in your purpose, by persuading
others also, who are owners of this village, to yield willingly the Saints
body: and for this purpose I have ordained them to come themselves hither unto
you.

CHAP. XI.
The Priours speech unto the people assembled in the Church, about obteyning
their leave to carry away S. Wenefrids Body; and how their consent was finally
obtained.

THe Priour seeing the people in great numbers assembled, by an Interpreter
told them, that he and his Companions were come, divinely warranted, to
procure of them S. VVenefrids body, that in their City, and Monastery much
devoted unto her, it might more the^ it could be there, honored and respected;
and the Blessed Virgin Martyr herself (said he) as your Pastor here partly
knows) has by many visions manifested her willingness hereunto, and will not
be pleased with such as shall dare herein to resist her. To which speech of
his, they gently harkened, and became inclined thereby to grant what he
requested: one only amongst them opposed himself, and clamorously told them
in presence of the rest, that they should never be deprived, by his will, of so
sacred a Treasure, as was the body of that Saint, who had lived holily, and
dyed happily in that place, leaving her relics to be honored by them, no
less then they had been by their Ancestors before them, Allmighty God having
from time to time, by miracles, approved the pious devotion of people toward
them.

This passionate boldness of the man much troubled the Prior, so as to stop his
mouth, and gain his consent, he caused one of his company to give him money
very largely, by which he was so altered, as that others not knowing the reason
of his change (carefully from them concealed) wondered thereat; and imputing
the same to some miraculous operation wrought by God and the Saint, began to
yield their own consents somewhat more willingly, then before, and finally
after many consultations passed among themselves, at last they all fully
agreed, and consented that the Saints body should be presently taken up, and
delivered decently unto them.

For which resolution the Prior and his companions very heartily and courteously
gave them thanks, and without any delay desired to enter the holy I Will, wherein
the Saints Shrine had been for many ages deuoutely visitted by holy Pilgrims,
and many wonderful cures upon diseased persons frequently performed.

Neither did they find her body there alone, but many holy bodies both of men
and women also were found lying by it; having without the place of their
burial, a wooden lardge porch, wherein the people used to kneel and pray;
esteemed also sacred of it self for this continual miracle, that if any beast
came to feed of the grass near unto it, it presently dyed; and (...) racles
wrought at Guitherin Church, by S. VVenefride, and other Saints there
interred, this one as freshly happened, was unto the Prior and his companions
thus certainly recounted.

A certain laboring man two years before, presumed, for some use, to cut
down a bough of an old Oak, growing near the Church door in holy ground
yielding also a convenient shade, and shelter to such devout pilgrims as could
not sometimes enter into the Church for the Concourse of people, but were
forced to stay without, and pray under it: Who had no sooner struck his
Hatchet into the bough, but it became therein immoueably fixed, and his whole
hand and arm did likewise cleave so fast unto the handle of the hatchet, that
they seemed to have grown unto it, and by no force were able to be removed.

The poor man finding himself in this distress, cried out for help, which
his neighbors hearing, they came running to the place, but finding him in that
most pitiful plight, stood amazed at the miracle, as not able any way to help
him. Wherefore by their advise he began to repent him of his fault, and humbly
besought, amongst the other Saints, S. VVenefrid to help him. The rest also
joining in like prayer with him, after they had cried aloud and all together,
Holy VVenefride take pity on him, his hand was presently loosed from the
hatchet, and his arm to all freedom restored.

Which evident miracle seen by the people, they renewed their wonted
veneration to the Saint. They showed also unto Priour Robert and his
companions, the Cut which the man had made in the branch of the tree, remaining
still for a testimony thereof: so as with very good reason, they all much
reverenced that holy place, by innumerable miraclesso divinely graced.

CHAP. XIII.
How Priour Robert, the Author of this history, did himself take up the holy
body of S. VVenefride, and carry it toward Shrewsbury; How also in the way, he
wrought a miracle by some of the earth, found in the Holy head of that Blessed
Martyr.

PRior Robert having had a general leave from the Pastor of the Church and
his parishioners to take up the Saints body, went down without a guide into
her To^be or Sepulcher, and by an interior light, communicated then divinely
unto him, knowing where it lay, caused the Tombestone to be removed, and
laborers to dig toward the body; which when they had found, the Prior
causing them to go forth out of the Vault, he only with some Priests and
Religious persons, stayed behind, singing psalms of joy deuoutely together,
and (...) into the sick man's stomach, but he fell soundly asleep, and when he
awaked, found himself of his dangerous and painful infirmity perfectly
recovered.

By which most evident Miracle, the credit of those sacred relics, to the
great joy of the Priour himself and his companions, was divinely confirmed,
and the devotion of all present toward them increased. Others also there
present did learn from thence, what due veneration and reverence was to be
yielded afterward unto them.

CHAP. XIV.
How Priour Robert, after seven days journey, arriving with the sacred
Relics at Shrewsbury, was by his Abbot commanded to place them in S. Giles
his Church near the gate of that City, until all was ready for their
sollemne receiving into the Monastery: With anotable miracle which happened in
that place.

PRior Robert and his company in seven days ended their journey back again
with the sacred treasure to Shrewsbury; and having before given notice to the
Abbot of their approach, they were willed by him to stay, and repose the same
decently in S. Giles his Church near the gate of the City, that the Lord
Bishop and his Clergy, with the rest of the people might be warned thereof, and
in solle^ne procession bring them to the Monastery.

And for the greater honor of them in the mean time, (...) prayed all the
night that God through the merits and prayers of great S. VVenefrid, would be
pleased to cure him, he fell toward the morning into a slumber, and before
the Priest came to say the first mass, he was to the wonder of all present,
and of the whole City likewise, perfectly cured, and made whole; so as after
he had sou^ded forth thankeful praises to God and the holy Martyr, he returned
without help of others joyfully homewards on his feet.

CHAP. XV.
With what solemnity and pomp S. Wenefrides body was brought unto the
Abbey-Church of Shrewsbury: And of a strange Miracle which happened thereat.

THE former miracle increased much the fame of these holy Relics brought into
the City, and the opinion also of S. VVenefrids sanctity, so that the
co^course of people was very great, daily honoring the holy Virgin in them.
Priour Robert in the mean time having by order of his Abbot, treated with the
Bishop about the solemnity of bringing her body from S. Giles his Church to the
Monastery; it was agreed between them, that the people of the City and
Country likewise should be warned of the certain day when this sole^nity
should be kept, and the Bishops blessing and indulgences for such a feast
promulgated, to all that should be present in the procession.

Whereupon, the throng of people kneeling on each side of the streets and
shedding tears of joy for such a blessing, brought amongst them, was so great,
that it was a wonder to see how grateful their devotion was to God, and to the
Saint thus honored by them. At which time also happened an evident miracle in the
sight of all, worthy here to be related.

The morning wherein this solemn procession was (...) miraculously in the
air, over their heads, and yet be kept from falling down upon them, till the
solemnity was ended: and therefore they redoubled their praises to God, and to
the Saint, as Authors of this great miracle wrought evidently before their face.

The Procession ended and the Bishop and Priests arrived with the Relics at
the Monastery, they were by the Abbot, and his Religious, as lewells above all
value, most reverently received, and upon the high Altar, dedicated to S.
Peter and S. Paul, magnificently placed, where many apparent miracles for the
help of souls and bodies, are, to Gods great honor glorified in his Saints,
daily performed: whose Name be praised for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XVI.
The Conclusion, of the Translatour, unto this second Book of S. Wenefrids
Life, and Miracles.

I May say here of S. VVenefrids miracles (of those later especially wrought
in Shrewsbury upon such as honored the Saint, and were cured by the virtue of
her relics) what S. Augustine in his 22. Book of the City of God, and 8.
Chapter, has left written of a blind man miraculously restored to sight, and
other like miracles done at Millan, whilst he lived there, at the holy bodies
of S. Geruasius and Protasius, divinely revealed and translated by S. Ambrose
to another place, as S. VVenefrids Relics were from Guitherine unto
Shrewsbury; that the City, to wit wherein they were done, grandis era^, and
immenso populo test res gesta est, was great, and an immense co^course of
people able to testify the verity of them. So as he must want (...) dit in
such Historical verities, as they will believe any Gentill, or Heathen Author
before them; the which my self have proved by many experiences, and for an
example, I will here mention one.

It was my chance some years since, to be the guest of a Protestant Gentleman
in England, of especial note and rank in the Country where he lived, who seeing
me one day fixedly to look upon a fair picture ha^ging in his Hall, wherein
the diverse torments of some Primitive Martyrs were lively represented; Sir,
said he, who can believe (as for my part I cannot) that men, to men, and for
Religion only, ever used such barbarous cruelties, and more then butcherly
inhumanities? To whom for clearing of so certain and testified a truth, I
alleged what Tertullian in sundry places of his works S. Cyprian, S. Iustine
the Martyr, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, and other innumerable Fathers, had either
expressly affirmed, or supposed of these Martyrs torments, and that in books
either written to the Martyrs themselves, or to Heathen magistrates their
Condemners; yet prevailed I nothing, till calling for Tacitus, a Gentill
Author, and most hateful enemy to Christ himself, with all such as faithfully
professed him; I showed this Gentleman what he had left written of Nero's
cruelty, used against Christians, by causing them to be put upon stakes in
emine^t places of Rome, clothed in pitched shirts, with their arms extended,
and so to be fired in dark nights, as torches to the City; with other like in
humane torments, exercised upon them.

Whereupon he began to credit what his Picture represented: and being asked
again by me, why he believed not before so many testimonies which I had cited
unto him, out of the holy Fathers; he plainly told me (and it is the common
persuasion of Prote- (...)

The End of the second Book.
THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS contained in this Book.
THe Authors Prologue to the life of S. Wenefride. page 1.
THE FIRST BOOK.
OF S. Beuno his great sanctity, and how he was inspired by God to go to S.
Wenefrids Father: and had his Daughter commended to his charge. Chap. 1. page
9. How S. Wenefrids Father did help S. Beuno to build a Church and Monastery in
his own Territory; And how S. Wenefrid resolved to conserve her Virginity.
Chap. 2. page 19. How S. Wenefrids Father approved the Resolution his Daughter,
and gave away her dowry in Alms to the poor. Chap 3. page 27 How S. Wenefride
was be he aded by Cradoeus the Kings son, in defense of her Virginity. Chap.
4. page 35. How Cradocus for his wicked fact, was swallowed up alive by the
ground; And what lamentations were made for S. Wenefrides death. Chap. 5. page
46. How S. Wenefride was raise again to life; and a white Circle appearing in
her Neck, in the place where it was cut off. Chap. 6. pa. 53. How S Wenefride
was sollemnely veyled by S. Beuno, and instructed in the practice of a
Religious life Chap. 7 page 52. Of S. Wenefrids great grief for her master S.
Beuno his departure from her. Chap. 8. page 72. How S. Wenefride gatherea to
geathen many Noblemens Daughters and instructed them in the practice of
Religious piety, as Gouernesse of the rest. Chap. 9. page 80. Of the great fame
of S. Wenefrides holiness of life: and of the gift she sent unto her master S.
Beuno. Chap. 10. page 87. How S. Wenefride had the death of her master S.
Beuno revealed un to her: and soon after changed the place of her abode. Chap.
11. pa. 94. How S. Wenefride was divinely directed in her journey to a holy man
called Deifer, who was chosen of (...) Of the earnest desire which the Abbot
and Monks of Shrewsbury had, to get the body of S. VVenefride unto them: and
how finally they obtained the same. Chap. 8. page 227. Of a vision happened to
Prior Robert in his journey, which gave him hope to obtain the body of S.
VVenefride. Chap. 9. page 226. How the Parish Priest of Guitherin, where S
VVenefrides body lay, gave his consent for the removing the same to Shrewsbury.
Chap. 10. page 231. Of Priour Roberts speech unto the people of Guitherin, to
obtain their consent, for getting away the body of S. VVenefride thence. Chap.
11. page 136. Of a certain laboring man punished for offering to cut down a
branch of an Oak near S. VVenefrides (...) Cha. 12. page 243. How Priour
Robert took up S. VVenefrides body, and carried it to Shrewsbury seven days
journey: And of a miracle wrought in the way. Chap. 13. page 248. How S.
VVenefrides body being brought to Shrewsbury, was for a time placed in S. Giles
Church, necre the gate of the City. Chapter 14. p. 254. Of the solemnity and po^pe
wherewith S.VVenefrides body was finally carried to the Abbey Church at
Shrewsbury; And of a strange Miracle happened thereat. Chap. 15. page 259. The
Conclusion of the Translatour, unto the second book of S. VVenefrides life,
and Miracles. Chapter 16. p. 266.
FINIS.

