The Vineyarde of Virtue collected, composed, and digested into a tripartite
order, containing XXXII. most excellent plants of fruitful virtue: In most
beautiful and blessed manner enuironing the true elect Church of God upon
earth. Every Plant containing this tripartite order: Namely Definition
Testimony Examples
of virtue

By R. R.

John.. 15. I am the true Vine, and my father is the Husbandman: Every branch
that brings not forth good fruit, does my father pluck away: and every
branch that bears fruit, does my father purge, that it may bring forth
fruit more abundantly.

Imprinted by Thomas Dawson.

To the Godly, Virtuous, and woorshipful Gentleman. M. Edmund Vvedale alias
Vdale of Shirburne in Dorsetshier, long and happy increase of corporal, and
spiritual good graces in this life with the participation of eternal
beatitude in Christ Jesus, for ever and ever.
WE are taught in that sacred book of divine Wisdom, this most sacred lesson,
worshipful Sir, Sapient. 15. Too know God, is perfect righteousness, and to
know his righteousness and virtue, is the root of immortality. A sentence
surely not so short and sweet, as effectually and at large comprehending
firm comfort from the Creator God unto the creature man. From which God as
we may define godlynes to proceed, touching his Godhead; and virtue also as
touching his manhood: so this godliness and virtue including his perfect
righteousness is according to the measure of his grace, now and then infused
upon mankind. Lactantius Firmianus seems to affirm this by his testimony,
in libro de opificio Dei cap. 12. Where he says. Vir dicitur, eo quod mayor
vis est in eoqua^ in foemina, and hinc virtus nomen accepit. And although here
man seems to have the prerogative of virtue, as of most fortitude valiancy or
manhood in him: yet we must not any thing exclude the feminin sex, from the
benefit of united godliness and virtue in the Lord. For as much as God by the
mouth of his Prophet David avouches by example, too compare as well the godly
and virtuous woman, as the godly and virtuous man, Like unto the tree planted
by the river side which bringes forth his fruit in due time and tide. Psa. 1.
ve. 3. But as this true tree of godlynes and virtue according to the proverb
may be planted by Paul; that is to say by the holy Ghost, watered by Apollo;
that is, by man's continual exercise, and by God and from God receaueth her
increase: so it is oftentimes seen, where God has his Church, there will the
Devil have a Chapel. Yea where has any goodness, godlynes or virtue taken root
or flourished at any time, or in any age, but even there also envy, malice and
mischief would have a fling? Plutarch in his morals could say, that as the
shadow follows the body: so envy evermore accompanies virtue, and as where
is no body, there is no shadow, so where is no felicity, there is none envy.
For the holiness of David, innocence of Job, wisdom of Solomon, fortitude of
Sampson, and virtue of the most virtuous amongst mankind could not avoid
enmity sufficiently, when the almighty Jehovah, and most holiest Messiah had
his most cruel and spiteful enemies, the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, ever
among inuaying against him, circumue^ting of him, and subuerting his doctrine.
Of the true knowledge of God, of his righteousness, and virtue rooted unto
immortality, in the hearts of those that believed in him. But in their greatest
iolity of justifying their own wickedness, seeming to themselves to have
perfect holiness, when they had not, bearing the world in hand that they
brought forth sound fruits of virtue, when they were filthily corrupted with
alkind of vice: Our savior Christ even then and therefore scourging them out
of the Temple of Jerusalem, to their shame and reproach, put forth the parable
of the Vineyard, and of the laborers. Luc. 19. as thereby not only
confounding their falsehood and revealing their painted hypocrisy: but also
utterly discovered the^ to be void of al true godliness and virtue, yea and
also the most extreme enemies thereof.

Touching the defect of this tree of true godliness and virtue, amongst the
worldly wise Philosophers, it has been from time too time apparently proved,
that neither the Academici resident in place where they taught moral virtue,
the Peripatetici preiudicating euentes, the Cynici of baser co^uersatio^, the
Eudomenees for all their woorking good effects, the Philotethes for all their
arrogant glory in themselves disdaining others, as though they only had perfect
zeal of truth, the Phisici, for all their skillful knowledge in things
natural, neither the Ethici, which taught their rules of good life and manners,
neither yet the Dialectici, of singular dexterity in disputing and reasoning
causes natural, could ever sauoure the taste of the true knowledge of GOD and
of his righteousness and virtue rooted unto immortality: although in deed
they took upon them a kind of profane, godly, and virtuous life, which they
thought in themselves to be right, which also they taught unto the world in
their time.

But they were far wide from the mark, they wa^dered in darkness for want of
light, they swallowed the sour grape in want of the sweet, and they crackte
the shel, but found no kernel, they were always learning, but never learned
in the law of the Gospel of Christ the Lamp of light unto salvation for as
Lactantius Firmianus says libro. 3. diuinarum institutionum they saw but a
shadow, of true godlynes and virtue, and not the light thereof it self, and
they labored al their life for it but they could never find it. Because
(says he) they either retained an ungodly religion, or else altogether
maintained the same.

But the Romish Antichrist, and his cursed crew the suckblood successors of
the Scrybes and Pharisees the brood of Belial, Nemrods near kinsmen and
adherents of wicked Achab, have from time to time heard seen, known and
perceived, The affspring of the root of Iesse, Esaias. 11.
which (as Esaias says) should rise too bear rule over the Gentiles, and in
whom the nations should believe. Also they have been toulde (by the Doctrine
of our savior Christ in his sacred Gospel, and by the testimonies of his
Apostles, Patriarcks, and Prophets) who was, and is and ever shall be the true
vine. The true husbandman, and the true laborers: John. 15.
yet of wilful blindness have they refused too be ingrafted in the vine of the
true knowledge of God, Mat. 20.
of his righteousness and virtue rooted unto immortality. Yet of obstinate
malice have they not only refused the calling of the heavenly husband man
Christ Jesus to come as laborers intoo his vinyearde: But also with the wild
bore rooted up every vine of good doctrine in the Church of God and with the
wicked husba^dmen slain not only their Masters servants, Mar. 12.
that is too say, a number of godly preachers and virtuous persons sent unto
them; but also crucified the son of God anew, by their horrible disordered
institutions in their Churches and Synagogues.

That most Princely Prophet David (woorshipfull Sir) pronounces al those too
be blessed which dwell in the house of the Lord, that is to say in the Church
of God, affirming further, that they shall praise him deseruingly world without
end. Psalm. 83. Surely, if the Lord GOD the holy one of Israel should
presently summon the husbandemen of his Vineyearde throughout the world, too
give perfect reckoning of due fructifying and happy state of his Church at
this day: I doubt whether any Nation under the Sun, have found so great
felicity and blessings abounding in them, as this little Island of ours, has
had in her of long time, neither that any Nation has better cause too praise
his holy name, for his gracious goodness, then we have, even world without
end.

Considering he has long since out of this his Vineyearde in England pluckte
up by the root that unfruitful fig tree of the Popes Luke. 12.
planting: Considering also that the vine of his glorious Gospel has long
flourished, and still does without the annoyance of any populer tree of foreign
Campania, maugre the malice of her malignant adversaries, from day too day
fructifying in the true knowledge of GOD and of his righteousness and virtue
unto immortality.

Wherefore as every labourer in this Vineyearde is bounden in duty too bring
with him godly care for conservation and preservation of the welfare thereof:
so ought each one faithfully to labor in true godliness and virtue too such
effect, that whereas our Savior Christ says, there are yet four Months,
and the Harvest will be here anon: We should therefore be ready too reap
the Harvest of the Lord, that we may receive reward, and gather our fruits
into the barn of everlasting beatitude. John. 4.

To this end and purpose (worshipful Sir,) as one most simple of many others,
and bounden in duty with them of better ability I have here not only
brought my best good will but also abillity therewith: as too further the
welfare of the Church of GOD amongst us, if by any means it so please GOD may
possible.

I have therefore (pressing my self an unworthy labourer, lacking Columellaes
cunning in contriuing or trying, Palladius his experience in planting and
purging, and Verroes virtue in aduauncing the beautiful beatitude of a
vineyard) simply here set down the names and natures of a few true vine
plants, collected the branches out of sundry testimonies of sacred scriptures,
and framed in order the fruiteful examples of our savior Christ (or of as
many most excellent godly and virtuous persons as out of the scriptures only
sacred, I could select) to beautify and fructify the state of Gods Church in
this my native country: the patronaige whereof I have vowed unto your worthy
woorship (as amongst others godly and virtuous Gentlemen my good benefactors)
at this present chosen for your lively sinceare zele to Gods truth, your
virtuous example of godly conversation, and singular love to al good learning
(proceeding from the root and branches of your worthy progeny especially
your right worshipful, grandfather M. Nicholas Vdale a man for all rare
respects of true Godliness and virtue beloved of God, his Prince the renoumed
King Henry the VIII. his godly and virtuous spowse Queen Katherin, and the
blessed King Edward the VI. and of al good and godly men) whose steypes as you
imitate, so therefore may you seem woorthely answerable too the protection of
this and far better travails. To you therefore I say as a valley replenished
with the virtuous plants of your virtuous progeny, and as a flourishing plant
in these most flourishing days of our divine Debora Queen ELIZABETH, whose
gracious and blessed reign, the Lord prorogate unto the end of the world)
do I with all humble and hearty good will consecrate this Vineyard of Virtue.
And because good meaning has many enemies in these days, and true virtue
never wants unjust envy, I am in duty bound to pray unto the Almighty
continually, that the Vineyard of the Lord so flourishing at this day in
England, may be by him still preserved from those same popish perilous
Coluoluoli, whose property is, ever to be gnawing upon fruitful vines. And
that my good meaning in this little labor may be also defended against that
combersome neighbor the Collecabedge being farther contrariety of nature,
namely, cold and moist always noisome unto the vine, and only refused of her
above al other plants, roots, or trees. Unto whom for her three harmful
discomodities in engendring Melancholy, in breeding noisome dreams, and hurting
the lungs in man's body, I may well resemble, pale maleuo (...)

which cause Christ himself affirmed that many sins were forgiven her, for
she loved much. Luke. 7. John. 11.

Paul the chosen Apostle of Christ Jesus, confessed that he esteemed all
things as vile, in respect of the love which he bare to God. Phil. 3.

For other examples of the love of God, look. Matthew. 21. 1. John. 4

As the great and inestimable love of Christ the true Samaritane appear
toward us in creating, redeeming, and preserving us from death to life: so
should we with mutual love, help, aid, and comfort our neighbors in all
good and needful cases. Luke 10.

The Centurion loved so his neighbors and the nations near adjoining, that
he builded a Synagogue for them, so that too show their mutual love toward
him, they came to Christ, and besought him that he would vouchsafe to heal the
Centurions servant lying sick, which thing he accomplished. Luke 7.

The Samaritan expressed a notable testimony and example of godly love toward
the man which travailed from Jerusalem to Hierico, who being robbed, spoiled,
and wounded by those thieves, was there pyttied by the Samaritane in such
manner that he went to him, bound up his wounds, powered wine and oil
therinto, set him on his own beast, brought him to a common Inn, and made
provision for him to his great relief and comfort. Luke. 10.

Thomas the Apostle surnamed Didimus (what time our savior Christ came to
Lazarus and said plainly that he was dead) he for the love that he bare (as it
seemed) unto Lazarus said unto the rest of his fellow Apostles, Let us also go
that we may dye with him. John. 11.

For other examples of love toward our neighbor, look in Abraham, Genesis 18.
Moses, Exo. 32. Ionathas, 1. Reg. 18. and Nehemias, 2. Reg. 19.

The iiii. Plant, Hope or trust in God.
S. Paul says this virtue Hope may well be termed the Helmet of salvation.
But this hope which he so calls is also governed by the assured promises of
the true God and by precise bounds is to be discerned from humane hope, which
is false and uncertain, which Aristotle terms, The Dream of him that
waketh. For he counts the hope of man in man, to be nothing esse but golden
blastes of leaves which now and then shake, now and then are still and within
a while are utterly blown away. Wherefore man's special hope and trust ought to
be in God, which never fails his faithful ones, neither in this transitory
life, nor in the life eternal.

Prou. 3.

They that hope in the Lord shall change their courage, they shall take them
wings as Eagles, they shall run and not labor, they shall walk and not be
weary. Esa. 40.

He that ploweth, ought to plowe in hope to reap the fruit of his travail.
Cor. 9.

Blessed is the man whose hope is in the name of the Lord. Psalm. 39.

Who so trusts in the Lord, mercy embraces him on every side. Psa, 31.

Blessed is the man which puts his trust in the Lord. Hierem. 17.

By hope in the Lord we are saved. Romans 8.

Abraham hoped against hope, that is, he looked for the thing which was to be
hoped for in the promise of God, yea although the thing represented before his
eyes expressed no cause of hope, namly that he should be the father of many
nations, etc. Genesis 13. 17. 22.

David amongst so many conflictes with his enemies, seeing that his hope and
trust in the Lord was never made frustrate, taking great consolation therein,
amongst others burst out with these words, namely, For this cause is my heart
joyful, and my tongue rejoices, yea and moreover my flesh shall rest in
hope. Psalm. 15.

Job the servant of God, a perfect pattern of patience, being oftentimes
diversely and grievously afflected, acknowledging the great mercies of God to be
more then man's miseries confessed his hope to be such, that he was sure his
redeemer lived, and that he should rise again out of the earth at the latter
day. etc. Job. 19.

For other examples of Hope look Iudi. 20. Tob. 2. Symeon, Luke. 2. of Paul,
Acts 13. and his admonition, 1. Tim. 6.

The v. Plant, The fear of God.


will. Prou. 1.

The fear of the Lord is a strong hold, and his Children are under a sure
defense. The fear of the Lord is a well of life to avoid the snare of death.
Prou. 14.

The fear of the Lord is the right Gods service that preserves and
justifies the heart, and gives mirth and gladness, etc. The fear of the
Lord is the root of wisdom, and her branches are long life. Ecclesiasticus.
1.

Whosoever fears the Lord he shall be happy, and when he has need of comfort
he shall be blessed. Ibidem.

I will show you whom you shall fear: fear him which after he has slain,
has power to cast the same into hell fire. So I say unto you fear him. Lu. 12

Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 6. 10.

Fear not him which kills the body only, but rather fear him which can
destroy both body and soul in Hell fire. Matt. 10.

drowned Pharaoh and his host in the red sea, was more feared of those
Israelites, and they believed in God, and gave credit unto the words of Moses
his servant. Exo. 14. 19. and 20.

Abdias the steward of the house of Achab feared greatly the Lord God of
Israel, for when wicked Iezabel had slain the prophets of the Lord, he led
with him 100. of those Prophets, and hid them from persecution, and was
afraid. 3. Kings. 8.

Tobias the elder, taught his son Tobias also even from his infancy to fear
the Lord, and made to be called unto his feast such persons as feared God. Yea
more fearing God then the king, under whose jurisdiction he lived, he took
away the bodies of those that were slain by the enemies of Gods church and
buried them. Tobi. 1.

Other notable Examples of the true fear of God are commemorated in Judith. 8.
in Job. 1. 2. 31. Iosaphat, 2. Chr. 19. Loath, Genesis 19. The midwiues for whom
the Lord erected dwelling houses. Exodus 1. Sara the daughter of Raguel. Tobi.
3. and in young Tobias as it appears. Tob. 9.

The vi. Plant, Humility.
bodies, and goods, unto the gracious good will of the same our God and
merciful savior which will not suffer us to be tried, tempted, nor troubled,
beyond our strength and ability of sufferaunce.

Matthew. 5.

The Prayer of him that humbles himself in the sight of God, pearceth the
very clouds, til she come nigh she will not be comforted, nor go her way
till the highest God have respect unto her. Ecclesi. 35.

How much greater thou art, so much the more humble thy self toward all men,
and thou shall find favor in the sight of God, because great is the power of
God only, and he shall be honored of men, Ecclesiastes 3.

Whosoever exalts him self, shall be brought low, and he that humbles him
self shall be exalted. Luke 7. 18.

Let the meek brother rejoice in his exhortation, and the rich man in his
humility because he shall away hence as the flower of the grass. Iam. 1.

Have patience when thou art brought low, because in the fire is Gold and
silver tried, and men acceptable unto God are tried by the furnace of
adversities.

Except you be converted, and become as one of these little ones, you shall not
enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble him self as
one of these little ones shall be greatest, etc. Matt. 18.

Learn of me because I am humble and meek of heart. Matt. 11.

The Angel of God, said unto Agar, Return again unto thy mistress and humble
thy self under her hands* Genesis 16.

Abraham spoke humbly unto the Lord saying, I will yet speak unto my Lord
although I am but earth and ashes. Genesis 18.

Jacob humbled himself very much before his brother Esau, and so pacified his
wrath. Genesis 33.

Moses excused himself five times before he would take upon him the leading
forth of the people, which yet the Lord enjoined him, and he was not
persuaded until he perceived that the Lord was angry. Exodus 3.

Gedeon (when the Angel said unto him go, in thy strength shall thou deliver
Israel) humbly aunsweared, Behold my stock is weak in Manasses, and I my
self am the least in the house of my father. Iud. 5.

David being tried in manifold troubles, and finding great comfort at the
hands of God thus said, It is good for me that thou O Lord have chastised me.
Psalm. 119. verse. 71. Note his humility being crowned king by Samuel 1. King.
17. before Saul. 1. King. 19.

The prodigal child returning to his father humbled himself. Luke. 15.

For other Examples, look Saul. 1. King. 9. Elisius, 4. King. 2.

The vii. Plant, Patience.
after perils, and as Saint Paul says Romans 8. being made like unto the son
of God by afflictions, should with him be like partakers of eternal glory.

Prou. 16.

The Furnace tries the vessel of the potter, so does the trial of troubles
prove those that are righteous. Ecc. 27

Troubles works patience, patience makes trial, and trial brings hope.
Romans 5.

My Brethren, count it for exceeding joy, when you fall into diverse temptations,
knowing that the trial of your faith works patience, and patience makes
your work perfect that you may be perfect and upright, not fainting in any
thing. Iam. 1.

Now therefore keep secret thy sorrow within thee, and suffer manfully
whatsoever chances shall happen unto thee. 3. Esdras. 10.

Blessed is the man which suffers temptation, because when he shall be tried,
he shall receive a crown of life, which God has promised unto all those that
love him. Iam. 1. ^2.

Be patient therefore one with an other, and confirm your hearts because the
coming of the Lord is at hand. Iam. 5.

Matthew. 4. Despised, hated, and disdained of the wicked worldlings: Ioh. 17.
and lastly persecuted and put to death by the cursed Jews: Mar. 15 leaving us
example that we should suffer iniuryes done unto us, and remit the revenge
unto him that says, Mine is vengeance, and I will reward again. etc. Deuteronomy.
32.

Isaac suffered gladly that injury to be offered him, when his Father Abraham
would have sacrifized him. Genesis 22.

Joseph patiently put up the cruelty of his brethren, when they sold him
and would have put him into the pit. Genesis 37. 45.

Moses prayed for Mary which spoke so iniustly against him, and by his prayer
she was healed. Numb. 12.

David fleeing from the face of Absolon said patiently unto Sadoch, If I find
favor in the sight of the Lord, he will bring me again. 2. King. 15. 16.

Tobias when he became blind showed a wonderful Patience under the Lords
scourge, and against the derision of his wife and his friends. Tob. 2. 3.

Other notable Examples, were Job. 1. 2. The three Children in the Oven. Dan.
5. and Eleazarus, 2. Machab. 6.

The viii. Plant, Perseueration in godliness.
PErseueration or continuance of virtuous and godly life, is the limited path
of perfection, which GOD requires of all his chosen servants which have begun
to run the race of righteousness, not to stay in the midst, neither to
start aside, neither yet to look back at any time, but to go forwards
without wavering, or distrust in the acknowledgement of God, and in the faith
of Christ constantly and for ever, so continuing until the very last breath
of our life, and not to be discouraged by any sinister chances or adversities,
neither suffer our selves to be seduced from so good a purpose by any manner of
means; because whosoever have once tasted the comfortable sweetness of Gods
good graces, may be well assured if they continue with a steadfast faith in
Christ unto the end, they shall inherit the promised reward, even the Crown
of life for ever. Apo. 2.

John. 10.

God is faithful which suffers not us to be tempted above our strength, but
gives an end with temptation, that we may be able to go thoroughly with our
vocatious. Cor. 10.

I will not leave you destitute of comfort but I will come unto you, I will
pray my Father and he shall send unto you another comforter, even the spirit
of truth which shall remain with you for ever. John. 14.

My little Children despise not the correction of the Lord, nor faint not when
thou art chastised, for the Lord chastises every son which he receives, Go
on forwards in discipline, God offers himself unto you as to his children,
for what son is he whom the father chastizeth not. Heb. 12.

Put upon you all the whole armor of God, that you may be able to resist in
the evil day, and that you may stand steadfastly in all things that you have
done. Ephe. 6.

So run, that you may receive. 1. Cor. 9.

But whosoever continues unto the end shall be saved. Matt. 10.

to withstand them.

The Apostles constantly perseuered in preaching, teaching, and working
woonders in the name of Christ Jesus passing from place to place, and from
country to country. Acts. 1. 4. 11. 13. and 20.

Joseph (notwithstanding his Mistress whom he served, did daily molest and
seek to discredit him) yet he for all that showed himself dutiful and
faithful in his service, and continewed so to his great perferment. Genesis 39.

David being sore rebuked of his elder brother, and also dissuaded from his
purpose by Saul, did not yet any whit shrink from his purpose, but fought
manfully and overcome Goliath. 1. King. 17.

Ioab constantly perseuered in the seege of Rabbath, till he had won the
cittye. 2. King. 12. Also in the battle against Absolon. 2. King. 18.

Although Nehemias was oftentimes hindered in building, yet he ceased not from
his woork till he had fullye built up she wall. Nehemi 4. and 6.

Eliachym the high Priest spoke unto all the people of Israel, saying, Know
you that because the Lord has heard our prayers, if you continue still in
fasting and prayer in the sight of God. etc. Judith. 4.

The Sociates of Daniel, constantly said unto the King of Babylon, be it known
unto thee O King that we worship not thy Gods. etc. Dan. 3.

Other notable Examples were Daniel, Dan. 6. Susanna, Dan. 13. The vii.
brethren, 2. Mac. 7. The blind borne, Ioh. 9. The Apostles, Acts. 1.

The ix. Plant, True Invocation upon GOD.
al purity and sanctify or honor the same with all dutiful, reverent, and
loving fear. For to that end has God given the benefit of the tongue and
speech unto men: especially, that they should declare the goodness of God
toward them, that they should praise him in his holiness, pray unto him for
continuance of his gracious goodness, and give thanks unto him for the same,
and excite others unto the consideration of their duties in those respects.
For God requires that we should with thanksgiving, confession, supplications and
prayers, come unto him, and to none other God, because he has made us as the
sheep of his hands, and people of his pasture. Psalm. 94. verse. 7.

Matthew. 4.

Whilst thou live and bear breath, thou shalt confess thy sins unto
God, and thou shall praise him, and rejoice in his mercies, because great is
the mercy of the Lord, and he helps and is gracious unto those that turn^
unto him. Ecclesiastes. 17.

Before thou prayest prepare thy soul, and be not as a man that tempts God.
Ibidem. 18.

When thou prayest, thou speak with God, when thou read, God speaks
unto thee. Aug. sup. Psalm. 85.

Prayer is good with fasting and almoyse, yea of more valor it is then to
heap up treasures of Gold. Tob. 12.

The continual prayer of the just person preuayleth much. Iam. 5.

Great is the virtue of sincere prayer, for as a faithful messenger,
performs duty enjoined, and pearceth whether as no flesh can attain.
August. super Psalm. 65.

Watch and pray, least you fall into temptation. Matt. 26.

Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever good thing you do ask of my father
in my name, he shall surely give it you. John. 16.

You shall pray for all men, especially for Kings and Princes and those in
authority. 2. Tim. 2.

Luke. 11. Also he not only prayed for him self, that the cup of bitter
persecution might pass from him: Matthew. 26. but for his very enemies and
persecutors he prayed. Luke. 23. Moreover he prayed for all those his chosen
children which his father had given him, that they might be saved. John. 17.

Paul the elect vessel of God, gave thanks unto God for all them of
Thessalonia, and prayed for their prosperous proceeding in the faith. 1.
Thessa, 1.

Abraham prayed unto the Lord, to spare the Sodomites from destroying them.
Genesis 18.

Jacob prayed unto the Lord, confessing his infirmity and want of ability.
Genesis 32.

Moses prayed diverse times and was heard of the Lord. Exodus 7. 8. 9. 10.
14. 17. 32. Number. 11. 12. 21.

Samuel praying for the Israelites against the Philistians was heard of God 1.
King. 7.

King Iosophat fearing sore the power and multitude of his enemies, which he
heard say came against him, prayed earnestly unto the Lord, and his prayer was
heard. 2. Chro. 20.

Manasses being king of Judah, prayed marvelous humby, devoutly, and
effectually with a repentant heart. 1. Chro. 23.

Ezechias turning his face to the wall prayed unto the Lord bitterly weeping,
and the Lord hearing him, granted his desire: 4. Kings. 20. namely long life
and prosperity upon earth.

For other examples of prayers, Anna, 1. King. 1. David, 2. Kin. 12. Idem, 2.
King. Elyas, 3, Kin. 18. Iosophat, 2. Chro. 20. and Esdras, 1. Esdra. 1. 8.
Nehemias, 1. Iud. 4. and 8. Hester. 4. Jeremy. 11. Daniel. 6. 9. 13. Jonas,
Judas Machabeus, 1. Match. 4.

The x. Plant, Thanks giving.
the heart and mind of man, and evermore ready to be uttered with the tongue, that
good things are not bestowed upon us by chance, or by good hap as we use to
say, but that God is rightly the author of all benefits. And that it is our
duties by this our thankfulness to exhort and inuit others to the due
acknowledging and serving of the true God: that they may also persuade
themselves, that it is God only which has care over them, and that we are
heard by him, if we crave any thing of him in faith. And therefore as he is
altogether more ready to give, then we to receive, and more beneficial and
gracious in giving, then we are thankful and dutiful toward him: so are we
evermore debtors unto him, and never able to repay that we owe him, howbeit
since he requires a thankful heart and true repentant life according to his
will, we ought never to be slack or slow, in testifying our vtermost power
and good wills in giving of thanks for his benefits, and in living so
thankfully, that his continued mercy may be a salve to our myserie.

Thessa. 5.

What better thing may we bear in our mind, express with tongue, or set
forth with pen, then Thanks be to God? Then this, nothing can be spoken
more short, more joyfully heard, more thankfully understood, nor more
frutefully be performed. Augustine in Epist. ad Marcil.

Let every one as he has received the good grace of God, despise the same
unto an others benefit, as the good stewards of the manifold grace of God. 1.
Pet. 4.

The best conseruer of benefits, is the remembrance of those benefits
received, and the continual thankfulness which we ought to render for the
same. Chry. Homi. 25. super. Matt.

I exhort you that you do always give thanks unto the Lord, if evil
chances happen unto you, bless ye the Lord, and those evils shall be taken
away, if prosperous good things happen unto you, bless the Lord, and they
shall continue still with you. Chrysostom in tract. de Symbol.

Thanksgiving is a most pure and perfect Balm, and therefore it requires a
pure sound, and profound vessel for the same. Brent. super Can.

Lazarus, and in the institution of the holy Eucharist. Matt. 26.

The Lord commanded that his deliverance of the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, should never depart out of their minds. It shall be ( says he) as a
sign in thy hand, and as a monument before thy eyes, that the law of the Lord
may be ever in thy mouth. Exodus 13.

Moses and the Israelites sung a song unto God, and said, Let us sing unto the
Lord, that is to say, after they had meruelously passed through the red Sea.
Exodus 20.

David when he heard the Revelation which God made unto Nathan touching the
continuance of his kingdom, gave very humble and devout thanks therefore
unto God. 2. King. 7.

We ought here in England to praise God greatly for his goodness, which
prospers the reign of our so gracious sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth,
according to that saying, Blessed be God which has given us David a most wise
Prince to govern the people, etc. 3. Kin. 1. and 15.

When Tobias had recovered again his sight, both he, his wife, and all they
which before had seen him blind, glorified GOD. Tob. 11.

For other Examples of Thanksgiving, look Cyrus, 1. Esdras. 1. The
Israelites, Judith. 16. Nabuchodonozer. Dan. 2. Judas Machabeus. 2. Match. 1.
The blessed virgin Mary, Luke 1. Zacharias, Luke. 1. Matt. 9. Luke 7. and other
places.

The xi. Plant, True Preaching.
S. Paul descrybeth the same more amply in the 1. Cor. 14. and 1. Tim. 4. That
is to say, it consists in Doctrine, Exhortation, and consolation: and
thereunto is applied the exposition or interpretation of any part or portion of
the Scriptures. The efficient causes of which office and function duly applied
are these. The holy Ghost by the will of God enioyning the Apostles first to
perform this office. Mat. 10 The tongue which ought to be the trumpet sounding
the glory of God his wrath toward sinners, and mercy toward those that
hear his will and fulfill the same. The faithfulness, diligence, and
constancy by the Preacher observed heerin, to the end that God may be obeyed,
rightly honored and acknowledged, and that many souls may be won as coheyres
with Christ in his kingdom for ever.

Deuteronomy. 18.

How beautiful upon the hills are the feet of him that brings and
preaches peace? Esaias. 52.

Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Luke 4.

Thou shall hear the word proceeding out of my mouth, and thou shall tell it
them from me. Ezech. 3.

Go your ways throughout all the world, preach the Gospel to every creature,
teaching al nations and baptizing them. Matt. 28.

Reprove, Exhort, blame, and rebuke with all patience, and doctrine. 1. Tim. 5.

For the word of God is lively and effectual, and pearceth more then does a
two edged swoorde, entering even into the division of the soul and the
spirit, etc. Heb. 4.

Luke. 5.
he himself affirming, that he is the true light of the world, whom who so
did follow should have light of life. John. 8.

John Baptist preached repentance, and the kingdom of GOD in the deserte of
Iudaea and prevailed therein. Matt. 3.

The twelve Apostles were sent of the Lord to preach, and had power given them
to cast out unclean spirits, and to heal the diseazed by virtue of the holy
Ghost and efficacy of the Gospel, and namely these for the testimony of the
truth suffered persecution, Saint Peeter was crucified, S. Paul at Rome
beheaded, Saint James the brother of our Lord stoned at Jerusalem, Pantaleon
in Chronographia Eccisiae.
James the brother of John be headed there: S. Philippe in Scythia, S.
Bartholmewe in India. S. Matthias in Iudaea, S. Andrew in Scythia, S. Matthew
in Aethiopia, suffered martyrdom, all within the space of 85. years after the
birth of Christ.

Jonas was sent of the Lord to preach at Niniue, forty days respite before
they should be destroyed, and yet the Lord knew that they would repent,
whereby he spared them, and withdrewe his scourge. Jonas. 3

For other Examples, look in Acts. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 11. besides other places in
Paul, Peter, James, and John, concerning Preaching.

The xii. Plant, Confession unto God.
by our godly life and virtuous examples be conquered unto Christ in this
world, that we with them and they with us acknowledging, confessing, and
firmly believing in one eternal and everliving God (as one sheepfolde under
one shepeheard Christ Jesus) may be gathered together in one faith against his
coming, to be called not only but also to be adopted Citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem. Apoc. 12.

Number. 5.

He that confesses me before men, I will acknowledge him before my father
which is in Heaven: and who soever denies me before men, him will I also deny
before my father which is in Heaven. Matt. 10.

with the heart do we believe unto righteousness, but with the mouth we
confess unto salvation. Every one that puts his trust in him shall not be
ashamed. Romans 10.

Confession works the health of the souls, is the vanquisher of vices, the
restorer of virtues, the scourge against the Devils, what more? It stops the
jaws of Hell, and opens the gates of that celestial Paradise. August. lib.
De poenitentia.

Let thy confession be simple, humble, pure, faithful and frequent, naked,
discreet, gladly, shamefast, upright, secret, mornefull, speedy, strong,
accusing thy self, and prepared to punish it self by repentance. Item, who,
what, where by whom, how often, why, how and when, to profit others by
faith. Bar. Amantius.

Who so hydeth his sins shall not be saved, but he that confesses them and
forsakes them, shall obtain mercy. Prou. 28.

Adam was admonished of the Lord, after he had sinned to acknowledge his
fault, but he after a sort laid it upon God and upon his wife, and his
wife upon the serpent, but afterward he repented himself. Genesis 3.

Pharaoh the tyrant confessed that he had sinned against God, and the
Israelites acknowledging God to be a just God, and that he and his people were
wicked. Exo. 9.

Tobias, although he feared God from his infancy, and kept his commandments,
yet he humbly said acknowledging his faults: We have not done according to
thy commandments, and we have not walked syncerely before thy face. Tob. 3.

The three Children and Sociates of Daniel, which lived so holy amongst the
Chaldeans (and for whom the Lord had wrought such a marvel in the furnace,)
did not at al murmr against the Lord, as though they had suffered such things
unjustly, but Azarias said, We have sinned, we have done wickedly. Dan. 3.

Other notable Examples of Acknowledging and confessing Gods mercies and wrath
for sins, are extant in Daniel. 9. 2. Match. 2. Matt. 3. and. 8. Luke. 15. and
17. S. Paul and other the Apostles of Christ, whose constant confession of
Christ and his Gospel, won very many to the faith.

The xiii. Plant, Obedience.
enemies against civil disobedyence and discord; for to obey the will of God
in righteousness of life, is the perfect fruit of righteousness unto life
everlasting: And to obey the will of superior power in the righteousness of
God, heapeth up the blessings of peace, plenty, prosperous, joyful, and happy
welfare, never decaying, but more and more increasing unto the perfection of
the life everlasting, which duties who so does not observe, are not only
cursed of God, woorthyly punished by him, and by man for him in this life, but
are rejected as reprobate from the blessed society of Christ and his elect
for ever.

King. 15.

Who so keeps the commandments of God, shall not suffer any evil. Eccle. 8.

The obedient person shall glory in victory over his enemies. Prou. 21.

We ought to obey God more then men. Acts. 5.

Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's; and unto God that which is Gods Luke.
2.

Let every soul submit themselves unto the hyer powers, for there is no power
but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God, therefore who so resists
the higher powers resists the ordinance of God, which who so resists shall
receive damnation. Romans 13.

I exhort you that prayers, petitions, supplications and thankesgiuings be
made for all men, but especially for Kings, and all that are set in authority
under them, that you may live a peaceable and quiet life, with all godlynes and
honesty. 1. Tim. 2.

Obedience is not to be put in ure with servile fear, but with entire
affection of love, not for fear of pains or punishment but for very love
toward justice. Grego. lib. 12. moralium.

If thou will be wise therefore, be obedyent: for so it is written, Desire
thou wisdom, keep his commandments, and the Lord shall give it unto thee.
Ber. in sermo. de Epiphania.

Luc. 2.

Because Abraham obayed the voice of God, and kept his precepts and
commandments, therefore the Lord promised Isaac that he would multiply his
seed as the fltars of heaven, and he said also, I will give all the nations upon
earth unto thy posterity, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
thy seed. Genesis 26.

Noah diligently obeyed the Lord in all things which he commanded him to do
before the deluge, and he was saved. Genesis 6. 7.

The children of Israel promised great obedience, saying, All things which the
Lord has spoken, we will do, and we will be obedient, but afterward with
their works they did contrary, for they worshipped the golden calf, but they
smarted for it. Exodus 24. and 32.

Because Achan transgressed the commandment of Joshua the Lords anointed,
therefore he was overcome in battle and afterward stoned to death of the
people. Iosu. 7.

Saul offering burnt sacrifice against the commandment of Samuel appointed
of the Lord was made a reprobate. Likewise because he spared Agag the king of
Amelech, the stock of sheep, and other precious things, and then said Samuel
unto him, Obedience is better then sacrifice. 1. King. 13.

The Apostles obediently left their nets, and followed Christ our Lord. Matt.
4.

For other examples of Obedience, look Abraham, Ge. 17. 22, Moses, Exo. 34.
Numb. 9. David, 1. King. 15. 17. the man of God, 3. Reg. 13. Naaman. 4. King.
5. Tobias. 1. Hester. 2 and the Recabites, Iere. 35.

The xiiii. Plant, Concord.
the Angels in heaven agree in mutual unity and concord of mind: So ought
mankind upon earth, serving this God in trinity, and trinity in unity, be
of mutual concord in him, and in all things which he bestows upon us for
our welfare, to show natural agreement of mind one toward an other to his
glory.

Phi. 3.

I beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that you be at concord and
unity one with an other, and that there be no discentions amongst you, but
that you be all one perfect body, of one mind and purpose in the Lord. 1. Cor
2.

Follow peace and concord with all men, and embrace holiness of life,
without which no man shall see God. Heb. 12.

He that has not peace in heart, word, and work, ought not to be called a
Christian, he that hops not in this puts both his foot yea and his whole
life in a slippery place, he anchoureth his Ship in a tempestuous Sea, he
ensnareth himself in the pit of destruction, and sows his seed in the sand.
Augustinus.

As there is nothing more precious unto God the^ the virtue of loving concord,
so the devil desires nothing more then the extinction of loving concord. Gre.
in Past.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. Mat.
5.

Mar. 9.

When the fifty days were come to an end, the Apostles were all of one mind
at Jerusalem, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like fire, and they
lighted upon them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. Act. 2.

The Angels at the birth of Christ brought glad tidings of peace, saying, Glory
to God on hye, on earth peace, and unto men a good will. Luc. 2.

The Gabaonites hearing what Joshua had done at Hierico and at Hai, came unto
him, and as his servants, made an acceptable peace with him. Iosu. 9.

Phinees and others the Ambassadors which were sent unto Rubens sons, hearing
their excuse were pacifyed, and heard their words with a great good will.
Iosu. 22.

The people blessed all those persons, which offered themselves voluntarily to
come and dwell in Jerusalem, which was interpreted the vision of peace.
Nehemi. 11.

The cause of peace which was in the time of Onyas, is excellently descrybed:
namely, the ready gracious good will of a wise and godly prince, and the
goodness of such subjects, 2. Match. 3.

God is greatly to be praised, when he gives to his people quietness, peace,
and concord, as it was with Solomon and his people. 3. Kin. 5.

David exhorts the faithful to pray for the peace of Israel. Psalm. 121.

The xv. Plant, Amity.
it sociateth man with God, it makes the Country church and common wealth in
respect of the Law, equal to the heavenly habitacle of the most highest: and
in use, it makes neighbors, companions of one office, and brothers of one
society, to prosper with many mutual benefits upon Earth: so as in common
she makes a firm knot of indissoluble felicity upon earth. Especially if
they hold fast the linck of fidelity, which ought to appear in word, work
and good will, for this virtue has wonderful effects even in the very brute
and unreasonable creatures, which do associate themselves with their like of
kind, which do nourish and defend one another, and which do as it were strive
with nature, to overcome nature in natural affections, and natural
conditions. How much more then in due benevolence one toward another ought
the worthy will and mind of man, resembling outwardly the image of the
Creator of all creatures, both by word and work recompense al dutiful deserts,
deserved good will from time to time.

Leuit. 19.

Study not to work any evil against thy friend, seeing he puts his trust in thee.
Pro. 3

Who so is a friend indede, at all times will show friendship, and a brother is
tried and known in adversity. Prou. 18.

A faithful friend is a strong defense, who so finds such a one, finds a
treasure. Eccle. 6.

Who so takes away or withdraws mercy from his friend, forsakes the fear
of God. Job. 7.

Better are the zealous stripes of him that loves faithfully, then the
flattering kisses of him that hates extremely. Pr. 17

Amity is sweet by reason of the unity of many minds. Augst. lib. 3 conf.

A certain person spoke rightly and well of his friend, when he termed him the
one half of his soul, for I understand that my soul and the soul of my
friend are both one soul in two bodies by reason of the earnest affection of
love. Ibidem.

That is a right and necessary member of amity, which is joined with the glewe
of Christ, which not the utility of worldly substance, not the present of
bodies only, nor the deceitful and hollow-harted flattery, but with the fear
of God and zeal of his holy word coupleth together. Hier. ad Paulinum.

Galathians showed such tokens of true friendship unto Paul, as he confessed
that they received him, as if he had been an Angel. etc. Gal. 4.

Onesipherus his family in the zeal of God oftentimes refreshed Paul, and
visited him when he lay in prison. Phil 4.

Ruth bare such faithful friendship in the Lord to his wives mother Noemi, and
said unto her, Wheresoever thou go, I will go with thee: and wheresoever
thou taryest I will tarry with thee also. Ruth. 1.

The soul of Ionathas and the soul of David was of faithfully fixed each to
others, that Ionathas stripped him self of his own cote to give it unto
David. 1. King 18.

Abner sent Messengers unto David saying, Be friends with me, and my hands
shall be with thee, and I will bring all Israel unto thee. 2. King. 3.

The 3. friends of Job when they heard of all the evil which had happened
unto him, they came every one from his dwelling place, and vizited him with
comfort. Job. 2. 6.

The Lord commended the unjust Steward which got himself friends by the
wise disposing of his Masters goods: so likewise ought every faithful
Christian justly to seek the loving favor of God in this life time, that we
may be delivered from death eternal, to live with him in joy and bliss for
ever. Luke. 16.

The xvi. Plant, Gratitude.
and preserved which ought also to be testified by speech as the instrument of
the mind, and by external gifts as the comprobation and satisfaction of both
their expectations. Now the matter or ground whence Gratitude grows to be
considered off, contains seven several particularities: First, God, 2. our
Parents, 3. our Schoolemaisters, 4. our Magistrates, 5. Ministers of the
Church, 6. our Country, and seventhly our benefactors and friends, which
calling this dutiful regratulation and repensation, least we incur that
penalty of Ingratitude which threateneth, The plague shall not depart from
the house of the unthankful. Prou. 17.

Ber. ad Imericu^ cancel.

A wise man will examine al things with him self, how much he has received, of
whom, when, where, what and how: Therefore we deny that no man can give
thanks or be thankful but a wiseman. Seneca ad Luci. episto. 8.

The remembrance of benefits received ought never to wax old. Idem lib, de
beneficiis.

A good turn done or freendly benevolence bestowed, ought evermore to be had
in remembrance. Ibidem.

We ought to render all possible requital, although we can not render
sufficient woorthyly, as toward God and our Parents we are not able to render
equal. Aristot.

For toward God, our Parents, and masters we can not make due requital.
Aristo. 8. and. 9. Ethicorum.

Unto whom so great thanks can not be given as is due, to them yet must we
yield such possible thanks, as our minds are able to comprehend. Cicero in
Phil.

Mary Magdalen and other testimonies of love toward him, forgave her her
sins. Luc. 7.

Pharao a very tyrannical King, did notwithstanding thankefully reward Joseph
for expounding his dream, and highly exalted him. Genesis 41.

Iethro the Priest of the Madianites was thankful for that cause, whereas
Moses had saved and defended his daughters, when they went to water their
flock, whereupon he made him to be called home to his house, to eat meat
with him, and gave him one of his daughters in marriage. Exodus 5.

David said unto Abiathar whose father loved the same David, tarry with me and
fear not, if any man seek to take away thy life, he shall also take away
mine. 1. King. 22.

By reason of the great good will that David bare to Ionathas the son of
Saul, he made inquiry if there were any of his kindred yet alive, yea or no,
and he ordained Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas to be a continual guest at
his table. 2. King. 9.

The Queen of Saba brought many gifts unto Solomon, and he to gratify her
good will, gave her all such things as she desired, except those things which
she of her voluntary good will, had brought him as a Princely present. 3. King.
10.

The xvii. Plant, Hospitality.
Cicero says) and not a continual dwelling place upon earth. And this is
used amongst men after two manners, the one necessary without necesitie, as in
entertayning those wealthy which travel from place to place in worldly affairs
and are able to requite it. The other needeful and not unnecessary, in
harbowring the poor abiects of this world, either impotent, sick, sore, or
otherwise, constrained to seek relief, help and succor, which are not able
of themselves to requite so charitable deeds. Although yet who so shows
compassion and succor upon such: to them does Christ our Savior
acknowledge and confess, saying, That they gave him to eat when he was an
hungered, they gave him drink when he was thirsty, clothed him being naked,
vizited him being sick, and harbored him being comfortless, for the which
cause he shall say unto them, Come ye blessed of my father etc. Matt. 25.

Deuteronomy. 10.

Forget not Hospitality, for by means theereof have some received even very
Angels as guestes unto them. Heb. 13.

Before all things, have mutual charity one toward an other, in all
godliness and honesty. etc. Be harborours one toward an other without
grutching. 1. Pet. 4.

Well-beloved thou do well, what soever thou workest toward thy brethren, and
specially such as are strangers. Ioh. 3.

Hospitality is so thankfully acceptable before God, that not so much as a cup
of cold water given with good will, but it shall be rewarded again and
recompensed fine fold. Amb. li. de Officiis.

Look what reward he has at Gods hand which trauaileth in Gods behalf,
such a reward has he and shall have, which intertayneth well such a
trauailer, and their recompense shall be equal, both his which he relieueth for
Gods sake, and his which trauaileth for Gods sake. John Chrysostom. super Mat.

Learn therefore without curiosity good Christian to minister hospitality,
lest hapily he who^ thou shuttest out of thy house, and whom thou deniest such
charitable relief, be Christ him self. 1. August: contra haereses.

Luke 10. when he himself went through the world, having not where to lay his
head, he was lodged at Marthas house. Luke. 9.

Abraham very diligently and gladly received Angels into his house, and caused
such things as was needful and necessary for the^ being strangers too be
ministered unto them. Genesis 18.

Loath also entertaining Angels into his house, whom he thought had been men,
did so honor them, and so worthily entreat them offering all things that were
needeful for the^. Therefore was he saved from the fiery plague of Sodom. Genesis
19.

Rebecca also ministered godly help of hospitality unto those strangers which
she received, furnishing them with lodging, man's meat, and Horse meat for
the time of their abode. Genesis 24.

Iethro with small entreatie or petition made received Moses guestwise, for the
which cause hoth Iethros daughter and his Nephews were by Moses greatly
advanced and hand in reputation. Exodus 9. 2.

The spies which Joshua sent forth were friendly and faithfully entertained by
the harlot Raab, and afterward let go again. Ios. 2. and 6.

Zacheus gladly received our Lord Jesus into his house, and the same our
Savior much more made him rejoice again saying, This day is health happened
into this house. Luke. 19.

For other notable examples of hospitality look Iudicum 19. as Benjamin in
Gaba, Elias. 3. King. 17. the Sunanite, 4. King. 4. Job. 31. the Apostles, Act.
10.

The xviii. Plant, Liberality.
Seneca says, that we deal not our alms at a wrong door, that is to say in
bestowing benefits in vain, as in giving weapons too women, books to
ploughmen, and nets too them which be given to studies of learning. Therefore
who so in bestowing their benefits have these considerations, they surely says
Cicero which for zeal to virtue and godly studies, are bountiful and
beneficial in this manner, these men how much they profit many others, so
many more worthy helpers and well willers shall they gain unto them selves, and
again by custom of this beneficencye shall they be better prepared, and as it
were better exercised to deserve well of many men Cicero lib. Offici.

Prouer. 19.

For distributio^ of alms to the poor, read Eccle. 4.

For God loves a cheerful geuer. 1. Cor. 7

Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. Mat. 7.

Let thy welspringes flow abroad, and thy rivers into the streates. Prouer. 5.

Give, and it shall be given unto you, etc Luke. 6. Minister unto the necessity
of the holy ones of God. Romans 12.

Forget not due benevolence and good will one toward an other: for with such
sacrifices is God pleased. Heb. 13.

Break thy bread unto the hungrye. Esaias. 58.

Every one of a good purpose and meaning that is to say willingly and francklye
bestow your benefits, not grudging or with compulsion. 1. Cor. 7.

Liberality is not defined in the quantity of the benevolence given, but in
the quality of zeal or affection in him that gives. Hier. de viduis.

That is called perfect liberality, when a man with silence concealeth his
benefits employed for the necessities of others, whom the poor man's mouth
commends and not his own lips.

Moreover perfect liberality is commended by faith, because by the convenient
place and time especially toward the household of faith. Ambro. lib. 1. de
offici.

Mat. 19. Mar. 10. and Luke 18.

Zacheus was very liberally disposed, when he said unto the Lord: Behold
Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any man
wrong, I restore him four fold. Luke 19.

The children of Israel with a diligent and godly mind offered their devotions
to build the work of the Tabernacle, and whatsoever else was nccessarie for
the ceremonial use thereof, so that the woorkemen were enforsed to say unto
Moses, the people offers more then is necessary or needeful. Exodus 25. 36.

To bias endeavored to imparte unto the brethren of his kindred such things
as they needed, he also fed the hungry and clothed the naked as appears.
Tobi. 1.

Godly, liberal, and merciful was Job unto the poor saying: I have bin a
comfort unto the heart of the widow, and a father of the poor Job. 29. 31.

The widows Mite was a slender token of benevolence, and yet esteemed by
Christ with the gifts of rich men. Luke 21.

The Apostles against a dearth, determined to succor the brethren in Iudaea
with corn, which they sent by Barnab. and Saul Act. 11.

The xix, Plant. Mercy.
mind conceived, sorowing for an others misery and calamity, especially of
good, godly, learned, honest and virtuous persons, but also effectually working
by external mean to help, relieve, comfort and succor others, so far as
equity and brotherly charity may extend. This mercy and compassion says
Lactantius Firmianus lib. 6. cap. 12. is a singular ornament appertaining unto
justice, to succor and defend the Orphans, Widows and helples, because the
whole law of GOD so commands. Besides these as Cicero says, we ought to be
merciful unto those especially which by reason of infortunitie, casualtie of
goods, or loss of lives, either for extreme miseries (and not for any manner
of trespass against God, and man grievously committed) do stand in need of
our commiseration. This virtue thus rightly to use (says he) of many virtues
is mercy more wonderful and more gracious. For men do not in any thing more
resemble or come near unto the likeness of God, then in relieuing and showing
mercy one toward an other. Herein fortune has nothing greater whereof she
may, nor nature any thing better whereof she would impart from her own breasts
Cicero in Oration. pro. Qu. Ligurio.

A great travel is there ordained for all men, and a great burden for all the
chidre^ of Adam, from the day of their birth, until the day of their grave the
mother of all things. Eccle. 40.

Mercy and truth shall preserve the King, and with mercy his Throne shall be
established for ever. Prouer. 20.

Blessed are the merciful, because they shall receive mercy. Mat. 5.

Go rather and learn what that means: I will have mercy and not sacrifice.
Mat. 9.

Forgive your offenders with mercy as equity requires, and you your selves
shall have your offenses forgeuen you. Luke 6.

Who so has this worlds good and sees his brothers need, and shall shut his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in that man. John 1. 3.

Mercy is the safegarde of health, the Orname^t of faith, the offered
satisfaction by Christ for our sins. This is she which commends the just,
strengthens the holy ones, and aduaunceth the worshippers or servants of
God. Ioh. Chrysostom. super Matthaeum.

Mercy is there more bountiful, where faith is more ready. Nothing so much
commends a Christian, as the charitable mercy of one man toward another.
Ambro. de officiis.

Luke. 6. Also saying, you shall find rest unto your souls in so doing. Mat.
11.

So had he compassion upon the woman whose son was dead, when he said unto
her, weep not, so that he raised her son from death to life. Luke 7.

Unto the sick of the Palsy, did he show also his meruaylous mercy, both in
curing his disease and forgeuing his sins. Mat. 9.

Upon the woman diseased with the blooddy Issue, upon the two blind, and upon
the possessed with a dumb spirit, did he work his wonderful mercies, to the
great admiration of the multitude standing by. Mat. 9.

Ruben and Judas were moved with natural compassion to withstand the other
brethren which would have slain their brother Joseph, whom although they
brought not again to their father, yet by their means his life at that ttme
was saved. Genesis 37.

When the children of Israel had taken 200000. of their enemies, men, women
and children prisoners, they spared them, and sent them back again unto their
own dwelling places appareling the^ and relieuing them. 2. Par. 2.

Nehemias hearing of the miserable state of the City of Jerusalem, wept many
days, and both procured oportune help and counsel to remedy the distressed
state thereof. Neh. 1. 2.

The xx. Plant, Innocence.
Adams innocence in our minds: before he was tempted how clear he was, and
when he tasted the fruit how much he had defiled him self. Wherefore let us
always live like little infantes in respect of true innocence (which as S
Hierom. says) proceed not in wrath, remember not harms done to them, lust
not after the eye, think not one thing and speak an other. This innocence
except we have (says S. Herome) we shall not as the children of God enter into
the kingdom of heaven. super Matt. cap. 18.

Mat. 5. ^^.

Verily I say unto you, except ye repent and become as little children, you shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 18. 3.

Who so receives one of these little ones in my name, receives me. And who so
offends one of these little ones, which believes in me, it were meet that a
Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the bottom of
the Sea ibidem. ^. 6.

You have heard how it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth, But I say unto you resist not evil with evil. Mat. 5.

The simple believe every word, so long as the innocent clean unto
righteousness, they shall not be ashamed. Pro 14.

See that you render not evil for evil, but always persiste in doing good.
1. These. 5.

Who is innocent? he which neither hurts others, nor himself, for he that
hurts himself, is not innocent. Aug. super Psalm. 35.

Be glad of thine innocence and rejoice, be glad I say, because she is
harmless in every place, and safe in every place. If thou be tempted, thou
profitest: if thou be brought low, thou shall be exalted, if thou
fightest, thou winnest: if thou be slain, thou shalt be crowned. Chrysostom in
Homil. Lord who shall enter into thy holy hill even he that is innocent of his
hands and pure of heart, which has not taken his soul in vain, nor has
sworn to deceive his neighbor, he shall receive blessing from the Lord and
mercy from God his Savior. Psalm. 25.

That most innocent Lamb Christ Jesus our Savior in whose mouth was found
none evil, and in whose heart was found no guyle, both lived in innocence as
he taught, and died in inno e^cie for our example, that we should refuse no
damage, danger, nor injury for the testimony of a good conscience toward
God in true innocence of life. Mat. 23. John. 19.

Susanna was innocent from that heinous fact, wherewith the false judges
charged her: for testimony of which truth God sent Daniel his servant to
diiudicate the cause of her innocence, and to condemn the false judges of
their mischeuous malice. Dan. 13.

David served Saul in all innocence, truth, and fidelity, a long time: yet
was he persecuted by him, but in the end he was crowned king after Saul. 1.
Reg. 28. vsque, ad 26. cap.

Joseph was also innocent, just, and faithful toward his Master: albeit his
Mistress went about to tempt him and procure revenge upon him, for not
fulfilling her pleasure. But the Lord preferred his innocence that he found
far more grace and favor both with God and man. Gen 39.

Job both just and innocent before GOD, though Satan desired God that he might
diversely touch him with vexation and adversity, yet did he never depart from
his innocence, but walked uprightly, glorified God and believed in his Savior.
Job. 1. and 2.

The xxi. Plant. Good counsel.
Solomon says, Words spoken in due time are like apples of gold in a silver
dishe. And that worthy Salust admonished his friends first to ask counsel,
before they begun any thing, and when they had taken counsel, to dispatche
their purpose quickly. He that will do any thing well therefore, let him also
consider, that as in delay to seek counsel brings danger, and in rash taking
counsel brings repentance: so to work by good counsel in due time
brings expected comfort and commodity from time to time. Let us crave this
good counsel of the holy Ghost the comforter, that in all thoughts, words and
works we may glorify God, and edify our selves, and our christian brethren
also.

Eccle. 32.

Give ear unto counsel, and receive discipline, that thou may be wise in
the last days. Prou. 9.

Even as water is in the deep, so is counsel in the heart of man: But who so
is wise, shall draw out the same. Prou. 20.

The wise man does all things with counsel: But he that is foolish,
discovers his folly. Prou. 13.

The heart of man with ointment and sundry sweet odours is made glad: so is
the soul comforted with the good counsels of a friend. Prou. 27.

A sweet word multiplieth friends, and mitigateth enemies, and a gracious tung,
abou^deth in a good man. Have thou as many friends as thou can get, and but
one cou^selour of a thousand. Eccle. 6.

Let not the good counsel of the aged escape thy hearing, for they have
learned of their fathers', because of them also, ^hou shalt learn
understanding and in time of need shalt thou give answer. Eccle. 8.

Through counsels are the determinations of men established, and with discreet
government are wars to be taken in hand. Prou. 20.

There is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no counsel against
the Lord. Prou. cap. 21.

viz. Every one which hears my words and does the same, shall be compared
unto a wise man, that builds his house upon a rock. Mat. 7.

Jacob hearkened unto the counsels of hid mother, working all things
accordingly. And it came to pass that the Lord prospered him greatly therein.
Genesis 27.

Ruben hearing the evil determinations of his other brethren against Joseph
resisting the same, gave counsel rather that he should be sold, whereby it
fell out, that his life was saved, and he afterward became a comfortable helper
of his brethren. Genesis 37.

Iethro gave good counsel unto Moses, for the welfare of the people of Israel,
worthy of imitation. Exodus 18.

Through the good counsel of Abigail that godly virtuous woman, David was
withdrawn from shedding of Nabals blood: which if he had done, would greatly
have procured gods wrath toward David for the same. 1. Reg. 25.

Abner gave good counsel to Asael when he followed him, saying: Do not thou
follow me, least I cause thee to fall unto the earth. Which thing to hear
because Asael contemned, he was therefore slain by him immediately. 2. Reg. 2.

The elders gave good counsel unto Roboam, but he to his own harm gave ear
to the counsel of the younger in authority about him. 3 Reg. 12.

Read the good counsel of Eliseus unto Naaman, and the good event thereof. 4
Reg. 5. Of Ioiada unto Ioas the King, and the event thereof. 4. Reg. 12. 2. Par.
24. of Nehemias in building the Temple. Nehem. z. of Tobias in captivity. Tob.
1. of Judith to the people. Judith. 8. of Jonas to the Nineuites. Jonas. 2. 3.
of Mattathias to his sons. 1. Machabes. 2. of Judas Machabaeus. 1. Macha. 3.
4. and 9. Item 2. Mac. 8. and 15. and of the Apostles. Act. 2. 4. 10. 13. 14.
16. 18. 19. 20 and 26.

The. xxii. Plant. Discipline.
Gregorius in his Morals says, that in this discipline ought to be admixed
lenity with severity, and that there should be made a moderation thereof.
Furthermore S. Augustine writing de Moribus Ecclesiae, distinguishes
Discipline in two parts. The first love, and the second fear, as who should
say, love in teaching, telling and admonishing the learner: and fear in
learning, following and practicing that which is taught. After this sort (says
he) where Discipline is, there is the Lady of true Religion, and of true
godliness, which neither so blames that she burreth, nor so chastises that
she wounds: But finally being angry, she corrects men's manners, and
being zealously moved she preserves them to perfection. Thus as Gregorius
Nazianzen says: The words of the nurses are milk, if they be good, or poison
if they be ill. In Regist. cap. 7.

Prou. 5.

Have thou children? bring them up in nurture, and from their childhoode make
them to stand in awe: Have thou daughters? keep their bodies in awe, and
show not a pleasant countenance toward them. Ecclesiasticus. 7.

My son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, neither forsake him when
thou art reprehended. For whomsoever the Lord loves, him does he chasten, as
the father which takes pleasure in his child. Pro. 3.

Who so rejects discipline, dispiseth his own soul: but he that hearkeneth
to good admonishment, enjoys his own hearts case. Prou. 15.

For whosoever despises wisdom and discipline is unhappy: and vain is their
hope, yea their labors are without fruit, and their works are unprofitable.
Sap. 3.

A man that is wise and well nurtured, will not murmr when he is admonished
to amend his fault etc. Eccle. 10. cap.

I beseech thee my good brother, that unto all those under thy jurisdiction,
from the greatest to the least, thou would declare both the sweet comfort
of the heavenly kingdom, and the bitter pains of hell. And that thou being
careful for their welfare, would be as a watchman over them. Because for
every one which are under thy authority thou shall render accountes unto God.
Admonish them therefore, and persuade them too beware of pride, slander,
drunkenness, fornication, wrath, perjury, and covetousness. Augustinus ad
comitem.

Luc. 2. Being also the light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his
people Israel, taught first his Disciples the true doctrine of salvation unto
al men, which whosoever believed should inherit everlasting life. Mat. 10.

This discipline was taught by the said Apostles by preaching of the Gospel, as
namely S. Thomas at Parthia, S. Matthew in Aethiopia, S. Bartholomew in India,
S. Andrew in Scythia, S. John Baptist in Asia, S. Peter in Galatia, S. Philip
in Scythia, S. James the brother of Christ at Jerusalem, Saint John the divine
in Pathmos, S. James the elder brother of John at Jerusalem, S. Simeon the
son of Cleopha, there also, and S. Paul at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia,
and Thessalonia, with Barnabas at Antioch, teaching and instructing the
faithful, as also reproving the seduced and erroneous Disciples, inducing them
by all tractabilitie and good order of discipline to be reconciled and
established unto the perfect path of righteousness. Act. 15.

This discipline (as the holy Prophet Moses in Israel, Jonas in Niniuee, Elias
and Elizeus in Israel, Daniel at Babylon, Nathan at Jerusalem, and diverse
other by the operation of the holy Ghost, taught and persuaded the kings and
nations of the earth, every one in their degree to learn their duties: So
likewise have the ancient fathers of the Church, as Joseph of Aramathia in
England, S. Ignatius at Antioche. Policarpus at Rome, Irenaeus at Lions, Origin
at Alexandria, Tertullian in Africa, Cyprian at Carthage, S. Hierom in
Bethleem, S. Augustine at Hipponesa, S. Ambrose at Milaine, S. Basil at
Caesarea in Cappadocia, S. Gregory Nazia^zen, and S. Epiphan. at Cypres. and
others by their divine gifts in preaching, teaching, detecting, disputing,
correcting and co^futing have wonderfully profited the Church of God unto all
posterity, co^firming this discipline of the Gospel, albeit some of them more
purer than other some expressing the same.

The. xxiii. Plant. Virginity.
Augustine, writing de bono virginali. It is more blessed in the flesh to
imitate the life of Angels, than by the flesh to increase the number of mortal
men. And S. Hierom in his sermon de Assump. says: Of good right was the Angel
sent unto the virgin: because unto Angels, virginity is evermore known. And
truly (says he) to live in the flesh as beside the flesh, is not an earthly
life, but a heavenly life. For to be an Angel is a state of felicity, but to
be a virgin is the state of surpassing virtue. But S. Ambrose more highly
aduauncing virginity, says, that virginity far surmounteth the state of
humane nature, whereby men are likened unto Angels. Yet greater is the victory
of virgins tha^ of Angels, because Angels live out of the flesh, but virgins do
triumph in the flesh.



For Virginity is the treasure whose precious price is inexpressible. Genesis 24.

Touching virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, but yet I do admonish
them. etc. 1. Cor. 7.

Let the unmarried woman and the virgin study for those things which perteine
unto the Lord, that she may be holy in body and soul. eodem.

No man could say the song, but those same xliiii which were redeemed from the
earth These are they which were not defiled in the flesh. Apoc. 14. For they
are virgins and follow the lamb wheresoever he goes. cap. eodem.

These are redeemed from amongst men as the first fruits unto God and the
lamb, and there is no deceit found in their mouth. For they are without spotte
before the throne of God. eodem.

Whosoever having power of his own will, has determined in his heart to keep his
virgin pure, does well: also he which joins his virgin in matrimony does
well, but he that marieth not his virgin does better. 1. Cor. 7.

Remember therefore in this life to prepare thee thy lamp of true godliness,
and the oil of sincere vetrue fervently luminating thy body and soul, that
with the five wise virgins thou may enter with the bridegroom Christ Jesus,
into the celestial joys of life everlasting. Mat. 25.

Marie the blessed virgin and mother of Jesus Christ, Examples. Maria interet.
Stella Maris.
by the power of the holy Ghost, though she conceived and brought forth the
savior of the world in the flesh, yet seemed she to be still a virgin
undefiled. When she saying, How may this be, for I know no man? her sister
Elizabeth being full of the holy Ghost especially commended the holy virgin,
saying: Blessed art thou amongst women, etc. Luke. 1.

The same Elizabeth by the divine providence one of the daughters of Aaron,
Elizabeth interpret. Plenitudo dei
a long time lived undefiled in the flesh, walking in all the precepts and
testimonies of the Lord unreprovable, to the great admiration of Zacharias her
husband, who was ^^^de by the Angel, that his wife Elizabeth should even in her
aged years miraculously also bear a child, which should be great in the
Lords sight. Luke 1.

The virgins and women children, which had not known carnal copulation
amongst the Medianites, were spared by the captains of Israel, and by the
commandment of Moses had their lives saved, when all the malekinde were
slain with the sword. Number. 31.

The daughter of the woman of Canaan being sore vexed with an evil spirit,
was at the instant prayer of her mother helped by Christ. Math. 15.

Philip the Evangelist had four daughters virgins which prophesied. Acts. 21.
Euphemia, Dorothea, Tecla, and Erasma, virgins of sincere, godly, and virtuous
conversation, for the testimony of Christ, had rather suffer martyrdom, then
forsaking him to live in blindness under Seruastus the tyrant. Pet. de natal.
lib. 3. cap. 29. Anno dom. 65.

Vrsula of England, with the 11000. virgins passing toward Rome by Basilea,
with Pantaleon the Bishop of Basilea, (homewards by the way returning from the
people called the Hunnes) suffered martyrdom for the testimony of Christ at
Colen in Belgia. Pol. Virg. in Ang. 3. Anno. 460.

The xxiii. Plant. Sobrieetie.
secrets, the covering of priuities, the prompt atchieuer of learning and
doctrine, the discipline of good arts and sciences, together reputed as Lady
and mistress over human wits, and the handmaide of enterprises, which is
ever desirous of good name, ordeyning things wholesome and profitable, and a
singular help to virtue, disposing al things with reason and always coveting
to keep company with honest persons. Thus much out of S. Augustine, touching
the definition of this excellent virtue Sobriety.

Pet. 2.

The grace of God has appeared unto us, that we denying and forsaking all
ungodliness and worldly concupiscences, should live soberly, justly, and godly
in this present world. 2. Tit.

Beware that your hearts be not greened with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
with cares of this life, and that the latter day suddenly steal not upon you:
for it shall come unlooked for, as a snare unto all the world. Luke. 21.

Sobriety, especially in women, carries always a lowly countenance toward
the earth, remembering that she came from the earth: But drunkenness having
lost all modesty, lifts up her lofty looks on high. August. ad sacr.
virgins.

Sobriety with great trembling and silence utters that word which cannot be
reprehended: But drunkenness both shows unshamefast speech and countenance*
ibidem.

Sobriety is the mother of all virtues: But drunkenness is the fountain of
all vices. Origin. hom. 57.

Luke. 10.

Daniel had determined in his mind before, that he would not be defiled with
the meat of Pharaos table, by means whereof God gave him and his sociates
knowledge and wisdom. Dan. 3. Eleazarus, although he was stricken in age, had
rather die a cruel death than he would eat swines flesh which was against
the law. 2. Mac. 2.

The seven brethren with their mother also being compelled of the king to eat
swines flesh, contrary to the law, chose rather to suffer most cruel torments.
2. Mac. 7.

Saint John Baptist was of such sober life, that his usual meat was only
locustes and wild honey. Math 3. Math 11.

The Lord commended the sobriety of those Rachabites, because they would
drink no wine, as their father commanded them. Ier. 35.

The xxv. Plant, Chastity.
and ungodly speech, word and deed in all things contrary to Gods holy will. And
although god commands that this virtue should be had in due honor, and
observed in all ages and degrees of men and women, yet it ought with special
care to be regarded in the state of wedlock, because when God has lincked in
mutual bo^ds of love, and placed in two bodies one soul, there ought to be no
violation of this virtue, nor no breach of this knot. For in this chastity and
mutual love consists wonderful felicity and manifold comfort each of other.
Contrariwise, if either chastity be without love, or love without chastity,
every felicity turns into infelicitie, and every comfort into a corsey. For
Chastity (as S. Bernard says without love, is a lamp without oil. Take away
the oil and the lamp cannot burn: so take away love, and chastity pleases
not. Ber. in epist. ad Senon.

Sap. 4.

Blessed are the clean and pure of heart, for they shall see God. Mat. 5.

The light of the body is the eye, if therefore thy eye be simple, all thy
whole body shall be light. Mat. 6.

For he that is steadfast of mind, makes none necessity, but has power of
his own will, and has decreed this in his heart, namely to keep his
virginity. 1. Cor. 7.

Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ. Shall you then take
the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Know
you not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost dwelling in you. 1. Cor.
6.

Separate not your selves one from another, except it be through both your
co^sents for a time, continuing in fasting and prayer, least Satan te^pt you
for your inco^tinency. 1. Cor. 7. Let the unmarried man care for those things,
which pertein to the pleasing of God. ibid.

Let the unmarried woman seek that which perteines unto the Lord, that she may
be holy both in body and soul. Ibid.

chastely, so has he left us this lesson as example worthy of imitation,
namely that there is no treasure comparable to the gift of chastity.
Ecclesiasticus 26.

So long as our parents Adam and Eve were in Paradise, they were in state of
virginity, but being once cast out by the displeasure of God, it came then to
pass, that Adam knew Eve carnally. Genesis 4.

Joseph although he was a bond servant, and a young man of elegant personage,
without wife, being earnestly provoked thereunto by his mistress, would not
give his consent to defile his masters bed, and had rather displease his
mistress, and be shut in close prison, than be would lose his chastity. Genesis
39.

Sara had such care and continency of her body touching chaste life before
she married Tobia, that in her prayer she confessed, saying, Thou know Lord
that I never desired company of man, but have kept my soul pure and undefiled
from al carnal lusts. Tob. 3.

Judith after she had buried her first husband never knew any man, but kept
her self a chaste widow* keeping the fastes and feasts of the Sabbath in the
house of Israel, with devout fasting and prayer. Iud. 8.

After that Phinees and other captains had subdued the Madianites, Moses
commanded that all the wicked women should be slain, and that the virgins only
should be saved. Number. 31.

Marie the blessed virgin and mother of Christ, continued in the estate of
chastity by divine providence. Luke 1.

Susanna a singular example for chaste married women. Dan. 13.

The xxvi. Plant, Repentance.
spirit, and sacrifice of sorrows unto amendment and newness of life. Thus
as S. Augustine says, who so shall truly repent, and be loosed of the bands
of sin, to be united in the body of Christ, and shall live well after their
repentance, as he should have done before his repentance, after his
reconcilement whenever he dies, he goes unto God, he goes to the good
rest, he shall not be frustrate of the inheritance promised in the kingdom of
God, nor separated from the society of Gods people. Aug. de poeneten. cap. 5.

Parali. 7.

Be not slow to turn unto the Lord, and defer not of from day to day, for
suddenly shall his wrath come, and in time of his vengeance shall he destroy
thee. Eccle. 5.

Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mat. 3. and 4.

Lay away from you according to your old conversation, the old man which is
corrupted, by reason of the desire of sin, and be renned in the spirit of
your mind, and put on the new man which is created like unto god, in
righteousness and holiness of truth. Ephe. 4.

Turn unto the Lord, and forsake the sins, pray before the face of the
Lord, and leave of to offend. Turn again unto the Lord, and turn away from
thy unrighteousness, and more and more hate thy wickedness, and knowledge the
righteousness and judgment of God, etc. Eccle. 17.

There shall be more joy in heaven over one sinner that truly repents, than
over 99. just which need no repentance. Luke 15.

Luke 5. affirming that at what time soever a sinner repents him of his
sins, from the bottom of his heart, that he would put away all his sins.
etc. Ezec. 1.

When the people of Israel heard, that the Lord was grieved at the murmuringes
in the desert, they mourned therefore, and would have done more in the morning
than the Lord commanded them. Number. 14.

They at another time said unto the Lord, we have sinned, render thou unto us
whatsoever thou will, and they cast away their Idolles from them, so that, He
sorowed upon their miseries. Iud. 10.

David quickly repented him, when Nathan reprehended him of his fault. 2. Reg.
12.

Achab the most wicked king of Israel, covered his flesh with hairecloth, and
slept in sackecloth, and walked bareheaded before the Lord, and his punishment
for the faults was dispensed with and forgiven. 3. Re^g 21.

Manasses being bound in chains, and carried into Babylon, very much repented
him before the Lord, and the Lord restored him again unto his kingdom of
Jerusalem. 2. Par. 33.

Esdras the prophet weeping for the sins of Israel, and making intercession
for them unto the Lord, it was answered him, thus. If there be repentance in
Israel, I will then enter a league with the Lord, etc. 1. Esdr. 10.

Job although he was a man simple and right, fearing God, yet I will do (says
he) repentance in sackcloth and ashes. Job. 42.

The Nineuites believed the Lord at the preaching of Jonas, and they preached
fasting, clothing themselves with sackecloth and ashes, from the least to the
most, and they were delivered. Jonas. 2.

The xxvii. Plant, Simplicity.
affection of the mind, and in nature for the true and unfeigned godliness,
which is both pleasing unto God, and profitable unto man. Thus, as S. Hierom
says, super Osea^ Prudence without simplicity, is but mere malice, and
simplicity without reason or wisdom is but mere foolishness.

Cor. 11.

Be you wise as serpents, and innocent as doves. Mat 10.

Be as the simple children of God, and vnreproouable amongst the evil and
wicked generation. Phil. 2.

The simple shall possess and dwell in the land. Prou. 2.

He that walks simply walks surely. cap. 10.

The just which walks in his simplicity, shall leave a blessed posterity of
children after him. eodem.

Thou shall be simple if thou entangle not thy self unto the world, but wring
thy self out of the wretched familiarity thereof. For in wringing thy self
from the world art thou simple, but in entangling thy self to the world, thou
art duble. Aug. super John. ho. 2.

The simplicity of the just shall direct the^ in the right way. Pro. 11.

He that gives, let him give in simplicity, that is to say, in true and
simple zeal to do well toward all men, not seeking any curiosity, or using
captiousnesse, Romans 12.

Mat. Mar. Luke. John.

His beloved Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and others, of simple fishermen, poor,
unlearned, base and abject in worldly wisdom, did he train, teach and
instruct with the fullness of the holy Ghost, as well by his life and doctrine,
making them perfect followers of him, as also worthy examples for his chosen
servants in this world: whose testimonies are left us for our worthy examples
of imitation. Mat. Mar. Luke. John.

Job is commended unto us to have lived always just and simple in the sight of
the Lord, just by wariness of wisdom, and simple by innocence of
meekness: simple, because he never desired to hurt any, but rather to profit
al men: just, because he would not suffer himself to be deceived by any. Job.
1. Beda de templo Solemonis. lib. 1.

All the Patriarchs and Prophets, were men of simple life and conversation in
the sight of God.

S. Hierome writing de Sapientia Serpentina and simplicitate Columbina, has
these words. Use simplicity of a Dove, that thou do not deceive or injury
any man: and have wisdom of a serpent, that thou be not supplanted in other
men's snares, for otherwise in respect of offense, it differs smally, but thou
shall either deceive, or be deceived. Hier. ad. Rust. Mona.

The.xxviii. Plant, Sincerity.
fan wheat is sifted from the chafe, and by which searce of sincerity, the
sweet sauorie Cinnamon of salvation is separate from the bruised bark of
bitter bale, by the operation of the holy Ghost, which is therefore called the
spirit of truth and sincerity, because he is true and sincere, that is,
agreeable unto the will of God, and the author which first expressed the true
doctrine of God, enclining the hearts of men to assent and consent unto the
same true doctrine, to worship the true god thereby, to honor and obey the
superior powers thereby, to profess with the heart, and confess with the
tongue all one, in all worldly dealings toward all men. That the name of the
true and everliving God may in truth be glorified: That the true and sincere
Church in truth may be amplified, and increased: That the true consolations of
Christ may in our consciences truly be multiplied, eternally to our salvation,
triumphing with Christ over Satan, sin and hell, to rest with him in the
sincere seat of celestial glory.

John. 4.

Thy word is the truth, sanctify them in the truth. John. 17.

God will that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, that is, of the true doctrine of the true God, and of the mediator his
son Jesus Christ. 1. Tim. 2.

The spirit of truth shall bring you into all truth. John. 16.

The truth is great and stronger than al things. 1. Esd. 4

We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 2. Cor. 13.

If you remain in the truth of my word, you are my disciples rightly, and my
truth shall deliver you. John. 8.

Laying aside all leasings, let every one of you speak the truth unto his
neighbor. Ephe. 4.

The Lord abhors lying lips, but who so speaks truth shall be safe
for ever. Pro. 10.

Lord who shall ascend into thy hill, or who shall rest in thy holy place,
even he whose hands are innocent from harm, whose heart is clean, which
has not taken his soul in vain, nor has not sworn to deceive his
neighbor. etc. Psalm. 23.

This is our glory only, and in this we are glad as to witness, we take our
conscience that we are exercised in the simplicity and sincerity of God, in
this world, and not in carnal wisdom, but in the grace of God etc. 2. Cor. 1.

Sapien. the light of the world. John. 1. the way, the truth, and the life,
John. 14. all whose ways, as David says, are mercy and truth. Psalm. 25.

His Apostles, Prophets, Patriarks, Martyrs and Confessors, have preached this
truth, practiced the same in life and conversation, and suffered persecution
for the testimony thereof.

Jacob had this sincerity with him, when he said, let us make an altar unto
the lord, because he has heard me in the day of my trouble, and has been a
companion of my journey. Genesis 35

Daniel had this sincerity of truth with him, when all the wise men of Babylon
were by Nabuchodonoser commanded to be slain, then he being inspired with the
spirit of truth, exhorted his sociates to seek for mercy of the Lord, who
revealing a vision unto Daniel in the night, by this advertisement of Daniel,
the king spared to execute his determined judgment upon the said wise men.
Dan. 2.

When all the Disciples of Christ were altogether of one mind in praying, the
holy Ghost wonderfully descended upon them, taught them, comforted them, and
directed them in the truth. Act. 1. 2.

This spirit of sincerity had the same Daniel in disprouing those false Gods
Bell and the Dragon, and in worshipping the true and everliving God, mauger the
malice of the malignant enemies of the truth. Dan. 14.

The.xxix. Plant, Justice.
Cardo, which is in English the hindge of a door: for as the hindge does catie
the force of the door opening to and fro, and bears the stresse of the same
against all other strength: so do these four virtues every one in his
property, carry, support, and bear certain other virtues, as it were imposed
upon them, or rather depending upon their force and effect. As namely, Cicero
terming this Justice the first Cardinal virtue, says, lib. 1. Offici. That she
is a great brightness and excellency, whereof good men are so called, whose
first office is to hurt no man, except he be first provoked by injury.
Again, to use things common for common, and thirdly private things as his
own. But more truly and amply in his 2. Rhetor. he says, Justice is an
excellent quality of the mind, to the profit of all men applyable, rendering
every one their due title and right: and her parts are these, Religion,
Piety, Gratitude, Challenge of right and Equity, Observation, and Truth in all
things before God and man acceptable. Cicero. lib. 2 Rhetoricorum.



The path of the righteous shines, as the light that is brighter and brighter
unto the perfect day. etc. Pro. 4.

There arises light in darkness to those that are just and upright of heart.
Be joyful you just in the Lord, and with continual memory acknowledge his
holiness. Psa. 96.

The just man shall flourish as the Palm tree, and as the Ceder of Libanus
shall he be multiplied in his seed. Psalm. 91.

For righteousness strive and groan thou even until death, and God shall
overcome and vanquish thine enemies for thee. Eccl. 4.

Justice is that virtue which claims not any thing properly perteining unto
others, which gives unto every one that which is his, which neglects her
own commodity, equally to profit others, and according to his will the first
point of justice perteyneth unto God, the second to our Prince and country,
the third to our parent. and the iiii. toward all men. Ambr. in Officiis.

The justice of the king is the peace of his people, the defense of his
Country, the easy yoke of the people, the fortress of the nation, the salve
of sorrows, the joy of men, the bright clearness of the air, the calmenes of
the sea, the plentifulnes of the la^d, the solace of the poor, the patrimony
of children: and unto the king himself this instice is the very hope of
blessedness to come. Cypr. de 12. Abusionibus.

and earth, which in his justice created al things to his glory, and unto
whose judgment al things are subject, both in heaven above, and earth bylow,
has left us a notable testimony of his justice me^cioned in the story of the
naughty servant which would not forgive the C. pe^ce. Mat. 8

Abraham desiring to separate himself from Lot his nephew, gave him choice to
take which part he would, and so might the distribution be well dealt, that the
elder might divide, and the younger choose. Genesis 13.

Assuerus executed justice duly upon wicked Aman, when he caused him to be
hanged upon the same gallows that he caused to be set up for that good
Mardocheus, most innocent. Ester. 7. 8.

The men that accused Daniel for an offender, were justly put into the den of
the Lions, at the king Darius his commandment, and they were scarce come
down to the bottom of the den, but the Lions took the men, and altogether
devoured them even to the very bones. Dan. 6. and 14.

Much like true justice was showed upon the two false Judges, for accusing that
godly and chaste Susanna. Dan. 13.

Antiochus also died an horrible death, being for his cruelty justly rewarded
therewith of the Lord. 2. Mac. 9.

David would not receive the altar of Arenna, the Iebusite, unless he had
first rendered unto him a just reward therefore. 2. Reg. 14.

When Tobias heard the Kid bleat, which was brought him, he willed them to
look that it was not stolen, because he said they ought not to eat of any
stolen thing, or of any stray. Tob. 2.

The xxx. Plant, Prudence.
Aug. li. 1. de lib arbit. This virtue Wisdom (as Aristotle lib. 1. Rhetor.
defines) is that virtue of the mind, whereby we may provide for those good
graces, tending to felicity in this life, and for ever: and also whereby we
may prevent those evils tending to destruction in this life and for ever. And
Macrobius, he says, wisdom is a virtue directing al things devised in our
mind, and externally enterprised, according to the rule of reason, neither
does she any thing but that which is right, and worthy of praise: and unto
her do these other virtues also properly apperteyne: viz. Understanding,
Circumspection, providence, Docilitie, and wariness. But Tho. Aquinas
concludes, that she is the true and perfect means whereby we are reconciled
to God, whereby we judge and prescribe all things tending to good use and end
in man's life, only agreeable to God and good men. Ex be. Th.

Eccle. 1.

The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and her branches are long life.
eod.

The children of wisdom are the congregation of the just, and their
generation is delighted in obedience and love. Eccle. 3.

Wisdom is better than strength, and a wise man excels him that is strong.
God loves no man but him which has his dwelling with wisdom, for this is
more beautiful than the Sun, and being compared above all the course of the
stars, is found more ancient than them al, for unto the light of the day
aprocheth the darksome night: but malice shall not overcome wisdom. Sap. 7.

A wise heart, and one that has understanding, will abstain from sins: and
in the works of righteousness shall he have prosperous success. Eccle. 6.

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, which gives to all men
plentifully, and casts no man in the teeth. But let him ask in faith,
nothing doubting, James. 1.

Possess wisdom, because she is better than gold, and embrace understanding,
because she is more precious tha^ silver. Pro. 16.

Luke. 2.

Paul the Apostle of Christ, was wonderfully illuminated with the spirit of
wisdom and heavenly understanding, as appears. Acts. 16. 19. 20. 22. 23.
25.

Abraham wisely separated himself from Loath, least the sheepeheards should be
at discord amongst themselves. Genesis 13.

He distributed wisely unto his children their portions in his life time, least
after his death they should be at variance amongst themselves. Genesis 25.

Joseph wisely admonished Pharao of his dream, and gave him good counsel in
many things, Genesis 41. He wisely counseled his brethren. Genesis 44.

For other notable examples of the wisdom of God, wonderfully appearing in his
elect. Look and read. Iethro. Exodus 18. Moses. Number. 13. Joshua. 21. and 8.
Phinees and others. Iosue. 22. David. 1. Reg. 17. 18. 21. 25. Solomon. 1. Reg,
3. Ezechias 4. Reg. 18. and. 2. Paral. 32. Zorobabel. 1. Esd. 3. Tob. 4. Iudit.
8. and 11. Ester. 4. and Daniel. 1.

The.xxxi. Plant, Temperance.
happy and golden mean in all things, abhorring excess, riot and intemperance
of meat, drink, cloth, and such like: whose parts are bashfulnesse,
Honesty, Chastity, Shamefastness, Continency, Humility, Courtesy or
Clemency, Modesty, good order, Frugality, and moderation: As Thomas of Aquina
that excellent learned doctor does define them, properly apperteyning unto
temperance: whose properties at large I have placed in the next page in stead
of testimonies, because the knowledge of them is singular, and the effect of
them no less worthy to be imitated, as well of high as low estate, rich as
poor, and of the meanest person, as of the better personage.

The testimomies of the parts of Temperance.



Honesty is that part, whereby any person embracing moderation, and discipline,
does exercise the same in observing person, place, and time.

Chastity deliteth her self in that integrity and unspotted part of
Temperance, that as she herself keeps her bounds, so will she by her
examples move others to observe the law of God and of nature.

Continency refrayneth the motion of the will stirred up by the assault of the
passion, that although a man suffer immoderate lusts, yet his will is not
subdued or vanquished by evil.

Humility refraineth the motion of vain hope, and wilful boldness.

Courtesy or Clemency, refrayneth desire of revenge in anger or injury
offered or done.

Modesty brideleth the motions of the mind within, and also the deeds of the
outward man.

Good order consists in knowing what to do, and what not to do, and herein
to continue firmly.

Frugalitie, in keeping a mean touching expenses, gifts or beneficencie, that
she may do that which suffices, and not to ouerdo beyond measure.

Moderation in so using the same benefits, which God and nature has given us,
that they may profit us in use of them, and others in bestowing them.

Iudaea. 40. days and forty nights, as a meet example of temperance, for
those which either fast with a defiled mind, or altogether despise temperance
in diet. Mat. 4. Luke. 4.

S. John Baptist refrayned from delicate fare, and only contented himself
with locustes and wild home in the desert. Math. 3.

Our Savior Christ bearing furthermore witness of himself, said: John
Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine and you say he has a
devil. Luke. 7.

Helias being by the Angel refreshed with barley bread and water, walked with
the strength of that bread and water, forty days, and forty nights, unto
the mount Oreb. 3. Reg. 19. etc.

The beginning of man's life was only contented with bread, water, and
apparel, and a convenient shade to cover his nakedness. Eccle. 29.

When David had desired water out of the well of Bethleem, to be brought him
(tempering his affections with rare moderation) he would not drink, thereof
afterward, because he had before too much greedily desired the same. 2. Reg.
23.

Read of the temperance and moderation of punishment which GOD had toward the
wicked King Achab, because he repented in sackecloth, tempering his ire (for
killing of Naboth) afterward sorowing for the same. 3. Reg. 21.

The.xxxii. Plant, Fortitude
Fortis, which is, strong, and the proper Etymology of this word Fortitude, is
as much to say, as strength, force and mighty courage of the mind, in
withstanding evil, in defending good, and in baliantly adue^turing against the
troublesome threatenings of adverse fortune, with firm trust and confidence in
God, which in respect of godly life and true virtue in this life, utterly
abhors and strives to vanquishe all wicked pleasures, vice, honors,
riches, envy and ignominy, death and destruction, to sauegard and fortify
her self with such heavenly virtues, that she may live for ever. And unto this
fortitude does Cicero ascribe these virtues properly apperteyning, namely faith
or Confidence, Patience, mighty Courage, Magnificencie, Constancy, and
perseverance. But this is only allowable with God and man, especially in
cryall of a right and just cause, in defending the truth, and depelling or
depressing the unrighteous, unjust, and untrue quarrels of the wicked, perverse,
and malignant members of Satan.

Ecclesiasticus. 2.

The name of the Lord is a strong defense, unto this flees the righteous, and
shall be saved. Prou. 18.

Because thou, oh Lord, art become strength unto the poor, a defense for the
needy in tribulation, a hope in their misery, and a shade from the heat.
Esaias. 25.

The Lord is my fortitude, and my hope. Exodus 15.

The eyes of the Lord do behold all the whole earth, and do give strength and
courage unto those which believe in him with a perfect heart. Paral. 16.

In the fear of the Lord is confidence of Fortitude. Prou. 14.

The way of the Lord is the fortitude of the simple. Prou. 10.

The fortitude of young men is their rejoicing in the Lord. Prou. 20.

The ungodly flees when no man pursues him: but the just person as a Lion
trusting in the Lord, shall be safe from fear. Prou. 28.

Be not afraid (says the Lord) because I have redeemed thee, and called thee
after my name, thou art mine. When thou shall pass by the waters, I will be
with thee, when thou walkst in the fire, thou shall not burn, and the flame
shall not be seen in thee, because I am thy Lord God, thy holy one of Israel,
thy Savior, etc. Esaias. 43.

If God be with us, who shall be against us. Romans 8.

Matthew. and of the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, which by all means came to
ensnare him. Mat. 16. 19. 21. Mar. 12. Luke. 20. and also with heavenly courage
of the spirit of truth in him, utterly vanquished and overcame them for our
worthy example.

Saint Stephen the protomartyr, otherwise called the first witness, constantly
dying in confession of Christ and the truth, by grace and fortitude in him,
wrought many maruelles, resisting the Jews in their wicked doctrine, suffered
grievous death of being stoned for the truth. Acts 6.

Moses boldly and constantly stood before Pharao, rebuking him, because he
would not let go the people of Israel. Exodus 4.

He also said to Iosue which should suceede him: Be of good comfort, and take
good courage unto thee, for thou shall bring in this people under thy
correction. Deuteronomy. 31.

Joshua himself with valiant courage (in the service of God enjoined him) so
constantly behaved himself, that he said unto those princes about him, go your
ways, and set your feet upon the necks of those five kings that withstand the
will of the most highest. Joshua. 10.

For other notable examples of fortitude in defense of the righteous and just
quarrel of God and his truth, look and read of Phinees. Numb. 31. Caleb.
Joshua. 14. Ahud judge of Israel. Iudicum. 3. Gedeon. Iudicum. 6. Sampson.
Iudicum. 14. David. 1. Regum. 17. Eleazarus. 2. Machab. 6. The seven brethren.
2. Macha. 7. Saint Paul. Acts 11. and others.

The four Arbours of amiable amenitie within this Vineyarde.
The first Arbor, Zeal to Godliness.
Who so being desirous to view and survey this Vineyard of Virtue, has
^^tisfied his bodily eyes with the beautiful ^ra^ches of every Plant, has
satisfied his lon^ing mind with the taste of the heavenly fruit ^ereof, and
delights in the sweet digestion ^ereof, unto eternal salvation: Let him here
^^uch safe to sit down under my beams, and ^rowd him under the boughs of my
beati^^de, who being termed Zeal to godliness, do ^^omise such happy
interteinment, and perform ^^th blessedness, yt they shall not repent the^ which
^^me to me: nay the longer they tarry with me, the more shall they labor in
love with me (...) and never be weary of their well doing, (...) when they
think they have done, they sha^ new begin again: So that the more often they
see, the more often they desire, the oftn^^ they desire, the oftener they shall
be an hu^gred, the more they hunger, the more the^ shall seek to satisfy, and
the more that the^ satisfy them, the more they will come to (...) For the more
they come to me, the better the fare. Wherefore whatsoever thou art, whi^^
after long looking, have liked, and in lyking have longed for the effectual
digestion of (...) fruit of this Vineyarde. Disdain not he^ in this place to
rest after repast, and perswa^^ thy self to be with Abraham, in the valley
(...) Mambrey, That is in the light of the Gospel.
sitting in the door of the tent (...) the very heat of the day: and that by
rep^sing thy delectation in this virtuous life, (...) by his grace will appear
unto thee, as (...) than appeared unto Abraham. Genesis 18. (...) persuade thy
self, whiles thus thou re^^ thy self with me, (that as Jacob rested hi^ self
in Aram after the Sun was set) so sh^^ thou not gather stones, but feathers
of dow^^ to lay under thy head, if thou sleep in (...) place: and as he
saw in his dream a ladd^^ reaching to the heavens, so shall thou (...) thy
self to be in heaven, even whilst thou yet dwell upon earth. Genesis 28. Be
also surely persuaded in thy self, that resting with this Seal to godliness,
thou art not sleeping with Samuel in the temple of the Lord, but waking and the
readier for the Lord, when he shall ^all thee to what end and purpose he
will. ^. Reg. 3. To be short, thou shall not seem to (...) exercised in a
Vineyarde of vanity, but of such virtue, that David's house of Ceder trees was
not comparable to it. Solomon's gorge^us dwelling places of pleasure, nor yet
the (...) winged Chariot of Elias were more de^ectable for thy souls health in
his life, and (...) the life to come eternal.

The second Arbor, Society of good men.
VVHilest thou art yet plucking a cluster of grapes from this plant, here there
taking thy pleasure in another place, (...) replenish thy longing mind with
delight^^me and pleasant fruit, digesting the same (...) full: Come hither yet
one step further vn^^ me, which am called the second Arbor, and ^est thee
now in the Society of good men, For be sure, thou have neither plowed in
stony ground, walked amongst weeds, beaten the busy waves, gathered
Caterpillars for good fruit, eaten sour grapes, nor tasted dregs and wine
lees, in stead of comfortable Muscadell: But thou have bestowed thy labor in
the land which brings forth good fruit, thou have with the Be borhe away
honey out of sweet and fragrant flowers: thou have sailed in the ports of
safety, brought home sound fruit, tasted of the wine of gladness, and
satisfied thy mind with cordial comfort in the company of men, not of brute
beasts, and not of men, but of good men, not only of good men, but of Angels,
and not only of Angels, but of the Almighty, whose ministers they are for thy
welfare and salvation, to accompany thee unto the resting place of eternal joy
and blessedness. And as Laban had verte small store of worldly substance before
Jacob came unto him, and by his companying with him was made rich, Genesis 30. So
thou which shall imitate the virtuous examples of these good and godly men,
daily acco^panying, that is to say, meditating and practicing their virtues in
life and conversation, thou shall be rich in the grace and favor of God for
ever. Yea in often using the counsels of these, thou shall with Tobias he sure
to have always as guestes with thee such men as fear God. Tob. 24. Thou shall
thus conversant, as David says, be holy with those that are holy, and
innocent with those that are innocent, Psalm. 17. Yea thou shall by company and
conference with these good neighbors dwelling in the midst of the ungodly, as
S. Isydore says, lib. 2. soliloq. glorify God, edify thy neighbor, and
damnifie thine enemy. To conclude, whilst thou as Peter did, remainest. Mat.
26 firm in conformity of mind and manners with these Apostles, thou art in the
right way, and art established in safety, but beware thou have no society
with the chief priests, as Pope, tyrant, hypocrite, infidel, nor irreligious
persons which deny the Lord of hosts the giver of salvation only. Thus with
Paul shall thou pass the stormy rage of this world, and all those under thy
charge safely unto the port of joys and blessedness perpetual. Acts. 27.

The third Arbor, Observation of the Sabbath.
AFter thou have labored thus in the Lords Vineyarde with continual company,
counsel, and comfort of the elect: it shall behoue thee to call to mind,
what our Savior by the mouth of his servant Moses commanded should be
establised for a peculiar law amongst the children of God, namely, That thou
shall keep holy the Sabbath day. Which keeping holy of the Sabbath, for as much
as he himself first observed for our example, when after his six days works
he rested the seventh day and hallowed it, we must therefore so construe this
rest, and so accomplish the same in our life and conversation, that in resting
from labor, we give no liberty to idleness, vain cogitations, vain speech,
nor vain deeds, so resting as though we never ceased to turmoyle, both body
in unquietness, and soul in desolation. For what profits this Sabothes rest
unto the body, with pampering her self in carnal pleasures putting on
gorgeous apparel, wallowing in all kind of wicked sensuality, caring not for
the affliction of the poor conscience, which starueth for the food of
salvation, dies naked in her sins, and sins in her nakedness of all
virtue, goodness, grace and godliness? For as the divine providence of the
creator of all creatures, ordained them a time of being: So has he determined
an end for the same: and as the Sabbath is the resting day after working
days: so is it a figure of the eternal rest, either in joys perpetual for
those that live well here, or in pains perpetual for those that live wickedly
here. Wherefore who so will rightly provide for the rest of joys eternal, let
him with the children of Israel in the vi. days of this life time, gather
Manna in the desert of this world. Exodus 16. Let them so fructify in good
examples of godly virtue, that they may be readily prepared themselves, and
prepare others also to that blessed rest But let us take heed of gathering
wood, that is to say, of binding one sin to another in this transitory
Sabbath, for as the man that so did gather wood was stoned to death. Deuteronomy. 5.
Number. 15. so will God be avenged of those which mispend the Sabbath day,
according as it shall seem good unto him. Wherefore, let us with the Apostles
especially bestow the Sabbath as most fit and convenient in hearing and
learning the word, will, and law of God. Act. 13. And while we live in the
wilderness of this world, let us so frame our lives thereafter, that we may at
al times seek the glory of God, our souls health, and the common comfort and
commodity of our brethren, that we may rest with the Lord of the Sabbath in
his celestial kingdom.

The fourth and last Arbor, Immortality.
Now that we have thus labored in the Lords Vineyard, and rested in due
observation of this appointed Sabbath: let us lastly contemplate the end of
our labor, and reward of our dutiful performed pains in this Vineyard of the
Lord. For whether we labor or no, yet we live, as we live we die, as we die
we rest till the judgment day, and as we shall then be judged, so shall we
receive the just deserved reward, either for painful true travel, the
triumphant crown of immortality, either else for slouthful and dissembling
negligence, the troublesome torments of never dying death. For so has the
Lord of the Vineyarde determined with all flesh from the first creation of the
world. That we shall (as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 5.) be al openly manifested
before the tribunal seat of Christ, there to receive every man his own works
that he has done in his body, whether it be good or evil. Wherefore as it is
said, Eccle 15. God from the beginning has created man, and left him in the
power of his determination: he has also enjoined him to walk in his
commandementes, and keep his precepts, if thou will keep his commandments,
they shall preserve thee, etc. Again he says, The eyes of the Lord are over
the^ that fear him, and he shall acknowledge every work that man does. Yea he
has promised that the souls of the righteous are already in the hands of
God, after their rest in the grave, and no torment of death shall touch them.
Sapi. 3. But as for the ungodly they shall be cast into utter darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat 22. and shall become the food of
fire unquenchable. Esaias 9. Wherefore whiles we live in this mortality of the
flesh, let us so labor in all virtuous and godly conversation, that we may find
rest unto our souls for ever in the Lord. To this end, let us run the race of
mortality, that we may receive the reward laid up in store for us, by the
Lord and giver of life, even the incorruptible crown of immortality: that as
true laborers we may be able to stand before the face of our workemaister,
Lord, and ouerseer Christ Jesus, and receive every one according to his days
labor. Mat. 20 That so still as profitable servants we may be found working
when our master shall come. Mar. 13. That having on our wedding garment, we
may watchfully wait for the coming of the bridegroom* Mat* 22. And so finally
with the five wise virgins attendant with lamps furnished with oil, we may be
interteined with Christ Jesus, the son of the eternal and everliving God that
immaculate lamb, almighty Messiah, the first and the last, Apoc. 22. when he
shall enter into the new and heavenly Jerusalem to give freely to those that
chirst, the water of life, and lively fruit of his Vine in the kingdom of his
father. To whom, with the father and the holy ghost, three persons and one God
of incomprehensible and eternal Majesty, be all honor, glory, power,
dominion and praise, for ever and ever world without end. Amen.

A Meditation for true fructifying in the Church of God, the true Vineyard of
Virtue, and for the prosperous preservation of the same.
Almighty, true, and everliving God, which as the heavenly husbandman
comparest thy kingdom unto a certain man which planted a vineyard, Mat. 20.
went forth early to hire laborers, and made covenant with the^. etc. For as
much as from the first day of the worlds creation, thou have by thy divine
providence, preordinated, created, and established thee a chosen Church, thy
peculier people, as the true planted Vineyarde: and by thy word and holy
Gospel, have hired thy Patriakes, Prophets and Apostles, as the first true
laborers therein, by covenant of eternal salvation: And from time to time
also, have so called and sent the Nations of the earth into thy Church and
Vineyarde, when they stood idle, without knowledge of thee, and of their
salvation: So we in England, amongst others, first called, Mat. 20.
sent in, and working with them at thy gracious good pleasure, have yet
afterward with others been found idle without at the third hour: And
again once more lastly called and sent in at the sixth hour, by thy
inspeakeable providence, mercy and grace, now still continually laboring in
the same thy true Church and Vineyarde of thy Gospel and holy laws, to the
great admiration, and worthy imitation of those which at the eleventh hour,
by thee are to be called, hired and sent in, do with all humility and hearty
affection, duly and dutifully acknowledge thy loving mercies and gracious
goodness most abundantly thus bestowed upon us: And therefore most justly are
bounden by all good means to become thankful unto thee for the same.
Wherefore thou* oh most gracious God, thou loving Lord, and heavenly
husbandman, our only stay, supporter, and comforter, graft us in thee,
strength us with thy help, and make us fruitful branches of thee the most
flourishing vine in all heavenly felicity. Look down we beseech thee from
the throne of thy grace, and with thy gladsom countenance and loving favor,
behold the state of thy chosen holy Church amongst us. visit this thy
Vineyarde with thy continual benediction, which thou have eftsoons transposed
out of Egypt. Thou have long since cast out the Gentiles from amongst us, Psalm.
79.
and have hitherto, and still do establish the same. Thou plantest the roots
of thy vines, and they spread far and near. The shadow of them has covered
the hills, and the branches have spread over the Ceders of the Lord. Vouchsafe
(oh God) we humbly beseech thee, to hear our prayers, and grant our
petitions, that we make unto thee in the name of thy beloved son our Lord
Jesus Christ, Continue still thy loving kindness unto us. Bless and preserve
our most dear sovereign Lady and gracious Queen Elizabeth, with long life,
and increase of heavenly felicity upon earth. Prosper and preserve all her
most honorable Councellers, Nobles, Bishops, pastors, teachers, and preachers,
with all and every other member of thy true Church, and Vineyarde in these our
Countries. Chase away, vanquish and overcome all our enemies. Beat back, and
abandon the malice of the Romish Bore from the borders of thy vineyarde, and
all other enmyties of Satan and his servants utterly expel, amoue from us, and
vanquish for us, we beseech thee, for the glory of thy holy names sake, and
for thy sons sake our Lord Jesus Christ. Also as christian charity binds
us, we pray thee of thy great mercies, to illuminate, help, and assist the
weak labors of such as in foreign Countries are willing, but want help and
comfort to be called into thy Vineyarde. Make them fruitful plants of thy
grace, replenish them with thy spirit of truth, and bless them with thy
blessings also: that we with them and they with us, so many as thou will call
to salvation in this earthly Vineyard, may be gracious operation of thy holy
Ghost, be made perfect laborers in thy sight, able to endure not only yt very
heat of the day, Mat. 20.
but also eue^ to the last minute of daylight: so shall thy servants set forth
thy wonderful works unto the heathen: so shall thy Vineyarde flourish in the
Nations upon earth. And so shall thy chosen Church and congregation, increasing,
fructifying, and triumphing under thee her chief pastor, guide, and governor
(receiving with all thy elect thy promised covenant of eternal salvation)
render all due honor, glory and praise unto thee, now henceforth, and for
ever, world without end

Amen.
As the branch can bear no fruit of himself except he abide in the vine:
so neither can you bring forth fruit (says our savior Christ) except you
abide in me. John. 15.
Imprinted in London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vinetree.


