A BLOVV FOR THE POPE: Or, A Discourse had in S. GILES Church in Elgen of
Murray, at a Conference with certain Papists, plainly proving, That PETER was
never Head of the Church.

With a short Register of all the Attempts and Murders upon Kings and Princes
in our time, by the persuasion of the Jesuits.

REVEL: 14. 8. And there followed another Angel, saying, It is fallen, It is
fallen, Babylon the great City, for she made all Nations to drink of the
wine of the wrath of her fornication. Hieronymus. Heretici conuicti ad
contentiones prosiliunt. August: de Ciuit: lib. 14. cap. 20. Non Theologi sed
Cynici mores, conuitiari, and allatrare. LONDON, Printed by G. Eld for Roger
Iackson, near the Conduit in Fleetstreet, 1615.

To the Right Honorable Lord, JAMES, Lord HAYES, Master of his Majesty's great
Wardrobe.
THe Spirit speaks evidently, 1. Ti. 4. 1.
That in the Later days some shall depart from the Faith, and shall give heed
unto Spirits of Error, and Doctrines of Devils. And surely, that Prophecy, if
at any time, is truly accomplished in these our days, on whom the ends of the
World are come: For Blindness and Error is so universally spread, like
palpable darkness, over the hearts almost of all, Esa. 1. 9.
that unless the Lord had reserved unto us even a small Remnant, we should
have been as Sodom, and should have been like unto Gomorrha. The sins of
the People, and negligence, with ignorance of Pastors, Ier. 3. 12. 15. Isay 59*
are the cause hereof: for the hand of the Lord is not shortened, that it
cannot save, but our Sins have divided betwixt him and us, and has made him
hide his face, that he should not hear. The iniquities of the People have
commonly their beginnings from their Teachers: Therefore Christ, Math. 21. 12.
when he was to cure the disease of sinful Jerusalem, enters first into the
Church, there to purge the impiety of the Priests, which polluted with
Covetousness etc. the Sanctuary of the Lord: Like unto a good Physician, who
searches the Malady from the root. For this cause are they styled Salt,
Math. 5. 13.
Watchmen, Light, Trumpetters, Ier. 6. 17.
Physicians, Soldiers; and that they, Ez^. 33. 2.
in time, and out of time, be able to Teach, Isa. 37. 8.
Exhort, Rebuke, Improve, with all Patience and Doctrine: 2. Tim. 2.
for who conuerts a sinner from the error of his life, Iac. 5. 20.
saues him from Death, and couers the multitude of Sins. Mat. 18. 15.
The Church is a Building, 1. Cor. 3. 9.
and Preachers Builders* as the Church of Jerusalem was reared by the People
with the Sword in the one Hand, Neb. 4. 17. 18.
and Trowell in the other, so must they with wholesome and sound Doctrine teach
and resist the Gainesayers: and if ever there was need, now it is, when out of
that bottomless Pit there are risen swarms of Locusts, Reu. 9. 2, 3
ouer-couering the face of the Earth, Reu. 18. 3.
making the People drunk with the Wine of their Fornication and Idolatry, who
have taught the world, 4. Sa. 2. 15.
with the sons of Elie, to take raw flesh, and sow Tares among the Wheat.
Luc. 24. 19.
Now (I say) it is time to be powerful in deed and word before God and the
whole People: for he that will do and say, Math. 5. 19.
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Ecclesia est Ciuitas (says
one) propter Populi collectionem, sponsa prepter dilectionem, Ouis propter
mansuetudinem, Ciuitas est, vigilate ad concordiam: Ouis est, intendite pastui,
sponsa studere ornatui. Pastors are Woers in Christ's place, beseeching the
World to be reconciled unto God. We have therefore to pray to the Lord of the
Harvest, Math. 9. 38.
That he would thrust out faithful Laborers into his Harvest, in this great
Desolation, and time of Corruption, when Antichrist has settled his Throne in
so many hearts, whom the Lord shall in the end confound with the breath of
his Nosthrils. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
We must not be partakers of others sins, Isa. 11. 4.
in betraying the Truth with silence, but Foxes being driven away, let the Bed
of the Church be watched by 70. of Salomons Worthies: Of the which, as I am not
fit to be named one of the meanest, so have I put in my Mite (for lack of a
Talent) and snrowd me under your Lordships wings, against all Rabzechez
Railing: 1. Reg. 1. 22.
as Solomon with Nathans Conuoy and help; 2. Reg. 4. 13.
the Shunamite by Elisha his offer, Ion. 4. 6.
were shadowed as with Jonas Gourd; so do I, induced by your Lordships rare
and singular virtues, cast my self under the Mantle of Protection. Kings have
waded in this Matter: Of his Majesty, The Oath of Allegiance.
God willing, there will be more apt occasion to speak hereafter. But it is
memorable in the most mighty Edward the sixth of good memory; to whom, on the
day of Coronation, when three Swords were presented (signs of the Kingdoms of
England, France, and Ireland) craved the fourth to be brought; which was (after
inquiry) the Book of the holy Scripture, the Sword of the Spirit: Which did
also, notwithstanding his tender years (for he died at sixteen years of age)
compile, Obiit 1553. 6. Iulii.
amongst other Treatises, a Comedy of this Babylonicall Whore. Accept (Right
Honorable) this first of these Heads belonging to this matter: and so I humbly
and heartily commend your Lordship to the grace of God, which is able to build
your L. further, and give you an Inheritance among them which are sanctified by
the Blood of Jesus Christ: in whose mercy I commit your Lordship. Ianuar. 26.
Anno 1615.

Your Honors in all humble duty, BARTHOL: ROBERTSON, Minister of Gods Word.

Simonis Rosarij Antithesis 15. Christi and Antichristi Anno 1558.
ECce tibi Lector vani ludibria Papae
a Pedibus Reges quem iuvat esse suis.
Qui tribuendus erat Christ praesumit honorem
iactitat and sancti, se caput esse gregis.
Dic mihi quaeso Biceps, Did. 19.
fietne Ecclesia monstru^?
impie qua quaeso, talia front refers?
Vah; nequit esse Biceps diuina Ecclesia? Christus
qui caput est vnum; Papa quid ergo? Lupus.
Huic caput est Christus sancti quoque Pastor ouilis
atque suo teneras, numine pascit oues.
Attamen ille suis immensum territat Orbem
Legibus, and Populi, subiicit Art Duces.
THE FIRST ARTICLE:
That Peter was never Head of the Church.
THe universal Church, 1. Tim. 3. 1 Cant. 1.
as it is the City and Spouse of the living God; so one part there of
Triumphant, is the Company of the Blessed ones in Heaven, who had run their
Race here, 1. Pet. 1. 9.
kept the Faith, and got the end thereof, even the Salvation of their Souls:
The other part is the Society of Mankind, Romans 12. 3.
known to God, renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, Act. 15. 9.
purified by Faith, Ioh. 15. 3.
waiting the coming of the Lord Jesus to their Immortality. Of this
secundarie part, it is controuerted betwixt Us and the Enemies of the Truth,
who should be the Head thereof; Whether solely and only Jesus Christ her
Husband, who neither can admit, nor will allow, of Spiritual Fornication,
imparting Vital and Heavenly Life, Ioh. 14. 6.
Light, Sense, and Motion thereto. Col. 3. 4.
Or whether there be another Head besides Christ: so that the Church,
Monster-like, has two Heads to one Body.

We, Ephesians. 4. 16.
out of Paul, affirm, Christ to be the only true Head of his Church: who
uses this Demonstration; He by whom all the Body being coupled and knit
together by every joint, for the Furniture thereof (according to the
effectual power which is in the measure of every part) receives increase of
the Body unto the edifying of it self in love, This same is, and only can
be, Head. But so it is, that Christ our Savior is the same, and none ever can
take upon them justly so to do to the Church, which is the Body, Ergo etc.
Yet the Adversaries to the Verity contend, That the Bishop of Rome, whom they
call Pope, should be added unto Christ, to be Head of the Church; leaning
unto this, as to the special Pillar and Ground they build upon,

Peter was the Head of the Church, The Pope is Peter's Successor, Ergo The Pope
is the Head of the Church.
To the intent the whole Matter may be the more clear and evident, and that a
perfect Answer may be had to the alleged Argument, these Heads in particular
are to be treated and discussed plainly; viz.

1 Peter was never Head of the Church. 2 Peter was never Bishop of Rome, nor
yet in Rome. 3 The Pope is not Peter's Successor, nor could succeed to him. 4
The Pope is not Head of the Church, nor Christ's Vicar. 5 The Pope is the very
Antichrist.
First then, no man can deny, but if Peter had been constituted and ordained
Head of the Church, the rest of the Apostles would or should have known it:
For it stood them greatly upon, to understand to whom they should have recourse
in dangers, as to their Commander, and unto whom they should give obedience:
to whom also they should render an account of al their proceedings, least they
should wander, bestowing their endeavors (as it would appear) unprofitably,
not governed by any President, who should either allow or disallow of their
travels in their Apostle ship, etc. But so it is, that they never acknowledged
Peter Head of the Church, nor of any of the Apostles, much less of them all.

Yea Christ, the wisdom of the Father, in whom the Godhead dwells bodily,
Luke 11. 49.
and in whom are the treasures of knowledge and understanding, leaves no place
to the vain Curiosity and foolish inventions of man, a little before his
death, as it were taking his farewell and good night of them: for then we
attend the last will and words of our friends most, they take deepest
impression in our minds and memories, how much the more advisedly and
deliberately they are spoken, as it were, by the heart, with great weight, not
only because the time is short and imminent certainty of death, (for Christ
knew well his hour) but also for that men keep most eagerly that, whereof they
have no long expectation of endurance and continuance. Christ, I say, the night
before his death, after Supper, recommended humility in his own example to his
Apostles, not to be looked on only, John 13. 15.
but followed, Ibid. 17.
did wash their feet: and to signify with due intimation, that nothing in
that whole action did come, but of his provident foresight and knowledge,
whereto he was privy; yea, and the Searcher of hearts did pry into the Closet
of Judas Treason, Ibid. 18* 19.
which Peter, when Judas was taxed for it, did desire to know by the means of
John, who leaned on Judas breast: If he had been Head, it was more competent in
his own person to have demanded it.

And for that they should be unwelcome unto the world, he arms them with
constancy and patience against the ignominy and shame of their future crosses,
Ibid. 31. 32.
with promises of sending the Comforter and other some heavenly instructions:
yea it was so far from Jesus mind and intention, to ordain Peter head of his
Church, or of the rest of his Apostles, that he before them all and in Peter's
own presence perticularly foretells his denial, Ibid. 37. 38
if this was that Champion (not to derogate to the Saint of God) that was to be
placed in primacie above the rest, judge ye? For when could Jesus have more
opportune time, or the Disciples better or quieter occasion to declare and
hear a Superior appointed over them, then now, when he should fore-speake his
defection to him, and his Apostacy who so arrogantly relied upon humane
strength and fortitude; beside that lately he had been rebuked in the highest
degree, by Christ in calling him Satan, for apparently Christ might have
forborne and tolerated the future head of the Church, and more mildly and
softly entreated him, as in these and such like terms. Peter thy lapse will
procure thee to be lowest of all, because it will be the greatest of all, yet
I will after advance and promote thee to be highest and head of all.

Now he was checked for intruding himself into the civil Magistrates office,
who if he had been to be surrogate in Christ's office might have been borne
with, Ihon 18. 11.
in some degree, yet so much as in him was, he hindered the mystery of our
salvation; At all these times was good opportunity to conciliate to Peter in so
open audience and famous places, both of the disciples and men without,
authority and credit, if it had stood with Christ's purpose to have exalted and
promoted Peter to the dignity of being head over his people and Church.

But which is of greater moment, it may be, Jesus would conceal and keep
secret to himself the dispensation of that charge until after his passion, or
then keep it in his own person, not willing to make any participant of the
same, until the time appointed in his good pleasure thereafter: yet so it is,
Peter is heavily vpbraided after the Resurrection, as (...), John 21. 22.
a busy body in other men's affairs.

In that reasoning, Ioh. 14. 5 8.
that Christ had with the Disciples, premonishing them that he was going and
departing from them, and with Thomas, pretending his ignorance of the way he
should take; if any, or Peter himself should have been substituted in Christ's
room, was it not now? When so familiarly he disputed with Thomas, Ibid. 8. 9.
I will not say, but even then he did answer to far harder and difficult
questions; as the Unity of the persons in one Deity, and if he should delay,
and continue the delivery of his mind in that point, would he not think you,
once without ambiguity and equivocation, both evidently and manifestly
thereafter have declared the matter?

Yea, Ibid. 23. 24.
Judas Lebbeus received a perfect resolution of his demand, in the economy
and distribution in the matters of man's Salvation, which was to some
manifested, to others hid: but of this transcendent excellency there is never
a whisper, and no marvel, for he was to reserve that point to himself
uncommunicable, not willing to diminish and lessen the same, by diuoluing that
function to another, or though he had bin weary (if so I may say) to bear that
burden himself, as not of sufficient power and ability to discharge it, to
the will of all his mystical members, which did receive spiritual Sap and
Juice of him, who is the root, in the which his Church is engrafted, by a
true, lively, and saving Faith. Romans 12.
And into whom the Church, after a heavenly and unspeakable manner (yet
truly) is united and encorporated, and so become one body with him, Romans 17.
Flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones.

And we know it to be accustomably used (for so did Moses to Iosuah at the
Lords own direction, and David to Solomon, etc.) to establish the Successor in
the second room, when one is either to dimit, or give signification of the
succedent, to prevent occasions of strife and debate which might arise, and are
commonly bred for degrees of preferment; but Christ remits and sends them to no
man's Sovereignty, but as it were, manumits them, and of Servants, chooses them
his free friends, and as friends have most things common, chiefly, wills,
councels and minds, so says he: All that I have heard from my Father, I have
declared unto you; but when said he, either first or last, that Peter was Head,
or should be head of the Church, which Christ knew to be immortal, and Peter
then mortal, which Christ told him thereafter, and the manner of his violent
death. And that a man, no not all the men in the world can viuifie or quicken
themselves: it is then far off that one can viuifie another. But we, when
we were dead in trespasses and sins, are quickened together, in, with, and by
Christ, by whose Grace we are saved: and surely neither Peter nor any of the
Apostles, can transfuse or derive any of the spiritual Graces one to another,
in such sort as Christ by his Spirit, save only, as all the disposers of the
ministers of God do, by the lively preaching of the word, etc.

Therefore if it had been Christ's contentment to have vouchsafed that
prerogative upon Peter, when that controversy anent Superiority did arise;
surely he would not have passed it without Decision, he is not the God of
Debate, but will have all things done in order, for he would have this
scrupple taken out of the way, seeing them all as upon a stumbling block rush
upon it; A little before in their gazing upon the stately building of the
Temple and princely Fabric of that magnificent material Church, Act. 1.
and as they did after the resurrection dream of the restitution of the Crown
and commonwealth from the unnatural tyranny of the Romans to whom they were
Tributaries (for now the Scepter had departed, and the lawgiuer from betwixt
Judah his Feet) with close mouth, neither than nor now did he pass over,
neither the matter and purpose it self, neither themselves unreproved, Mar 13.
but forespake the ruin and sacking of the Town of Jerusalem, Mat. 23.
thereby taking occasion to Prophecy the consummation of the whole world, Luc.
21.
with the diverse Incidents at that period of time, when it should happen, as in
that his Sermon most evidently shows it self. But in that so high a Question,
so earnestly tossed among the^ nothing, the world and Jerusalem both shall
perish, and they shall wax old as does a garment and as a vesture shall they
be folden up, and in Jerusalem (as was then foretold) is not a stone left upon
a stone, but the Church endures for ever, and such an everlasting and eternal
head should it have, which Peter in no wise could be. This was I say the
meetest time for removing of the doubs, yet our Savior did not command to
acknowledge Peter for head, which without all contradiction he would have done
if he had appointed him chief and principal over the rest, if so it had been
his intention, that the other Apostles should have acknowledged Peter for their
Lord and Master. Yet so it is that flat contrarily he delivers and gives his
Decree and Sentence, that there should be no principality nor primacie among
them, but the greatest as the smallest, etc. For so says he, the Kings of the
Nations do reign, etc. but so it shall not be among you. In the which words
he does not only recall them from such government and regencie as is amongst
the Gentiles or Nations, but also he disswades and dehorts them from all manner
of Primacie; for Christ answered to no other interrogation here, but such as
they propounded; but they did not enquire of the government and Lordsh., of the
kings of nations, for what was that form of Regiment appertaining or belonging
to them, out of a primacy which every one of them affected among themselves,
and unto the which they would have climbed, for they did chide among
themselves, and were divided, as it is said there: And forsooth if any might
have looked for a high place and promotion, Mat. 20, 20.
the sons of Zebedeus, James and John, Mar. 10. 35.
(Christ's Cozens concerning the flesh) whereupon they did ground their petition
by appearance. But there is no acceptance of persons with God. Their mother as
meaning to find greatest favor both in regard of her kindred with the Virgin
Mary Christ's Mother, as also for her Sex and humble behavior, but all their
suites were cast over bar, and they simply denied for the causes there
alleged, which are not necessary here to repeat, and besides those reasons
there set down, they should have remembered that Christ before had closed their
mouth from such a subject, Mar. 9. 33.
and therefore taught them, Iuc. 9. 46.
that their desire proceeded from ignorance and obiuion.

But it would seem Peter should have his ordination, if not immediately from
Christ, in the days of his Flesh, yet by the authority of the rest of the
Apostles, who had received the holy Spirit on the Pentecost in great
abundance, but they never acknowledged such place in Peter, whose pre-eminence
(if any had been) they would not have neglected; Act. 8. 14.
yet so it is they took upon them boldness to send both Peter and John from
Jerusalem to the Samaritans, whom they heard to have received the word of God,
for whom also the rest did pray and give imposition of hands. Now he who sends
and directs another is above him that is sent, else how dare he usurp that
title and right as to command, either how can he look for obedience, or
perfecting any point of duty at the hands of him who is sent if he be not
subject to the senders command and will, for it is not said the Apostles
requested, or entreated, or besought Peter, but that they sent the other
Apostles, having, from their meeting and present assembly enioined to Peter and
his Colleague John, equal with him in that charge, to undertake that journey,
for the benefit of the Samarirans. If ever at any time, surely here, Peter
might have stood upon his estimation, and might have rejected their ordinance
as arrogant and presumptuous in extending their power too much, if he had been
head of the Church.

It may be that Peter as he was ever very willing and prone to undertake, so
here he would yield to his Brethrens desire, but who can excuse the Apostles;
yea and the other Brethren which were of Judea, which could not have a like
place and authority with the Disciples of Christ, in many and diverse respects,
which are not here to be reckoned, Act. 11. 1. 2. 3.
to have accused and caused Peter to give a reason of his conversation and
Doctrine among the uncircumcised, in that he had entered unto them and eater
with them after the receipt of the word of God, if he had been constituted
head of the Church, either in Christ's time here upon earth, or yet after his
resurrection, by Christ or his Apostles or by any other means whatsoever
remarkable, who can say, but that the Apostles have done greatly amiss in
challenging their Superior and not rendering that simple and humble submission
as in such matters is requisite, and suppose it were tolerable in the
Apostles, who were in like rank and estate with him; yet if Peter had been
mounted* to that degree, he could not have comported to hear himself so
disgraced as it were, ibid. 2.
and contended against by those far inferior to the Apostles, and adacted to
give in his Apology, clearly expounding and dilating the whole matter unto
them with all the circumstances thereof. Peter, if he had been their Master
and head, might have put them to silence for their sudden strife with him, or
else have said, I have done no wrong, I have reason for my actions; and that
may suffice that I have commandment by Revelation from above, whereunto I am
privy my self.

Peter yet might have delivered in defense of his proceedings to the Apostles
and Brethren of Judea offended at him, for Peter's primacie had not been
divulged and made manifest to the Church (if any had) or for persecution and
injury of the time it was suppressed and holden under until more convenient
time, while it should break up, either (truly) in Antioch, or at Rome. But it
is exceeding marvelous that Paul should not many years after have got
intelligence of the same seeing it was such a necessary Head in the Church as
tending to calm and tranquil all controversies when refuge and appeal should
be made to him as unto an Oracle) for whom God sends in his work whatsoever,
him he furnishes fit and meet for the discharge thereof) and being advanced
to be head, his graces should have surpassed the other Apostles, especially
Paul, who calls himself an abortiue issue and borne out of time, Gal. 2, 2, 6.
and it is credible that Paul would not take that arrogance upon him, by
sundry arguments to contend, himself no wise inferior to Peter, if Peter was
head of the church, and that he received no point of doctrine from him, or any
other of the brethren at Jerusalem, to which he did ascend by revelation to
know his conformity with them. Ibid 9.
Moreover in recompting certain disciples as John and James, he places not
Peter in the first order and room: this is far from his accustomed manner:
who was so meek as a nurse to her children, and who requires his Galathians
to be as he was, 1. These. 2. 7. 8.
for he was as they were, and to give to all men their duty, Gal. 4. 12.
scare to whom fear and honor to whom we owe honor, Gal. 2. 12.
but in Gods cause when he did see Peter, that he went not the right way to
the truth of the Gospel, he did withstand him to his face before all men,
because he was to be rebuked, what can be more evident? We know when Paul
was ravished in the third heaven and received vasions and revelations,
fourteen years before he manifested the same, and heard words unutterable:
but of this preferment of Peter, there is not one siyllable, yea Paul was his
contradictor in this place, where, he brings his warrant, for in that matter
and combat with Peter he did nothing without express command, as not
purposing one foot in that voyage without special revelation; yea and if the
subscription and date be true, Gal. 2. 2.
he wrote the same Epistle to the Galathians from Rome.

Now in many other placees he comes to intimate by the spirit of Prophecy the
condition of the world and the state of the Church under Antichrist, 1. Tim. 4.
1.
but of this prerogative of Peter at any time he has not one word, 2. These.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
but that three years after his conversion he came up to Jerusalem to see
Peter and staid with him fifteen days, where Paul might have been taught of
others, 2. Pet. 315.
or of Peter himself, and been persuaded of this his Primacy; after so many
years since Christ's ascension, and so many days conference and society with
Peter himself, who doubtless would have imparted to Paul, whom he called his
beloved brother, all special comfort and heavenly grace particularly this
point of the head of the Church, if any other then Christ had been, land so
much the more for that Paul, of all the Apostles, makes oftenest mention in all
his Epistles almost thereof, ever deferring that honor to Christ only, the
Savior of the Church which is his body, for Paul is far off from grudging
and disceptation, but his zeal must show it self when Christ's truth is
perverted as he himself witnesses. Phil. 2. 14.


Besides this three years after God had revealed his son in him that he
might preach him among the Gentiles, Gal. 11. 8. 19.
because he did foresee that this verity should be called in question, by
them who would establish another head of the Church then Christ, he conceits
a grave atestation, Gal. 7. 21.
saying, in these things which I write unto you behold before God I lie not, as
also more plainly in another place, whose preacher and Apostle (says he) I am
constituted, I speak the truth in Christ and lie not, ^. Tim. 2. 7
even a Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.

Moreover three years after his conversion he passed to Jerusalem and
fourteen years after he ascended to Jerusalem the second time, now in this
seventeenth year after his calling to the Apostleship, which fell in the
year of Christ, Anno 6. Paul testifies the Gospel of uncircumcision was
committed unto him, as that of the Circumcision to Peter, and the Lord blessed
and made both their Ministeries effectual, Gal. 2. 8.
So that it came to pass that Paul and Barnabas did covenant and give their
right hands of fellowship that they among the Gentiles, James, Peter and John
(for so he ranks them) among the Jews should discharge their Apostleship;
now it must be of necessity that if Peter was head of the Church, then he was
constituted head both over Jew and Gentile, (unless they would say, that he was
but half a head) but Paul affirms and that by their own motive and voluntary
will, that the Gospel of the Gentiles was committed to him and Barnabas and
not unto Peter, how can we say then that he was, or appointed to be, head of
the Church, seeing he was bound and tied by his own faithful promise, beside
his Commission, not to meddle with the Gentiles in his Ministry, or was not
that an vnfirme head of the Church (if so I may say) that had so mutilate a
body, seeing the one half as it were separated and seioyned from Peter's
Apostleship, he having obliged himself by his troth in his right hand to the
contrary.

Again if Christ would have Peter to be an universal Apostle both of Jews
and Gentiles, how durst Peter without special license had and obtained of his
Author, and evident certainties thereof, have brought his calling into such
streighths and narrownes so hastily or at any time after, that within four and
twenty years he should enter in league with Paul to dimit and forgo, the most
dificult part, and of greater confequence, because both that the benefit of
calling was not generally offered before but counter-manded; which was a
mystery, as also for the multitude and greatness of the Gentiles* for there
was far more Gentiles then Jews, whom the Lord suffered to walk in their
own ways while there was light, in some measure, Ephesians. 4. 23.
among the Jews in particular places and persons, I. Pet. 1. 19
although not generally and amongst the greatest, Act. 13. 27.
and yet such as might make inexcusable, and for this cause Peter not
unmindful of his charge, he had contracted himself unto, as he taught, with
great liberty and feruency among the Jews, for wheresoever he might have
occasion, as we see abundantly in the Acts of the Apostles, so likewise by
writing an Epistle he taught the Jews, 1. Pet. 1. 1.
Strangers which dwelt here and there throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bythinia, containing himself always within the limits and bounds of
his calling, requesting them to be mindful of the words of the prophesies
spoken so long time before, 2. Pet. 3. 12
for unto Jews was it that the oracles of God were committed. Rem. 3. 2.


And so did Paul also, Act. 13. 2.
being separated to the work, Romans 1. 5.
he was called to was sent a fair off to the Gentiles by the Lord by whom he
had received Grace and Apostleship to the obedience of Faith among all the
Gentiles for his name, Romans 11. 13
and therefore calls it, the exalting and adorning of his Ministry to be
called the Apostle of the Gentiles, working in the Euangell of God, that the
oblation of the Gentiles might be acceptable, sanctified by the holy Spirit,
Act. 13. 46. 47.
not but that it behooves the word of God to be first expounded to the Jews,
but since they did repel it, and thought them unworthy of eternal life, he
and Barnabas did convert themselves unto the Gentiles, 2 Timothy 1. 11
whose Preacher, Romans 11. 14.
Apostle, and Doctor he calls himself, yet ever desiring to provoke his
Kinsmen, that he might save some of them.

And to whom I pray you can we better give credit unto then to Peter himself:
for surely, although once he had dissembled in that denial of his Master in
threefold form. And again* in that evil example he had given to Barnabas and
others, Mar. 14. 66. 67. 68.
when he is precisely challenged by Paul. Now would he not have hid his
Talent in the earth, but that which was spoken to him in the ear, he would
have spoken upon the house tops, especially since he had promised by Christ's
Prayer, his Faith should not fail; yea, and it was enjoined him not to deny,
but being converted to confirm his Brethren in the verity of those things he
had heard and seen, as he did also abundantly; yet he calls himself no other
then Apostle and Servant, not Superior: yea, 2 Pet. 1 15. 16. 17. 18.
he names himself a fellow-elder with them who are Elders. 2. Pet. 11.
And if it be so, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
how can he he justly said to be Lord and Prince over his Brethren, and rest
of the Elders, Ibid. 3. 4. 5.
shall we give him more then either Christ bestowed upon him, or that he
would claim himself, or any of the rest of the Apostles and Elders would
acknowledge him to be. And which is more, he requests them to feed the Lords
flock which is amongst them, taking diligent heed thereunto, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as
though they were Lords over Gods Heritage, but to be examples to the Flock,
that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they may receive an incorruptible
Crown of Glory: he forbids Dominion and Lordships over the Heritage of God,
if he had so done himself, and affected Primacy in the Church, which was far
from the mind of this Saint of God, he had wrongfully forbid that, whereof he
was culpable himself.

Likewise who will not esteem it a great absurdity to repute all the Apostles,
which then lived, and all the company of the faithful to be Peter's members,
and all things that appertain and belong to a spiritual body, to be
communicated by him to them, which must be granted, and that of most necessary
consequence follows, if we condescend Peter to be head of the church: but
this of Paul only, in place of all that might be brought in, is plainly
refuted, who does esteem himself nothing inferior to the highest Apostles,
here is no exception of Peter, or Primacy, Romans 12. 16
which Paul (such is his modesty) would have don if Peter had bin superior.

And who would not contend Paul to be Head of the Church of the Gentiles,
rather then Peter: because it is proved already he is appointed both by Christ,
as also with consent of those which were thought to be Pillars of the Church,
and in price had conditioned to be the Apostle of the Gentiles. Now it is
certain, we are not of the Jews, but of the Gentiles, if there should be
any of the Apostles Head of our Church, it must therefore be Paul, who did
correct Peter's error in Antiochia, Gal. 2. 11.
the first place of his alleged seat and residence, to whom also even their
own great Bulwark Tho: Aquinas. 2. secunda quest. 33. sect. 4. and Gloss. ad
Gal. 2. 11. does make Paul equal, but not superior.

Besides this, Act. 20. 11.
Paul was sent to Rome by God, that he should testify of Jesus Christ, as he
had done already in Jerusalem, whom the Lord did encourage to that effect: the
which also by an Angel of God, sent to him by night, was reiterate, saying;
Fear not Paul, it behooves thee to be presented to Caesar: Act. 27. 23. 24.
And further, Act. 28. 30.
Paul was at Rome and taught there two years, and the Romans did thereby come
to that perfection of Religion, Romans 1. 8.
that their Faith at that time was spoken of in all the world. Here is a
special designation of Paul to go thither, whither we hear of none to be
formerly sent, appointed thereto by two several Mandates, tending to one
Scope, who did enter into Rome, exercised the Office from morning till evening,
expounding the Law and Prophets, Act. 28. 31. 32. etc.
testifying and persuading of the kingdom of God in Jesus Christ, and made his
abode there during the space aforesaid in a house hired for himself, and
received all that came unto him, teaching with all boldness of speech without
let, what can be more craved in a good Bishop, then which we find in Paul at
Rome, but in all this time there is no mention made neither by Paul of Peter,
neither Salutation sent to him in any of all the Epistle Paul sent to Rome,
neither yet any remembrance had of Peter in any of the Epistles he sent from
Rome; as that to the Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, the second
to Timothy, to Philemon, unless their subscriptions be faulty: No remembrance
I say, neither any word of Salutation which Paul uses not to omit, and that
very largely, yea, and not to forget even the most obscure men and women, so
they be faithful of whatsoever degree. Now I pray you, whether Peter or Paul
has best right to claim the Superiority, or which of these two shall we
adiudge to be Head of our Church (if either of them be.) And by the way
(Gentle Reader) take a view, whether or not, Peter was ever at Rome, at the
least never in Paul's days, and if not then, he never saw Rome with his eyes,
as shall be proved (God willing) in our second Discourse.

For the which cause Anthonius Pyranensis Legatus did say, it was not lawful
for men to read Paul's Epistles: for I know (says he) by reading of them, men
may become Lutherans; and therefore Ioh. Siluanus Atheseus. Pastor Herbipolis
confesses, that the Papists doctrine was false and Antichristian, and that he
had learned that out of Paul's Epistles: which moves Rhegius Gallicus
Aristarchus, when he had burnt 9. in Lions for Lutheranisme, publicly to
proclaim, That if the holy Church had not received Paul's Epistles, and
accounted them Canonique, he would not repute them better or of more credit
then the Fables of Aesope. And therefore are they named by them, Armamentarium
Lutheranorum. Fincelius Alue. exami. Part. 1. Chap. 1.
writes, that Anno 1557. a Priest in Forcham, a City in the Bishopric of
Lamberg, in his Sermon, alleged Paul to have erred, and that the Sacrament of
the Supper should be received under one kind only: And if it be not so, that
Satan should take him away alive from out of his Pulpet, and so it happened to
the great fear of all the whole Diocese; as the History written by the said
Fincelius at length reports.

And we know the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God; and is
profitable, etc. that the man of God may be perfectly instructed unto every
good work. And that Timothy from his childhood has known the Holy Scripture,
which might make him wise to Salvation: Now since they contain all things
necessary to be believed, and that to believe the holy Church universal is
one point of our Faith, Ephesians. 22. and 4, 15.
and for that the militant Church here is one part thereof: Col. 1, 38. and ^.
19.
The head whereof is searched here by us, and seeing the holy Scripture
directs us to no other head then Jesus Christ, wherefore is it that we would
be wise above that which is revealed, yea rather foolishly enquire for that
which the Word of God has been silent in. And pursue after that which cannot
in any case become meet to supply and minister the virtues and duties requisite
in him who should be Head of the Church, and those never were nor can happen in
the person of any mortal. Yea Paul takes upon him to institute Timothy and
Titus to be Bishops, and prescribes unto them, 1. Tim. 4.
their particular and several duties, Tit. 2.
yet he sends us always to another head, namely Christ, and that which he
does it is not of any power he received of Peter, Gal. 1, 1.
for this he marks purposely as neither did Titus create Bishops in Creta by
any ordinance derived from Peter. Tim. 1. 1.
I join hereto that Paul accompanied with Barnabas passed through all the
Churches of Asia, li. 7. 1. 11.
in which they preached and there, Act. 14. 23.
by the Suffrages of the same, Act. 20.
choosed Bishops and elected them, and in a word Paul in that most solemn and
most accurate Sermon, rendered to the Bishops of Asia, never enioined them to
submit themselves neither to Peter nor any other whatsoever earthly wight head
of the church. And would he obscure the same if it had been commanded him, or
any ways profitable unto Salvation or quitting the estate of the Church, for
he declared unto them all the counsels of God, Act. 20.
yea and foretells them that after his departure there would grievous wolves
rush in amongst them devouring the flocks and that even of themselves should
men arise speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them, as heretics
do at all times, but he never remembered Peter unto them, who should put order
to this proud attempt and heinous tyranny in the Church. If he had been made
Superior to assuage the Fury and rage of Tumults and Schisms: Paul would not
have buried the same in the beds of Oblivion, but he ever directs us a far
other course which is to CHRIST only.

Surely Christ is a Priest for ever after Heb. 7. 1. 2.
the order of Melchizedech leaving no Vicar nor Successor but his Holy Spirit
which he promised to send, and lead his Disciples in all truth, and to be
present with the Church for ever. To the which Priesthood in the New Testament
neither by Paul, or whosoever he was that was Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews who speaks of this matter at length, is mention made any to succeed
the same, for he had neither beginning nor ending of days, as it was
constituted in that Aronicall Priesthood to pass from man to man, in Leui his
posterity to the coming of the Messiah who has by his Heb. 9. 11.
own blood entered in once into the Holy place, Ephesians. 1. 23.
and obtained eternal redemption for his Church which is his body, even the
fullness of him that fills all in all things.

And to the end neither Peter John 18. 39.
nor any of the rest of the Apostles were otherwise sent but as God sent
Christ, Luke 12. 14.
But his Kingdom and Regiment is not of this world, for Christ took not upon
him to judge and distribute of earthly and transitory affairs, but he by his
word and Sacraments, which are the ordinary means to breed Faith, and by the
operation of his Holy Spirit from above, does effect the whole purpose of man's
Salvation, instilling in mortal souls the immortal seed of the Gospel of
the Lord, by whose power we are kept through Faith unto Salvation, which is
prepared to be showed in the last time. And this is that precious Balm far
above that of Gilead, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
whereby Christ the Head of his Church does anoint the hearts and cheer the
minds of his own Elect with unspeakable peace descending from Christ as the
Head (like unto Aarons Ointment) unto his Church the members of his mystical
body sons of God by free adoption, Coheires with their Head the Lord Jesus
Christ. If flesh and blood can accomplish these offices, let any reasonable man
judge.

It is now convenient we hear what our Adversaries object in the contrary,
that by this means the truth may more brightly shine, and doubting brains be
resolved, as also that those in whom the Verity has taken some hold may be
confirmed and established, and way be stopped to the undermining and subuerting
of the simple and ignorant.

Scripture, say they, calls Peter first, and why should we deny him the place
which the word of God gives him. Mat. 10. 2.
Answer. It is not one thing to be called first, and to be called principal
Lord or commander, for we say Homer is the first of Greek Poets, has he
therefore commandment or power over all the rest: Peter in order may be called
first, either in feruencie or magnanimity or such like, but his authority and
dignity over the rest is denied. Secondly, Paul making mention of Peter about
three and twenty years thereafter, inuerts that order and placed him betwixt
the Bonerges, Gal. 2. 9,
that is James and John the sons of Thunder, to signify that there was no
hidden mystery in that ennumeration, yea, and in the Catalogue, by sundry of
the Evangelists, the Disciples are permixt. Luke 6. 14.


But if upon Peter (say they) the Church was builded, he must be Governor and
Head thereof: for so says our Savior, Thou art Peter, Mat. 16. 18.
and upon this Rock will I build my Church. Answer. Albeit there might be
framed a Sillogisme in mood and figure, as there cannot be, because there be
four terms (after the Schoolmen) which cannot enter in a right Sillogisme
(besides the construction in the Greek and Latin Tongues, which altogether
overthrows the Argument alleged) yet the Assumption is denied: for there is
not meant Peter, on whom the Church should be builded, but upon Christ (as
with many other ancient Doctors, August. John, Tract. 124.) Which Christ was
that Rock which he confessed immediately before to be the son of the living
God. So Lyranus in Gloss: marginali super hanc Petram scilicet quam confessm
est, ibidem in Gloss: interlineari and Gloss: ordinaria, Tu es Petrus scilicet
a me Petra, ita tamen vt mihi retineam dignitatem fundamenti. Et Lyranus ibid.
says, Quod Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus quia multi Pontifices and
Principes inuenti sunt Apostatasse a fide. And so also Gregorius Nicenus in
testimoniis Veteris and Noui Testamenti. But in stead of all these, Paul
satisfies us when he says, No man can lay any other foundation but that which
is laid, Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 3. 11.
Then Peter is not the ground: Which if it had been otherwise, believe we,
that Paul would be ignorant of it, or of purpose deny so serious and earnest
a matter. Moreover, if the Church was builded upon Peter, how was it, it did
not fall when Peter, at the voice of a Maid, yea, and a long time thereafter,
was relapsed and reproved by Paul, as is aforesaid, and whom Christ did
vpbraid with the most vile name of a Devil. Will the Building stand firm and
stable after the Ground is sunk or fallen? or rather, is it not the Foundation
that vpholds and sustaines the whole Fabric? But that Church which Christ
promised to build upon this Rock, could not fall: for so says he, The Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against her: She cannot therefore be founded upon
such a tottering Mould as Peter was.

Paul boasts of himself (and that truly) that as a skillful Master Builder
1. Cor.
he had laid the Foundation: and shall we think, that Christ, the Wisdom of
God, Luc. 11. 49.
would build upon the Sand where the Winds beat and Waters rise, and made it
fall, and not upon that Stone, hewn out of the Mountain without hands: And
shall the Masons of Salomons 1. Reg. 5. 17.
Church be commended for their Wisdom, that they should have brought-great
Stones and costly Stones to make the Foundation of that material House, even
hewed Stones, (which was figurative of Christ and the Temple of his Body) and
shall we not say, Lo here is a greater one then Solomon. The Fathers all
drank of the Rock that followed them, 1. Cor. 10. 4.
and the Rock (says Paul) is Christ.

And certainly no man, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6
yea the Devil cannot deny, but that there is one Body, and one Spirit, one
Lord, one Faith one Baptism, one Hope of our Vocation, one God and Father of
all; and that this Church began in the Creation with Adam and Eve, and
continued ever since in one Place or other, Family or Kingdom, sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter, sometimes larger, sometimes narrower, and had but
one Ground, which now also, under the Gospel, as by the Prophets long since
has been foretold, the Gentiles are joined thereto. But where was this
Foundation then? What was the Ground that this Building leaned to? For shame
we shall not say Peter was borne then, unless wee-should make him as old as
Adam and Eve, or then (I tremble to speak it) elder then them both; for the
Ground of the House must be first laid before Building be made. Surely, if we
will trust Paul, he will explain the matter, That neither Jews nor Gentiles,
believers, are any more Strangers and Forrainers, but Citizens with the
Saints, Ephesians. 2. 20.
and of the Household of God, and are builded upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being that chief Corner Stone in
whom all the Building, coupled together, grows unto a holy Temple unto the
Lord, in whom ye also (says he to them of Ephesus) are built together, to
be the habitation of God by the Spirit. If any point of all this can be
attributed justly to Peter, he is blind that cannot see. I know the
Adversaries of the Truth will trust Peter at least, who sends the Jews
dispersed unto the consideration of another Foundation. If he had been that
Ground that the Church should be built upon, would he not have claymed it
himself? If so be (says he) you have tasted how bountiful the Lord is, 1.
Pet. 2, 4, 5, 6.
to whom you come as unto a living Stone, disallowed of men, but chosen of God,
and precious, and ye as lively Stones be made a Spiritual House, and a holy
Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, Behold I put in Sion, viz.
the Church, a chief Corner stone, elect and precious, and he that believes
therein, shall not be ashamed. Unto you therefore which believe it is precious,
but unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the Builders disallowed,
the same is made the Head of the Corner, and a Stone to stumble at, and a Rock
of Offense, even to them which stumble at the Word, being disobedient: where
lively, as it were in orient Colors, he paints out that Roman Hierarchy and
Antichrist. For seeing they stumble in disobedience at the Word of God both in
Doctrine and Manners, dispensing with it, and substituting in place thereof
Councels, Traditions, Ceremonies. For this cause they forge to themselves
another then the true Head of the Church, and would have a pretended Entry and
Passage thereto by Peter, without any Warrant or Approbation in the Word of
God, as shall be at length, in his own place (God willing) evidently proved.

But (say they) to whom the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven was given, him had
CHRIST appointed Head of the Church: Math. 16. 19
for he had received (...) to bind and loose, remit and (...) sins: for all
these tend to one sense and meaning, and so said Christ that to Peter he
would give them. Answer, if Jesus had given the keys, and power to lose and
bind, etc. to Peter only, it had been somewhat, but so it is, that Christ
promised the same in the person of Peter, unto all the rest of the Apostles, as
the foresaid Lyranus Gloss: interliniari upon the seventeenth verse of the
same expounds, and so has Gloss: ordinaria ex Hieronimo, Habent eandem
potestatem etiam alii Apostoli quibus post resurrectionem dixit, accipite
Spiritum sanctum, habet eandem et omnis Ecclesia in Presbiteris et Episcopis.
But why is mention specially-made here, of Peter and of the rest of the
Apostles? Answer ibidem ex Hieronimo, Petrus specialiter accepit claues quod
quicunque ab vnitate fidei et societate eius se seperauerint a peccatis solui
et regnum coelorum ingredi non possunt. And Ciprianus lib. de simplicitate
Prelator: in persona vnius hominis Dominus dedit claues omnibus vt omnium
vnitatem denotaret. vide Augustinum in John: Tractat 129.

Secondly, it is answered, Christ said not ( do, sed dabo) which promise Christ
did perfect and accomplish thereafter to all the Apostles, with Peter, Ioh. 20.
22.
Wheir the first day of the Week, after his Resurrection, Jesus stood in the
midst of them etc. and breathed on them and said, Receive the Holy Ghost (Is
there a better Porter, or Key-bearer, of the Heavens then the Holy Ghost?)
Whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever Sins
ye retain, they are retained, etc. Was Heaven ever more locked, till now?
Then none could have access to Abraham's bosom, and enjoy that Inheritance,
provided for them before the Foundation of the World was laid.

But to shut up this matter, well has Augustine said, Tractat 11. and 124. and
501. super Ioh. If Christ gave the Keys to Peter alone, then the Church had
not the Keys after him but as he answered for all, so he received the Keys
withal. And what account has been made of them by the Pope Julius the
second, Aruoldus Farronus, Burdegalensis, Gallicus Historicus testify: Which
Gilbertus Ducherins translates thus:

In Galliam vt fama est Bellum gesturus acerbum*
Armatam eduxit Julius Vrbe manum:
Accinctus gladio Claues in Tibridis Amnem
Proiicit et saeuus, ralia verba facit,
Cum Petri, nihil efficiant ad praelia Claues,
Auxilio Pauli forsitan ensis erit.
And seeing Jesus our Savior did commit the feeding, John 21. 15.
that is, the oversight of his sheep and Lambs particularly unto Peter, would
he not have him had one degree or other of preferment among the Apostles and
above the people of the world for such direction was not given to the rest of
the Disciples.

Answer. He that does feed the Lambs is not Lord but a Servant, for so he
says, Feed my Sheep and not thine own, 2. Pet. 5. 3.
yea and Peter makes an opposition betwixt Dominare in Clerum, to have Dominion
over the Lords Inheritance, and Pascere Oues, to Feed the sheep. Answer.
Secondly, Peter was commanded to feed the Flock, not that he should presume
above the other Fellow Apostles, sed vt Apostolico muneri redderetur, vnde per
fidei elapsum and Christi abnegationem excidit, says Augustine: Thirdly, it is
answered, for that he specially directs his speech to Peter, if he loved
him, and that three several times, by Augustine ibidem. Christus rogauit
Petrum number se amaret, ter, vt trini negationi redderetur tri^a confessio, and
^^minus linguae amore quam timore seruiret. For it was he only, among the
Apostles that so openly and cowardly denied his Master, as it was foretold him,
for the which cause no demand was directed to the rest of their love toward
CHRIST, etc. Fourthly it is answered to feed in the Scripture by usual form
of speech, is to teach and preach, etc. As also Lyranus ibid. and Arias
montanus do testify, with innumerabe others, and were not the rest commanded
to go and teach all Nations baptizing them? etc. Or is it because Peter was
commanded to feed, were the rest enioined to be idle, remiss and negligent?
Or rather did not their sound pass through the world, and as they were
commanded were witnesses unto Christ both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and
in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. Yea, did they not direct
their wholesome and sound Doctrine both to Sheep and Lambs. First, both young
and old, Master and Servant, Husband and Wife as it is evident abundantly in
their writings and Epistles, yea both to Jew and Gentiles, to those who are
within, and those who are without. And shall we say therefore, that all they
that did feed were heads of the Church. Gerion of whom the Poets Fable had not
so many heads, but the Church shall have many more which is most absurd, for
they are all enioined to pass about the Lords business, yea and Paul affirms
that the cure of all the Churches did hang upon him. To this effect says
Cyprianus, Lib. de Dignitate Eccles. Pastores, sunt omnes sed Grex vnus
ostenditur, qui ab Apostolis omnibus vnanimi consensu pascitur; Wherefore if
all the Apostles were enioined to feed the Flock of Christ, then was not Peter
only. And if he were commanded for the causes before specified so to do,
shall we not think, that Christ ascended on high and led captivity captive.
And gave gifts unto men, some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians.
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering
together of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification
of the body of Christ till we all meet together in the unity of Faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the
age of the fullness of Christ, Which charge the Holy Scripture every where,
and Histories of all times do report. And suppose it were so that to feed the
flock would import him to be Head of the Church, then reason I thus, Peter
was appointed Head of them whom he was commanded to feed, but no man will
say, he was commanded to feed the rest of the Apostles, (viz.) preach and
teach them their Gospel whereunto they were put a part and received by the
lively voice of Jesus Christ, for unto them it was given to know the mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven. It must needs follow therefore that he was not, at
the least, head of the rest of the Apostles, and so consequently not head of
the whole Church whereof the Apostles were members. Yet say they if Paul
ascended to Jerusalem to Peter to confer his Gospel with him, and from him
receive authority for the confirmation of his Apostleship, Gal. 2. 2. 3. 4. 5.
that he should not tun in vain. Then it must needs be that Paul did
acknowledge Peter head of the Church. Answer, Paul did not confer with Peter
only, but with James and John also which were esteemed of price, and pillars
of the Church Second answer, Paul himself denies that he did receive ought
of them, neither was inferior to them, and truly if he had received
confirmation of his calling from them in that respect, he had been inferior:
And that which is of more importance, if Paul had acknowledged Peter for his
Lord, and Head of the Church, How was he so bold I pray you, to withstand him
to his face; and so publicly, in presence both of Jews and Gentiles vpbraid
his dissimulation, Ibid. 11.
alleging him to be a Rock of offense to others, who were brought into the
like dissimulation. But thou will demand what moved Paul from Siria and
Silicia, and other far distant bouilds, wherein he had planted the Gospel
amongst the Gentiles, to take the second pains and travail upon him to pass
to Jerusalem, if it were not for the cause aforesaid. Answer. Paul expresses
the cause himself of his ascending to Jerusalem, was to remove and cut off
that false rumor which was spread abroad by false Apostles, Gal. 2. 4.
that he taught otherwise then the rest of the Apostles did: for these false
Brethren did conioyne Moses and Leuiticall Ceremonies of the Law, new Moons,
Saboaths, Circumcision, etc. with JESUS CHRIST and Evangelical Doctrine, as
simply and absolutely necessary unto Salvation, which Paul rejected to be done;
yea, taught, Call. 5. 2. 4.
that whosoever was circumcised, was fallen from Grace, and that by the works
of the Law, no flesh should be justified, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ,
and not by the works of the Law.

Thus then I reason, if Paul at that time did ascend to receive authority, and
confirmation to preach the Gospel: then we must grant, that the fourteen
years proceeding, wherein he had traveled in the Euangell, he had openly
taught without any warrant, which is manifest absurdity.

And last of all, if Paul received any authority of Peter to publish the
Gospel: how is it that Paul declares, he was an Apostle not of men, neither by
man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father which had raised him from the
dead. It rests therefore, that Peter was never ordained Head of the Church: and
that whatsoever the Adversaries of the troth allege for the establishing of
his Primacie and Superiority, is frivolous, and cannot abide the balance of
the Sanctuary, because they are too light. Wherefore, also in that third time
Christ acquaints his Disciples with his Resurrection, most lively speaking and
inuiting Peter with the rest, to eat after his unprofitable labor all the
night, John 21. 3. 4.
he did not even then, as it were, lastly design him to such a Supreme place.
And also he left unto him a Prophetical declaration what death he should dye,
Ibid. 18. 19.
and would he not have signified unto him of this his great Style in the
Church. And this did Peter himself very well remember, and prepares himself
for such a departure; recommending sundry good and profitable Observations,
Doctrines, and Lessons to the Jews, ^ Pet. 1. 14.
saying; I will endeavor therefore always, that ye also may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departure; but neither Christ remembers
in the Gospel at any time, neither the Apostles nor Brethren then remaining of
the Church, acknowledge, neither Saint Luke the Compiler of that
Ecclesiastical History of the Acts of the Apostles records, neither yet
Peter leaves any succeeding Monument of that mere usurpation, which cannot fall
without great blasphemy in any humane Nature.

Soli Deo Gloria.
Prophetia Frederici Jmperatoris de Excidio Romano, ad Gregorium Pontificem.
ROma Diu, titubans, varijs erroribus acta
Corruet; and mundi desinet esse caput.
O Roma, a Roma quantum mutata vetusta es,
Nunc Caput es sceleris, quae caput orbis eras.
FINIS.
A short Register of Jesuits Attempts and murders, of Kings and Princes of
our time.
ANd that you may have an inspection how carefully the Papists, who brag of
Peter's primacy, have fed the flock of Christ, and diligently administered the
keys: (nam potest atem dedit remittendi non admittendi peccata Petro
Christus,) I will briefly remember that decree published by the Pope in the
year of his great Iubile, proclaiming himself Prince of all Kingdoms, 1600.
as well in matters temporal as spiritual: for he accounts it noe sin, to
bereave Kings and Princes, (the Lords anointed) of their lives: A brief
recital whereof is here set down, and collected out of the Jesuits
Catichisme, published in French, 1602. and experience in these our days.

Low Contries.
The Prince of Orange was killed by Balthesar Girrard borne in the Contry of
Bourgondy, 1584.
sent by the regent of the College of Triers.

Peter Pan; 1598.
a Cooper, dwelling at Ipres was sent to kill Maurice Prince of Orange, and
Earl of Nassau, the other Princes son, by the Jesuits and Prouincial of
Doway, executed at Leyden.

Scotland.
Robert Bruce, Iun. 22.
accused and sore troubled at Bruxelles, by father William Chrichton, because
he would not kill, or cause to be killed by some other, John Metellanus my
Lord Chancellor of Scotland.

Master James Gordon and William Chrichton, Jesuits, persuaded certain of
the Nobility of Scotland, 1594.
to give certain Blankes which they delivered, to George Carr, and were
discovered by the indiscretion of Robert Albercrome, etc.

England.
William Parry at the desire of Bennet Paulmeo, in Venice, 1585.
and Haniball Coldrett^, at Paris, was induced to have killed Queen Elizabeth
was Executed January. Edward Squire executed for intending to poison the
foresaid Queen Elizabeth of good memory, and the Earl of Essex, great
Marshall of England, 1597.
and after deputy of Ireland, at the desire of father Richard Walpole Jesuit
in Spain.

Henry Sammier of Luxembourge, 1582.
Jesuit, plotted with certain others to bereave the said Queen Elixabeth of
her life.

France.
Peter Barriere borne at Orleance, 1593.
by his first trade a basketmaker, purposed to kill the French King either with
knife or pistol in the midst of his gardes, at the request of four Monks of
Lions.

Henry the third, King of France and Poland, was killed by James Clement, a
Dominican, the which also had a caveat given in his Epitaph upon the tomb of
his heart, 1589.
in the Church of Saint Clow, near Paris adjoining to the house where he was
slain.

Adsta viator, et dole, regum vicem,
Cor Regis, isto conditum est sub marmore,
Qui Iura gallis, Iura Sarmatis, dedit,
Tectus eucullo, hunc sustulit Sicarius,
Abi vi^tor? 1594.
et dole regum vicem.
King Henry the fourth, stricken in the mouth, in his royal Palace of the
Louure, in the midst of his Nobility, by John Chastall a Parisian, executed the
29. of December 1594 the which King also was afterward slain by Francis
Rauiliack, borne at Angolesme, after he had built the Jesuits a College in
la Flesh, where the said King was borne, and had reduced them, and defaced the
marble Pillar, in the which was recorded that first blow of the said Chastel,
who was but 19. years of age, brought up in the Jesuits schole in Paris.

Italy*
Upon Saint Steuens day in Christmas, as John Galeas Duke of Millan went unto
the Church, three Gentlemen of a Town named Cases of the families of the
Empoignane Viscount and Olgiate, at the discourses of Cola Mentouan, doubted
not to murder him though they could hardly escape the Dukes guard, for two of
them were slanie presently, the third hang^

Portugal,
Sebastian king of Portugal was counseled by the Jesuits, to undertaken
journey for the conquest of the kingdom of Fesse, where he was slain in a
pitched field, lost boh his life and kingdom together.

Aragon.
Antonio de Peers, Secretary of Estate to the late king of Spain, escaping out
of prison in Castile, he with the Iesuists, moved the Aragonians to take Arms
against the said king etc. But thereafter by the same means the Aragonians
dissolve the army, etc. The king of Spaines forces enter Sarragossa, where
they pull down houses to the ground, killed the Nobillity, raise a Cittadell
withn the Town, and since that time the king of Spain had command there
absolutely, as he does within the rest of his dominions; whereas before the
people of Aragon had in their foundation from all antiquity very great
privileges, against the absolute power of their kings.

Poland.
Stephan Batori, King of Poland, and Sweden, was suboined to enter Sweden, that
the Jesuits might be admitted there, Duke Charles his uncle and Lieftenant
General answered, the people would never be brought to like of that society
etc. The King is bereft of Sweden, and those places which were gotten by the
prowess of Gustaue his Grandfather, and kept by the wisdom of his Father:
Poland being not very firm to him withal.

And what shall be said of Jesuit Garnet, Gunpowder.
that Arch Traitor? counted a Martyr by vild blood-sheders, the like conspiracy
was neeer contrived since the creation, Griffin and Wilkinson.
yet that horible attempt was approved by unnatural Papists of this Land, and
allowed by the Jesuits General at Rome. And to end this, their custom is not
only to persuade to commit, but also to commend such diuilish and odious
slaughters. Like as John Duke of Burgundy when he had caused Lewis Duke of
Orleance, Son and Brother to a King to be slain. Produced John Pettit
Jesuit, who passed to the Ladies Church at Parris and preached that murder to
be lawful etc. The which satanical violence was stiffly mainetained by them,
until John Gerson Chancellor of the university of Parris got him to the
Counsel of Constance, holden by 141. Bishops, and procured such attempts be
called herertical.

Yea John Guignard Priest, Regent in the Coledge of Clairmont, 1415.
in the City of Parris, Sess. 15. 6. Int.
approved the most cruel and barbarous paracide of King Henry the third, by
the foresaid John Chastell for the which he was led to the place of the Grieve,
there hanged, and afterward burned. So did also Borgoin Prior of the Iacobins
defend the same. But this is most memorable that John Marriana, Scholemaster to
the now King of Spain, is not ashamed to publish defenses for the murder of
Kings, and dedicates it to the said King Phillip the third, printed in Cenobio
Madrili 13. December. 1598 and approved by Friar Peter de Onna, to the which the
University of Paris, agreeing with the word of God, 1413.
opponed it self and pronounced the committers thereof heretics. 1610.


If this be feeding the flock of Jesus Christ, any reasonable man may judge:
One did say very well, it was the duty of a good Shepherd to sheare the sheep
and not to flea them.

If they would know further of the Histories above aleadged, they may have
them in their own Historiographers, And the Lord so bless thee, that thou
may make thy use hereof, to the glory of God, and honor of the higher powers
ordained by him.

Finis.

