decorative, engraved title page A SACRED SEPTENARIE, OR THE SEVEN last words
of our Savior Christ uttered upon the Cross, (with the necessary
circumstances of the same:) Expounded by a Commentary, gathered out of the holy
Scriptures, the writings of the ancient Fathers, and later Divines.

BY ALEXANDER ROBERTS, Bachelour in Divinity; and Preacher of Gods word at
Kings-Linne, in NORFOLK.

God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christen
hereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world,

Galath. 6. 14. (...).

Ignatius Epistol. 12. ad Romanos. Grata ignominia Crucis ei, qui Crucisixo
ingratus non est,

Bernardus super Canuca. sermon, 26. LONDON. Printed by E. G. for SAMVEL MAN,
and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Ball.
1614.



SYN THEO.
ILLVSTRISSIMO ET HONORATISSIMOVIRO, EDOVARDO COKO, MILITI AVRATO, MVSARVM
GRATIAR VMQVE ALVMNO, SACRAE THEMIDOS ET IVSTITIAE, HIEROPHANTAE, TOTIVS
ANGLIAE SVPREMO IVSTITIARIO, SACROSANCTAE REGIAE MAIESTATI A SECRETIS
INTIMISQVE CONSILIIS. OB FIDEM, INTEGRITATEMQVE, REBVS IN GRAVISSIMIS
SPECTATAM, INTER PRIMOS MAXIM ACCEPTO. QVA VIRTVTEM, QVA PRVDENTIAM, QVA
PIETATEM, RERVMQVE OMNIVM PRAECLARISSIMARVM SCIENTIAM, LONG PRAESTANTISSIMO,
DOMINOQVE SVO SVBMISSIME COLENDO, SACRVM HOC (...), DEVOTISSIMI OBSEQVII
TESTIMONIVM, LVBENS MERITO, D. D. D.

ALEXANDER ROBERTS.

To the Reader.
IT may justly (Christian Reader) be liable to the censure, either of
indiscretion, or presumption, that I, who might have lien hid in obscurity,
should offer my self to the view, and sight of the world; and so consequently
to the sundry judgments of the refined wits of this learned age. But yet
herein I have some refuge and excuse left; for I take not upon me Scribo
relatoris potius fide, quam Authoris praesumptione. Vincentius Lyri^ensis
aduere sus Haereses.
the style, to be titled an absolute Author, but accounted a faithful relator
of that, which in former times holy Fathers, and reverend Divines of succeeding
ages, have committed to writing; and so shrowde my self under the wings of
their authority. Yet if any shall conceive, that even in this I might have made
better choice of their sentences, and more artificially disposed the same, I
will not stand to make any Apology for my self: for howsoever, it shall not
be unprofitable, that I have given the attempt, to handle an argument of so
eminent quality, as is these heavenly and last speeches of our blessed Savior,
because Men's boni studij, and pij rot^, si effectum non inuenerit caepti
operis, habet tamen praemium voluntatis. Salulanus in praefatione ad libros
suos de Gubernatione Dei.
where there is a good purpose, and a religious end propounded, though the
effect be not answerable, yet even those are not to be unrespected. And it may
be, that some hereby will be stirred up hereafter (to whom God has vouchsased
more happy wits, and greater lysure) to supply my wants, and amend my faults.
In the mean while, happily time shall not be altogether evil spent, in
reading this so inartificially and rudely penned Treatise. For oftentimes those
who are fed with delicates, do find better Saepenum^ro inter quatidianas
de(...), e^^a (...) sapiunt, etc. Gregorius Ma^^ues in praef ti(...) suas in
Pr^phet(...) (...).
taste, and receive greater contentment in homely and country fare then in
their own meats so exquisitely dressed; or else have their stomachs whetted,
more desirously to eat of their own former diet. And we know that for the
furniture of the Tabernacle, not only gold, silver, purple and precious
stones were offered and accepted; but also goats hair, and badgers skins,
Exodus 25. 45. Neither am I ignorant, that School divinity, and handling of
controversies, is now more in request then positive; yet I thought it not
a^^sse, in this, rather then the other to bestow my pains. For L^ l^^icus
(...) lib. 3. (...) discordia, (...) Carolum Quintum, (...).
it falls out most usually, that in the heat of contention, some men wrest
the holy scriptures, and stiffly maintain their own conceits; only that they
might not seem to consent in opinion with them, from whom they dissent in
affection: whereby the truth of Religion is eftsoons ^^gn ^^ibus (...)ribus,
^e (...).
obscured, and our holy profession wounded, and such points of faith called
into question, (through importunity) which should have continued untouched, and
unmoved. For hereby weak consciences are unsettled, all religion is made
questionable, and holy discipline of life and conversation utterly neglected.
And so thou have (Christian Reader) the reason of my labor thus employed in
this Treatise (first penned in Latin for my own private use, in the
intermission days of a lingering Quartane, and then also Englished at the
request of some friends;) which I submit to thy judgment. He therefore who
suffered those things for us all, which every one should have done for himself,
but none could; open the eyes, not of our bodies, as he did those of Thomas,
but our souls, that we may behold his side, and wounds, and be ravished with
the love of that glory he has prepared; until he shall show (coming in power)
that his face in the clouds which the wicked spitted on upon earth, and
pronounce the irreuocable definitive sentence upon all flesh, and take us (whom
he reconciled to the Father, for whom he died and suffered) unto himself; that
we might be one with him, as he is one with God, who is with the Father and
the holy Ghost, God eternal, blessed for ever, Amen.

Forsitan, hunc aliquis verbosum dicere librum Non dubitet; forsan, multo
praestantior alter Pa(...)perta pu^et, quum plura inuenerit ipse; Deses, and
impatiens, nimis hac obscura putabit: Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata
libelli, etc. TERENTIANVS MAVRVS.

MIhi absit gloriari, nisi in cruce Domini nostri Christi (ait Apostolus:)
poterat dicere, in sapientia Dowini nostri Jesus Christi, and veru^diceret; in
maiestate, and veru^ diceret; poterat, in potestate, and verum dicere; sed
dixit in cruce; vbi mundi Philosophus erubuit, ibi Apostolus the saurum
reperit: non contem^endo vile inuolucrum peruenit ad pretiosum inuolutu^n.

Beda, in Collectaneis suis, ad Pauli Epistolas, ex Augustino. NOn est morbus
Animae, cui his floribus mederi non possis; collige tantum folia florum
florentis Jesus, stillas sanguinis rubicundi, and tanquam pillulas (Sine quibus
esse nolo) in cubiculo cordis tui reconde: erit tibi earum sapor and odor, in
medecinam salubrem, morbos, si qui fuerint, repellentem, venturosque cauentem:
vide tantum, ne vnquam, sine illis esse velis, quae vere nomen habent,
(quolibet fideli dicente) Sine quibus esse nolo. Hauri ergo, toto cordis tui
affectu, odorem vitis verae Jesus Christi Nazareni; and delectare in illo, sicut
Pater coelestis in illo delectatus fuit.

Bernardus in libro de passione Dowini, ex verbis Euangelistae Iohannis, cap.
15. (Ego sum vitis vera) cap. 43. The names of such Authors whose Testimonies
are alleged in this TREATISE.
ABbas Vrspergensis. Aben-Ezra. Adrianus Papa. Adrichomius. Aenaeas Gazaeus.
Aerodius. Agapetus. Agathias. Agatharcides. Agrippa. Alexius Rharturus. A.
Gellius. Ambrosius. Anselmus. Antiphanes. Antoninus. Angelus Caninius. Apologia
Catholica, contra faederatos in Regno Franciae. Apologia Ecclesiae Graecae, de
igne purgatorio, in Consilio Florentino exhibita. Alciatus. Aquinas. Arnoldus
Carnotensis. Arnobius. Arrianus. Aristoteles. Aristophanes. Arbiter. Arator.
Aretius. Athanasius. Athenodorus. Athenagoras. Athenaeus. Augustinus.
Auentinus.
B
Bar-Cephas. Barclaius. Baleus. Basilius Magnus. Basilius Isaurienfis. Beda.
Benno Cardinalis. Bellarminus. Bernardi^. Berchetus. Beza. Tho. Bilneius. Dr.
Bilsonus Episcopus Vintoniensis. Bernardinus. Bibliander. Biel. Beumlerus.
Bodinus. Bonauentura. Bonsinius. Boquinus. Brechaeus. Brissonius. B^canus.
Bucholcherus. Budaeus. Bullingerus. Bullingerus. Buntingus. Burchardus.
C
Caietanus Cardinalis. Caluinus. Caluisius. Callimachus Experiens. Chaldaeus
Paraphrastes. Callimachus poeta. Philippus Camerarius. Ioachimus Camerarius.
Cardinalis Cusanus. Ioh: Carrion. Cardanus. Capitula Patrum. Cassander.
Cassiodorus. Cassianus. Casa^bonus. Cedren^. Celsus. Censorinus. Cheramon. Ioh.
Chekus. Censura Coloniensis. Nichol. de Clemangijs. Chemnitius. Cicarella.
Ciaconius. Cicero. Chytraeus. Chrysostomus. Chrysologus. Cis^crus. Claudianus.
Clemens Alexandrinus. Ioh: Climachus. Columella. Costaerus. Cornelius Seuerus.
Consilium Aurasiacum. Consilium Tris^entinum. Crinitus. Curtius. Cuiacius.
Cyprianus. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Cyropolates. Continuatio discursus de rebus
Gallicis incerto authore.
D
Danaeus. Demosthene^. Diascorides. Dicaearchus. Diogenes Cynicus. Diogenes
I^^ertius. Dictionarium Pauperum. Dinothus. Dion Chrysostomus. Dion Cassi^s.
Dionisius Carthusianus. Dionisius Areopagita. Dionisius (...). Diodorus
Siculus. Discursus de rebus Gallicis. Drogo. Drusius. Dominicus a pace.
Dorothaeus.
E
Elias Cretensis. Elias Venetus. Epictetus. Epiphanius. Epistola, sieve supplex
libellus ad Hispaniarum Regem, nomine Principis Auriaci. Eutbymius. Eustathius.
Eustoc^ium. Euscbius Caesariensis. Eusebius Captiuus Hyronimi Marij. Euscbius
Emissenus. Euagrius. Euripides. Eugubinus.
F
Petrus Faber, Fabricius. Fernelius. Ferus. Ferronus. Festus. Flaccius
Illiricus. Ficinus. Florus. Forsterus. Foxus. Franciscus de Verona. Fulgentius.
Fredericus 3. Imperator. Fulgosius. Fuluius Vrsinus.
G
Galatinus. Galenus. Garcaeus. Gemistus Pletho. Gentiletus. Genebrardus.
Gerson. Glossaordinaria. Gonsaluus. Glycas. Gregorius Magnus. Gregorius de
Valentia. Gualterus. Guichiardinus. Guntherus. Gueuara. Grinaeus.
H
Halicarnassaeus. Harmenopulus. Hansmillerus. Haymo. Helmoldus. Heraclides
Poutious. Heliodorus. Hemingius. Hero. Herodotus. Heresbachius. Hyronimus.
Historica narratio condemnationis and supplicij Ioh: Hussi. Historia
persecutionis Waldensium. Historia de statis Religionis and Reipub: in Gallia.
Historia Tripertita. Hierocles. Hilarious. Hippocrates. Homerus. Holcotus.
Horatius. Horologium Graecu^. Hospinianus. Hotomannus. Hugo. Humfredus. Ioh:
Hussus. Hymnus vetus.
I
Ignatius. Iansenius. Innocentius. Iornandes. Ioh. Chassanio. Ioh: de sacro
bosoo. Josephus. Isidor: Hispalensis. Isidorus Pelusiota. Iuellus Episcop:
Sarisburiensis. Iunius. Iunctiuus. Justinius Martyr. Justinius Historinus.
Iuuenalis. Iustinianus Imperator. Iustinianus Patriarcha. Julius Obseque^s.
Iulianus Apostata.
L
Lalamantius. Langius. Guil: Laurentius. Lactantius. Lectius. Leo Afer.
Lemnins. Leunclaius. Leo primus, Papa. Leo decimus, Papa. Lexicon Iuridicum.
Libauius. Lipsius. Lycosthenes. Lombardus. Lonicerus. Lutherus. Ludonicus
Viues. Ludouic: Granatensis. Lucas Gaurious. Lucretius.
M
Macarius. Macrobius. Machiauellus. Malchus. Malsburiensis. Manuel Paleologus
Imperator. Marlorotus. Marcilius Ficinus. Marcilius Patauinus. Maximus
Scholiastes Dionisij Areopagitae. Meierius. Melanthon. Menander. Mercurialis.
Mestlinus. Meursius. Minutius Felix. Mollerus. Mornaeus. Carolus Molinaens.
Petrus Molinaus. Munsterus. Musculus. Mylius.
G
Nadab Aginonius. Natalis Comes. Nauclerus. Nazianzenus. Nemesius. Nicephorus
Calistus. Nissenus. Nonnus Johan: Paraphrastes. Nonnus Interpres Historiarum
quae a Naezianzeno citantur in orationibus contra Iulianum.
O
Olympiodorus. Oppianus. Origenes. Orofius. Orus Apoll^.
P
Pachimeres. Papias. Paraeus. Parrhasius. Paulus Diaconus. Paula. Paulus ab
Eitzen. Paulus Iurisconsultus. Paulinus. Pausanias. Pelargus. Petrus Guaphaeus.
Petrus de Cauilleria in tractatu, cui titulus, Zelus Christi. Petrus de Viueis.
Pezelius. Phauorinus. Phlegon. Philo. Phocillides. Pindarus. Pierius. Phagius.
Philo Iudaus. Plinius. Plato. Platzius. Platina. Plautus. Plutarchus. Polanus.
Antonius Po^us. Porphyrius. Protestatio concionatorum aliquot Augustanae
Confessionis. Prateolus. Prosper. Procopius Caesariensis. Procopius Gazaeus.
Proctus Licius. Pythagoras. Pythoens.
Q
Quintilianus. Q. Smyrnaeus.
R
Rabanus. Rabbi Maimon. Reinerius. Rennecherus. Elias Reusnerus. Richterus.
Ritherhasius. Rhodinginus. Rollocus. Rosinus. Rungius. Rupertus.
S
Sabellicus. Saluianus. Sanderus. Josephus Scaliger. Scotus. Sedarolam.
Sedulius. Seluerc^rus. Senarcl^us. Seneca. Seruius Grammaticus. Sextus Rufus.
Sibilla. Sidoniu^ Apollinaris. Simter^s. Sixtus Senensis. Sleidanus. Solinus.
Sonhius. Spartianus. Spinaeus. Sophocles. Stephanus de Vrbibus. Strilius.
Strabo. Stucki^s. Suetonius. Suidas. Sulpitius Seuerus.
T
Tacitus. Tanlerus. Terentianus Maurus. Theocritus. Theodoretus. Theophilactus.
Theophrasius. Conradus Theodoricus. Theophilus. Tilenus. Tertullianus.
Tunocles. Tindallus. Tiraquellus. Tritemius. Thuanus. Tossanus. Tzegedinus.
V
Valerius Mazimus. Valesius. Tho: Walsinghamus. Varro. Venantius Honorius.
Weinrichius. Verrius Flaccus. Veteres Rithmi. Whitakerus. Virgilius. Georgius
Wirth. Victor Vticensis. Vindicia Ecclesiae Gallicana. Vincentius Lyrinensis.
Wolphius. Wolphangus Franzius. Vopiscus. Zaoharia^ Vrsiuus.
X
Xenarchus. Xenophon.
Z
Zanchius. Zeno Veronenfis. Zenocharus. Zepperus. Zonaras. Zezomenus.
Zuinglius. Zygomalas.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
THe faults and oversight of the Press, be more then I wished, fewer then I
feared; for there was a careful eye ouerseeing, and a heedfull regard had, for
the avoiding of all errors: but it is not incident to humane diligence, to
prevent every escape. Therefore amend these, which are here signified, being as
I hope of the greatest moment. If there be any more, pardon them, whether in
letters misplaced, or mistaken.

Faults in the context.
Page 2. lin. 13. for more, read then, p. 15. l. 24. add (is) before but once
used, p. 51. l. 34. for g^rge purge, page 53. lin. 13. for them him, page 56.
lin. 18. for practice practique, page 62. lin. 12. for Zomen Z^zemen, page 74.
lin 29. for his her, page 84. lin. 12. after comfortable hope, add Of, page
102. l. 11. for but a few, read not a few, page 112. lin. 25. for cause case,
page 110. lin. 35. for then when.

Faults escaped in the margent.
Page 5. for migrent migret, page 9. for (...), page 10. for rep: rerum, and
for (...), p. 13 for lib. 8. 3. page 25. for hu^^ synodi, huiusmodi, page 28.
add Senarclaeus indignam Iohannis Diasij, etc. pap. 73. for (...).

A COMMENTARY, OR EXPOSITION upon those seven last words which Christ
uttered upon the Cross, (with the necessary circumstances of the same,)
gathered out of the holy Scriptures, the writings of the Aun cient fathers and
later DIVINES.
THE FIRST WORD. A word of mercy.
When they came to the place which is called Caluary, there they crucisied him,
and the evil doers: one at the right hand, and the other at the left. Then
said Jesus: Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. LVK. 23.
Verse. 33. 34.
THat Augustinus tractat. 119. in Iohannis Euangelium.
Cross whereon Christ suffered, was the Chair from whence he taught and
preached. Arnoldus Carnotensis de septe^ vltimis domini verbis.
And in these his last words, uttered in the last hour, when now he was to
undergo his passion, rehearses in a brief sum, all his instructions,
before delivered at large. That in this short Abridgement, the reason and
substance of Christian faith might be apparently manifest, and from a small
seed a plentiful increase grow up, to the benefit of all believers. For the
shorter the words be, and uttered then, when the very circumstance of the time
requires things only of weight and importance to be spoken, with so much the
greater care and diligence are they to be searched into of us. Wherefore
vnfouldinge the causes, and bringing forth into light as out of darkness, and
from a rich and beautiful Cabinet, the excellency of the inward and secret
meaning, the truth shall come forth and show it self openly in her glorious
beauty, which before thou knew not, being covered and vayled from thine
eyes; and the nearer thou come, she shall enlighten thine understanding with
her divine and bright shininge beams: thou shall more apparently perceive a
flame of fire enclosed in a sparkle, and a great sea or ocean included in a
drop of water, and in a 2. King. 4. 23.
cruse of oil such abundance, out of which thou may satisfy thy creditors
debt, and 1. King. 17. 14.
largely feed thy self in the time of want.

The Analysis or resolution of the words.
This passage of Scripture contains in it two general points; First the
reproach and ^gno^iny of Christs-death, and that is laid forth, 1. by the
loarthsomnes of the place, for in Itlay scattered the souls and other boanes of
malefactors, who were there executed for their offenses. (when they came to the
place which is called Caluary.) 2. From the kind of death which he suffered,
which was base and accursed: (They crucified hi^^). 3. From the society and
company among whom he suffered (And the evil doers). And these are described
by their number that they were two: Math. 27. 36. and by their position, that
one was placed at his right hand the other at his left, he in the midst: The
second general point obseruable is the Alij hanc Christi orationem sic
distribuunt ex circu^stan^ijs suis, hoc modo. 1 Quis petit: Christus. 2 Que^^?
Patrem. 3 Quid, remissionem. 4 Vbi^ in monte Golgotha. 5 Quando: cum
crucisigeretur. 6 Pro quibus: Crucisixoribus sul^. 7 Qu^medo ardenter ^um
valido clamore and lachrymis, nam huc referu^t illud Heb. 5. 7.
prayer he there made, in which be to be considered. 1. the object to whom it
was directed, God the Father (Father) 2. the matter or subject (forgive) 3. the
parties for whom he entreated (Them) his crucifiers, in which is the cause of
his petition, and the excuse or extenuation of their fact. They know not what
they do: When they came to the place which is called Caluary. etc.

A (...) in ^^bis le ^us^ le^ descriptione. Eurchardus cap. 6. 42. Bu^tingus in
It^erario sacr^ tom. 2. Quod hic mons idem sit cum illo in quo Abraham (...)
rerum capitalium, haec fuit (...) lictor, (...), etc. Brissonius de formulis
lib. 5. and ex emplu^^ insign^ est apud S^necam lib. 1. de ira, cap. 16. de
Cneij Pssonis iracundia amentia plena.
Caluary was a stony hill called in Hebrew Golgotha Ioh. 19. 17. situated
without the walls of the City Ierushalem, lying toward the west, over against
the old gate, so named of the s^uls and bones of dead men, there scattered,
who were condemned and executed for their mis(...) death of the Cross: And
propter imitationem, therein leaving us an example of imitation that we should
go forth of the world, and abandon all the delights thereof, at the least in
affection: Therefore says Paul, let us go forth of the camp bearing his
reproach: Heb. 13. 13. And in testificationem: to be a testimony of the Aquinas
in sun^ma p^^te. 3. q. 47. artic. 10. Ludolplus de (...) Christis part. 2. ca.
63.
common and general salvation purchased by him for mankind, that as there is
one Veluti est vnum pro omni victima sacrificium, sic vnum de omni gent^ sit
regnum: Leo primus de passione: sermon. 10.
oblation in stead of all sacrifices, so should there be also one kingdom of
all nations.

Wherefore the Lord Jesus Chrysostomus de passione.
would not suffer in secret, Romans 3. 29. 30. Therefore albeit God for a time
did chose, and set a part to himself, a peculiar people, that so it might be
undoubtedly manifest, from whence the Messiah, the redeemer was to be looked
for; yet this did detract nothing, from the general promise, made to mankind
by the (...).
first Gospel preached in Paradise after the fall, Genesis 3. 16. nor hinder, why
the covenant of Gods sauinge mercy, should not be communicated unto all, of
what nation so ever, which do believe. El^g^nter Petri visionem (cuius (...)
Lucas) ^uc accommodat Augustinus lib. 50. Homiliaru^. homilio 45. vide and
Glossam ordinariam.
Act. 10. 34. 35. 36. and that by Christ, who has broken down the partition
wall Ephesians. 2. 14. At whose commandment, giving his Apostles that large
commission, they, by the preaching of the word were to propound and offer
salvation to all nations, Math. 28. 19. to every creature, Mark. 16. 15. And
from the most ancient times (as a foreshewing token of this benefit) even
under Moses himself Ergo veteres patres in hoc sacramento, non tantum
spectabant comm^^orationem liberationis prioris, sed etiam promissam Christi
redemptione^: Quid enim ad exteros haec liberatio, cum n^que m^^ores hoc be^
sicium ^cceperant, noque ipsi sortem in terra sancta habebant? Symlerus in 12.
cap. Exodus Bibliand. de misterijs salutiferae passionis Jesus Messiae: lib. 1.
ex Iustini martyris Dialogo cum Tryphone.
and the strict observation of the legal ceremonies, strangers might be
admitted (upon some conditions) to the eating of the passover: Exodus 12. 48 And
there were (as the first fruits of a more plentiful harvest to follow) Job an
Edomite fearing God: Job. 1. verse. 1. the Queen of Arabia 1. King. 10. 1.
Cyrus the Persian 2. Chron. 36. 22. and the Cananitish woman, whose undaunted
faith did and suffered great things, removing those Chrisost. homil. 20. in
Epist. ad Hebreos vocat (...): Particularitatis tentatio. Non sum missus nisi
ad oues perditas domus Israelis:
mountains of two feirce and strong temptations, one of particularity the
other of Indignity Math. 15. 28. and so made it apparent, that the heathen had
right to beg the blessing, which was given the Jews by promise: and that the
crummes of Gods mercy did belong also unto them: And S. Chrys^st (...) (...) ^.
(...) est (...) ere (...) liberorum and abijcore catellis.
the wise men of the East, who came to seek Christ, directed through the
guidance of a star Sermon ei^ (...).
the entrance of the Gentiles unto grace, and the dissolution of idolatry; who
were wonderfully called and taken out (as it were) from the depth of hell: and
thus is fulfilled the prophetical prayer of Noah, For God has persuaded
Iaphet to dwell in the Tabernacles of Shem Genesis 9. 27. And, they who in times
past were not a people are now the people of God, etc. yea a chosen generation,
a royal priesthood, a holy nation Osea. 2. 23. 1. Pet, 2. 9. 10. And it is
observed by some of the Paula and Enstochium ad M^rcellam, suadentes vt migrent
Beth-lehem: apud Hieronimum: tomo primo Epistolarum. Augustine. bomilia
dominicae 2. post festum Trinitatis de plaga de^.
ancient Fathers, that after David had numbered the people, and the revenging
pestilence raged amongst them, the destroying Angel (stretching forth his
sword to punish the wicked City) appointed the threshing floor of Araunathe
Iebusite for the site of the temple, and a place where an Altar must be built,
and sacrifice offered to appease the wrath of the almighty; even then
signifying that the church of Christ, was not to be confined within the
territory of Israel, but should be spread also among the nations; which thing
the Apostle makes more plain and apparent, sharply reproving the Jews for
the contempt of the Gospel, thrusting the same from them etc. and thereupon
turned unto the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. and yet for greater confirmation of this
point Georg. Wirth in Harmonia Euangelij lib. 1. cap. 3. Aquinas in Cathena.
Christ our Lord and Savior was contented to descend according to the flesh,
as well of Ruth the Moabite, Rhahab a Cananite and harlot, Tamar an incestuous
person, as of the holy Patriarchs and Kings, David, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Iehosophat, Ezechias, etc. Math 1. 5. Thereby manifestly declaring, that he
came into the world to save sinners, and gather to himself a Church from
among the Gentiles, that where sin abounded, there grace might ouerflowe
Romans 5. 20. And at the very end of his life, when he was ready to die and to
suffer for us, he consecrated all nations by the Hyronomus tom^ 1.
Epistolaru^, in Epitaphio Nepoti^ani.
title of his cross, written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, tongues spread wide
and far over the face of the (...) (...) lib. 5. (...) 5^.
obscure prophecy of the Gospel of Christ to be published in (...) languages,
that every tongue might confess that Jesus is the King of Kings to the glory
of the Father Philip. 2. 1. And therefore should no more be said, God is known
in Judah, his name is great in Israel, in Salem is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling in Syon, Psalm. 76. 1. 2: but from the rising of the Sun to the going
down of the same his name is great among the Gentiles: Malach. 1. verse. 11.
Hyronimus Epistola ad Saluianum. Judges. cap. 6. 37. 39.
For the Church is removed from the straight and narrow enclosure of
circumcision, into the large and wide bounds of uncircumcision; neither has
God rained now only upon the sl^^ce of the Jews, but also upon the floor of
the Gentiles.

God is no respecter of persons, but offers his mercy to all believers: for
so he loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that all that
believe in him, should not perish but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 16. Who is
the Mediator (...).
between God and man, and gave himself a ^ransome for all men to be a
testimony in due time, 1. Tim. 2. 6. So that now there is neither Grecian nor
Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scithian, bond, free, but
Christ is all in all things Colos. 3. 11. and we all, one in him Galath. 3. 28.

showed the unmeasureable mercy of God, who does chose unto himself a Church
of the weak, sinners, and his enemies, Esaias. 56. 3. 4. Romans 5. 8. 10. and this
love or mercy appears, not that we loved him, but he loved us, and sent his
son to be a propitiatior for our sins 1. Ioh. 4. 10. For they that were
without Christ and aliants from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the conenaunt of promise, and were without hope, and had no^ God in the
world, now in Christ Jesus are made near by his blood, Ephesians. 2. verse. 12. 13.

should stir us up both to holiness and innocence of conversation, because
the grace of God which brings salvation to all men has (...) appeared, and
(...).


Viuendum. Sobrie quo ad nos ipsos, in munditia cordis custodia oris disciplina
corporis
Iusse quae ad alios, tribuendo Superioribus obedientiam Paribus concordia^
Inferioribus beneuolentia^.
Pre quo ad ad Deu^, reddendo illi Honorem vt creatori Amore^ vt Rede^ptori
Timorent vt Iudici.


teaches us that we should deny in godliness Obedience
and worldly luster, and live soberly, and justly and godly in this present
world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the almighty God, and of
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself zealous
of good works, Tit. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14. Augustinus sermon de te^pore. 29. and
114.
Acknowledge therefore, o man, thy value, and thy debt, and seeing so great a
price is paid for thy freedom and redemption, be ashamed of sin, which is
thy thraldom, and be carefully heedfull, that the Devil wound not that, which
God has healed, least by the consent of thine heart, and transgression of thy
body, thou be found to perform that service to thine enemy which thou owe
to thy Lord. And also to a most religious and careful thankfulness; we are
made a chosen generation, Thankfulness.
a royal priesthood and holy nation, a peculiar people, that we should set
forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his maruay
lous light, 1. Pet. 2. 9. Therefore blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in him Ephesians. 1. 3.

cherishes in us good hope, and from hence arises a certain and undoubted
persuasion for the obteining of eternal life, for as Christ must suffer and so
enter into glory Luke 24. 26. in like manner we must be saved, so many for whom
he died: he carried our sins upon his body on the tree, by whose wounds we
are healed 1. Pet. 2. 24. and has put out the hand writing of ordinances which
was against us and contrary to us, he even took it away and fastened it unto
the cross, and has spoiled the principalities, and powers, and made a show of
them openly, and tryumphed over them in the same cross Coloss. 2. 14.

is an example propounded unto us for imitatition. Christ is led out of his
own city to be unjustly executed, why should not we then willingly for his
sake, leave our houses and children, and other benefits of this life?
especially seeing hereafter we shall receive a superabundant recompense in
heaven Math. 13. 29. And as Christ now ready to enter into his glory, left this
earthly City, so let us willingly forsake this earthly tabernacle and house:
2. Corinthians. 5 1. Bernardus de Ascensione.
and that in affection, so that we love not the world; in effect, that we both
in soul and body utterly renounce it, in desiring perfection, breathing and
endeavoring to be made one spirit with the Lord: and thus follow Christ to
the place of his passion and suffering, bewayling our selves (as he advises
the women of Jerusalem) and mournefully lamenting the brittle and miserable
condition of our estate, Luke 23. 28. When they came to the place which is
called Caluary, they crucified him.

They crucified him:] This kind of death was always accounted (...) base,
reproachful and grievous, appointed for a punishment to such men as were of
the worst condition and (...) Lypsius de Cruce lib. 1. cap. 12. 13. Petrus
Faber. semesirium lib. 2. cap. 8.
desperately wicked. Base: for servants and slaves (most usually) did undergo
the same: whereof the Cross carried the name, to be called a servile
punishment for the common rascal people of meanest and least reputation, such
as differed not much from servants and bondmen. Sometime also it was inflicted
upon free men, of no servile condition, but such as were degenerate from their
birth, dishonesting their stock by wickedness and outrageous offenses, as
thieves, robbers, murderers and such like: reproachful, for it is branded
with a curse by God himself Deuteronomy. 21. 23. and therefore was it objected unto
the Christians by the heathen Arnobius contra nationes sieve gontes lib. 1.
to the discredit and infamy of their profession, that Christ whom they
worshipped for God, was nailed to the Cross, that he was a man put to the
worst death for his deserts; Mi^utius (...) in Octanio.
and the Jews in reproach call him Munsterus in annotationibi^ ad Euangelium
(...) Matthaeum He^braite ab ille editu^: and qua^ contemptibiles sucre
christiani m^nifest^m est ex Turtul. Apolog. cap. 16. Sic Christum and (...)
dis(...) 1 per (...) voc^(...) Iulianus Imperator in Epistolis.
hanged or crucified. Chrysostmus homil. 2. epist. ad Romans
And hereof it came, that if any man of place or quality, did receive the
Gospel and profess Christ, presently in all have his alliance, and kindred,
and friends, would come and dissuade him from his purpose, by this only
reason, what? do thou worship such an one, who was condemned, crucisied and
died among thieves? and suffered so many and so great extremities? And out of
question from hence proceeded those protestations and speeches of the Apostle
confronting (as it were) the dishonorable and slanderous reproaches of
Christ, usual in their times. As that, Romans 1. 16. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, and, we preach Christ Decruce, quomodo scandalu^, stalitia
and sapientia sit, vid^ Forsteru^ in Lexico hebraico in radice (...). Et
Se^uerceu^ in primu^ caput 1. Epist. ad C^r, and Phagiu^ in suis annotat. ad
Paraphrasin Chal. Deuteronomy. cap. 21.
Jesus crucified, a scandal to the Jews and foolishnes to the Gentiles, 1. Corinthians. 1. 23. 29. And, God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Galath. 6. 14. As also those attributes of the Cross so
often mentioned, how full soever of disgrace they seemed unto the world and the
men thereof, as when they name it the shame of the Cross Heb. 12. 2. and the
scandal Gal. 5. 11. And concerning the sharp and grievous pain of the
torment, or (to use the words of Innocentius) Lib. 1. de contemptu mundi sieve
de misaria humanae conditionis cap. 26. in quo de innumevabilibus speciebus
agritudinis.
the insufferable sufferance thereof, out of all question it was most extreme
and painful; if either we consider the manner of the punishment; Augustine. in
Ench. c. 53. (...) Misericordiae genus est cito occidere.
for the persons to be crucified, were most forceably stretched upon the
Cross, and fastened unto it by nails, pearcing through their hands and feet,
and then lifted up on high: or the continuance of their suffering, for
leysurely by little and little, and with much lingering, amids most horrible and
intolerable pain finished their lives: (...) the end (which is the best in
any punishment) being deferred: so that it was not without cause styled by the
Action quinta in Verrem.
Roman Orator the most cruel and hideous punishment, and of others most Drogo
de mysterio passionis.
dreadful and terrible, and by way of extremity the Paulus receptarum
sententi(...) l. 5. cap. 17. and ad (...) Cai^cius de arbore (...). Andreas
Libanius, de vniuersitate and originibus rep. lib. 4. ad opus dici t^rtij
Hexameri.
Ciuilians term it the chiefest or greatest; for so Paulus the Lawyer ranketh
the principal punishments used in his time (Crucifying, burning, beheading)
and places the Cross in the highest room as that which excels the rest:
and hence came that usual proverb, that when any would wish the greatest
Plautus (...) Pseudolo. and dignus mala cruce. apud Ver^ium Flaccum in vocabulo
masculin.
evil he could to another, it was in this form abiin malam crucem: go and be
hanged.

Paulus recep. tarum sententiarum lib. 5. cap. 12.
And here it may be enquired, but religiously and with reverence, what pretense
the Jews had (for there was no^ cause) to enforce and urge Pilate with such
earnest vehemence as they did, that Christ might be crucified. The answer is
easy and offers it self at hand. They accused him (but falsely) of sedition,
and desire to invade the kingdom, and aspiring to obtain the crown: for by
the law of the Romans (whose province then Iudoa was) the Authors of sedition
or tumult, respectively according to the quality of the persons, were either
condemned to the cross there to die, or to wild beasts to be devoured of
them: and it is apparent that Christ was charged with this transgression, as
Luke does make it most manifest, cap. 23. 1. 2. For thus the synagogicall
assembly frames their accusation against him before the deputy: we have found
this man perverting the people and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, saying
that he is Christ a King etc. Suetonius lib. 5. cap. 25 and hos Iudaeos, fuisse
Christianos manifestum: nam hos (...) vocat Arrianus in dissertationibus ad
Epictetum: and qui baptizati nisi Christiani? Et rem^^tra omnem controuersiam
ponit Sulpitius Sencrus in Historia sacra lib. 2. de Hadriano agens. (...) per
cont m^lum and (...) quasi minime vtiles vocabant ethnics, and eos crinunab.
(...) tanqu^m maloru^ omniu^^ causas, b^lli, fam^^, pestis etc. vide sis
Iustinum Martyrem Ap^log. 2. Cleme^. Alex. (...) lib. 2. Tertul. Apol^g. cap.
3. 40. 42. Theophil. ad Autolychum. Purum Pythaeum Aduersario^um lib. 2. cap.
3. P^^lippum Camerarium h^r^rum succisi^^rum Centuria, 1. cap. 39.
And this opinion or rather jealousy settled it self and took deep root in
the minds of the Roman Emperors; for Claudius is said to expel and drive
out of Rome all the Jews who troubled the quiet state of the commonwealth and
raised tumults, Christ being the persuader and incensour thereunto. Now why it
pleased our Savior Christ to suffer and undergo the death of the cross, many
reasons are alleged by divines, and amongst them these are the chief and
principal.

1 That it might be atestimony how he suffered under the government (...)
Hypotheseo^ Theolog. lib. 3.
of the Roman Emperor, when the scepter was taken away from Judah, and
therefore the true Messiah, who was foretold Genesis 49. 10. and borne the five
and thirty year of Herod, who being a stranger obtained the kingdom of
Judea, by the favor of Augustus and Antonius, and three years before that,
destroyed the Sanhedrin the supreme counsel, and procured all the elders to
be murdered, that so no hope might be left unto the Jews ever to recover the
kingdom; and albeit this punishment of the Cross was in use amongst most
people in the world Agathar(...) in fragmentis ab Henrico Stephano (...):
Brissonius de Persarum principatu lib. 2. Iorna^des de rebus Geticis cap. 48.
as Syrians, Jews, Egyptians, Persians, Affricans, Greeks, Goths, and those
of the Islands of Joseph. Sca^g. in annotationibus ad Eusebiu^ Andraeus
Libanius de vniuersitate and originibus rerum lib. 4. ad opus tertij diei.
Iaua: yet was it most of all put in practice by the Nicephorus Calistus
Histor. lib. 7. cap. 46. Halicarnass^us lib. 5.
Romans; and that aunciently since any memory of man.

2 That so he might deliver us from the curse. For this kind of death was
accounted accursed, not only in the opinion of man, Caluinus Institutionum
lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 6.
but by the decree of God himself, insomuch that the earth was thought, to be
defiled, if the body of one so executed were not taken down before the Sun
setting: Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Therefore truly did Lib deincarnatione.
Athanasius that star of the east affirm, if therefore Christ came to purge
our heinous offenses, and bear the curse due unto us, how could he any way
perform that, but becoming an expiatory sacrifice and curse, and suffering a
cursed death, and that is the death of the cross? So the Apostle: Christ has
delivered us from the curse being made a curse for us Gal. 3. 13.

3 It was that there Hyronimus in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 3.
might be fit and equal correspondence between the medecin and the malady,
that as the tree was the cause of death, so the tree might be the cause of
life: For when Christ did undergo his passion, then was there Nazian. (...).
21. quae est apologeticon fuga.
the tree against the tree, and a hand against a hand: this obediently
stretched forth, against that disobediently put out: these pierced with nails,
against that loose and wanton; these conjoined the uttermost ends of the earth
together, against that which separated Adam from the delights of Paradise Per
lignum p^n^ est emtracta, per lignum ^ulpa redimitur. Eusib. Emissenus Hem. 11.
de passione: Nos a damnatione ligui retustt dissoluit Christus. Ve ^^tius
H^norius in enegis. Symboli Apostol.
.

4 Thus the foretellings of the Prophets are fulfilled, and the shadows of the
types removed: Concerning the predictions: David does so lively express (as
though he had then stood under the Cross with Mary and John) the malicious
hatred, the profane scoffs, the biting tauntes of the behoulders, the cruel
percing of his hands and feote, the vehement strayning of his body (that the
bones might be numbered) the parting of his garments and the casting lottes for
his seameles coat Psalm. 22. verse. 8. 16. 17. 18. And that his side should be
opened with a spear, it is expressly affirmed by Zachary cap. 10. 12. yea in a
word Esaias does declare all things that did befall him so fully, especially in
the 53. chap. that he seems (...) and Eustochium de ^^nstatione Esaie.
rather to be called an Evangelist then a Prophet, and not so much to foretell
things to come, as historically to relate things done. Concerning signifying
types which are almost numberles, amongst the rest these are most eminent.
Isaacke Nazian. (...). de Theolog. vocat (...) magnae victimae and in eum Elias
Cretensis. Gregorius magnus Homil. 6. in Ezechielem: Procopius Gazeut in 22.
Geneseos. Bucholcher in Chronologia: de collatione-Isaaci and Chri. crucifi^i
plenissime. David Rungius in Genesin, camque in octo membra distinguit.
when he was to be sacrificed unto God, carries himself the wood In Hymno
quodam veteri pulchre. De parentis protoplasti Fraud factum congraens; Quando
pomi noxialis Morsis in mortem corruit, Ipse lignum tum notauit Damna ligni ve
solueret. Hoc opus nostrae salutis Ordo depoposcerat, Multifor^^is proditoru
Ars, vt (...) falleret; Et madela spir^^ inde Vnde hostu laserat.
unto the place where he must be offered, and suffers it patiently to be
laid upon him, as also to be bound, and to be stripped by his Father,
performing obedience unto the expected stroke of death Genesis 22. 10. of whom
Gregory thus: Isaac is bound and opens not his mouth, is laid upon the Altar,
and strives not; ready to be sacrificed, asks where the sacrifice is, and
when himself is to be offered, is silent; So Christ our Lord, made a sacrifice
for us, takes and carries the Cross upon his own shoulders, suffers
himself to be bound, opens not his mouth Esaias. 53. 7. and is obedient to his
Father even to the death Phil. 2. 8. Abraham carries in his hand a sword and
fire, and in a religious cruelty makes have to the death of his son: God
the Father for the sin of man, afflicts his son Christ Jesus, and
strikes him with the sword, and therefore is said not to spare him, Rom^. 8.
32. but he is wounded for our sins Esaias. 53. 5. Moses sets up in the
wilderness a brazen serpent Salut^^ fuit hoc spectaculu^, and dominica crucis
vim intentabat, qua s^rpons Prabolus pubiicabatur, and Iaeso cui^ a sp^rit^^
lib is colubris, intuent^, and ^red^nti in (...), sanit^s morsuum peccat rum,
and salus exinde praedicabatur. Ter^ull. aduersus Marcionem lib. 8.
upon which whosoever looked, were healed from the sting of the fiery serpents.
Number. 21 8. This Christ interprets of himself, and the benefit of his death,
how he heals those who are wounded with sin, and with the wrath of God,
and freeth them from eternal destruction, beholding him by the eye of a true
faith, spread and lifted upon the cross. Ioh. 3. 14. 15. Augustinus sermon de
tempore 101. and in E^angelium Iohanuis Tractat. 12. Prosper de praedictionibus
and promissionibus in sa^ris lit^ris.
The Isralites beheld the dead serpent, to escape the living: the brazen
serpent set upon a pole, overcame the venom of the living serpent: Christ
hanging and dying upon the cross, quenched the old and consuming poison of the
devil, and healed all those who were smitte^ of him.

5 He would give an example Augustinus de symbolo ad ad Catechumenos, lib. 1.
cap. 3.
to his Martyrs, who should suffer for his Names sake, not to fear any kind
of death, seeing he himself did choose that which was most exceeding evil of
all other. It is therefore said of the ancient Christians in their truly named
Golden Legend, that some of them were tried by Lothu^ a Sodomitis, Genesis 19. 14.
Llizaeus a pu^ris Bethelensibus, 2. Reg. 2. 23. Ieremias per Passur, cap. 20.
verse. 2. Paulus and Sylas Act. 16. 23. Zacharias 2. Chron. 24. 21. Stephan^s
Act. 7. 59. Esaias, vt scribit Lyra in 6. cap. eiusdem preph^tiae. Vzia Ier.
26. 23. Ioh. Baptist. Mat. 14. 10.
mockings and scourgings, yea moreover by bonds and prisonment, that they were
stoned, that they were hewn asunder, that they were slain with the sword,
were racked and would not be delivered, that they might receive a better
resurrection, Heb. 11. 36. 37. 38. That speech of Ignatius Epistoia 12. quae
est ad Romanos. Eusebius histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 8. cap. 7.
was full of faith and Apostolical zeal, who now carried up to Rome there to
be torn in pieces of wild beasts, desired that they might show their
fiercest cruelty toward him, otherwise he would allure them, if not prevail
so, then provoke them, that they might not spare him as they had done other of
the faithful, whom they would not touch. And adds further: come fire,
Tormenta, carcer, vngul^, Stridensque flammis lamin^, Atque ipsa paenarum
vltima Mors, Christianis (...) est. Prudentius (...). hymno In laudem Vincentij.
cross, wild beasts, slaughter, tearing of bones, dismembring of the parts of
my body, yea let all the torments of the devil rush upon me, so I may enjoy
Christ: better for me to be a Martyr, than a Monarch; my love is crucified. To
leave the ancient professors, in whose hearts the blood of Christ was yet
warm, and to desuend to later times. Ex narratione historica, de condemnatione
and supplicio Ioh. Hussi^^ Consilis Constantiensi.
John Husse after many reproaches and contumelies, was condemned in the Counsel
of Constance to be burned, and led forth to the place of execution, having a
cap of paper set upon his head, in which three devils of an ugly and ill
favored shape were painted, and an inscription added, this is an
Arch-heretique: when he beheld it, said very mildly: my Lord Jesus Christ who
was innocent, vouchsafed to wear a sharp crown of thorns for me wretched
sinner; and therefore will I bear this, though imposed as a scorn, for his
truth and names sake. And to comprehend all in a word. The constant Martyr (
Sermon super cantica 62. Ab ista constantia, mars sieve supplieium Martyru^,
triumphus dicitur (vt non semel a Gunthero, de rebus gestu Frederici
Barbaross^) nam patiendo, moriendoque vincunt, and Satana^, mundum, carnem
triumphant: Leo sermon^ 1. in natali Apostoli Petri, and Pauli. (...)
Su^^nittitur.
says Barnard) stands rejoicing and tryumphing, while his whole body is in
tearing, and the butchering executioners knife ransaking his entrals; and does
not only resolutely with a good courage, but cheerfully also behold the
sacred blood to stream from his flesh. where then is the soul of the Martyr?
truly in the rock, in the bowels of Jesus Christ; his wounds lying open,
that it may enter. Neither is this to be wondered at, if an exile from the body,
feel not the pains of the body; which proceeds not from astonishment, but
love, wherein sense and feelinge is not lost, but brought into subjection. And
concerning this whole mystery, Isodorus Hispalensis de Ecclesiasticis officijs
l. 1. c. 27. Quatuor causas eur Christus mortem Crucis sustinere voluit, ponit
Phagius ad 21. caput Deuter.
Isodore comprehending many things in few words, speaks thus: we, who were
wounded by Adam disobediently eating of the tree, are again healed by the
tree, on which Christ obediently suffered. And there is a threefould reason of
this his passion.

The first, that Christ paying the price for the redemption of the world, the
old enemy might be taken with the hook of the Cross, and so compelled to cast
out those whom he had swallowed and loose that prey which he held; not overcome
with power, but justice etc.

The second, to be an effectual instruction unto men. For Christ ascended the
cross, that he might give us an example of his passion and resurrection; of
his passion, to confirm patience: of his resurrection, to strengthen hope: and
to show two sort of lives; one miserable, the other happy^ miserable, which we
must suffer: happy, for which we must hope.

The third was, to beat down the puffed-vp pride and swelling wisdom of the
world; that by the foolish preaching of the cross (as men esteem it) they
might be cast down: and so appear, how much the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God exceeds all humane strength. Barnard in
his sentences has the like, and refers all to three general heads; thus.
Illa omnia propter quae Dominus Jesus mort^ and Cr^cis ignominiam tulit, ad
haec tria referri possunt: primum filial^m obedientiam, quae prioris
inobedientiae piaculum s^lueret; Secundum Compassibilem and communem miseriam,
qua Dei iustitiam inflexibilem, virgom ferrea^, ad miserecord^^ hortabatur;
Tertium, Celeberrimam and solenuem victoriam, cuius successu, ineuitabilis
Diaboli and mortis potentia, in momento glori^se and efficaciter erat
imminuenda.


The storehouse is opened, full of all sovereign Bonauentu^a in Stimulo
ameris, part prima cap 10.
medecines; enter by the window of Christ's wounds, and take from thence
Physic or remedy, curing, restoring, comforting, and preserving; from thence
receive what simples thou desire, what delicate electuaries thou will. For
the merit of Christ suffering, is the price of our redemption; he was wounded
for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Esaias. 53. 5. His
blood does purge us from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. And this is the confession of
the four beasts, and four and twenty elders who fall down before the
lamb, Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people and nation Apoc. 5. 8. 9. And so he is an all sufficient
ransom for us 1. Timoth. 2. 6. which word (...). Haec subest verbo huic notio,
vt sit precium aequiualens, quo captiui redempti demittuntur, and in
pristi(...) libertatem restituuntur. Seluecerus in locum Apostoli.
r^nsome in the original but once used in the new testament, and in it the
proposition where with it is compounded, notes an opposition, and shows that
Christ our deliverer or redeemer, is so set against Adam the author of all
bondage, as he is stronger and of greater power, then he by whom sin entered
into the world, Romans 5. 17. Now this captivity or bondage, in which the devil
holds man fast bound, is threefold.

The first, of blindness and error. For when Eve listened to the contagious and
infecting hissing of the serpent, that both she and Adam by eating the
forbidden fruit should become like unto God knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. 5.
she was ensnared by the first question that ever was Beda. Duo promissa sum
mulieri, Immortalitas and Diuinitas; neutrum prouenit, fed iumentorum conditio
and hominum, sub vnius similitudinis comparatione and damnatione premulgata
censetur. Arnoldus Carnotensis de operibus sex dieru^, simado illius liber sit,
de quo non leaves suns dubita^di causae: sed censuram omnem Criticis relinquo.
asked in the world, and deceived by the first lyethen made: from whence all
their posterity and offspring walk in darkness, strangers from the life of
God, through the ignorance which is in them, Ephesians. 4. 18.

The second of sin. For whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin,
Ioh. 8. 34 Nothing more grievous, nothing more base, and unbeseeming a man. For
as a servant is not at his own power and liberty, but depends wholly upon his
Lord or Master, doing that which he wills and commands: so the sinner is
given over to the devil, and altogether subject unto him, and adversary
seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Theodericus, in Analyze Ena^geliorum
dominicalium. Seruitus Diaboli, 1. vilissima. 2. vitiosissima. 3. Durissima. 4.
Necentissima.
And this estate is 1. most base, for he is constrained to obey infinite
lusts, which the better sort of Heathen thought dishonorable; 2. most wicked,
for he heapeth sin upon sin, offense upon offense, evil upon evil, and
those contrary each to other: and with these vexes and tormenteth his slaves;
3. most grievous and cruel, for the sinner is a drudge to so many devils as
offenses. 4. most hurtful, for the wages and reward of this service, is the
destruction of soul and body the loss of eternal salvation, and endless
condemnation in hell fire prepared for the devil and his Angels. Therefore,
partly to make the Romans ashamed, partly to convict them by the witness of
their own conscience, the Apostle demands of them, propounding a comparison
of the estate of life in which they served sin, and that wherein they lived
unto righteousness, what fruit they had? and answers, no other, but that
whereof they were now ashamed, Romans 8. 21. 22. And it is the confession of the
wicked concerning themselves, and their endeauours, that they were wearied in
the way of sin and destruction, and had gone through dangerous ways, and now
known the way of the Lord. Wisdom. 5. 7.

The third is of corruption and death. For man borne of a woman has but a
short time to live, and is full of misery, Job 14. 1. the truth of this
sentence, not words but wounds have taught. Man borne of a Bernardus in in
Hemilia feriae 4. Nebdomadis pa. and lib. 2. de consideratione. and Gregorius
Magnus in Moralibus ad 14. cap. Iobi.
woman, therefore with guilt, and nothing more contemptible then he: has a
short time, therefore with fear: so in the very entrance into life, he is
dreadfully admonished of his departure: full of misery, therefore with tears
and mourning for the miseries of the body, miseries of the soul, miseries when
he sleeps, miseries when he waketh. For what calamity can be wanting unto
him, who is borne in sin, with a weak body and a barren soul? And thus the
penalty of man in a short sum is expressed; for after Leo p(...) s(...). 3.
d(...) ^io(...) D(...).
that first and universal ruin, thorough which sin entered into the world,
and by sin death went over all men, none could avoid the rule and
souereignitie of the Devil, none shake off the fetters of his cursed and
terrible bondage, neither could any have been reconciled unto God, or had
entered into life, except the son of God coeternall and coequall unto the
father, had vouch safed to be the son of Man, and come to seek and save that
which was lost, Luc. 19. 10. that as by Adam was death, so by our Lord Jesus
Christ should be the resurrection from the dead; and from all the wretchedness
before mentioned has he obtained deliverance for us, of his Father, even then
when he offered himself upon the Altar of the cross, and was made unto us
righteousness, sanctification, wisdom and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30.

But this benefit is not bestowed in one moment, but successively and by
degrees.

For we are made partakers of the first freedom or deliverance, 1^. liberasin
a caecitaete and ^rere.
when Christ does call us by the voice of his Gospel, and enlighten our dark
understandings with the bright shining beams of his holy spirit. For he
conuersing here upon earth, preached deliverance to the captives, etc. Luc. 4.
18. and when he ascended up to heaven, gave gifts to men, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11.
ordeyning a perpetual ministry, by which the eyes of the Gentiles should be
opened, that they might be converted from darkness to light, and brought from
the power of Satan unto God; that they might receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in him, Act. 26. 18.
whereof is a notable remarkable example, of the people, Publicans, and
soldiers, Luc. 3. 10. 11. and those Jews, who so vehemently desired, that
Christ might be crucified, and Barrabas a thief and murderer let loose. Act.
2. 36. 41.

We obtain the second freedom, when he gives saving 2. Liberatio a peccato.
faith, by which we embrace the pardon of our offenses, and being regenerate,
the holy Ghost does so abate and repress the power of sin, that it bears
not rule in us. And in this sense we are said not to sin, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
because it reigns not in our mortal bodies, that we should obey the lusts
thereof; so that though in the flesh we serve the law of sin yet in the mind
we serve the law of God. Romans 6. 12. and 7 23. and so offend not stubbornely
and obstinately, but bewail our corruption, and be exercised in continual
repentance.

For the third deliverance, it shall be performed, when 3. Liberatio a
corruptione and morte.
God by his mighty power does raise our putrified and corrupted bodies, from
out of the earth unto glory. For then shall we all be Just, Esaias 60. 21. the
sons of God, and of the resurrection, equal unto the Angels. Luke 20. 36.
That as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of
the heavenly etc. And when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this
mortal has put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory, Deridet Apostolus morte^,
quae gloriabatur quasi victriu, ^cciso seruatore and posito in sepulero.
Arnoldus Carnotensis de oparibus sex dierum.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be unto God which
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 15. v. 49. 54.
55. 56. 57.

From hence we may behold as in a glass, the exceeding justice, mercy,
wisdom, and truth of God; justice, for his First use.
wrath could not be appeased, nor sinners received into favor without a full
and perfect satisfaction made for transgressions committed: and therefore has
punished the iniquities of all mankind in his son; neither does he
acknowledge or receive any, but such as are clothed with his obedience. For the
offense committed against the greatest good, was to be recompensed with the
greatest punishment of the offender, that is, the extreme destruction of the
nature transgressing: for the reward of sin is death. Romans 6. verse. 23.

Mercy, for Augustinus in meditationibus.
when we were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in times past, we walked
according to the course of the world, and after the Prince which rules in the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, etc.
and were by nature the children of wrath etc. God rich in mercy, through his
great love wherewith he loved us, etc. has quickened us in Christ, by whose
Grace we are saved, and has raised us up, and made us sit in the heavenly
places in Christ Jesus, etc. Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 3. etc. And this is that
bottomless depth Bonauentinae De stimulo amoris diuins part 1. cap. 2.
Bernardus ser. in 4. feria Hebdomadis Panosae.
of mercy which cannot be sounded; for the father that he might redeem a
servant, spared not his own son: not the son, himself.

Wisdom, for God did so temper and intermingle his justice and mercy in this
work of redemption, that he remained both infinitely just, and infinitely
merciful; Infinitely just, for he punished our sins to the full: infinitely
merciful, laying this burden not upon us, but upon our pledge and suerty
Christ Jesus; for we all, as sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one
after his own way, and the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Esaias
53. 6. And this is that wonderful work of God, which the Angels, bowing
themselves down with reverence, desire to behold; and that mystery of
godliness dimly shadowed by the two cherubims, covering the propitiatory of
the Arc of covenant, (a type of Christ) and turning their faces one toward
another, as desiring to look into it. Exodus 25. 20.

Truth; For God requires the deserved punishment: our surety undertaking for
us, has derived the same, together with our sins, upon himself, according
to that decree, that the breaking of the serpents head should not be without
the bruising of the heel of the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. even Christ,
whom God sent at the fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4. and he by death overcame him
(the devil) who had the power of death: Heb. 1. 14. and therefore took upon
him our nature. For Thaeodoretus.
bare man could not heal so deep a wound, because in Adam all have sinned,
are corrupted in the root, and conceived in iniquity, Psalm. 51. 6. neither was
this in the power of any Angel; a finite creature unable to bear an infinite
punishment, or to uphold it self from falling. For Angels Augustinus in
Enchiridis cap. 100. Fulgentius ad Trasimundum Regem lib. 2. cap. 2.
stand by that grace, by which we were raised. Such an one therefore was to be
sought for, whose benefit might renew, wisdom inform, and power confirm the
creature; so as eternal equality might justify the wicked, truth instruct
the ignorant, strength confirm the weak: and he must be, not only man, but
G(...), such an help did both our nature and case require. For neither could
Augustinus.
Majesty without humility, nor humility without majesty restore mankind;
therefore is God said to redeem the Church with his own blood, Act. 20. 28.
and he is that lamb killed from the beginning of the world, Apoc. 13. 8. who
was not taken by the hands of the wicked otherwise, then delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, and so crucified and slain.
Act. 2. 23. and 4. 28. For so it was foretold by the mouth of all the Prophets,
Act. 3. 21. even that Christ should suffer; neither could it be, but that the
event must answer the infallible praediction Luc. 24. 26. So he suffered
necessarily, though by no necessity. That thus the justice, the mercy, the
truth and wisdom of God might be made known, and our freedom from bondage
procured.

2 Hereby appears how Bernardus in natale Domini sermon. 3. and 6.
grievous a thing sin is, and how Second use.
odious unto God; for deep must needs those wounds be, which could not be
healed but by the wounds of the son of God. And further Augustinus sermon. de
tempore 29.
we may understand, at how high a rate God does value the transgressions of
man, from which debt that we might be delivered, he sent not down to earth an
Angel nor Archangell, but God. The greatness of the remedy, bewrays the
greatness of the malady. Leo I. sermon. l. de passione.
Such were the fetters, in which we were hard bound: that we could not be
loosed from them, but by this means: so great was the price by which we are
redeemed, so great is the expense by which we are cured. For what return could
there be from impiety to righteousness, from misery to happiness, except the
righteous had bowed himself down to the wicked, and the blessed to the
miserable? Augustinus sermon. de tempore 114.
Behold therefore, holiness is scourged for the ungodly, wisdom is
mocked-at for the foolish, righteousness condemned for the wicked, truth
murdered for the liar and deceitful; sincerity it self drinks vinegar for
the wretched, sweetness is filled with gall, innocence is accused for the
guilty, and life dies for the dead. Let us not then be ashamed of the Cross
of Christ, we have victory and triumph by his death; for as he the everlasting
son of God, was not borne for himself, but for us Esaias. 9. 6. so the same
immaculate and spotless lamb of God suffered not for himself, but for us, 1.
Pet. 1. 18. 19. wherefore let us carefully avoid sin, and crucify the flesh
with the lusts and affections thereof Gal. 5. 24. least we seem to tread
under foot the son of God, and account the blood of the testament as an unholy
thing, wherewith we are sanctified: and dispite the spirit of grace: Heb. 10.
29.

Let us not doubt of the love of God toward us. For how can he but love
those, for whom he gave his beloved? Ioh. 3. 16. And this is Paul's comfort, who
sometime was a blasphemer, an oppressor, a persecutor, that he was crucified
with Christ, and the life that he now lived, was by faith in the son of God:
who loved him and gave himself for him: Gal. 2. 20. And one of our Thomas
Bilneius apud Foxis in Martyrologio.
own Martyrs, standing at the stake, ready to offer up his body a sacrifice
for the co^firming of his faith and profession of the Gospel, there rehearsing
the Apostles creed, the sum of his belief, when he came to the Article of
Christ crucified, in most submisse and humble manner, bended his body low to
the ground, and gave God most dutiful thanks, (so great as he could conceive)
for this infinite and unspeakable mercy: who by the death of his son had
delivered us from out of the power of the Devil, by whom we were taken alive
to do his will. Then brethren Augustinus lib. de virginitate cap. 54. 55. 56.
behold the wounds of Christ hanginge upon the cross, the blood which he
shed dying, the price which he offered redeeming, the scarres which he showed
after his rising: his head is bowed down to kiss thee, his heart opened to
love thee, his arms spread abroad to embrace thee, his body sacrificed to
redeem thee. Wonder with thy self, how great these gifts are, wey them in
the balance of thy heart, that he may be wholly fastened of thee in thy soul:
who was wholly fastened for thee upon the Cross. And they crucified him.

This was the purposed intendement of the Jews, priests and Pharisees, to
brand Christ with the greatest infamy they could devise, and that even by the
Tanlerus in meditationibus de vita Christa cap. 37.
fellowship (if I may so call it) of those two thieves between whom he was
crucified; endeavoring thereby, to persuade the people, that he was guilty of
the same offenses for which they suffered, and therefore was placed in the
Iansenius in Harmonia Euangeliorum cap. 143.
midst between them (whereof more afterward) that so he might, not only be
reckned among the wicked, but also accounted as the chief: so foretold of the
Prophet Esaias 53. 12. Fulfilled accordingly: Mark. 15. 28.

As Christ the Redeemer of the whole world, took upon esteemed publicly for a
most wicked one, so we by faith in him, and through his absolute obedience are
accounted righteous, For he that knew no sin was made sin for us, that we
might be the righteousness of God in him: 2. Corinthians. 5. 21. In which one
divine Aphorism of the Apostle, the whole sum of the doctrine of our
Redemption is briefly comprehended. For the Redeemer himself is by way of
description expressed (he knew noe sin, but was pure, undefiled, innocent:
Heb. 7. 26. Christus filius crat carnis Adae, non filius praeuarica^^onis Adae.
S. Bernardus in fesso pensecostis sermon. 2.
the son not of the sin, but of the flesh of Adam, Luc. 3. 38. and in this
place the word (sin) signifies the vicious habit inherent in our corrupt
nature, from which our blessed Savior was most free) The manner of the
redemption (made sin for us) that is, a propitiatory sacrifice, or offering
for atonement, a Augustinus in Enchiridio cap. 41. Chytraeus in Leuiticum.
phrase of speech taken from the law, Leuit. 7. 2. Osea. 4. 8. The fruit and
benefit, (that we might be the righteousness of God in him,) for he came to
seek and save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but k Non sumpsit modo formam
serui, vt subesset, sed and mali serui vt vapularet; and serus peccati, vt
paenam solueret, cum poena^ non haberet. Bernardus in sermon. feriae quartae in
hebdomade paen.
he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in his shape as a man; humbled
himself and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross,
Phil. 2. 7. 8. and putting out the hand writing that was against us, fastened
it upon the Cross Coloss. 2. 14. so cancelled, and by death overcame him that
had the power of death (the Devil) Heb. 2. 14. and dissolved his works 1.
Ioh. 3. 8. For we fell in the hands of the prince of the world, who deceived
Adam, made him a Captive, Nam quum dei opere vintulo tenebatur diaebolici
operis, apparuit filius dei vt illud solueret, hoc sanaret. Fulgentius ad
Trasimundum Regem lib. 1. cap. 5.
and took us as his descended bondmen. But our redeemer came and the
Captiuator.
usurper was dispossessed; what did he Augustinus sermon. de 5. pa^^bus and
duobus piscibus.
The rejoicing of faith.
to the usurper? cross for the trappe, his blood for the bait: and so was
taken.

Therefore far be it from us, and God forbid that we should rejoice in any
thing but in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. Now this rejoicing is two fould;
The one of faith, the other of patience: of faith, when we are persuaded in our
hearts, (notwithstanding the greatness and number of our sins) that we are
received into favor, reconciled unto God, and saved, because it pleased the
father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and by him to reconcile all
things to himself, and to set at peace through the blood of his cross, both
the things in earth and the things in heaven etc. Coloss. 1. 19. 20. And from
hence proceeds that holy boasting of the Apostle, that he spared not his own
son but gave him for us all; Who then shall lay any thing to the charge of
the chosen? It is God that justifies; who shall condemn, it is Christ which
is dead, yea rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of
God, and makes request also for us: And (as it were treading under foot and
trampling upon all those extremities, indignities and disgraces, which the
world can offer) breaks out further with joy, what shall separate us from the
love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? and so forth to the end of the chapter: Romans
8. 32. 33. 34. etc.

The rejoicing of patience is, when in any the most grievous The reioicing of
patience.
affliction, we humbly submit our selves under the mighty hand of God, and
comfor our fainting souls by the example of Christ crucified, rejoicing that
we are made partakers of his sufferinges, 1. Pet. 4. 12. For if we suffer, we
shall also reign with him, 2. Timoth. 2. 12. So the Apostles when they were
beaten with rods, departed from the council (by whose sentence they were
adjudged to this punishment) rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to
suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: Act. 5. 41. And thus did the ancient holy
Martyrs stand affected. Nicephorus Califius lib. 6. cap. 36. Suidas in
vocabulo Babilas.
Babilas ready to lay down his neck upon the block, requested this one thing
at the executioners hands, even to be buried with the chain, wherewith he
was bound; that rising at the last day from the dead, it might appear he once
carried it for Christ's sake. And it is very remarkable that Lib. histor.
Ecclesiastica. (...). cap. 6.
Eusebius reports, how the Christians, willingly and (as it were striving who
should be the first) having made confession of their faith, offered themselves
to death: and receiving the sentence of condemnation, went aside to a place
adjoining upon the walls of the City, tied with no other fetters, then the
bonds of faith, yet none of them fought to escape, when none watched them, but
all, yea one preventing another, put themselves into the hands of the butcher;
and while the first were executed, the rest cheerfully sunge psalms and
praises unto God, waiting their course and place of Martyrdom. Wherefore let
us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the
Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the
throne of God. Heb. 12. 1. 2. And they crucified him.

The chief Priests had hired Judas the Apostle Matthew. 26. 14. 15. who for
thirty pieces of silver the price of a Johannes Drusius ad 27. caput Matthaei.
slave or bondman, (at so low a rate was he valued,) betrayed his Master: he
is brought before Caiphas, charged with false accusations, delivered over to
Pilate, that he might pronounce the condemnatory sentence upon him: who though
he was found guiltless and innocent, (even by the testimony of the Judge
himself) in a furious rage they cried out that Barrabas a murderer and
desperate villain (the offer being tendered which they would choose) might be
set free, and the Lord of life crucified. Neither did the Jews ouerslip any
thing, which might either make to his reproach, or increase his torment. For his
body was torn with whipping, his head crowned with thorns, led De forma
eductionis pleniss. Lipsius do cruce lib. 1. cap. 6. and Petrus Faber
somestriu^ lib. 2. cap. 8.
forth to execution with all disgrace and contumely, is constrained to carry
his cross upon his mangled shoulders, (and that the whole for a time, Luc. 23.
26. for else what needed a help to be taken up, and enforced to take a part?)
he is stripped of his garments, hands and feet nailed to the cross, which is
the peculiar torture of this kind of death, Pilate writes a title, and
causes it to be set over his head in Iansenius in Harmonia Euang. cap. 143.
Sixtus Senensis sacrae biblioth. lib. 2. Hunc Sinodi titulum Dion Cassius vocat
(...). Caietanus Ientaculo prim. quaest. 4. Observation.
scorn and contempt, vpbrayding and taunting him, as though he had sought to
usurp the kingdom over the Jews, and intimating thereby that for this cause
he was adjudged to this present punishment, and all to this end, thereby to
procure the favor and good liking of the Emperor toward him, as one who
defended his Royal authority over the Jews against the Jews.

The cruelty of the wicked against the godly is outrageous, and cannot be
appeased but by their utter destruction, and therefore are said to devour the
poor, as with fire, and to consume them to ashes, Psalm. 10. 2. and are
described in the holy Scriptures, by such titles as express their conditions,
for they are named Lions (Neroes Eusebius Histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 12.
style 2. Timoth. 4. 17. the first who stained his sword with the blood of
Tertull. in Apologetico, cap. 5.
Christians, and dedicated persecution against the Gospel) wayters for blood,
hunters of their brethren, Micha 7. 2. Caniballs, moneators, Psalm. 53. 4. and
(in one sum to comprehend all,) such, whose mercies are cruelties, Proverbs
12. 10. clay steepod in blood, as (...), dictus est obsaeuam and lonta^ naturam
Tyberius. Suetonius lib. 3. cap. 57.
Theodorus was wont to call Tiberius. The view of the Scriptures, the histories
of the primitive Church will afford for confirmation of this, plenty of
examples. Wicked Cain murthereth righteous Abell his brother, Genesis 4. 8. (the
first Martyr who watered the field of the Church with his blood.) Pharaoh
commands the sucking infants to be pulled from their mothers breasts, and
cast into the river Nilus. Exodus 1. 22. Manasses, while he was yet an Idolater,
to other his wickedness added this, that he shed innocent blood, till he filled
Jerusalem from corner to corner. 2. King 21. 16. It was not a sufficient
satisfaction to Hamans mind, that Mordecay should be destroyed, but (sparing
no cost, by a lavish offer of great sums of money to be brought into the
Kings coffers) obtained, to have the whole nation of the Jews rooted out,
Hester 3. 6. and in the day of Ierusalems calamity, the Edomites cry out Race
it, race it, even to the foundation thereof, Psalm. 137. 7. and, to descend to
the first times of the Primitive Church, the endeavors and practice of the
enemies of godliness was to choke it newborn, and being as it were in the
swathing bands, and a tender infant in the cradle. Such and so great was the
cruelty which the Tyrants practiced in Thebais, that Eusebius hist. Ecclesiast.
lib. 8. cap. 3. 10. 11. 13. plura nefanda crudeli. tatis exempla (Si qu^ tant^
amor veteram cognoscere casus) inveni^e est apud Victoreus de persecutions
Africa. Bullingerum, in libro de persecutionibus Ecclesiae. In historia
persecutionu^ Waldensium ab anno 155. ad (...). 161. and Reginandum Gonsalum in
detectione Inquisitionis Hispanica.
Eusebius affirms, it far exceeded the credit of any relation. For they
rent and tare the whole body with po^^erdes, until the skin was scraped off,
they hanged up women naked by one foot, upon certain engines, with their
heads downward, without any respect to the modestic of the sex, a detestable
spectacle; some they pulled a pieces, having their legs and arms tied to the
boughs of trees, bended by force to that purpose; and these, and the like for
many years together; in which, every day ten (when the fewest) sometime an
hundred men, women and children were unmercifully massacred by these torments
Stigelius in 3. partolocorum Theolog. (...) Christo, vsque ad Con(...) M. sunt
ann^ 300. and (...) plures. in quibus sueriat (...) persecutienos, sed omnium
(...)^issima sub Dio(...), quo regnante (...) di(...)bijt, quin Alexandriae ad
minimum december Christiani true(...) sint.
And it was lawful for every one who had devised any new or strange kind of
torture, to make trial of the same upon the bodies of the Christians; so that
some were beaten to death with clubs, others with rods, some with whips, many
hanged, (their hands tied behind them) and, stretched up with pullies, pulled
asunder by peace-meale etc. And Tacitus reports, that Nero Annalium lib. 15
and de hoc intelligoudus est Iunenalis, satyra 1. lib. 1. ^one Tygillinu^ (...)
lucebis in illa.
afflicted them with most exquisitely devised torments, adding thereunto
whatsoever might, to their reproach and mockery: as covering them with the
skins of wild beasts, that so they might be sooner torn of dogs: and,
nayling them to crosses, enwrapped them with combustible matter, that set on
fire they might serve to give light in the night: Nauclirus in historia,
Generatione 10. Z^gon(...) in historin politices Constantino poleos. Crusij in
eam annorationes.
Mahomet the second when he took Constantinople, commanded the Christians to
be chopped into gobbets, in his own sight, and some to be set up, with a
sharp stake thrust throw their secret parts, pearcing the ridge bone of the
back. The Hot^ma^nus in bruto sulmine.
Pope of Rome importuned Frances the first, king of France, that the
professors of the reformed Religion might have their tongues cut out (by which
means they should not complain) and then to be burned. In the Historica
narratio de vita and morte Iohannis Hussi.
Council of Constance, when John Husse was consumed with fire, the Papists
finding his heart yet whole, spitted it upon a sharpued (...) of wood, roasted
it with a new fire, gathered up his ashes, cast them into the River Rhene, that
there might not so much as the dust of him (so far as they could prevail) be
left upon the earth. Who knows not, how, in the memory of our Fathers, (for
now I come to touch those things which are incident to our times) they Ioh.
Foxus in martyrologio. and Iuollus Episcopus Sarisburiensispiae memoriae in
d^f^nsione Apologiae Eccles. Anglicanae cap. 4. sect. 3.
took the infant issuing out of the mothers womb in the midst of the flame,
and the executioners with their forkes cast it into the fire? that, as the off
spring of an heretic, it might burn together with her. Add to this, how they
murdered Dinothus lib. 2. hist. de bello Gal. (...)gionis causa suscepio.
aged men, sucking babes, people lying sick in their beds unable to stir,
women big with child, and cast them down headlonge from the rocks, breaking
their necks and crushing their bones in pieces; such, who, with shedding of
many tears, and promising large rewards, have begged life: yea buried some
quick, and disturbed the rest of others laid at peace in their graves,
spoylinge them of their winding sheets, and casting them in savage manner to
be devoured of dogs. Our ancestors have Epistola sieve lebellus supplex ad
Ph(...)m Hispa(...) Regem, nomine princip^ Auriari and ordinu^ Hollandiae, and
Lelaudiae, oblatus.
seen the bodies of the dead dug up, and most dispitefully hanged upon
gibttets; men alive fleaed, and drums covered with their skins: and many
plucked asunder with hot tongues. And not to reckon up more of this sort (the
remembrance of them is a terror to my soul) he is but a child and ignorant of
the history of his own times, who knows not, how, from the Vespera Parisime,
de quibus versus numeralis annum tam (...) stragis denotans (vz 1572)
BarthoLoMeVs fLet, qVla GaLL^eVs oCCVbat At Las.
twenty four of August (which day is consecrated to the memory of Saint
Bartholomewe) unto the first of December, in Paris and other Cities of France
one De haec Laniena vide historiam de statu veligiou^ and Reipub. i^ Galli(...)
lib. 10. H^^drici Zuinglij Epito^^ de Regibus Galli^, in Carolo 9 Th^^num, qui
in historia sui temporis lib. 52. minorens numerum ponis; and illsus liberum de
hac faeda te^pestate, and ^^dium lientia, quod profert lib. 35. non pr^cul ab
initio.
hundred thousand of the religion were murdered; and that after a most
treacherous and bloody manner. These and the like transcendent outrages may be
sufficient testimony, that Rome is that scarlot-coloured harlot, drunken with
the blood of the Saints Apoc. 17. 6. For by the space of these A^glinus in
Apocalipsin Bullingerus con(...) Pij. Quinti Bullam. 1 Testes sisut omniu^
atatum historiae, qua doc(...), Papam Reges inter se co^co^sisse; (...) in
dominos sicos, fi^os in patrei concitasse, (...) Authors fuisse, and
iuramentis, vt p^^rum astragalis vsos; ad^o vt vero dicatur, Pontifices Romans
Romulo succedere in parricidiis, non Petro in pascendis ouibus, vt and Adrianus
4. priusquam moreretur, dixisse fortur: Amoninus (...) 17. 9.

2 Exempla sint Paschalis secundus, primus bellator, vi^ ^agni ingenij atque
(...), (...) a religious ad (...) conuersus est. Platina in Pascals 2. Hunc
sequntus Innocentius 3. Budeus in Innocentio 3. Julius 2, qui in Gallias
emissurus coptas, ense and clauibus accinctus, in Tiborim proiecit cla^^s, hoc
referens, quando quidem Petri claues nihil prodessent, Pauli ensem quem (...)
^auxilio futurum: Arnoldus Ferronus (...) Gallesaru^ lib. 3 in Ludouico 12. De
Iuliano Cardinale cicius suasis ruptum cum Turcis (...) est and insoliciter
pugnatum. Bonsimus rerum Hungaricarum decad. 3. lib. 5. De vrbano 2. qui and
Turbana dictus est. Abbas Vrsperg^^sis. De ^lijs. Auctinus lib. 5. annalium.
Sumptus Pontificis ad Bellum Germanium contra protestants commentora^^
Sladanus lib. 17 Thuanus histor. parto prima lib. 2 Quid o^^m and ^^per
match(...) siut in Augliam nostrem, (...) and apud Maisburionsont. Mathaum
Parisiensem, Tho. Walsinghamum, T^^dellum de artibus pr^^latorum: Antonium
Ciraullam in vita Sixti 5.

3 De Paulo 3. Bale^ in illius vitae De Gregorij 7. and Vrba^^ mach^^s contra
Henricum 4 Imper. Helnoldes in Chronicis Sclauorum, cap. 28. 29. Abbas
Vrspergensis indignum Ioh. Diasij cedem descripsis ^^gro libello

4 Huius sceleris conscij. Bernardus (...), Gregorus 7. de quibus Nicholaus
Cisnerus De Henrico Lun^^burgico, Simon Schard^^ in Hypo(...). (...)
Cardinalis. Quid mo(...) sius ad tollendam vitam Di^^ Elizabeth^ Regi^^ nuper
(...) memory, legere est apud Bilsonum Episcopum Wim(...)ensim, in i^o
cr^di^issimo suo opere contra Apolog^^ Catholicoru^ Anglicanoru^. In recenti
adhuc memoria sius Henrico 3. and 4. Galliarum Regum pa^^icidia. De quibus
(...) Galli(...) Ecclesiae, Tuss(...) (...), (...) lib. 6.

5 Quam in ha^ art p^riti sunt^ doce^t aperte Mo^neus contra paruas data^.
Mach^auellu^ in principe suo cap. 18. Gu(...)dinus l. 1. de Alex. 6. 6 Hae sunt
Pontificum art^s. Apologia Catholica contra Federatos, in Regno Franciae part
2. Petrus de vineis passim in epistolis. Simon Scardiuc in Hypomnemate.
Cisiacrus. Marsilius in defonsore pacis. Ioh. Meierius de schismatibus. Et
Petrus Crinitus de honest^ disciplina. Petrarcha epist. sieve titulo epist. 7.
and 15. etc.


five hundred years, what 1. euilles, 2. wars, 3. murders, parricides, 4.
King-slayinges, 5. periuries, 6. seditions, rebellions, treasons, has there
been in the Christian world, whereof the Bishops of Rome were not either
principals or accessaries? And therefore the Apostle does not without cause
marvel, that so great power is given unto them; but let us possess our
souls in patience, for God at the last will judge them, and deliver his from
the jaws and cruelty of raginge Antichrist.

1. Use. Trust not those who are ungodly and irreligious, neither be familiar
with the^, howsoever they fawningly slatter you, and pretend love; for they are
wolves in sheep clothing: Math. 7. 15. silver dross laid upon a potshard,
and though they speak favorably, yet there be seven abominations in their
heart, having one thing ready in their tongue, another close in the mind. Pro.
26. 25. And be well inured with Plinius historiae lib. 11. cap. 44. and
similis est Dolonis Gestus apud Homeru^, Iliade decima.
Ioabs salutations who took Amasa by the beard with one hand (a complement of
great humility) and used sweet words, art thou in health my brother? but
smote him with the other, and shed out his bowelles to the ground: 2. Sam. 20.
9. and Judas treasonable kisses, Luke 22. 48. he counterfeited affectionate
love, with a patheticall repetition, Rabbi, Rabbi: Mark 14. 15. making a way to
the performance of his Leo primus sermon. 1. de passi. Lupinofurore, vim sceleris
per speciem pacis incipiens, signu^ traditionis, saeuiore (...), telis osculo
prabuit.
woluish fury under the show of peace: and gave a smoth kiss a token to
betray his master, sharper then any dart. And of such the holy Ghost speaks
by David that their words are softer then butter, but war is in their
hearts; smother then oil, sharper then swords; Psalm. 55. 21. They are sweet
in their lips, and can make many good words and speak many good things,
yea weep with their eyes, but in their heart imagine how to throw thee into
the pit: and if they can find opportunity, will not be satisfied with blood.
Thus are the crafty and fox-like conditions of the wicked described in lively
colors, Ecclesiast. 12. 17. The only preservative against these Sinons (who
have every one a Trojan horse in themselves) is, not to trust them Ierem. 9. 4.
For as the Greek orator (...) Demost. orat. 2. contra Philippum.
advised the Athenians, concerning Philip King of Macedon, who lay in wait to
ensnare them, and surprise their City, the greatest bulwark to withstand his
attempts, was distrust, the strongest sinews of true wisdom: so for
Christians the surest means of safety, is (according to the ancient Clem^ns
Alexandrinus lib. 7. Stromatum. and simile quid est apud Niss^num de
virginitate (si modo illius liber sit.)
proverb of the Church,) to join the serpent with the dove. And this is that
direction which our Savior commends to his disciples, that they should be
wise as serpents, and simple as doves. Matthew. 10. 16. but wisdom must be first
and guard simplicity.

Let us strive with God by earnest prayer, that we may be preserved from such
unreasonable men. This was the desire of the Patriarch Jacob concerning his two
sons Simeon and Leui, (who deceived the Sichimites by a fained pretense and
glosing terms of making a perpetual league and friendship with them,
conditionally that they would be circumcised, and then murdered them all,
unable to make resistance by reason of the grief of their wounds, and spoiled
their goods,) Into their secret let not my soul come, my glory be not joined
with their assembly etc. cursed be their wrath etc. Genesis 49. 6. 7. For such be
false brethren 2. Cor. 11. 26. unreasonable and evil men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. And
the cause why these dregs of the world wherein we live, is so foul and muddy,
and such Mala tempora facit nobis contemptus Dei, temporu^ cursus non facit.
Chrysolog. ser. 4^. Non Planetae, non sydera, nos ipsi mutamus re(...) naturam
nostru^ iniquitatibus; and quae Deus bona facit munere pictatis suae, nos
facimus mala esse moribus malis. Salutanus de prouidentia Dei lib. 6.
dangerous days in these last times; for they have a show of godliness, and
deny the power thereof, 2. Timoth. 3. 5. and are of Hannibals mind, in whose
eyes no ^ight was more pleasing, than a ditch swimming over with man's blood;
David's petition therefore may well fit every man, Deliver me O my God, out of
the hand of the wicked, and out of the hand of the evil and cruel man. Psalm.
71. 4.

There they crucified him, and the evil doers, one at the right hand and the
other at the left. A strange spectacle in one place at one time; the guilty and
the guiltless are executed by one manner of death: Jesus the Savior and two
malefactors are hanged upon their several crosses: of those, one condemned,
the other saved. And the very creatures seemed to detest this cruelty showed
unto the Lord of life; for the earth now trembled, the sun (the joy of the
day) covered his bright shining with darkness, as with a mourning black, the
Moon (the nights comfort) is turned into blood, and lost her light, Mark. 15.
33. Matthew. 27. 51. For Bernardus sermon in feria 4. hebdomadae poenosae.
then the wicked killed the righteous, and laid their sacrilegious and cursed
hands upon the son of God; merciless murderers of men, (and if I may so
say) of God himself. At this sight the wholeframe of the world was afraid and
astonished, and waxed pale, and all things ready to return to their ancient
Chaos and confusion. The Jews Isodorus Pelusiora lib. 1. epist. 255. and 256.
purpose herein was, and all their attempts tended to this only end, that
Christ being crucified among thieves might be thought partaker of those
offenses, and accounted the ringleader of the wicked, or at the least be
stained by the society of their company: or as the modern Greeks now Alexius
Rha^turus (...). Charlophylax fuit, and quid hoc officij ganus vide Ioh.
Moursinum in Glossario Graecobarbaro.
speak, (for God has a remnant of Saints, and a Church even in the midst
of Mahumetisme) be esteemed as the chief thief, a deceiuer and enemy unto
God. But they were disappointed of their purpose, and all their subtile-deuised
counsels made frustrate. For as neither the loathsomeness of the place, could
hinder, but that there he erected a Trophe and monument of his glorious
victory, nor the stench of the carcases, which lay there putrified and rotten,
abate the sweet smell of his sacrifice, why it should not spread it self over
the face of the earth, and ascend up even to heaven: so this infamy and
disgrace which is now offered, did Horalogicum Graecum.
nothing at all obscure his spotless glory: for the cross of Christ was a
balance of righteousness, between the two thieves, the one carried down to
hell by the weight of his blasphemy, the other lightened of his sins, brought
to the knowledge of God. Or, as Saint Sermon de passione.
Chrysostom, a just and equal scale weighing out, and trying faith and
infidelity; and thereby also intimating the office of his mediatorship,
between God and man, between the Jews and the Gentiles.

-- Sedulius Poeta Christianus eleganter in carmine pas^bali.
Insontis latere ex vtro^ cruentos
Constituere viros; meritum licet omnibus vnum
Non faciat similes, similis sententia: namque
Inter Garnisices sancto pendente latrones,
Par est poenatrium, sed dispar causa duorum etc.
The bare and naked act of suffering does not make us Observation.
acceptable to God for the same, but the cause is to be considered. The
Israelites died in the wilderness, in many of them God was not well pleased,
I. Corinth. 10. 5. Moses also the servant of God dyed there, and takes a view
of the land of promise from the top of the hill, but tastes not of the good
things thereof, nor enters into it, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. Achab fell by the sword, a
just punishment, 1. King. 22. 35. Josias also perishes by the sword, and this
is a merciful correction, and is gathered to his Promissio haec cum grano
salis est intelligenda. Nam promissiones corporales semper habent annexam
conditione^ crucis. and m^minit hu^us pugnae Herodorus in Musis. in Euterp.
lib. 2.
fathers in peace, according to the promise. 2. Chron. 34. 28. In the same
prison Pharaohs servants for their offense against their Lord, are shut up, and
Joseph with them falsely accused, Genesis 39. 2. 20. For in the likeness of the
sufferings, there is oftentimes a difference of the Augustinus de ciuitate Dei
lib. 1. cap. 8.
sufferers. Therefore our Savior Christ does not absolutely and without
exception pronounce all blessed, but with a limitation, Caietanus Ientaculo 4.
de Beatitudinibus.
such as suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Matthew. 5. 10. For there
cannot be the truth of Martyrdom, where the truth of God is wanting.
Wherefore this is the comfort of the faithful under the cross, For Vox martyru^
(Occidimur tota die) Causa Martyru^ (Pro te Domino causa tua.) Augustinus in
Psalm. 43.
thy sake O Lord are we killed all the day long, and are accounted as sheep
to the slaughter. Psalm. 44. 22. Romans 8. 36.

Historia tripartita lib. 8. cap. 13.
Martyrs had the Arriant, of whom we read in Church histories. Such were the
Donatists mentioned by Saint Augustine, Epistola 167
who sought to scrape up praise for the due correction by severity imposed, to
restrain them from outrageous wickedness; being ignorant either throw
wonderful blindness, or dissembling by damnable boldness, to know thus much, that
none can die the death of a Idem Epist. 61. and contra Crescoriu^ Gra^maticum
lib. 3. cap. 47. and in Psalm. 34.
Martyr, who lives not the life of a Christian. For grant all to be Martyrs
who suffer punishment, from these premises will follow an absurd conclusion,
that every Prison then should swarm with Martyrs, every chain should draw a
Martyr after it, every gallows should make a show of Martyrs, every one,
howsoever executed, should be crowned with glory. But in good earnest to
affirm this, were little better then madness it self. Therefore in those sad
and woeful times of the Church, the ancient Christians judged him who pulled
down and tare in pieces the cruel edict of Aeuodius decretorum lib. 5. ad
legem Corneliam tit. 13. sect. decima.
Dioclesian and Maximinus, and was therefore put to execrable torment, worthy of
the same, and did not enroule his name among the Martyrs; for not the
punishment but the cause gives that honorable title to any. Therefore in this
Calender no place is left for Story and Felton (traitors against their
country,) whom notwithstanding, as it were disdayning to rank them in any low
order, De visibili Monarchia lib. 7.
Saunders calls great and excellent Martyrs. No room here for the
inconstant runagate Campian, none for Garnet, guilty and convicted of so
strange and hellish a treason, as no former age can parallel; except happily he
be such a Martyr, as was his miracle, counterfeit, and a wispe of straw. And by
no better right may either the youth Chastell, or father Guiguarde, infamous
for their bloody and unnatural murders, challenge to have their memories
regestred in the catalogue of Saints, extolled by In Apologiae pro Iohanne
Chastello part 3. and 5. Vindiciae Ecclesiae Gallicanae.
Franciscus de Verrona above the common and usual condition of all other, to
be noble Gentlemen, half Gods: and their deeds heroycall, and so exempt from
any stain of sin. But why should we marvel at all these strange Paradoxes?
For Prateolus lib. 3. cap. 19.
Petilian worshipped Judas Iscarioth who betrayed his Master, as a Martyr, a
Devil and the son of perdition Ioh. 6. 70. and 17. 12. And they shall have
good leave to be numbered among the ancient Martyriani, which were also called
Satanists, Epiphanius Heresi 80 and Augustinus de heresious cap. 57.
because with all submisse humility they honored Satan, as protector of their
lives and governor of all their actions; But let these pass, and receive such
reward at Gods hands, as is their due. Because such heretofore has been, and
may hereafter be the estate of the Church, that either through the good works
and purity of Cyprianus epistola 9.
the brethren, she be clothed in white, or died purple in the blood of Martyrs
(for among her flowers there be as well roses as lilies) let the professors of
Christian religion strive, and with all diligence endeavor, that none suffer
as a murderer, or a theife, or an evil doer, or as a busi-body etc. but if
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in
this behalf, 1. Pet. 4. 15. 16. then shall he undertake a good trial
Tertullianus libro ad Martyrs. De his a Gymnastica sumptis vocabulis. Petrus
Faber in Agonistica. Et Hyronimus M^rcurialis de art Gymnastica.
of Maisterie, whereof the living God is the chief author, the principal
ruler the holy Ghost, Christ Jesus the ouerseer, who has anointed us with his
spirit, and brought us sorth to this trial, the reward a garland of eternity,
glory in heaven for ever and ever etc.

They crucified him and the evil doers, one at the right hand, another at the
left. In this action lies covered a secret mystery. For under these two
malefactors is represented the whole body of all Crux Christi Tribunal.
mankind, which may well be divided into two sorts, the godly and faithful,
who shall be saved, the wicked and vnbeleouers, who must be condemned: and the
site and placing of them; shadoweth out the difference of their estate; For in
this position of the Leo primus sermon. 4. de passione. (...) Pelusiota
^pisiolarum lib. 1. epist^^. 255. and 256.
cross, is not obscurely showed unto us, that separation which Christ shall,
in that day when he comes to judgment, make of all men; the faith of the
believing theife, being a representation of such as shall be saved, and the
impiety of the n other blaspheming, a figure of the damned. For he shall
appear in the end of the world, in the glory of the Father, and flaming fire,
to take vengeance of those who have not known God, and obeyed the Gospel, and
to be glorified in his Saints and made wonderful in all that do believe: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. Then shall he separate the sheep, and put them at his right
hand, and the goats at his left, these shall be cast into everlasting fire,
with the Devil and his Angels, and undergo that dreadful sentence, depart
from me you cursed: they shall be put in the possession of the kingdom
prepared for them from the beginning of the world, with that sweet Duae
sententiae ferentur in iudicio vltimo, vna pro bonis, altera contra malos;
sententia pro bonis haec continet, prim^ amabilem vocationem (venite) Secund.
diuina^ benedictionem (benedicti.) Tert. paternam dilectionem (patris mei) 4.
remunerationis retributione^ (percipite) 5. praemij assignationem, (Regnum,) 6.
gloriae praeparationim (quod vobis para^um) 7. ae^erna^ praedestinationem (ab
origin mundi.) In sententia contra malos 1. est a Deo separatio (ite) 2.
maledictio (maledicti) 3. poena (in ignem.) 4. liberationis desperatio,
(aeternum) 5. infelix ass^ciatio (paratum Diabolo, and Angelis cius.) Albertus
in compendio Theologiae lib. 7. cap. 19.
inuitation come ye blessed of my father: Math. 25. 31. 32. 34. 41. etc. And
from hence two especial doctrines do arise.

After the ignominies, contumelies, sufferinges and afflictions, of this life,
God will give, unto those that are his rest and glory; for to every one that
does good shall be honor and peace and glory: Romans 2. 10. Glory, in the soul and
body. In the soul; for it shall have the knowledge of God and likeness with
him, and we Nazianzenus.
shall see him, at the last, as he is: and never be deprived of that sight: 1.
Ioh. 3. 2. face to face 1. Cor. 13. 12. even behoulding him (as with the eye)
who is neither comprehensible in human understanding, nor expressible by any
word of man. Then God Bernardus in Psalm. 91. Sublatis omnibus imperfectionibus
(...) cu^us nunc est erodore, tunc videbit. (...) cuius hic ect sperare,
obtinebit fi^miter id, quo enitebatur; (...), cuius est an^^re, tunc diliget
perfect, vnde perfecta visio, perfecta dilectio, and perfecta fruitio. Tilenus
2. part, Syntagmatis Theologici, loco de vita aeterna.
shall enlighten fully our understanding with brightness of wisdom, govern
our will and bound it in the limits of righteousness, and quiet our affections
so, that they shall repose themselves in heavenly peace; that whatsoever grace
has prepared and begun, glory may perfect; And then we shall be freed from
sin and misery. For as in Danaeus de homine lib. 1. cap. 5.
creation we were so made, that we might not have sinned, and by the fall of
Adam so corrupted, that we cannot but sin; so being glorified, shall be so
restored, that we shall not sin at all. For then shall we be perfectly
regenerated, Math. 22. 30. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. effectually governed in all our
actions, 1. Corinthians. 15. 28. and transformed into that Image according to which
we were first made; that there might be in us Haymo lib. 1. de varietate
libr^rum, cap. 1.
light without darkness, wisdom without error, life without death: and be
Sancti duplicem glorificationis stolam habebunt, vnam sp. alteram carnis: stola
sp. in tribus consistit, in cognitione, dilectione, and dilectatione. stola
carnis in 4. claritate, subtilitate, agilitate, impassibilitate. Innocentius in
sermon, de Diuo Gregorio: Aquinas in summa partis 3. supplemento quaest. 82.
83. 84. 85.
translated from the glory of believing, to the glory of behouldinge, and enjoy
the fruition of our hope.

In the body, De his qualitatibus Hol^otus in librum sapientiae, cap. 3. verse.
7.
for that shall be made conformable to the body of Christ, Philip. 3. 21. and
furnished with several endowments, particularly laid out and illustrated of
the Apostle by opposite terms of mortality, baseness, infirmity, and
frailety, which we all so long as we live here, do carry about us. 1. Cor.
15. 43. 44.

Of both for soul and body shall then be in peace, and honor; and this
honor is manifold: because we shall be manifested to be the friends, sons
and heirs of God, and coheires with Christ, Romans 8. 17. who will commend us
before his heavenly Father and holy Angels, and acknowledge we belong to
himself, Math. 10. 32. Luc. 12. 8. and place us for ever in the house of his
father, the kingdom of heaven, John 14. 23. Math. 25. 34. and make us as it
were fellows with the Angels, the spirits of the righteous, and himself, Heb.
12. 22. that we may be with him for ever, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. when we
Gaud^bi^^^ propter loci amaenitat^^ quam p^ssidebimus, propter ^ucundam
societat^m, cum qua regnabimus, propter corp^ris glorificationem, quam
habebimus. Bonauentura Dieta 9. cap. 50.
shall have comfort of the pleasant place we shall possess, of the joyful
company with whom we shall live, of the glorification of our bodies which then
we shall enjoy.

And concerning our peace, it shall be peace with God, peace with the elect
Angels, peace with men, peace from the Devil, peace from our enemies;
quietness without war, and security from adversaries, and all tears be
wiped from our eyes, Apoc. 21. 4. clothed in white garments, washed in the
blood of the Lamb, and carrying triumphant palms in our hands after many and
great tribulations; Apoc. 7. 14. Then our life shall be nothing else but a
continual Augustinus Epist. 146. Ibi erit aeterna sani^as, sana aeternitis.
secura ^ranquillitus, tranquilla incunditas, incunda foelicitas, foelix
aeternitas, and aeterna f^licitas. Prosper.
Saboath, an endless Halleluiah, and an eternal Iubelye, wherein we shall
enjoy liberty and rest of our souls in the beholding of truth, love of
goodness, assuredness of eternity; sorrow shall be forgotten, joy shall be
perpetual, all grief and mourning removed, Esaias 35. 10. and we satisfied
with the fullness of Gods house, and drink of the rivers of his pleasures,
Psalm 36. 8. For this present life Basilius magnus in Asceticis
is the place and time of labor and combat; that to come of the Crown and
reward in the new heaven and new earth, in which Righteousness shall dwell and
we enjoy those good things which no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can
enter into the heart of man, 1. Corinthians. 2. 9. so Vitae aeternae beatitudo,
omnem sermonem effugit, omnem sensum humanae mentis excedit, desideria and veta
transgreditur: acquiri potest, aestimari no^ potest. August. Trinitate Dei,
lib. 22. cap. 21. Vide loco Apostoli Iosephum Scaligerum in notis ad Eusebium.
great as cannot be measured, so many as cannot be numbered, and so abundant as
cannot be comprehended.

Let us learn to possess onr souls in Patience, Luc. 19. 21. and humbly with
willingness undergo the calamities of this life, in hope of a better
hereafter; so the Apostle, pressed out of measure, passing strength, 2. Corinthians. 1. 8. wiped Gregorius Magnus moral. lib. 8. cap. 8.
away with the assurednes of reward (as with a towell) the fullage of all his
suffered calamities; for the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy
of the glory that shall be revealed unto us, Rom, 8. 18. And in truth there is
no reason which may induce us to look for joy upon earth, it is the valley of
tears, and the place of temptation; here is the race, else where the garland;
here is the battle, in heaven the victory, into which we must enter by many
tribulations, Acts 14. ver. 22. and follow the steps of Christ our Lord and
captain, (who thus dedicated the way, Luc. 24 26.) and be made conformable
unto him. Romans 8. 29. both in bearing the cross and shame, (you shall drink
of my cup) Math. 20. 23. and in the enjoying of glory and honor, Luc. 22. 29.
(I appoint you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed me.) And in a Rharturus,
(...).
resemblance of this, Moses commanded to eat the Passover with sower herbs,
thereby insinuating, that all who will be united with Christ, must endure
sorrow and grief in this world, 3. Tim. 3. 12.

Let us Augustinus tractatu vltimo in Euangelium Iohannis.
earnestly desire another life, and strive with all Use. 2.
endeavor, how we may come from labor to rest, from faith to fruition, from
the way to the country, from action to contemplation, and at the last to that
kingdom, in which is light without darkness, good without evil, Idem in
soliloquijs.
youth never waxing old, life endless; where beauty shall not fade, love
decay, nor health become feeble nor joy decrease; in which no grief shall be
felt, no mourning be heard, no discomfiture seen, no evil feared, all delight
enjoyed, because in it is the possession of all good; which is, to behold the
face of the Lord of hosts. And to conclude with the words of an ancient
Father, Those who are made partakers of this Haymo de variet ate librorum sieve
amore coelestis patriae. cap. 1.
blessed life, do behold the author of their happiness, unsatisfied with the
same: and, assured of that estate, are secure of their continuance in it:
filled with unspeakable joy do with a foruent and vntyred endeavor, serve
their God: so blessed, that they neither desire to be nor can be more blessed,
etc.

If we Bernardus in meditationibuc cap. 16.
love so much this frail and brittle life, wherein we live with great trouble,
and by meat, drink and sleep, Use 3.
hardly satisfy the desires of the flesh: how much more should we take
pleasure in eternal life? where we shall undergo no calamity, in which is
exceeding joy, great happiness, happy liberty, happy blessedness; when men
shall be like the Angels of God, and the righteous shine as the sun in the
kingdom of their Father; how surpassing (think thou) shall the brightness
of the soul be, when the bodies shall be glistering as the Sun? Paul
wished with an earnest desire, to be (...). de natiua huius verbi
significatione, Johannes Luuenclaius, in suis ad Nisseni libellum, de hominis
opificio, annotationibus.
dissolved, and to remove out of the weak and frail house of this mortal
life, that he might dwell for ever with God the eternal creator, and Jesus
Christ his redeemer. Philip. 1. 23. Let us therefore run speedily with the
Apostle unto the goal, and to the Bernardus de ascensione ser. 4. and 6.
reward of our high calling, not by the steps of our body, but the affections,
desires and breathless sighs of our soul. For God the Father does expect us
as his children and heirs, that he might set us over all things: God the Son
expects us as his brethren, and coheires with him, that he might present us
unto the Father (the fruit of his birth and passion:) God the holy Ghost
expects us, who is the love and gracious goodness, by which we were
predestined from all eternity, and (no doubt) will have this benefit
fulfilled, the whole company of heaven attends for us, and desires our
coming. Let us therefore our selves in most earnest manner desire and long for
the same.

The wicked shall be tormented with such punishment, as Another observation.
can neither be Quantitatem and qualitatem poenarum infornalium nulla mortalium
assequi potest cogitatio, nulla exprimere oration. Augustinus sermon. 8. de
tempore, and de speculo peccatoris cap 3. Generality of the punishment of the
wicked.
conceived nor expressed; and in that day of revelation and the just judgment
of God be inflicted upon them: which the Apostle expresses under the terms
of Anger, wrath, tribulation and anguish. Romans 2. 9. 10. intolerable, and
above measure grievous; and that in respect of the generality, diversity,
sharpness, and continuance of the same, and the company among and with whom
they shall be suffered. All which several points may easily be confirmed, by
the testimonies of holy Scripture (the pure fountains of Israel,) without
borrowing any thing from the muddy puddles of humane conceit. Therefore, for
the generality of these punishments, it is of large extent, reaching to the
soul and body, to all and every several parts of the one, and sundry
faculties of the other, when both shall be cast into hell fire. Matthew. 10. 28.
The diversity is Diversity.
manifold; fire unquenchable, the worm never dying, Esaias 66. 24. brimstone,
Apoc. 19. 20. Fletus ob ignem qui non extinguitur, stridor ob vermem, qui non
moritur: fletus ex dolor, stridor ex furore. Vide and Gregorium de poenaru^
diuersitate. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 27. and dialog. lib. 4. Augustinus de Baptis.
contra Donat. cap. 19. Isidor. Hispal. de summo bono lib. 1. cap. 32.
weeping, wayling, gnashing of teeth, Luc. 13. 28. outward darkness, Matthew.
22. 13. and those inflicted according to the proportion of the sin. Therefore
our Savior Christ says, it shall be easier in the day of judgment for Tyrus
and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrha, then for Bethsaida, Corazim and Capernaum
despisers of the Gospel, Matthew. 11. 21. etc. The sharpness inestimable; for
hell, and the insufferable torture of the damned, does without mercy afflict
those, whom it once takes hold of; in so much that men (for the greatness of
the pain) seek death and cannot find it, desires it, but it flees from
them Apoc. 9. 6. And a lively example is De hac paraboli vide plum and
mo^eratum iudicium Augustini lib. 8. de Genesi ad lineram cap. 5. Continuance.
propounded unto us in the person of the rich glutton, who by his gesture and
the effects, shows the exceeding greatness of his intolerable torment; and
is said, to desire but a little refreshing, a drop of water, and cannot obtain
it Luc. 16. 24. The continuance, that is endless; for the punishment though
Gregorius Magnus homilia 6. in Ca(...)cum Salomnus. Paulinus de obitu Celsi.
Dorotheus doctrina 12.
never so great yet would be tolerable, if there were hope to those miserable
wretches of deliverance: but from this they are eternally excluded, Wisdom. 3.
13. the tormenting fire shall be unquenchable, Matthew. 13. 30 the shame
everlasting Dan. 12. 2. the destruction eternal, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. the smoke of
the torment shall ascend for ever Apoc. 14. 11. neither are the Augustinus
sermon. 57.
tormentors, at any time wearyed, neither can the tormented die; for there the
fire does so Tertull. Apologet. cap. 45. Ignis arcani subterraneus thesaurus ad
poenam destinatus.
consume, that it does not waste, so spend that still it is renewed, so destroy
that it preserves; and the life of those miserable ones made immortal, that
their punishment might be endless: and that justly. For man sinned against
the eternal, infinite God, therefore must the punishment of the offense be
eternal and infinite; and he Agitola est haec quaestio Augustini te^poribus,
an iniusium non sit, pro peccatis, quamlibet magnis parmo tempore patratis
poena damnari sempiterna. lib. 21. de Ciuitate Dei, cap. 11. Albertus in
compendio Theologiae lib. 7. cap. 21.
worthy, whose life was dead in sin, that his death should live in torment.
And this is agreeing with the strict justice of God, that they should never be
freed from punishment, whose mind in life was never free from transgression;
neither should they have any end of revenging pain, who, while they might,
would never make an end to provoke God by offending; woe to those, for whom
those hellish torments are prepared; better they had never been borne, then
ever be enwrapped in them. The society and Society.
company with whom they shall be, are the Devil and his Angels Math. 25. 41.
thrust down into hell, delivered to the chains of darkness, reserved to
damnation, 2. Pet. 2. 4. to everlasting chains: Iud. verse. 6. where the
Bernardus in sermonibus.
satyr shall call to his fellow (one to another, devil to devil) smite,
tear, rent, kill, spoil: Esaias 34. 34. where the wicked shall have no rest,
night nor day Apoc. 14. 115. but be always in sorrow and mourning; where Hugo
de anima.
shall be grief intolerable, incomparable stench, dreadful fear, death of
soul and body, without all hope either of pardon or mercy.

This may serve for an effectual and piercing sermon of Use.
repentance, and be as the loud voice of a crier in the wilderness of this
world, sounding into the ears of man, Amend. For the wicked shall go to hell,
and all the nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. Fruitless trees are cut
down, and cast into the fire, Math. 3. 10. Listen therefore, and be attentive
unto the Apostles admonition, Take heed Brethren, least there be at any time
in any of you an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart from the living God:
but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 12. For this life is but a nest
of of straw and clay soon shaken a pieces; many have seen a fair bright
morning, who never beheld the evening (as the Sodomites Genesis 19. 24.) upon many
the Sun has set in the evening, to whom it never appeared rising in the
morning. So was it to the rich glutton in the Gospel Luc. 12. 20. And, for
this cause, let us live soberly, justly and godly in this (...).
now present world, Titus 2. 12. For now is the acceptable time, now is the day
of salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2. here life is either lost or kept; and what shall
it profit a man, to get the whole world and loose his soul? Matthew. 16. 26. And
therefore let us work forth our salvation with fear and trembling. Philip. 2.
12. and be careful, least at any time, our hearts be ouerladen with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, etc. Luc. 21. 34. And
so I close up this point with the holy prayer of the Apostle, The God of peace
sanctify us throughout, that our spirits, and soul and body may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus. 1. Thessal. 5. 23.

But Jesus said, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Hitherto
has been opened some antecedent circumstances of this prayer, now follows
the prayer it self, which Christ made upon the Cross. In which, as in the
rest, nothing is of little respect, nothing to be neglected. Among Pelargus in
7. Christi verba.
men it is usual, that we observe carefully the last words of our friends,
especially such as are uttered upon their death beds, and esteem them either
as Plato in Apologia Socratis, (...).
prophesies of future events, or as testimonies of their nature and faith; for,
that one day of our departure from hence, does as it were give sentence of the
quality of all the days before past. Therefore some called the testaments and
last wills of men, the looking glasses of their conditions. Much more are those
words of Christ remarkable, and worthy deep consideration, uttered then, when
he was ready to undergo and suffer a shameful death, for the reconciliation
of our sins: and are as the swanlike song before his funerals; and that not
only an evident witness of his innocence, patience, and other virtues, and
certain infallible proofs of his tender love toward his Church, and wholesome
instructions how we may die well and happily, but also the perfection of all
those actions, which are propounded unto us for imitation. The Holy Ghost has
vouchsafed to record in Scripture, the last speeches of the Saints, as of
Jacob, Genesis 49. 1. 2. etc. Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. and 32. Joshua, 24. David, 2. Sam.
22. and 23. Zachary the son of Iehoiada 2. Chron. 24. 22. Stephen Act. 7. 6.
In all which though there be something worthy especial note, yet above all,
these passing speeches of Jesus Christ our Savior, Apostle and high priest of
our profession, Heb. 3. 1. are deeply to be engraven in our hearts. To come
then to the doctrine and instruction of this place, nothing is here done
without the will of God; for it is expressly said of the Apostles in their
prayer, after they were cast out of the Temple and sent away, with sharp
threatening, by Annas, Caiphas, the Elders, Scribes and others of the kindred of
the High Priest, that whatsoever he suffered, was before determined by the
counsel of God to be done, Act. 4. 28. Therefore in his great extremities, and
agony in the garden, Math. 26. 39. where he swet blood, and the (...).
clodded drops trickled upon the earth, Luk 22. 44. (an example singular, and
without Parallel:) he acknowledge God for his loving Father.

When we wrestle and struggle with most grievous calamities, Prou. 3. 16. And
the greatness of his love appears thus; for we are now corrected, that
hereafter we might not be condemned, 1. Corinthians. 11. 32. and feel the Rod
of a father to amendment, not the sword of a Judge for punishment. And
therefore the Apostle enformeth us after this fort, my Son despise not the
chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him; for he
scourges every son whom he does acknowledge; if you be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards and not
children. Moreover, we had the fathers of our bodies, which corrected us, and
we gave them reverence, should we not much rather be in subjection unto the
father of spirits, that we might live? for they verily for a few days
chastised us for their own pleasure, but he corrects us for our benefit,
that we might be partaker of his holiness, Heb. 12. 5. 6. 7, etc. And hereby
is brought to pass that many eminent virtues do spring up, and flourish in
us; as Faith, 1. Pet. 1. 5. 6. Prayer: Esaias 26. 16. Patience, Job 1. 21.
Humility, 2. Chron. 32. 26. Obedience, 2. Sam. 15 25. 26. And David (else
where) does freely and from his heart acknowledge, that before he was
afflicted, he went astray, and therefore, good that he was troubled, Psalm,
119, 67. 71. For as the stars shine brightest in the darkest night, and sweet
spices when they are bruised, smell most pleasantly: so true Christian
profession is most apparent under the Cross; Therefore we glory in
tribulation, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 3. For God strikes not, with a purpose
to wound, but heal; and he is not more acceptable, amiable, pleasant, and
familiar, then after he has made trial of us, by some means or other: and
the sun of his favor and love does not at any time shine out more clearly,
then after a showrie, dark and tempestuous day. But of this point more
hereafter.

Let us not then grow out of heart, though we do undergo many calamities, and
suppose that Gods favor is less toward us, when we be hardly handled under
them. For (...), Clemens Alexand.
nearest to God, fullest of sorrows. A Christian is a Christianus Crucianus
Lutherus.
Cross. bearer; and (as one Seneca de prouidentia, ca. 3. 4.
no Christian spoke, in this respect not unchristianly,) fathers and mothers do
not, in one and the same manner. show themselves loving and indulgent to their
children, etc. and God bears a fatherly mind and affection toward good men,
and puts them to labor, sorrow, losses, that so they may gather some
strength, and betryed and hardened, fitted for himself; and this is no cruelty,
but a conflict. Righteous Abel dedicateth the Church in blood, Genesis 4. 8. Great
Elias is weary of his life, and betaketh himself to the wilderness for fear
of Iesabel, 1. King. 19. 4. Gods delight, Josiah falls by the sword, 2.
Chron. 35. 24. John, then whom none was greater among the begotten of women,
Luke 7. 28. he who Chrysologus, sermon. 91.
rejoiced in his mothers womb, and declared Christ before he was borne, 9
murdered in prison; with whose innocent blood, Herod besprinckled his table,
and defiled the feast of his birthday, at the request of a wanton dancing
Minion, Math. 14. 10. Let us then run with patience the race that is set
beforevs, Heb. 12. 1. that when we have finished the course, and gotten the
goal we may obtain the garland of righteousness in the day of reward. 2. Tim.
4. 7

Father forgive them. This is the holy and sacerdotail Polycarp. Lizorous, de
passione.
prayer of Christ our high Priest, when he offered himself the true paschall
Lamb once upon the altar of the Cross; herein showing the incomparable
Theophylactus in locum.
greatness of his meek love; and makes this supplication, and that for his
enemies, as was foretold, Esaias, 53. 12. for his accusers, for the soldiers, by
whose labor he was nailed to the Cross, by whose cruelty he suffered most
sharp pains, by whose violence all the parts of his body were stretched, and
both his hands and feet pierced with nails: yet for all this he breaks not
forth into any impatiency, makes no bitter complaint against them; but now
bethinketh how he may obtain their pardon, and procure the salvation of their
souls. A Anselmus in speculo Euangelici sermonis sieve stimulo amorus, cap. 12.
speech of great patience, of much sweetness, of ineffable love; a speech of
blessing, such a one as has not bin heard from the beginning of the world, and
that for persecutors: He regards not his own wrong, makes no reckoning of
his punishment, seems not to feel the reproaches of his enemies, but shows
compassion upon those, of whom he suffered his passion, heales them of whom
he is wounded, gives life to those of whom he is killed; for he Leo primus
sermon. de passione. c. 19.
that came to forgive the sins of all that do believe, does not exclude from
his indulgence and pardon the outrageous and desperate offense of the Jews.
Mercy prays, that misery might learn to pray. This action of Christ is our
instruction.

We must not only be glad, that the prodigal wandering Observation.
son, finds the way again to his fathers house; but pray also, that such
as be dead in sin, may be quickened to righteousness, Luke 15. 24. For true
love seeks nothing but the glory of God, and the salvation of others. Thus
Abraham often with great humility, and earnestness becomes a suitor for the
unclean Sodomates, Genesis 18. 23. and Moses obtains mercy for the rebellious
Israelites, who rose up against him, Numb. 14. 13. and had rather be blotted
out of the book of life, then that they should die. Exodus 32. 32. Samuel when
he was causlesly removed from his dignity and government, yet thinks it a
sin that he should cease to pray for this people, 1. Sam. 12. 23. And from
h^^e proceeded that patheticall and compassionate complaint of the Prophet, Oh
that my head were a fountain, and mine eyes a river of tears, that I might
bewail day and night the destruction of my people. Ierem. 9. 1. For the Godly
do, and must especially aim at this, that the wicked might leave his ways,
and the unrighteous his imaginations, and the glory of God be advanced among
the sons of men. Aspring which arises upon the top of a mountain, does
easily send down his waters unto the low valleys: and where the love of God is
grafted in any man's heart, it cannot but bud forth and spread his branches, in
showing charity toward his neighbors. And therefore are the precepts
concerning these two, so married together, that there can no divorce be made.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all heart, etc. and thy neighbor as thy
self: Materially, in respect of the matter whereabout this love is occupied;
that as thou bear the tenderest affection toward thine own soul; so
should thou do to his; and finally, for the same end for which thou love
thy self, that is, for the^ obtaining of Grace now, and the enjoying of glory
hereafter, Philip. 1. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc.

The punishment of the Arnoldus Carnotensis de 7. vltimis Christi verbis.
Cross must be both a medicine and example unto us. Christians ought to learn
of Christ to love their enemies, and so much as lies in them procure their
good, and labor to bring them to eternal life. For 1. It is the Hunc
Euangelistae locum eleganter (...) Tertullianus in libropationtiae, non procul
ab initio.
precept of God, Math. 5. 44. 45. Love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, pray for them that hurt and persecute you; be perfect as your heavenly
father is perfect. Where the pattern propounded, (as your heavenly father
etc.) does not signify equality of perfection, but prescribes the Rule of
imitation: (Love) this requires the affection of the heart (pray) the duty of
the tongue (do good) the work of the hand. For in the greatest and deadliest
enemy that can be, 1. there is the same nature common to him and us; 2. the
fault he has committed; 3. the want whereunto he may fall. Nature, because
the work of God, is to be loved; the fault by which he has offended, prayed
for; and his want to be supplied, that so we may be like our heaven y
father. Augustinus homilia 50. de tempore, and homilia incerti Authoris, quae
(...)ter August(...)s, sermon. 47. de sanctus.
Choose then which likes thee best; if thou love thine enemy, thou art not
only the friend but the son of God; but if thou love him not, neither can
thou have God merciful unto thee. 2. We have the example of God, an
effectual motive; for he so loved the world Ioh. 3. 16. (men, weak sinners
and his enemies) that for such he gave his beloved son, Romans 5. 6. and the
son gave himself, an offering and sacrifice of sweet smell unto the father.
Ephesians. 5. 2. And it is observed by some Divines, D minicus a part. (...). 2.
part. 2. sermon. 23
that then he saluted Judas by the name of friend, when he came to betray him,
and execute in deed that wickedness he had conceived in mind. Math. 26. 50.
esteeming him so to be, because he reached unto him that cup, whereof the
father had decreed he should drink: thereby teaching, that we should also
patiently suffer those who doevexe and wrong us, for they do but offer unto us
that cup whereof Christ has begun; and the servant is not above his Master,
Ioh. 15. 20. Suppose a father had a son sick of a frenzy, he rayleth and
strikes at him, who comes to visit and comfort him: he is grieved to see
the extremity of his son, sorroweth for it, and bears all things with
patience, thinking with himself, this is not the forgetfulness of duty in my
son, but the vehemence of his sickness. And even so speak thou, the man
has not done this, or spoken thus and thus, but his malice; love nature:
accuse corruption. But Sermo imeryti Authoris de Martyr bus, qui inter
Augustinianos reperitur de sanctis. De exceptionibus irreconciliabilium
Theodoricus in Analysi Euangelioru^ Dominucalium, diminica 6. Trinitatus, part
2. obseruatione 4. and dominica 22. obser. 7. plenissime exantiquis Patribus,
Augustino precipue and Chrysestoms.
happily thou will say with thy self, he has dealt so evil with me, that I
cannot love him: but consider what have thou done to God: For if thou do
narrowly sift thine own conscience, and search every corner thereof
diligently, thou shall find thy sins, without comparison, greater against
God then any man's are, or can be against thee. 3. The holy Saints Augustinus
sermon 68. de tempere.
treading the steps of their Lord and Savior, have gone before us in this
duty. Blessed Joseph requited not his brethren with answerable unkindness,
who sold him for a slave, but showed unto them all sweet love that possible
could be: kissed every one of them, wept upon their necks, bestowed many
benefits, and was most kind both while their father lived, and after he was
dead Genesis 45. 15. and 50. 21. Faithful Moses passing by the contempts of the
people, when they would have stoned him, mindful of the divine love toward
man, made such vehement intercession for them, that he desired to be blotted
out of the book of life, so they might be saved, Exodus 32. 32. David, a man
enriched with singular endowments of virtues, when Shemei ray led upon him to
the face, gave place to revenge, left that to God, and repressed his own
affection, 2. Sam. 16. 12. Therefore he confidently spoke that which no man
ought to do, but with fear and trembling; if I have rewarded evil to him
that had peace with me, (yea I have not delivered him that vexed me without a
cause) then let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it. Psalm. 7. 4. Stephen
the first Martyr, and a glorious follower of his Master, when he was beaten
down with a shower of stones, prayed for his enemies, and upon bowed knees,
and all his force cried: Lord lay not this to their charge. Act. 7. 60. This
and much more has Saint Idem sermon. de tempore 5. and 68.
Augustine left written unto us. 4. Add Tanlerus Institutionu^ cap. 31. and
rations particulares septem affert, propter quas Christus Iudam proditorem
benign tulit. and 17. quibus nos iucitemur ad inimicos diligendos, quarum
omnium summam, paucis complecti sum conatus.
further, our enemies taken at the worst, and to be more malicious than we
conceive of them, yet they are created according to the image of God, as well
as we. Genesis 1. 27. and they have him also their heavenly Father; Christ, by
taking our humane nature upon him, and suffering a most cruel death, offered
indifferently his love to both. And to conclude, let us thus resolve our selves
humbly to bear our adversaries and those that hate us, as a deserved scourge
of God, sent for the chastising of our sins; and be persuaded that it
proceeds from his love: Those that walk after this rule, peace is upon them,
and mercy etc. Gal. 6. 16.

Father forgive them. O blessed word, Bernardus de passione Dom. super illis
verbis Ioh. 1. 51. Ego sum vitis vera.
beseeming the Word of the heavenly Father: this good teacher practices his
own precept, does that which he commands, and prays not only for his
persecutors, and malicious accusers, but also for his merciless and barbarous
murderers. Let us then consider the form and manner of his prayer. Children
when they will entreat any thing most affectionately, are wont to use the name
Father in their requests, that so calling to remembrance that natural love,
which is ingrafted in the heart of a Parent, they may the more readily obtain
their petition. So our Redeemer, good and merciful, and of great kindness
unto all, though he knew, that his Father did always hear him, yet that he
might make known unto us, with how great an affection he prays for his
enemies, prefixeth this sweet name. As though he should have said; Father, I
do entreat thee by that love, by which we are one, that thou would hear
me for these my crucifiers, and pardon them; acknowledge the love of thy
son, and forgive mine enemies. (Forgive) Gutuarade monte Caluariae cap. 3. 4.
5. 6.
Oscared word, O blessed speech, which was made of the son, uttered from the
tree of the Cross, powered forth amidst many sighs, received of God, washed
with the blood of Christ, and offered with the tears of the Redeemer. For he
says not, (Lord) but (Father) forgive them. The name of Lord is full of fear
and dread, the name of a Father amiable and procuring love; whereof it comes
to pass, that he who is named Father, is bound to answer accordingly, and not
deny the request of the petitioner. Again (Father forgive) absolutely without
condition, not (if thou will, forgive;) asking pardon not according to the
rigor of justice, but of favor and mercy. And thus with greater Rabanus.
earnestness he prays on the Cross, for his crucifiers; then he did in the
garden for himself. For there conditionally, Father, if thou will, let this
Cuppasse from me; here now absolutely (Fongiue them.) Them, (asuite and
supplication not for any one in particular, but generally for all:) for he is
the lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world Ioh. 1. 29. Neither
did he say to that harlot Mary Magdalen, thy sin is forgiven thee, but
sins: Luc. 7. 48. without exception of number, or greatness. (Forgive them)
them? whom? those, by whose hands he was apprehended; of whom he was scourged,
spitted upon, shamefully reproched, crowned with thorns, given gall to drink,
laden with his cross, constrained to carry it, unmercifully stricken through
in his hands and feet with nails, and at the last lifted up on the same, for
these he prays, that they might not incur the wrath of God, and suffer
deserved punishment. For he did not regard that he suffered death by their
means, but for their salvation. He saw among them such who belonged not unto
him, many Augustinus tract. 31. in Iohannem.
who were his; and for their sakes is this request made. A wonderful thing.
The Jews cry, crucify: (...) Chrissost. Homilia (...) Beda in Marcum, apud
Pelargu^ in Questionibus in Matthaei Euangelium.
Christ, forgive; great was their sin, but greater was thy love o Lord. That
blood which they wished might be upon them and their children, the son of God
prays might be for them. When Moses and Aaroa Origenes in Matthaeum.
beheld the wrath of God kindled ready to devour the people, they hasten into
the Tabernacle, the one to pray, the other to sacrifice; and became mediators
between God and them. That which these two did in the wilderness, the same
Christ performed in mount Caluary. For when he saw the elements troubled, the
lights of heaven darkened, the earth tremble, and all creatures in a sort
prepared to be revenged upon the wicked unjustly putting him to death: he
stops their course and withholdeth them from the intended purpose: Father
forgive them.

None Augustinus tractatu 31. in Iohannem.
now can despair to obtain pardon of his sins, Lord of life, are washed
from their sins with the blood which they shed. Of these, three thousand are
converted by one sermon of Peter's, believe and repent, Act. 2. 41. They
Bernardus sermon. 3. super Missus est.
cannot perish for whom the son of God has prayed, that they might not
perish: for whom the Father has given the Son to death, that they might live.
Righteousness and Arnoldus Carnotensis de septem vltimis Christi verbis.
peace are met, and kissed each other, and Christ has made himself a faithful
pledge for us captives; and the Letter Patents for the pardon of the sins of
mankind, is strongly confirmed, written, in the Parchment of Christ crucified,
with his own blood, and until this day, the scale thereof perfect, even the
wound of his side, which he presents always in the sight of his father. And
therefore our Testator has conveyed the perpetual inheritance of this mercy
and grace unto all succeeding posterity, etc. Let us not then utterly be
dismayed, and cast down, seeing we have such an Advocate, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. making intercession for us. Romans 8. 34. and, abiding
for ever, has a Priesthood which cannot pass from one to another; wherefore
he is able perfectly to save them which come unto God by him, etc. Heb. 7. 24.
25. and calls all who labor, be heavy burdened, and groan under the heavy
weight of their sins, and promises rest unto them, Math. 11. 28, De hac
scripturae (...) est Iohannu Gersonu Tractatus.
For there is no malady, which the Almighty Physician can not heal; and
therefore Cain did God wrong, when he said his iniquity was greater then
could be forgiven, Genesis 4. 13. yea, that horrible fact of Judas, (the
superlatiue of all wickedness) when treacherously he betrayed his Lord and
Master, did not Ambrosius de Poenitentia, Nyssenus in ratione contra cos, qui
alios acerbius iudicant, Augustinus in libro 5. Homiliarum, homil. 27.
shut him out of heaven, and from hope of mercy, but his impenitency and
despair after the deed committed, when he became his own executioner, Math.
27. 5. and Act. 1. 18.

Let us strive therefore to be resolved of the love of God toward us; who is
so Fulgentius Epistol. 7. cap. 4.
good and merciful as he is Almighty, and infinite; but neither the goodness
of the Almighty can be overcome, nor the mercy of the infinite brought to an
end. Let us then take words with us, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him:
Take away all our iniquity, and receive us graciously, Osea, 14. 3. For with
him is compassion, Dan. 9. 9. He is the father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort, 2. Corinthians. 1. 3. and of forgiuenesses, Nehem. 9. 17. to whom if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive them and gurge us
from all iniquity, 1. John 1. 9. faithful, Grineus in primam Epistolam Iohannu.
showing himself so to be, when he fulfilleth his promise of pardoning
offenses: just, requiring the Righteousness of Christ, which is made ours by
imputation, and testifies his Justice to be satisfied, etc. For the case
Sidoniue Apollinaris, lib. 4. Epist. 14.
does not so stand with us, before the heavenly Judge, as before an earthly;
for whosoever to this confesses his fault, he is convicted from his own
mouth, and receives the sentence of death: but he that acknowledges his
sin unto God, is cleared and absolved: Therefore let us open unto Christ the
putrified soars and rotten ulcers of our consciences, for he will heal them;
and come with boldness unto the throne of Grace, that we may receive mercy,
and find grace to help in the time of need, Heb. 4. 16. Of this more
hereafter in the third word of Christ; and of it I have spoken in the
Exposition upon Psalm. 130.

For they know not what they do. What is it oh Lord thou Arnoldus Carnotenjis,
de 7. vltimis Christi verbis.
say? thou accusest not these thy cruel adversaries, thou seek not
revenge, thou excusest, thou do extenuate and lessen the greatness of their
conspiracy, and take from the wicked their hereditary burden; thou do not
lay against them their malicious offense, but rather iudgest it to be
pardoned, because thou do affirm it ignorantly committed: but where is that
which before thou spakest; If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should
have had no sin but now they haueseene and hated me and my Father, John 15.
22, They saw indeed and hated thee, and every Saboath read and expounded those
things, which Moses and the ancient Prophets writ of thee. Thou wentest into
their Synagogues, and (as was apparent) did expound the book of Esaias; not as
one receiving understanding from the writings of others, but from the abundance
of the spirit in thy self, Luke 4. 17. How could they be ignorant of thee,
when they themselves asked the question; how thou knew the Scriptures and
never learned them? John 7. 15. And this indeed was a sufficient proof of
thy divine wisdom, that they did not at any time see thee ascholler, learning
the principles of knowledge in their schools, and yet themselves bare witness
with astonishment, of thy skill in the law, and approved the same, Math. 13.
55. And what reason can there be of doubt? what cause of ignorance? when the
blind receive sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the dead arise,
the Gospel is preached to the poor. But neither persuading signs, nor
miraculous works can prevail with such who are obstinate, and will not
understand: and although the Caluinus in Harmonia Euangeliorum. Pareus in 1.
Cor. 2. 8.
authority of the Mediator did remove the weight of this great and heavy
offense, yet the rebellious and stubborn infidelity was not excusable of it
self. But when Christ beheld the people and the soldiers, with a blind and
furious violence to rage against them, though they were not acquitted in respect
of their ignorance, yet he did so pity them, that he became a suitor
entreating for them. In the mean time knowing that God would be the just
revenger of this wickedness, left unto him the judgment against these
desperate transgressors. For it is very probable, that he prayed not
indifferently without exception for all, but for the wretched and seduced
multitude, who were carried away headlong with an inconsiderate zeal, and no
deliberate and purposed malice: And Bernardus de passione Domini, cap. 8.
questionless this prayer of his was heard of the heavenly father, whereby it
came to pass, that many drank of that blood to salvation which before they
had shed.

Among many instructions which from hence might be observed; As first, that
there be two kinds or sorts of sinners; one voluntarily offending against the
check of their own conscience, and of purpose with deliberation, wittingly
and willingly running into all kind of evil, and defiling themselves: another,
transgressing of weakness and frailety, seduced by the devil, and corrupted
by his subtlety; and yet Idem in tractatu de praecepto, and dispensatione.
this not altogether excusable, nor exempted from punishment: for man should
not be ignorant of God his Creator and Redeemer, yet he spares, knowing our
weak condition, Psalm. 103. 14.

Secondly, we may learn by this example of Christ not too far to aggrauate
and augment the offenses of a'ny. For he frames an excuse for his adversaries,
and when he might have given them over to eternal destruction, does diminish
and make less the heinousness of their sin.

Thirdly the Scribes and Pharisees did sit in Moses chair, who wrote of
Christ, the Priests and people were auditors of his heavenly doctrine, and
beholders of his strange miracles, which did testify of him, John, 5. ver. 36.
so that they could not be ignorant who he was: but the saving knowledge of
Christ is an especial gift of God, exceeding all humane apprehension; so that
if he do not vouchsafe to open the eyes of our understanding, we cannot but
continue in darkness; wherefore when Peter had made that true confession, how
Jesus was that Christ the son of God, he is pronounced blessed; for flesh
and blood revealed not this secret unto him, but the father in heaven: Math.
16. 17. For Nicodemus a great Rabbi and doctor in Israel, does very childishly
trifle in the point of Regeneration, John, 3. 4. And the Athenians famous over
the world for their skill in Arts, and all kind of learning, laugh Paul to
scorn, discoursing of eternal life to come, and the mysteries of salvation,
and term him but a babbler, and word-sower. Act. 17 18. 33. None can behold
the sun, but by the benefit of the sun: none can De Deo discendum, quid de
Deo intelligendum, quam non (...) authore ^ognoscitur, (...)a (...) de
Trinitate, lib. 5. and 10.
know God without God enlighten them, 1. Corinthians. 2. 14. Therefore the Scotus
quaestione prima, in prologum sententiarum Pe(...).
conclusion of the School Divines is true, that there is some spiritual
doctrine, supernaturally infused, necessary for a man, so long as he is a
traveler, wandering here upon earth; to which he cannot attain by any humane
understanding; for Godliness is a great and deep Mystery, 1. Timoth. 3. 16. And
for this cause our Savior Christ does give thanks unto the father, both for
the hiding the same from some, and opening it to others; and ascribes them
both to his good pleasure. And that can no way be unrighteous which pleases
the most Righteous, Math. cap. 11. verse 25. But to let these and other the
like pass, one thing shall be sufficient to observe now.

That ignorance is here made the cause of that strange Corinth. 2. 8. and those
not of the common sort, or the barbarous Gentiles, who knew not the true God,
but the chief amongst them, and of most eminent note, who read the Prophesies,
foretelling and describing most plainly the Messiah every Saboath in their
Synagogues, but without understanding, without affection: From hence it
follows, that the ignorance of God and of his will, is the original of all
evil. So the holy Ghost speaks plainly, that after the death of Ioshuah,
the Israelites did evil in the sight of the Lord, served their Baalims, and
forsook the Lord the God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land
of Egypt, etc. and adds the reason of all this, they knew not the Lord, Judge.
2. 10. 11. and Job. 21. 14 makes this the very root from which sprung all
those outrages, which the vndgodly do commit, and that desperately, for they
say unto God, depart from us, we will have none of the knowledge of thy ways.
And Saint Paul laying forth the extreme lewdenesse of the Gentiles who live in
the vanity of their minds, does as it were point the finger at the original,
when he says, having their cogitations darkened, being strangers from the
life of God through the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4. verse 17. 18. And
this is the cause why God has a controversy with the inhabitants of the
earth: there was no mercy, no truth, no knowledge of him: and from hence
proceeded both those great evils of sin amongst men, and dreadful evils of
punishment threatened of GOD, Osea, 4. 2. 3.

Ignorance then is not (as the Romanistes conceit themselves,) the mother of
devotion: for how can that be acceptably worshipped, which is negligently
unknown? you cannot be ignorant what Christ says to the Sadduces, that
therefore they err, because they know not the Scriptures, Math. 22. 29. And
they are liable to a grievous punishment, who know not God, and are not
obedient to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Cardinalis
Cusanus.
Impious then is that saying of Cardinal Cusan, who affirmed that blind
obedience, without any reason leading thereunto, was the most perfect. David, a
man by whom the holy Ghost spoke 2. Sam. 23. 1. was of a far other judgment,
who upon his death bed, bequeathed as a Legacy unto Solomon his son this
admonition: know the God of thy Fathers, serve him with an upright heart, and a
willing mind etc. 1. Chron. 28. 9.

Let us seek to obtain all those good means by which we Use second.
may come to the true knowledge of God; and suffer his word to dwell richly or
plentifully in us in all wisdom, (speculatiue, for the informing of our
judgment, and practice, for the reforming and directing of our conversation,)
Coloss. 3. 16. For the holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation. 2.
Timoth. 3. 16. And amongst the rest, these are the most special. First:
Fervent and humble prayer, for if any want wisdom he must ask it of God
James 1. 5. So did Solomon for himself, Lord give thy servant an understanding
heart, 1. King. 3. 10. Paul for the Ephesians, I bow my knees unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would give you, according to the riches of
his glory, that ye might be strengthened by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that you being rooted and grounded
in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ which passes
understanding, and that ye may be filled with all fullness of God. Ephesians. 3.
15. 16. 17. etc.

The second, Codicem accedens, interlegendum, saepius oculos and cordis, and
corporis, in coelu^ eleua, and Christum breui suspirio, and humili
desperatione, ciusque gratiam implora, ci^^ ipse solus sit, qui operatur
omniae, in omnibus. Lutherus.
diligent reading of the Scriptures. Of this an excellent and singular example
in Daniel, who when he was in Babylon, in the Kings Palace, by reading of
Ieremies Prophecy understood that the seventy years determined for Judah, were
now ended, and then God would take pity of his people, free them from their
grievous bondage, and bring them home again into their own country and former
dwelling; whereupon he poured forth that sweet prayer, the very jewel of the
whole book Dan. 9. 2. And ancient Histories testify, how In vita Fulgentij
cap. 2.
Cyprian and Fulgentius, (two shining lights of the Church in their days,)
were converted unto the Christian profession, the one by reading the
Commentaries of Saint Augustine upon the thirty sixth Psalm, the other of the
Prophet Jonas. And In oratione de funere Patris.
Gregory Nazianzen reports the like of his Father how he became a Christian
and embraced the Gospel.

The third, the often, reverent and Soloecismi auditus apud Ethnicos obseruati.
1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). Et de auditoru^ diuersis generibus veteres
Rabbini in Capitulis Patrum sic statuunt. Quadr^plices conditiones inven^untur
in his, qui sedent coram sapientibus audiendi causa; videlicet, Conditio
spongiae, quae sugendo attrabit omnia: Clepsydrae, quae vna ex part attrabit,
ex altera rursu^ effundit: Sacci secinacei, qui ^ffundit vinum, and colligit
feces: Cribri, quod omittit farina^ and colligis simila^. Paulus Phagius
vi^endus est in scholijs suis ad Capitula Patrum, and in illo, Rabbi Maimonis
interpretati^.
diligent attention unto the public ministry, which God has appointed to
open the eyes of men, that they might be brought from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan unto God, and receive now in earth forgiveness of sins,
hereafter inheritance amongst the Saints, through faith in Christ Jesus Act.
26. 18. For when the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. 1. Corinthians. 1. 21. And therefore the Gospel is called the power of God to
salvation Romans 1. 16. and the immortal seed, by which we are begotten to
Insigne exemplu^ de se concusso, dum Ambrosium concionante^ audir^t, narrat
Aug. confess. lib. 5. c. 13. 14.
eternal life. 1. Pet. 1. 23.

The fourth, the denial of our own reason. For he that will be truly wise
in this world, let him be a fool that he may be wise. 1. Corinthians. 3. 19. For
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God: Romans 8. 7. In which manner of
speech, Saint Paul has a special reference to Moses, sentencing man, that all
the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart are only evil continually. Genesis
6. 5.

In the fifth place, whatsoever thou learnest out of the word, lay it up in the
closet of thine heart, Psalm. 119. 11. Express and show the power thereof in
thy life and deeds. Keep the commandments of the Lord and thou shall live,
and his instructions as the apple of thine eye, bind them upon thy Sicut
species ar matica ailigenter debet masticari, vt virtus, and suauitas ^ius
sentiatur, sic and ma^data. Iuxta legem, animal quod non ruminat est immundum:
sic homo non ruminans in cord praecepta Dei. Seruanda ergo illa in cord
periugem meditationem, in ore per frequentem loquutionem, in manibus per operum
executionem. Nam probatio dilectionis, est exhibitio operationis. Pelargus in
6. cap. Deuteronomij.
fingers, and write them upon the table of thine heart. Prou 7. 2. 3. For the
foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are
his, and let Sanctum nomen sine sanctis moribus est annulus aurous in naribus
suis, and qui Christiani dicuntur, perdunt vim tanti nominis, vitio prauitatis;
vita a professione discordans, abrogat illustris tituli honorem per indignoru^
actuum vilitatem. etc. Saluianuc de prouidentia sieve gubernatione Dei lib. 3.
and 4. Nomen congruat actioni, and actio respondeat nomini, ne sit nomen inane,
and crimen immane. Ambrosius de dignitate Sacerdotum cap. 3. Multa in hanc
sententiam Nissenus (...). Cyprianus de vnitate Ecclesiae. Chrysostom. sermon. 23.
ad populum Antiochenum. Nam multos est vbique in venire, qui Christum simulant,
and Satanalia viuunt; vt non inepte diceret Linacer noster, cum 5. 6. 7. (...).
Matthaet caput percurrisset, (abiecto quaentum potuit totis viribus libro) aut
hoc non fuisse Euangelicum, aut nos non esse Christianos, quorum tam
discrepans, and dissentanea vita esset a professione. Johannes Chechus in
epistola quadam ad Stephanum Episcopum Wintomensem de pronunciatione linguae
Graecae.
every one that calls on the name of Christ depart from iniquity, 2. Timoth.
2. 19. And (to conclude) grow therefore in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be glory now and for evermore. AMEN. 2.
Pet. 3. 18.

THE SECOND WORD a Word of Carfulness, and natural affection.
JOHN, 19. VER. 25. 26. 27. Then stood by the Cross of Jesus, his mother, and
his mothers sister, Mary (the wife) of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen, And when
Jesus saw his mother, and the Disciple standing by, whom he loved, He said
unto his mother; Woman behold thy Son: Then said he to the Disciple, Behold
thy mother: And from that hour, the Disciple took her unto him.
The Analysis or resolution of the words.
THis is put in the second place among the words of Christ, by Divines. And in
it are obseruable three points. The occasion thereof, the form, and the event:
The occasion is the presence of his mother; who is described by her site,
place, and attendants, her site (she stood,) place, (by, or near to the
Cross) attendants, (her sister Mary the wife of Cleophas, Mary Magdalen:) And
each of these are illustrated by their proper attributes; the first, of her
kindred (his mothers sister) and from the state and condition of life (the
Filiam potius fuisse, put at Caluinus, in commentarijs suis ad Iohennis
Euangelium.
wife of (leophas.) The second, from the Country or place of birth: (Mary
Magdalen, for Buntingus in Itinerarij sacri, tom. 2. Magdala ciui. tas, sieve
castrum in occidentale littore maris Galilei sita est, habetque planitiem
magnam quam D. Marcus c 8. Dalmanutham vocat.
Magdala was a Castle or City wherein she was borne.) The form is the
utterance of the words, and that twofold: To his mother, (Woman behold thy
son) to the Disciple, (Behold thy mother:) The Event, (The Disciple took her
home unto him) which obedient action is amplified from the circumstance of
time: (from that hour.)

Then stood by the Cross of Jesus his mother. All four Evangelists make
mention of these women, Math. 27. 55. 56. Marc. 15. 41. Luc. 8. 2. 23. 15. 5.
And S. John in this place. For the remembrance of the righteous shall be
blessed. But there seems to be some opposition or contrariety amongst them,
in the relation of this history: for all the other affirm, that they stood a
far off: John here in manifest terms, that they stood near unto the Cross
of Jesus. This doubt is soon removed: for we may understand it, that
Augustinus de consensu Enangelistarum lib. 3. cap. 21. Daneus in Enangelium
Marci, quaestione 66. Iansenius in Harmonia, cap. 144.
they stood in a distance, truly said both to be near, because they were in
the sight of Jesus: and far off, in respect of the multitude who environed
him with the Centurion and Soldiers: Or we may conceive, that the women
accompanying Christ our Lord, after he had commended his mother to the care of
John the Apostle, began to go back out of the throng of the people; and so
further off, beheld the things which afterward were done. But this is
admirable, that John testifies of these women: for when the Disciples fled,
and made no appearance, forsaking their master: Peter denied, the Priests
scorned him, the Jews were all in an uproar, his pensive and careful mother,
and the beloved Disciple stood near to his Cross, with Mary Cleophas, and
Mary Magdalen, women by nature, Euripides in Medea.
weak and fearful: Arnoldus Carnotenfis de 7. vltimus Christi verbis.
She (which is a thing most grievous) now died, and could not die; and
concealing the inward torment of her grief, showed outwardly another
countenance, so that by it could not be known the crucifying of her soul, and
cross of her spirit: in which she was a living sacrifice well pleasing God,
etc. And here might thou see two Altars set up: one in the Soul of Mary,
the other in the body of Christ: Christ offered his flesh, Mary her spirit; so
that she seemed not to stand near the Bonaventura in stimulo ameris, part, 1.
cap. 3.
Cross, but to be fastened to the Cross with her son. And this was that
sharp two edged sword, whereof Simeon prophesied, that it should pearce
through her soul, Luc. 2. 35. The weak sex of women shows it self here
more manlike, and of better courage then the Apostles.

What we are to gather from hence for instruction, let us hear Saint Paul
teaching us; Brethren you see your calling, how that not many wise men, after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty, and vile things of the world, and things which
are despised has God chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught
things that are. 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27 etc. Lot is laughed to scorn of the
unclean Sodomites, and his admonitions derided; but he is preserved, and has
a place provided for security: then the Lord rayneth upon them In praesenti
quod suturu^ est Deus voluit declarare iudicium, quando super impium populum
Gehennam misit e coelo: Saluianus de gubernatione sieve prouidentia Dei, lib. 1.
Hell out of Heaven, a shower of fire and brimstome: for as their sin was
extraordinary, so likewise i^s the punishment, Genesis 19. 26. David the least
among his brethren, young, and the keeper of his fathers sheep, is made choice
of, to be made king and anointed with the holy oil, though the other were
tall and goodly personages; for God sees not as men, 1. Sam. 16. 7. Who more
contemptible and vile in the eye of the world then Lazarus, full of sores,
extreme poor, a beggar; pined with hunger, cast at the Rich man's door as a
thing abominable, and there could not obtain so much as the crummes from his
Table, to supply his wants? but none more dear beloved of God; for being dead,
he is carried by the hands of Angels into heaven, and placed in Abraham's
bosom: Luc. 16. 23. And they are tried with mockings and reproaches, tortured
upon the rack, and sundry ways afflicted, of whom the world was unworthy,
Heb. 11. 36. The Augustinus in quaestionibus in (...)s and ^ounm Testamentum
quest. 1. and de v rbis Domni, sermon. 59. de Ciuitate Dei. lib. 18. cap. 49. and
lib. 22. cap. 5.
Apostles in number few, ignorant of all liberal sciences, not skillful in
Grammar, not armed with Logical arguments, not furnished with Rhetorical
enchanting persuasions, but poor, rude fishermen, sent to cast the nets of
says into the wide sea of the world, enclosed in it great fishes, learned
Philosophers; a thing of the most wonder, because of the raritie; for seldom
such are caught. Thus Augustine, and so Lib. 1. hist. r. Ecclesiasticae c. 18.
Zomen makes mention how in the Council of Nice, an aged Christian, simple
and unlearned, convinced and brought to the faith a subtle Sophister by the
power of the word, (himself confessing it to be so) who before deluded, and
scorned the Bishops, and shifted off their arguments when they disputed with
him.

Cardinal Lib. de Lcclesia militante 4. cap. 18. nota decima. 5.
Bellarmine, and other Papists, who make temporal felicity and worldly glory a
note of the Church, whereby it may be known, and an inseparable attendant on
the faithful; for first the Scripture is manifestly opposite to this their
opinion, which does every where teach, that the wicked flourish, and spread
forth their green boughs in this life, when the godly are withered with
sorrows, Job, 21. 7 8. and Psalm. 73. 5. etc. And therefore the Prophet
desires that he might talk with God of his judgments, and be informed why
the way of the wicked does prosper, and why all they are in wealth, that
rebelliously transgress, etc. Ierem. 12. 1. Abacuc. 1. v. 3. expostulateth
this case with the Lord. And it is the Apostles constant resolution; that all
who will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer afflictions, 2. Tim. 3. 12.
yea our Savior Christ tells his Church what they are to look for in the
world, even many tribulations, John, 16. 33.

Church hereupon earth is a Tertullianus, Apologet. cap. 1.
pilgrim and stranger, and therefore finds but hard entertainment, (knowing
that no better can be looked for amongst enemies,) poor and subject to all
kind of wrongs, and injuries: and therefore is compared to a dove, dwelling in
the rocks: Cant. 2. 14. to a ship tossed with the raging waves of the sea, but
not overwhelmed; to a house builded upon a rock, against which the floods
beat, the storms fall with violence, but cannot be overthrown. Math. 7. 25.
Also she is said to fly into the wilderness, and there hide her self for a
time, and utterly to loose her beauty Apoc. 12. 14 And Aduersus Auxentium.
Saint Hillaris tells us, that we must seek her rather lying in caves and dens
(thereby to avoid the tempest of persecutions,) then shining in high places
above others; so that if there were not another life besides this, then should
we Christians, be more miserable than all the rest: 1. Corinthians. 15. 19.

This argument of Bellarmine is the very same and all one Use 3.
with that which the Pagans used against the ancient Christians; and by this
reason, the same note should agree as well to the heathenish as to the
Christian Church. For Lib. 10. epist. 54. cui respondet Ambrosius epist. duabus
30. and 31. lib. 5. Et Prudentius Christianus poeta duobus libris.
Symachus alleged none other whereby to persuade Theodosius the Emperor, that
he should continue in the old religion of the Romans then this, how their
civil estate and commonwealth, was most abundant in riches, and large in
dominions, when they worshipped Jupiter, Apollo and their other Gods. Wherefore
let us serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him in trembling, Psalm. 2.
11. 12. and both in prosperity and adversity continue steadfast in says and
be thankful, Job 1. 21. For as well evil as good proceed from the mouth of
God, Lament. 3. 38. and both are his gifts; the one Augustinus epist ad
Rusticit and Foelicitatem.
comforting, the other chastising; neither ought we to have our eyes too much
dazeled with the glittering of worldly prosperity, (which we see the
unrighteous do for the most part enjoy) nor account adversity absolutely and
without Augustinus de ciuitate Dei lib. 1. cap. 23. Neminem moueat magis
impiorum faelicitas, quam mouere debe, principatus Diaeboli in mundo. P^^rus de
la Caualleria in tractatu qui insoribitur Zelus Christi.
exception evil, wherewith the Saints and dear children of God are enwrapped.
For it has pleased the divine providence to provide hereafter good things for
the righteous, which the wicked shall never enjoy: and evil for the wicked,
wherewith the righteous shall not be tormented. But for these outward and
temporal goods and evils, God would have them indifferently common to both,
least we should too greedily desire the one, which the wicked do obtain: or
over basely seek to avoid the other, which falls in the lot of the most
These reasons, and more of the same sort has that worthy professor of
Divinity Doctor Whitakers gathered against Bellarmine.
holy.

Then stood by the Cross of Jesus, his mother and his mothers sister, Mary
(the wife) of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen. Controuersia de Ecclesiae notis,
quaestione 5. cap. 16.
This narration, does greatly set forth and manifest the grieuousnesse of
Christ's death; that he suffered so terrible and shameful a punishment, in the
sight and beholding of his dear Mother, and beloved friends: who all (out of
qnestion) did exceedingly sorrow at the same, and with melting hearts followed
him. But so it must be, that no kind of extremity should be wanting in his
death, who was to be the sacrifice for the sins of the world. And to this end
that he might sanctify unto those who are his, all yea even the most grievous
sufferings. These women accompanied him, glorious in working miracles, and
teaching with the astonishment of the hearers: and now forsake him not,
apprehended, condemned, whipped, crucified. Also great multitudes of people,
and women of Jerusalem, came forth of the City, to see what should be done,
which bewailed and lamented him: Luc. 23. 27.

As God in the creation has engrafted in the minds of he not disallo^^, or
condemn them in any, so long as they do abide and are confined within their
bounds and limits. And therefore the Apostle commands, that we should weep
with them that weep, and rejoice with them that Affici nos dolor vult Pater
coelestis, and in nostris and proximorum afflictionibus, quo in nostris
patientes, in alienis benigni ergae fratres ac misericordes simus; In prosperis
gaudio, and laetitia exultare, quae indicat nos, nec invidere aliorum
faelicitati, nec insolentes esse.
rejoice Romans 12. 15. which precept he gives in respect of the double
condition of man, prosperous, and adverse; and urges the performance thereof,
by an argument taken from comparison of the like, (that sympathy, and mutual
compassion, which is between the members one toward another, of the same
natural body.) 1. Corinthians. 12. 25. 26. For if the head do ache, all the rest
of the parts do suffer with it; yea if the Chrysostomus in 12. caput 1. epist.
ad Cor.
foot be pricked with a throne, the grief is spread over the whole body: the
head boweth it self down, the eyes look carefully where the hurt is, the
hand makes haste to pulle it out, the tongue asks for a medecin to apply
unto it, and to ease the pain. The same affection and fellow-feeling ought
thereto be, between the members of one and the same mystical body, the Church.
For first we have all one beginning, and are brethren of one Tertull.
Apologes. cap. 19. Minutius Faelix in Octauio.
Father, (the heavenly God, the earthly Adam,) all framed of the same clay,
whereof we are named the sons of Adam: with whom the world was replenished,
Deuteronomy. 32. 8. and (that which is greater than this) so many as do believe in
Christ, have drunk of one spirit of Tertull. Apolog. cap. 39.
sanctification, and have breathed from out of one womb of the same ignorance
unto one light of truth. 1. Corinthians. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 5. 6.

Secondly, there is in all a conformity and participation, of the same nature;
from which ground arises that exhortation of the Prophet, Break thy bread
unto the hungry, bring y Quod cuiquis contigit, cuiui^ potest contingere. Cum
mimu^ recitaret hac verba, Julius Caesar largas fudit lachrymas, and
quaerentibus causam respondit, Ego casum Po^peij deploro, and meam fortunam
metu^. Plutarchus in vitae Caesaris. Vide de simili Socratis exemplo, and huius
generis alijs apud Pezeliu^, in explicatione Examinis Theologici Philippi
Melansthonis part 2. loco de causis calamitatum.
the wandering poor into thy house, when thou see him naked, cloth him, and
turn not thy face from thine own flesh: Esaias 58. 7. In which Marlarocus^^
locu^ Prophetae.
speech there is a certain inward and piercing power; as though he should say,
hide not thine eyes from him, who is one of thy own members, (for under the
name of flesh is comprehended all mankind) none whereof we can look upon, but
in him behold our own image, which to despise and neglect, is the highest
degree of cruelty. etc.

Thirdly, such is our condition that whatsoever has befallen any one, the same
may befall every one; we are all subject to the same darts, wherewith both
soul and body are wounded; wherefore Isocasius, when he was convented before
Posaeus a governor of Constantinople, and brought bound with his hands behind
him, at his back, unto the bar, falsely accused, that he had of a Christian
turned Pagan, answered him well, (asking disdainefully, if he knew in what
plight he now was:) and said: he knew it well, neither thought it strange,
that being a man, he was fallen into those calamities which are incident to
Cedrenus.
men. And De resurrectione Domini sermon. 2.
Bernard reports of a certain aged holy man, who when he heard that any of
his brethren, had sinned, wept bitterly: saying, he has fallen to day, and I
may fall to morrow; for even the most perfect do offend sometimes and
grievously, as Lot by drunkenness and incest, and is buried in his Lutherus in
(...) 19 cap. Genesis
repentant tears, no mention afterward made of him: or how he dyed etc. Genesis
19. 38. Moses sinned by distrust, at the waters of strife, who before through
faith divided the red Sea: Number. 20. 12. Aaron the anointed Priest of God, by
Idolatry, Exodus 32. 6. Religious Ezecinas by pride and unthankfulness, 2.
Chron. 32. 25. and not to insist upon more particulars, there is no man that
sins not, as Solomon (without exception of any) confesses: 1. King 8. 46.
Let us then listen to the wholesome admonition of the Apostle, Brethren if any
man be prevented, or suddenly taken in any offense, you that are spiritual
restore such an one with the spirit of mecknesse, considering thy self least
(...) numeri diligent^r notand. est, in qua est specialis applicatio, vt quis^
quan^^scun^ donis instructus sit, se excutiat, and qui stat videat ne cadat;
nam iuoeta versiculum antiquum, Aut sumus, aut ^u^mus, aut possumus esse quod
(...) est. Vale si non dixie, (d^m ait, intendens teipsum ne and tu tentoris)
sias tanquam ille, vt illum lucrifacias, non (...) vt ipsum delictum fallaciter
ageret, aut se id habere sim daret, sed vt in alterius delict^, quid etiam sibi
accidere possit attenderet; atque alteri, tanquam sibi, ab altero vellet,
misericorditer subveuere^; hoc est non men^^entis (...), Iod compatientis
affectu. Augustinus in Epistola ad Hieronymum.
thou also be tempted. Gal. 6. 1. 2.

Use. Far therefore be from us that Adamantyne sencelesnesse (as Plutarchus.
Plutarch calls it,) of the Stoics, and sottish benumming of the
Anabaptists. For the heathen themselves have passed the sentence against their
own Philosophers, when they compare them to ships, which have Good fortune
written upon the Stern, and yet nevertheless, as well as others, stick fast
in the shelues of sand, are battered against the rocks, torn with the rage of
the winds and tempest, and oftentimes make shipwreck amongst the raging waves
of the sea. And all this not without cause. For affections in men have their
manifest profit, and evil would it go with us, if nature were wholly deprived
of them. For Johannes Spinaeus de tranquillitate animi lib. 5. Melanthon in
Epi^om, moralis philosophiae.
they are placed of God in man, as apt means of conueyance for the soul,
whereby she might e Lactantius lib. 6. cap. 14. 15. 16. 17. Melanthon de anima.
Job. Ludouicus Viu^s de anima lib. 3. Danaeus in Ethica Christiana lib. 1. cap.
23.
more easily attain to that end, whereunto reason directs etc. As for
example, That grief which stingeth sharply, stirs us up to be earnest
suitors both for our selves and others; as in the Cananitish woman, whose
daughter was miserably vexed of a devil, Math. 15. 25. Love is an effectual
means which provoke and pricketh forward to well doing, necessary for the
preservation of mankind. Anger kindles the mind to take due punishment of
deserving offenses; and so of the rest. Wherefore these passions are to be
Theophrasius de historia pla^tarum lib. 2. cap. 3. and de causis plantarum lib.
3. cap. 23. Job. Cost^us de stirpium natura lib. 1. cap. 37. 38. 39. Perstium
pomu^ in Perside veneni vice fungitur: in Italia tamen mutato solo salubre est,
and cibus innocens. Col^milla de cultu hortoru^ lib. 10.
ordered and guided by judgment and the advice of reason, not utterly rooted
out. But herein we are to follow the practice of Horse-riders, who when they
will break young colts, do not deprive them of their swiftnes and stomach,
but so moderate and temper them, as they may become fit for the sadle; or of
Husbandmen, who do not pull up wild plants by the roots, but with diligent
manuring, insition, and removing into another soil, change their f quality.
Even so by industry, and the blessing of God, these motions may be restrained
and their fierceness bridled. Now for this purpose, among many other, these
rules be most especial. First, because sense is moved by the outward offered
object, before either the understanding does conceive, or the will desire it,
(as Eua sees the forbidden fruit, that it is beautiful to the eye, then after
takes and eats. Genesis 3. 6. the wedge of gold and the costly Babylonian
garment glistereth in Achans sight, before he puts forth his hand to take
and hide it in his tent, Joshua, 7 21.) therefore we must with humble and
earnest prayer, entreat God, that he would turn away our eyes that they
behold not vanity, Psalm. 119. 37. but that which is right; and direct our
eye-liddes the way before him, Proverb. 4. 25.

Secondly, as a man finds himself most inclinable to these passions, so let
him least trust them, (either in making choice, or judging any thing) except
they be calmed and appeased. For when Caine gives place to hatred and anger,
he becomes a mur^^erer, Genesis 4. 4. 5. And the Devils Basilius Magnus homilia
de inuidia.
scholar learneth of him those two conjoined sins, (hate and murder) which
Saint Paul has yoked together, Romans 1. 29. who else where does give this most
holy caveat, be angry but sin not, neither let the Sun (...)
go down upon your wrath, and give not place unto the Devil, h Hotuilia 14
in cap. 4. Epist^ ad Ephesios. vt sicut adueniens nox, maximum d^e^ aestu^,
sole occumbente extinguit: sic etiam iniquum irae aestum deponamus vna cum
vestimentis cum inous cubitum. Zanchius in 4. ad Ephesios.
Ephesians. 4. 26. 27. It has risen (says that goulden Doctor Chrysostom) unto us
by the goodness of God, let it not go down upon us as unworthy the same: And
that old adversary of ours, seeks nothing but to bring us to revenge, and
from one sin to another, from the less to the greater. That counsel which
Athenodorus Apud Plutarchum in problematibus Romany.
gave unto Julius Caesar, is not to be rejected, who being desired (when he
made suit to retire himself, and to leave the Court in respect of his years)
to give him some instruction worthy such a Philosopher for a remembrance, only
advised, that before he either did or spoke any thing, he should reckon over in
his mind, the names of all the letters in the Greek Alphabet: for he knew
right well how by nature, he was cholerike, inclined to anger and hastiness:
and that no better medicine could be for to abate this humor, and cure this
disease, then delay. If a man will as it were, take truce with himself, before
he break forth into open violence, or be withheld by another, the first heat
and fury of the affection, will wax cold and faint, and that mist which
darkened his mind, will either settle or be dispersed. And hereof it was, that
those batchets which were carried before the Magistrates of Rome (ensigns of
their authority) be bound about with rods, that Idem in problematibus Romans
questione 82. R^sinus, Antiquitateum Romanarum, lib. 2. cap. 3.
when punishment was to be taken of any, in the mean time while they were
unloosing, there might be space to bethink themselves, lest they should
command that thing to be done upon the sudden, whereof they might afterward
repent, either too late, or in vain. And upon this occasion, after the
massacre of Historiae Tripartit. lib. 9. c. 50. Theodoret^^ lib. 5. cap. 18.
Augustinus de ciuitate Dei, l. 5. cap. 7.
Thessalonica, wherein were killed seven thousand, as well strangers, as
inhabitants, without difference, and such as were innocent, etc. Ambrose
obtained of Theodosius the Emperor, author thereof, that between the time of
sentence passed upon the offenders, and execution, should be thirty days
respite: that so any error committed, might be recalled; and this was enacted
for a perpetual law, yet Iustinianus in Codice, lib. 9. tit. 47. de poeni^^
lege si vindicari.
extant: Wherefore in the heat of passion, nothing is to be determined; for
the understanding being troubled; is not able to petceiue that, which it could
hardly do, though quiet: for we cannot behold Gregorius magnus moral. lib. 5.
cap. 33.
the Sun mantled over with clouds, nor any image in disturbed waters; but as
those which use Spectacles, (whereby things seem greater then in truth they
are) correct the error of the sense by judgment; so must we be careful not to
let loose the reins to affections, and licentiously do what they suggest, for
so may we soon be wrested from that which is just; as Nebuchadnetzar growing
full of rage, (insomuch that the form of his visage was Nullum est animal tam
horrendum, tam perniciosum, vt non appareat in illo si ira inuasit nouaeferi.
tatis accessio: Pauhasius in Commentarijs ad Claudianum de rapta Pro.
changed) gave commandment to have the fiery furnace seven times more heated
then it was before, and Shidracke, Mesach and Abednego to be cast into the same
by the most valiant men in his Army, because they would not fall down before
the golden Idol, he had made, Dan. 3. 19. And David (otherwise a holy man)
violently transported by a sudden motion, condemns Mephibosheth, and
bestows all his goods upon subtle and insinuating Siba, 2. Sam. 16. 4.

Thirdly, let us not yield too much to our selves, especially, in those things,
unto which either by the Ludouicus Granatensis in locu.
temperature of our body we are inclinable, or drawn by some present offered
occasion. For as those who are sick of an ague, do always suspect their
thirst, because they know it rather proceeds from the force of the disease,
then any necessity: even so they who boil in their passions, should always
be suspicious, whatsoever is suggested by them. For if they obey, it cannot
be, but they must needs incur great and manifold inconveniences: wherefore
the fittest means to repress and keep them under, is this, to be earnest
with God by humble and fervent prayer, that he would bridle and restrain them
by the grace of his spirit. For the earth cold and dry by nature, unapt to
bring forth any thing, yet being watered with the sweet dewes, and fructifying
showers of heaven, is by the moisture of another element made fertile; so
borrows that else where, which it has not of it self; In like manner should
every one endeavor to amend by grace his barren nature, infected with
corruption of sin; that it may bring forth fruit pleasing and acceptable unto
God; This was David's petition; Create in me a new heart O God, and renew a
right spirit within me.

Then stood by the Cross of Jesus, the mother of Jesus, and his mothers
sister, Mary the wise of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen. There is in these words
an effectual power, to wound, even the most stony, and hard flintie heart. For
first, in miseries and distresses, the presence of friends is, and should be,
an especial comfort to the afflicted: now it is far otherwise; here nothing
but sorrow; his mother stands by the Cross almost dead, Tanlerus in
meditationibus vitae Jesus. cap. 30. and 44.
yet not touched with death, and the eyes of her son beholding her, does
increase his sorrow, hanging now upon the Cross, and laden with contumelies:
Secondly, the place it self, appointed for the execution of the worst sort of
men, and greatest offenders: Thirdly, the kind of death most dreadful and
cursed, do all increase the grief: for what has the holy virgin Ferns in
tractatu de passione Domini, part. 4.
to do with the Cross? what participation is there, between the undefiled
Temple of God, and this contemptible place? But I withdraw my hand from
picturing of this woeful mourning: I take not upon me to express the
sharpness of this heavy grief, neither do I persuade my self, that I can be
able in words to express the tears, and perplexed anguish of this blessed
virgin; and therefore leave it to the estimate and apprehension of the Reader,
as Valerius Maximus, lib. 8 cap. 12.
Tymanthes sometime did (if I may join in comparison profane Examples with
divine) Agamemnons sorrow; present when his daughter was to be sacrificed: for
because he could not draw with his pensill, the sadness of his countenance,
such as it then was, and represent in diversity of colors, the sundry passions
and changes appearing in the same, covered it over with a veil: But the holier
the virgin, the more sorrowful, and such a virgin, suffered so great
affliction.

God (many of whose Judgments are secret, none unjust:) does oftentimes cast
his dearest children into the deepest Sea of tribulation. So Christ Jesus the
only son by nature, bare the Cross of shame, before he ware the Crown of
glory, Luc. 24. 26. and the sons by Adoption, must look for no other order
to be kept with them. 2. Timoth. 3. 12. The Israelites come to the Land of
Promise, flowing with milk and honey, by the red sea, (between the waters
lying in heaps on both sides) not without fear; and through the vaste and
terrible wilderness. And by many tribulations must all Christians enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, Act. 14. 22. Of this before in the former word, etc.

lesson of Humility, and a restraint of rash judgment, and hasty censure, that
we do not over sharply sentence those, or account them for wicked ones, and
reprobate, whom we see to be exercised with hard trials, and sundry sorts of
afflictions. Thus did the Jews sometimes err in their judgment of Christ,
Esaias. 53. 4. and (if we may ioyn the servant with his Lord) the like
peremptory doom did Jobs friends pronounce upon him and his children) whose
lamentable distress, and manifold calamities they did behold, Job. 8. 4. But
the case in truth stands far otherwise. For the Cross is the precious
stone enclosed in that ring wherewith Christ weddeth his Church; and therefore
if any will be his Disciple, he leaves this admonitory rule, to deny
himself, take up his Cross and follow him: Math. 16. 24. For the life of a
Christian in this world consists in the denial of himself, the taking up of
the Cross, and imitation of the virtues of Christ; that renouncing his own
judgment and will, resigneth himself wholly over unto him, and does not
bear, but take up the Cross and embrace it, and so follow the Lord Jesus, who
has suffered whatsoever we can snffer. And at the last all things shall turn
to the best, and therefore do we rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5. 3. For
blessed is the man who is tempted, because when he is tried, he shall receive
the crown of life which God has promised to all those whom he loves, James,
1. 12.

When Jesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved. Christ now being
in great extremity and perplexity is in this very hour not careless of his
mother; he has no part free, but his eyes and his tongue, with this he lovingly
speaks unto her, with those, he tenderly beholds her; that so he might show
how dear she was unto him, how deeply she was engraven in his heart. A strange
miracle, a lamentable conflict of the eyes. His eyes at the same time did
hasten to be closed up in death, yet did turn themselves toward his mother.
The power of death did enforce the^ to fail, the greatness of love opened
them to behold her: and not only so, but gives comfort with his speech, and
provides for her future estate: and thus shows himself obedient to his
heavenly father, in the mean time not neglecting or making light account of
the performance of the duty of humane love unto his earthly mother.

That precept, that we Augustinus tractatu 119. in Iohannis (...).
should honor our parents, and Arnoldus Carnot^^sis de (...). vltimis Christi
verbis.
which Christ our Savior gave, he does himself practice. And though the
speech be short in words, yet therein is included a dutiful affection, and
singular love expressed. Wherefore since he has consecrated this duty by his
own (...) Theophilactus.
example, for the better understanding thereof two points (but briefly) are to
be discussed: The one, wherein this duty does consist; the other, by what
equity we are bound to the performance thereof. For the first, Jesus the son
of Syrach does unfold the force and power of this word (honor) cap. 3. And
therein are comprehended 1. Filij in parents ^ria particularia peccata
numerantur a Summistis, 1. irreu^rentia, 2. i^obedientia, 3. omissio
subuentionis. Caieta(...) in summa.
Reverence, that is, an acknowledgement of dignity and superior power, and
that in the mind, body, action, Diogenes quendam de patre male loque^tem
castigans, Quid inquit de eo male loqueris, absque quo, si non fuisset, tu non
modo loqui non potuisses, sed nem natura quidem r^rum fuisses. Epictotus in
Enchiridio. cap. 37.
speech, and gesture; (for oftentimes piety is wronged by an outward
countenance.) So David when he speaks unto Saul his father in law, and
professed enemy, styles him with those submisse terms, my Lord and King, 1.
Sam. 26. 17. and Solomon when Bath-shebae his mother comes unto him, rises
up from his Royal throne, goes to meet her, boweth down to the ground, and
causes her to be placed in a seat at his right hand, 1. Kin. 2. 19. Vide
Agellium noctium Articarum, lib. 2. cap. 2. and Plutuorim in eodem
dissertationem. (...). Timocles.
.

2. Obedience: the performance and execution of their parents commandments, so
far forth as lies in them, and Gods glory may be preserved safe and unstained.
Thus Jacob rests himself in the counsel of Rebecca his mother, and yields
to her admonition: Genesis 27. 14. The Rhecabites are commended by the mouth of
God himself, who abstained from drinking of wine and dwelt in Tabernacles,
because their father Ionadab had so enioined the^, Ie. 25. 19. and in truth
this is one of the chief virtues that can be found among men, b (...) Menander.
and the very sinews and preservation of all societies. Therefore Paul does
expound the word (honor) by (...).
obedience, and subjection, Ephesians. 6. 1. Coloss, 3. 20.

3 Gratitude, the supply of their wants, if (...). Menander. Harmenopulus in
Promptuario miris. lib. 3. titulo 5.. 83. Insignis locus est apud Ambrosium, in
Luc. Euangelium, l. 8. cap. 18. Illud obs. quid habes, quibus debes, quantum
debes, etc.
they stand in need of our goods, labor and counsel. When the famine
prevailed in Palestina, Joseph sends for his father into Egypt, receives him
honorably, and provides him and his family of a fit and convenient place of
habitation, and feeds them most plentifully, Genesis 45. 11. And among the very
heathen, who are (as the apostle speaks) without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.
12. this part of honor was both wondered at, and rewarded. Plinius historiae
naturalis. lib. 7. cap. 36. sanguinis ingenui mulierem appellat Valeri us
Maximus, l. 4. cap. 4. apud que^ multa ei^sdem generis exempla inuenies, and
apud Fulgosium illius imitatorem.
For a young woman of the meanest rank and sort of people, fed her mother
condemned to die by hunger, with the milk of her breasts, when she might have
access unto the prison: and was diligently searched by the Iayler that she
should bring no meat; but afterward perceiving what she had done, the mothers
life was given to the daughter, the daughter honored for her care, both
nourished of the common allowance, and the prison converted into a temple: Nunc
Sancti Seruatoris de pictate. Fabricius in Roma sua lib. 1. (...) Regione vrbis
11. quae Circus Maximus appellabatur. Sextus Rufus P. victor.
The history of Trogus Pompeius apud Iustinum in Epitome, lib 2.
Cymon the Athenian is well known, who willingly offered himself to be bound
in fetters, and lie in that prison, into which his father was cast for robbing
the common treasury; that so he might redeem his body, being there dead, to
decent burial. For children if they undergo any trouble for their Sophocles
in Oedipo Coloueo. (...). Antiphanes.
parents, must not once make mention thereof, because they can never do too
much for them, for whom they cannot do enough; as Ismene in the tragedy
speaks to his sister Antigone, commending unto her the care of their father
Oedipus, while he was absent.

For the second general point, which is the equity, and right, whereby we are
obliged to the performance of this office, it is threefold. Daneus Ethices
Christianae lib. 2. cap. 12. Zepporus in legum Mosaicarum forensium
Explicationem, lib. 3. cap. 12.
.

First theological, or divine; for God himself has commanded it, and
therefore simply just, because agreeing to his will. Ephesians. 6. 1. 2. For of him
is named all the family in heaven and in earth Ephesians. 3. 15. and gives this
precept Deuteronomy. 15. 16. Prou. 3. 15. and has confirmed this bond, that it should
ever stand firm and inviolable, and approved of the duty that is performed. It
is a very memorable history, and recorded by many writers, of two brethren;
who when the hill Aristoteles de mundo. Strabo lib. 6. Geographiae. Pausanias
in Phoeicis. Valerius Max. Solinus cap. 11. Claudimus Epigrammate 35. Ausonius
de claris vrbibus. Cornelius Seuerus in Aetna. Quod poema Virgilio olim
ascriptum fuit. and vide in illud Iosephi Scaligeri comment.
Aetna was set on fire, and cast out abundant flames like to a river, carried
out their weak and aged parents upon their shoulders, the flame dividing it
self in this holy action, (God approving the deed,) to make a passage, and
after returned to his former course; in remembrance of which action, posterity
honored the place where they laid down their religious burden, with this
title: Campus piorum, the field of the godly.

The second, Political; for unless children may be kept under the awefull
fear and government of their parents, of necessity must follow the confusion
of all things, orders, and magistracy. And therefore by the law of every
nation, it is established, that Parents should be honored, and that they might
have an action of ingratitude against their undutiful children. For the
Xenophon de dictis and factis Socratis. Imo and lege Dei confirmatur. Deuteronomy. 21.
18.
Athenians gave authority to disinherite such; and the Dionysius
Halicarnasseus l. 2.
Romans granted full power, by all sharp means to repress and keep under
the stubbornness and undutifulness of their children, if by gentle and mild
admonitions they could not be reclaimed. And therefore it was lawful to cast
them into prison, to scourge them, to send them fettered with chains into the
field unto rural labors, that they might cast them off and deprive them of
that right which otherwise did belong unto them; Quinti(...)us lib. 7.
In(...)n^ Oratoriaru^.
and, if they did not ransom their father taken prisoner by the enemy,
Tiraquellus de legibus connubialibus part. 2. gl^ss. 8. numero. 284.
seclude them from the right of succession; as we read of Jacob the Patriarch,
who because of his filthy and unclean act, took from Ruben the kingdom, the
priesthood, and the double portion, which by the right of his birth, as the
eldest son, were his. Genesis 49. 22. 23.

The third natural; for the creatures who want reason, do not want this
dutiful respect. The Solinus Polyhistor. cap. 53. Philo in Ia^bis. Basilius
Magn. Hexamer. homilia 8. Ambros. H^xam^ri lib. 5. c. 16. Cassiodorus variarum
lib. 2. epist. 14. Ioachimus Camerarius emblematu^ Centuria 3. Emblem. 40.
Alciatus in Emblematibus. (...) apud Aristophane^ in Au^bus. Oru^ Apollo
appollat Cucupham cap. 51. and 58. Pierius Hieroglyphic^^ l. 17.
Storkes nourish their aged dammes; yea, look how much time they bestowed in
feeding them, so much do the young ones employ again for their benefit: and
cover and keep warm their naked bodies wanting feathers; and unable to lift
themselves up, with the benefit of their wings, do help them to fly again.
That is not grievous which is due, nor burdensome which is natures debt; and
this no written law enforces, but that which is ingrafted, teaches; and
thereof, among the Latins is called Pia auis, the merciful, or just and honest
bird, and from his name is taken (...).
that word which signifies a thankful requital of benefits received; and
among the sacred Hyroglyphickes of the Egyptians, his picture carries with it
the signification of piety: and is to be seen in the coin of Adrian the
Emperor, with this added inscription, Augustus, benignity and gentleness. A
great example for imitation for men, who have received so many benefits from
their parents; Conradus Hotesbachius in Christianae Iurisprudentiae Epitome.
being by generation; life by nourishment; instruction and doctrine by good
education. And therefore it is provided by the civil and imperial laws, that
children should be bound to supply the necessity and wants of their parents,
and provide food and nourishment for them; who might, in the time of famine
and extreme want, sell them for their relief; for there is nothing more just
and agreeing with reason, then that children should recompense their kindred;
for that is a thing honest and acceptable before God. 1. Timoth. 5. 4.

First then, unkindness and disobedience toward parents are Use. 1.
sins of the highest degree, and signs of a reprobate mind; in which, the
reserved notions of justice, ingrafted of God, and engraven in the mind of man
at the day of his creation, are choked, and conscience (a particular testimony
which the mind of every one bears unto himself, and witnesses either the
good or evil which is in their actions, howsoever secret and unknown to
others) is corrupted and broken. Yet these are the poysonfull affections of
this doting and dying age of the world, in the which the Apostle foretold
(among the rest) that men should be disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, unnatural, 2. Timoth. 3. 2. 3. and are reckoned among those sins,
whereof the principals and accessaries are indifferently liable to the wrath
and vengance of God, Romans 1. 30. And not without just desert, because they
break the bond of all civil society, and procure just punishment. For the
first commandment with promise, is, to honor Father and Mother Ephesians. 6. 2.
that they may prolong and lengthen their days upon earth; where In expositione
Decal^gi. Sic Chaldaeus Paraphrastes, and in suis ad eum annotationibus Paulus
Phagius.
Aben Ezra observes, that the word used is of the active form; for by them
God does convey his blessings to posterity, infuseth a certain secret and
powerful virtue into their prayers: and bestows many benefits, when they
become Est ploru^ parentum benedictio, efficax precatio pro liboris, and multu^
valor; mal^dictio, quasi domestica excommunicatio and prophetia, de poenis
sequuturis. Paulus ab (...)zen in decalogu^. Triste exemp^u^ ref^rt Augustinus
cuius ipse exparte (...) fuit, de ciuitate D^^ lib. 22 c. 8. and huis non
diss^^ile est apud Louicenum in Turcica historiae tom. 2. lib. 1. c. 4.
petitioners for the same, upon the succeeding issue. So Jacob prays for Judah
his son Genesis 49. 8. and is fulfilled 2. Sam. 8. 13. But such as be stubborn
and undutiful, (as monsters of nature) have pulled upon their own heads many
and grievous vengances. Therefore, among other causes for which the Jews are
given over into the hands of Nabuchadonezer, and carried to be slaves into
Babylon, Ezech. 22. 7. puts this for one, they despised their Father and
Mother. And we read among the ancient verses of the Oraculoru^ l. 1.
Sibills, that God destroyed the men of the first world, because they laughed
their Fathers to scorn, and dishonored their Mothers. And, though but
heathen, and guided only by the dim light of nature, Illiade 4.
Homer tells us of one Symoisius, and lib. 11. (...).
Quintus Smyrnaeus of another Hypasus, who both were cut off by untimely death,
because they refused to nourish their Parents being old, and stricken in
years. For the sounder sort among the Gentiles, do deliver many wise and
discreet precepts, concerning this observance of children toward their Parents;
as Pythagoras in his golden verses, Honor thy Father and Mother, and those who
are near unto thee in blood; which In Commentarijs ad aurea carmina
Pithagorae. Mal^hus sieve Porphyrius de vita Pythag. (...) Charemon. (...).
Menandor.
Hierocles expounds thus, that we should perform like honor to God and our
Parents, and leave nothing undone, (what urgent occasions soever we may seem
to have to the contrary) which does make any way to their good and quiet; and
the more laborious and servile the office be, to think it the more comely and
honest: and therein to spare for no cost; for nothing can be more beseeming,
then, by all means to further their benefit, and to be cheerful and glad in
all expenses, which we bestow and lay out upon them. For whosoever does this,
observes the law of virtue, and requiteth or repayeth that love which nature
requires. And so In poemate admonitorio.
Phocillides joins the honor of God and Parents together; for they are
(says In expositione Docalogi.
Philo) visible Gods. And, without alleging more testimonies, Jesus the son
of Sirach handles this point with choice words, and exquisite sentences, all
the third Chapter.

Use 2. God will have this bond authentical and constantly ratified, and upon
no change or occasion altered. And therefore it is observed, that when Christ
raised the widow of Nayims son from death, who was carried out of the gates of
the City to burial, delivered him to his mother, Luc. 7. 15. teaching by this
example, that by no Emancipation or liberty this subjection can be frustrate.
Therefore the practice of the Roman Antichrist is no way justifiable, who
stirs up the children against their Benuo Cardinalis in vita Henrici 4.
Parents, and provoke them by force and arms to deprive them both of life and
dignity; and compels such whom they receive into their Hansinillerus in
historia Iesuitica cap. 3.
monkish orders, under a solemn oath to renounce for ever all that honor and
reverence, which they owe unto their parents; and so that adversary seeks
cursedly to break that Paulus ab Eitzen in do^^ma Ethica.
obligation and bond, which God and nature has ratified; neither does he
understand how sharply they are reproved of Christ, who under the vizard and
pretense of superstitious religion, either do neglect their Parents, or teach
the same. Therefore you (says he, speaking to the Pharisees, Math. 15. 4. 5.)
transgress the commandment of God to maintain your own traditions. For God
has given the charge, Honor thy father and mother, but you teach, that
whosoever shall say to father or mother, Corban, by the gift that is offered by
me, thou may have profit, and so though he honor not his father or
mother, shall be free, etc. Which obscure place, that Noble Joseph In Elencho
Triheresij. Non tam enum (...)mile, quam est Papismus Pharasismo, de quo
libellus Boquini est elega^ter scriptus.
Scaliger (while he lived in earth the Phoenix of learning, now enjoying
heavenly bliss) does thus illustrate out of the Jewish Rabbis, when any
offered his corban or gift, he then said, (being taught before hand of the
Pharisees) Let this gift which I now offer, profit both me and mine; and by
this means supposed, that he was discharged from the performance of all love
and duty unto his parents: insomuch that if he were by them challenged of any
good office or help, he put it off with that exception and restraintiue
clause of his offering made; in respect whereof he thought himself
blameless, though he did shake off all natural duty.

When Jesus saw his mother, and the Disciple standing by whom he loved, he
said to his Mother: Woman (behold thy son.) There is mention here made of
three persons, Christ hanging upon the Cross, and amidst his unspeakable
torment, careful and pensive for his mother: and she, a wowan most
distressed: and John the beloved Disciple, to whose charge she was to be
committed for her comfort, (a Beda in Homilia 2. post Epiphaniam.
virgin to a virgin;) for now the Lord is moved with a compassionate and
tender affection, and assigns the Cyprianus libello quod et astribitur de
passione Christi, Sect. 9 Edition^ Pamilianae.
Bedae of his humanity to his dearly beloved Chamberlain: and appoints
her, blessed among women, to the tuition and safeguard of the Apostle, who being
adopted, takes the place of a natural son. At the last Supper he g Arnoldus
Carnotensu, de 7. vltimis Christi verbis.
leaned upon his masters breast, and is now honored with another privilege,
to be the faithful keeper of an invaluable treasure: The Johannes Hussus de
passione Domini ex quaetuor Euangelistis.
meaning then and sense is, as if he should have said thus, Receive (Mary) a
servant for the Lord, a Disciple for the Master, a fisherman for God: John for
Jesus Christ, a kinsman for a son; hitherto I have had a vigilant care of
thee, and now am ready to depart this life, and commend thee unto him, who
shall see to thee: and to his watchful care do I commit thee.

Christ is always Pelargus in 7. Christi verba.
present with spiritual Mary, and comfort faithful; for these are his
mother and sister, Mat. 12. 44. he will raise up nursing fathers for his
Church, Esaias, 49. 21. and 60. 4. and in the midst of the greatest dangers, k
Duplex Christi cognatio, carnalis and spiritualis. Nazianz. orat. 22. in laudem
Machabeorum. Isodorus Pelusiota, lib. Epist. 159. and lib. 4. Epist. 46.
Hilarious in Mattheum.
deliver them. All flesh perishes in the universal deluge and ouerflowing
flood of waters, Noah with his family is preserved, 1. Pet. 3. 20 and after
some months is brought forth (a new inhabitant of the earth) with the beasts
and fowls, who are enclosed with him in the Arc. Lot is led out of Sodom by
the Ministry of Angels, and that supernatural tempest of fire and brimstone
deferred, until he be placed in safety, Genesis 19. 16. Pharoh and the Egyptians
are consumed with sundry Augustinus quaest. 26. in Exodum obseruat in omnibus
plagis f^cisse (...), sieve (...). Nouit Deus in medijs poenis, interbonos, and
malos discernere and Ecclesiae suae rationem habere. 2. Pet. 2. 13.
kind of plagues, but in every one the Lord makes a difference between them
and his people, l In terram nouam nouum (...), Theodoretus. (...): Philo in
libro de Abrahamo; duo miracula, humani generis deletio, and Nohae conseruatio.
the Israelites, Exodus 8. v. 23. and 9. 16. And when that fatal time drew
near, which Ghrist bewailed with tears, Luc. 19. 41. in which Eusebius
histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Jerusalem was to be laid waste and ruinated by Vespasian and Titus the Roman
Generals: God by an Oracle gave warning to the Christians, before any siege was
laid unto it, that they should depart the City; and so in Pella a town
beyond Iordake, saved their lives and escaped the common calamity.

Gods Church shall continue upon earth, hell gates may not prevail against it:
Math. 16. 18. It is that tabernacle which cannot be removed, and the stakes
thereof can never be taken away, neither shall any of the cords thereof be
removed, Esaias, 33. 20. It may be pressed, but it shall not be oppressed: Though
Caines anger be enraged against Abel, and shed his blood, yet Seth shall stand
a foundation immovable, Genesis 4. 25. Israel complains that he is oftentime,
afflicted from his youth, but they could not prevail against him: Psalm. 129.
1. 2. For God will be as a wall of fire about his, Zach. 2. 9. those who seek
to harm them shall not escape free: and therefore for their security he has
made an Edict, Touch not mine anointed, Psalm. 105. 15. Whatsoever the enemies
plot, and contriue against them, shall not prevail; all their treacheries and
violent cruelties shall be frustrate: Iezabel persecuteth Elias, and when he is
taken up into heaven, thinks none is left to reprove her impieties, or that
God has any to serve him, but might now wallow carelessly in her sins, and
the Baalims be worshipped according to his own will: yet seven thousand are
left, which never so much as bowed the knee to that Idol; and when he is
received into eternity, Elisha succeeds, furnished with a double spirit of
knowledge and power, 2. King. 2. 15. Stephen is stoned to death, the professors
of Christianity are scattered, but by this means the Gospel is spread abroad
in the world, Act. 8. 1. 2. For the Church shines brightest under Tyrants. It
is Discursus d^rebus Gallicis continuatio.
plowed up with the share of torments, fatned and compassed with the contempt
and dung of the world, sown with ashes, watered by blood and tears: it uses
the flame of consuming fire, as nourishing sun; the butchery of executioners,
as the dew; flourishes in the autumn of calamities, and brings forth most
sweet and plentiful fruit in the deep winter of tribulation. And (as In
Apologetico, cap. 45.
Tertullian speaks) the exquisitely devised cruelty of persecutors, is an
effectual allurement to embrace the profession; Christians are made more, when
they are cut off, they fall by unities, but rise by multitudes: the blood of
the Martyrs is the seed of the Church.

Let all the righteous cast their care upon God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. for he is
merciful and will, Almighty, and can, most wise and knows how to deliver his
out of the greatest dangers, and free them from the narrowest streights,
wherein they were enclosed, Esaias, 43. 1. 2. Neither are we to despair of Gods
mercy and loving kindness, though he seem sometime to deal hardly, and
bring us to his Cross; for though for a moment he does Vt in Solstitio
Hibernali tunc Sol^i Horizontem spectes) nobis proximus est; and tamen ob aecis
inclementiam, longissime videtur distare. Ita Christus iustitiae sol tum nobis
pr^xime astat cum longissime abesse putamus. Psalm. 145. 18.
forsake, he will gather us again in great compassion, Esaias, 54. 7. and not
suffer us (because he is faithful) to be tempted above that we are able,
but will give the issue with the temptation, 1. Corinthians, 10. 13. Wherefore we
must contentedly undergo all afflictions, and set before our eyes those who
have suffered greater. God provides Saropta a refuge for Elias, when he is
constrained to forsake Israel, and a poor widow to give him food with
entertainment, whose store is miraculously increased, and he triumphantly
carried up into heaven, when he can find no rest in earth; 2. King. 2. 11.
The Israelites go^ out of Egypt with great honor, where they had for many
years been grievously afflicted, Exodus 12. 41. And when Peter the next day
should hane been brought forth to execution, and for that end was guarded with
a strong watch of sixteen Soldiers: the night before, the fetters fell from
his feet, the prison gates opened, and he obtained sudden and unlooked for
deliverance, Act. 12. 7. For it is an undoubted truth, that many be the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them out of them all,
Psalm. 34. 19.

Woman behold thy Son. This Christ said in the presence of John, who stood
with her near unto the Cross, and the words are in effect thus much: I am now
ready to depart this life, and do appoint in my place, and substitute this
John, who in my stead shall perform the duty of a son unto thee. But here
it is questionable among the Divines, why Christ said not mother, but woman
behold thy son: and they render these reasons among other.

First, that hereby he might not Iansenius in harmoniae Euangeliorum cap. 143.
increase her grief, which doubtless he should have done in calling her by
that sweet name of mother: For great and forcible is that natural love which
is between parents and children. Abraham then wrastled with a strong
temptation, Origines in 22. Geneseos. Nissenus in oratione habita in funere
Pulcheriae. Basilius Isauriensis oratione de Abrahamo. Lutherus in Genesin,
cap. 22.
when Isaacke spoke unto him, my father, and he answered, behold my son, Genesis
22. 7. This for the present was the voice of a great temptation, wounding the
fathers heart, who though in respect of his faith, he was resolute and
vnbendable; yet notwithstanding showed a tender and relenting affection, when
he answered, my son. And David does most passionately bewail the deserved
death of graceles Absalom, went up to his chamber, and wept, and as he went
said thus; O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would to God. I had
died for thee: O Absalom, my son, my son: 2. Sam. 18. 33. And when Jacob
heard that Joseph his son was torn of some evil beast, he rent his
garment, put on sackcloth, mourned for him many days, and would not be
comforted. Genesis 37. 35. for so it is ordained of Saluianus l. 1 de auaritia.
Nature, that all parents love their children more then themselves, and they
be dearer unto them then their own eyes: Oppianus, 1. Halieutic^n.
because by succession of them, they obtain a certain kind of immortality
Iustinianuc in nouellis collatione, 4. de nuptijs; titulo. 1.
in their descendents, and by the merciful appointment of God the stock and
kindred is continually renewed: And we read in the histories of former times
how the Sabellicus.
women of Carthage, accompanied their sons unto the Seashore, with shedding
many tears (who were to be carried over into Sicily for hostages) and when the
ships were out of sight, impatient for their want, cast themselves into the
water and perished,

The second cause, was, lest he should bring her into danger; for, if the
crucifiers had known that she was his mother, they would have dealt more
hardly with her; for they hated Christ most maliciously, and oftentimes it so
falls out, that we do not only wish evil to those by whom we think we
are injured, but also even to all who belong unto them. So David upon this
ground, fearing such measure, when Saul persecuted him unto the death, with an
inward hatred, conveyed his Father and Mother unto the King of Moab, that with
him they might be safe; lest for his cause the enemy should also wrong them, 1.
Sam. 22. 4.

The third was, to put us in mind of that gracious Semen tuum conteret caput
Serpentis Genesis 3. 15.
promise made in Paradise; and that we might know, he was appointed of God to
take our flesh, and offer himsefe upon the altar of the Cross a sacrifice for
the redemption of the world: for thus God spoke unto our first parents after
the fall, and torture of their souls, arising from the sensible feeling of
that good and blessed estate they had lost, raising them up to the comfortable
hope salvation: The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent,
Genesis 3. 15. And hereof Saint Paul, God when the fulness of time was come, sent
forth his son made of a woman, and vnde^ the law, Galath. 4. 4.

The last reason, and that most especial; Christ foreseing and Augustin^^ de
nup^ ijs and concupiscenti^. lib. 1. cap. 12. and. 24.
prophesying, that many heresies and blasphemous opinions should arise, vayled
under the name or title of godliness and devotion, calls her by the name of
woman; for who is ignorant, that the Epiphanius contra hereses. lib. 3. tom. 2.
here is. 79. Daneus in Augustinum de heresibus, cap. 83.
Collyridians, very superstitiously upon an appointed day of the year, offered
Cakes, (in honor of the virgin Mary) to a certain maiden sitting in a stately
chair, or chariot, covered over with a curtain, and her they esteemed as a
Goddess; whom Contra Hereses, lib. 3. tom. 2. here is. 78. and 29.
Epiphanius calls a people carried away with a brainsicke rage and mad fury
of mind, and their fact unlawful, blasphemous, an idolatrous practice, and
devilish attempts: for indeed the virgin Mary is to be honored, but not
worshipped, she her self worshipped him, whom she barc, and who took flesh
of her, but came from heaven, and the bosom of the father: yet all this in
comparison of the Romish Idolatry is but little, who have taught that she is
to be worshipped after a supereminent Anselmus de excellentia virginis, cap. 9.
10. 11. Antoninus in summa titul. 22. cap. 8.. 2. Bernardinus in Mariali, and
Iacobus de voragine in Mariali, buius (...), author Petrus Grapheus Hereticus
Nicephorus, lib. cap. 11.
manner, and entitle her to all those attributes, which properly do belong
unto Christ, that as he is our Lord, so she our Lady, he King, she Queen of
heaven, etc. and blush not to call her their hope and life, salvation of the
world, throne of grace, the Queen of mercy, the advocate, helper, and comfort
of dispairing souls, the only Innocentius in oratione de 300. dierum
indulgentia.
Savior of sinners and have corrupted the whole Psalter, that whatsoever David
speaks of God the father, son, and holy Ghost, they changing the word,
(Lord into Chemnitiutin examine confilij Tridentini part 3. ^itul^ de
veneratione, and inuccatione Sanctorum.
Lady) from one end to the other, do blasphemously apply it to the virgin
Mary, and so christen that book with a new name, the Ladies Psalter.

After that first and universal ruin of man, whereby through one, sin
entered into the world, and by sin death, Leo prim^^ sermon 1. de passione.
dominion of the Devil, and be loosed from fetters of his cruel bondage,
neither be reconciled for the obteyning of pardon, nor have access unto life,
unless the son of God coeternall and coequall unto the Father, had
vouchsafed to be the son of Man, and come to seek and save that which was
lost; for he our Lord, in the Augustinus sermon (...), 1 14. de tempore.
balance of the Cross, has weighed out the price of our salvation, and by
his once suffering death, acquitted the whole world, that as he was the Creator
of all things, so he might be the restorer. Wherefore we must undoubtedly
believe, that he has redeemed the world, who has paid a greater ransom then
the worth of the world. For Christ alone is the author and perfecter of that
grace and mercy we do obtain, Heb. 12. 2. and therefore before he was
conceived in the womb, is named Jesus, because he should save his people from
their sins, Math, 1. 21. and is made unto us of God the Father, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Neither is there
salvation in any other; for among men is given no other name under heaven,
whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 12. and no man comes to the Father but by
him; for he is the way, the truth and the life, John 14. 6. He is the way,
Cyrill^s lib. 1. Thesauri cap. 1. Bernardus in paruis sermonibus, sermon 23
by which we return out of exile into our Country; the gate of reconciliation
between God and man; He is truth, true righteousness, whereby the wrath of
God is appeased, and we accepted as children, and heirs of his kingdom: he
is life, the only author of life; himself always and essentially life. Thou
have not how to go, but by him, nor whether, but unto him; and (to comprehend
all in one sum,) he is the way, leading k Augustinus in Iohannis Euangelium
tract. 21.
us: the truth, directing, the life perfecting; for there is one God, and one
mediator between God and man, even the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
ransom for all men, 1. Timoth. 2. 5. and if any man sin, he is our Advocate
1. Ioh. 2. 1. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell,
and through peace made by that blood of that his cross, to reconcile to
himself, all things, both which are in earth and which are in heaven: Coloss.
1. 19. For no man (so In lib. 2. Cur D^us homo, cap. 15.
Anselmus truly) can have pardon of his offenses, but by that man, who also was
God, and made sin that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: 2.
Cor. 5. 20. and did bear our sins upon his body on the tree, by whose wounds
we are healed. 1. Pet. 2. 24. he alone has trodden the winepresse Esaias 63. 3.
he alone endured that bitter passion, for the transgressions of the world, has
washed away with his blood the wickedness of all: for he is that lamb of God,
which lays upon his own shoulders, and takes away the sins of the world.
Ioh. 1. 29.

By this is overthrown all humane merit both of congruitie and De merito
congrui, digni and condign^, R^inerius in summa tom. 2. titulo meritum cap. 5.
Aquinas 1. 2. quaest. 114. art. 3. Pelargus in nouo Iesuitismo loco 10.
condignitie, and all challenged reward to be due for good works. And yet are
the Proctors of the Romish Church never louder speakers, never greater orators,
then in extolling and commending works, even to heaven: never profess
themselves more skillful Physicians then in covering their own, and disclosing
the diseases of others; herein not much unlike the frogs, mentioned in the
fable, among whom one professed great art in curing all sicknesses, but by her
pale and yellow color, bewrayed how unfit she was to heal others, who could
not heal her self. For these are the embossed commendations they set upon
works, that they are the Bellarminus de Iustificatione lib. 5. cap. 4.
merchandise of the kingdom of heaven, that they Costerus in Enchridio de
meritus bon^rum operum.
merit with God, and to them eternal life is due, that they are of Gregorius
de Valentia tom. 3. disput. 7. quaest. 20. Censura Colonieusis Dialogo 5.
satisfactorie power for deserved punishment, etc. But because according to the
rule of Paepias in Eusebius, Historiae Ecclesiast. l. 3. cap. 39.
we must not listen to those who speak much, but deliver sound doctrine:
truth only which proceeds from the holy Scriptures, and is approved by the
most pure and ancient times, ought to be embraced, from which these coyners of
new doctrines are far departed. For first, the works of the most regenerate
are not absolutely good, neither Adriani Pap. sententia pia. Quotidie super
pannum bonae vitae, quem teximus operibus Iustitiae, stillamus sani^m
diuersorum criminum.
extensiuely for number, nor intensiuely for perfection as is manifest by
uncontrollable evidence of Scripture. For we all have been as an unclean
thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes, and we do all fade
like a leaf, and our iniquity as the wind has taken us away: Esaias 64. 6.
And as Solomon confesses, there is no man just upon earth, that does good and
sins not, Ecclesiast. 7. 22. The Apostle (of himself and others) in many
things we sin all, James 3. 3. And Paul, though for righteousness which is
in the law unblameable, yet basely accompteth of his works, and dignities,
calls them dung; and therefore rejecting them, desires to be found not in
his own righteousness, which is in the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ Philip. 3. 8. 9.

Secondly, Adam in his first estate yet undefiled, and before None can merit,
not Adam standing in his integriue.
his fall, Philip. Mornaeus de sacrificio Missae lib. 3. cap. 18.
could deserve nothing, keeping the image in which he was created Genesis 1. 27.
which is, as Saint Paul interprets it, righteousness, holiness of truth
and knowledge of God, Ephesians. 4. 24. abiding in Paradise, a place full of
delight, which David calls, to be in honor, Psalm. 49. 22. whereby he had not
only a being, but a good being, grace and glory according to the good pleasure
of the Creator and his mere mercy and undeserved goodness: and yet had no
power to deserve well of him, from whom he received all things, having nothing
of himself, but was wholly his. Let it then be granted that our first Parent
used the gifts of God bestowed, in the best manner, that he possessed them in
such reverent fear as he ought, fulfilled the law, as then naturally he might:
yet could he not say, (except he should speak from that pride which cast him
down headlong from the top and height of his dignity) I have deserved that
God should bestow this or this more upon me etc. But here must that take
place which God says to Job, chap. 41. 2. who has prevented me, that I should
make an end? all under heaven is mine. Wherefore, if Adam continuing Not in his
fall and corruption.
still in his innocence could not merit, who is so absurd and repugnant to
godliness, yea to the light of reason, that dare ascribe unto us so degenerate,
any such power? For being corrupt, what can we deserve but the wrath of God,
curse, and eternal death? because that stain of sin wherewith we are
defiled, has corrupted even all the most noble powers and faculties both of
the divine soul and humane body; the will, so that now it is subject and a
slave to unbridled appetite: the understanding carried aside by imagination; and
thus by their inbred corruption, the will is estranged from the love, and the
mind from the knowledge of God, and both the one and the other, turned from
their natural and good estate, to the contrary: from their own and proper
benefit, in the desiring and knowing that which is offensive to God, and
hurtful to themselves. It is the general sentence of God concerning all men,
that the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts, are only evil
continually, Genesis 6. 5. and does represent (as it were) with lively colors our
condition in a table, that we may behold the same Romans 3. 10. and Ephesians. 2. 12.
wherefore to save this wretched flesh, the Word became flesh, and, to free us
from the bondage of sin, he that knew no sin was made sin etc. 2. Cor.
5. 21. yea, the regenerate, and such as are sanctified by the holy Not in his
regeneration.
Ghost, cannot climb up into heaven without Jacobs ladder, the help of the
Lord, the merit of Christ: without which they shall sooner, by their pride
loose that benefit of their regeneration, then did Adam the excellent
endowments of his creation, at the entising suggestion of his wife Eua.
Therefore the Apostle ingenuously acknowledges that he lives not now, but by
faith in Christ Gal. 2. 20. and bewayleth with deep sighs, sent from the very
heart and soul, his manifold sins, and miseries Romans 7. verse. 15. 16. 17.
18. etc.

Thirdly, the immediate and next causes of our works are not altogether
spiritual, regenerate and pure, because there dwells yet the Iebusite in
Jerusalem with the Israelites: in the soul, the old man with the new: the
flesh with the spirit: and the law of sin with the law of the mind, Romans 7.
23. and Gal. 5. 17. and no work, no not of the most holy Saints upon earth, is
wholly free from the spots of corruption; and therefore comes far short from
deserving any good at Gods hands; for which cause, it is their humble petition,
Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no flesh can be justified
in thy sight. Psalm. 143. 2.

Fourthly, the nature and essence of a Bucanus in Institutionibus.
merit, requires three things; first, that the work whereby we would deserve
any thing, be free without hope of recompense, not due from us to him, unto
whom it is performed: but whatsoever we do, is part of that duty we owe unto
God; For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has prepared that we should walk in them; Ephesians. 2. 10. and,
therefore has he delivered us from the hand and fear of our enemies, that we
should serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.
Luc. 1. 74. wherefore, when we have done all things that are commanded us, we
must say that we are unprofitable servants, for we have done no more then we
Vae enim nobis, s^ non facissemus, and hac est vti^ magna virtus, and summa
securitas, quando and pi^ viuis, and tamen plus attendis quid desit tibi, quam
quae obtinuisse videris, oblitus quae retro, and extendomite in anteriora.
Bern. in Psalm. qui habitat. sermon. 4.
ought, Luc. 17. 10. and we are debtors Romans 8. 12. Secondly, the thing offered
of us, must be answerable in value and dignity, unto that which we receive,
but no works of ours are any way comparable unto salvation and eternal life
which God bestows; for these are finite, those infinite, between which, there
is no proportion; and the sufferings of this present time are not worthy the
glory which shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. (where the Apostle uses a metaphor
or borrowed speech taken from these things which are examined by the balance
and found to be of like weight,) but all our deeds are too light. And therefore
God rich in mercy has saved us Ephesians. 2. 8. and, everlasting life is the free
gift of God Romans 6. 23. and the kingdom which we hereafter shall possess, is
prepared for us from the beginning of the world, not purchased by our labors
and endeavors Math. 25. 34. Thirdly, the work which should be meritorious,
must be both our own, and beneficial also to him of whom we would deserve,
but we are not fit to think a good thought as of our selves, but it is of God.
2. Corinthians. 3. 5. and he works in us both the will and the deed according to
his good pleasure, Philip. 2. 13. our good reaches not unto him, Psalm. 16. 2.
neither does he stand in need of any thing that is ours. Job 22. 1.

Fifthly, (for further proof, we may add the consent of the purer times of the
Church,) the Fathers in the Council held at Confilium Arausicanum sess. 2.
can. 19. circa annum Domini 444. vel vt alij 450. Est autem Arausia vrbs
Galliae, prope Aueuionem, qui nunc Orange nominatur. habitum est autem hoc
consiliu^ tempore Theodosij Iunioris, etc.
Orange, decreed against the Pelagians, that though man had continued in that
integrity wherein he was created, yet he could not save himself, but by the
mercy and help of the Creator. Wherefore, if without the grace of God he cannot
keep salvation given, how can he repair and restore it again without the
same? Therefore, the mercy of God is from everlasting to everlasting. For even
the works of righteousness are not sufficient to merit perfect blessedness,
except the mercy of God (in the most holy sanctified will) do not impute and
lay to our charge the sins and defects of humane motions; as In Psalm 51.
Hilarie religiously speaks. After we be redeemed from all corruption, what
remains but the crown of righteousness? that indeed remains but neither
in it nor under it must there be a swelling and proud head, that it may wear
the Crown. Hear attentively what God says, who does crown us with his
mercy: For thou were not worthy whom he should call, nor justify being called,
nor glorify being justified: so Augustinus de verbis Apostoli sermon. 22.
Augustine. And these are the confessions of the worse and declining ages.
Although Gregorius Magnus moral. in Iobum lib. 9. cap. 11. and est insignis
locus apud Anselmum in libro de miseria hominis, sed quu^ longior esset quamuis
lectu digr^ssimus, eum de industria trans^ribere o^isi.
I exercise my self in the works of virtue, yet do I not recover life by
merit, but by pardon: grace can have no entrance there, where desert before
has taken up the room. To end, let the publishers of desert, who despise the
oracles of sacred Scripture, and decline the judgment of divine truth, make
their appearance before the Tribunal of the Sorban, and give ear unto
Ethicorum ad Nichomachu^ lib. 8. cap. 14.
Aristotle, who says, that we can never requite the benefits received from
God, and our Parents; which one sentence does utterly overthrow the sandy
foundation whereupon the merit of condignitie is builded: and show, that there
is sounder heads in the Philosophers schools, than in the Popish Church. It
were to be wished, that De Iustificatione l. 5. cap. 7.
Bellarmine, who will neither hear the Scripture, nor Aristotle, would hear
himself speak where he thus concludes, that in respect of our own
righteousness, (or rather certeinty of our unrighteousness) and danger of
vaineglory, it is the safest course, to repose our whole confidence in the
only mercy and goodness of God. Which one speech of his, is the very sponge,
which wipeth out with one blot, the whole Ajax of this Sophister, Tilenus
Syntagmatu Theologici part 2. cap. 48. de meririt^ operum.
painted out and described in those his five books written of Justification.

Woman behold thy Son. The circumstance of time when Christ uttered these
words, is very remarkable. For if we consult with humane reason it may seem
that all this which he now does, should have been disposed of and perfected
long before: especially, considering that he was not only man, but God also,
and therefore knew the time of his passion, which also he foretold unto his
Disciples, Math. 26. 21. Marc. 8. 31. Luc. 9. 22. But there is in this his
deed, some thing which we ought both to know and follow; for every action of
Christ (in Moralls) is our instruction. Therefore (that now, and not before, he
does manifest his care, for the fafety and protection of his mother, when he
was ready to fulfill the decree of God, for the reconciliation of Mankind, to
be made by his death, and not long after gave up the Ghost) great consent is
there and agreement between the precepts of the first and second Table: yet to
be placed in their several order: that so the duties toward God must have the
precedencie, and that follow, which belongs unto man, as issuing and flowing
from the other. Rollecus in locum Euang.


Those things which God commands, are carefully Abraham received the charge
to sacrifice his son, (which was revealed unto him in the night) very early
in the morning, he arises and fitteth himself to the work enjoined: Genesis
22. 3. Christ will not have that disciple whom he calls, to go home and
celebrate his Fathers funerals, but presently follow him, Math. 8. 21. And
when he sends out his Apostles to preach the Gospel, they must make haste,
and salute no man by the way Luc. 10. 4. (not thereby forbidding the common
offices of civility, but the hinderance of their calling:) wherefore not
unfitly, does one of the ancient Johannes Climachus gradu 4. de obedientia.
Divines call obedience, the grave of our will, the denial of our mind showed
by the body; and in respect hereof, makes every Christian, a holy soldier,
whose complete armor is the shield of faith beating down all thoughts of
disloyalty; the sword of the spirit, whereby all adverse suggestions are
killed; the breast plate of mildness and patience, by which we receive
contumelies, the stinges and darts of reproachful speeches; the helmet of
salvation, which is prayer, a spiritual safeguard; furthermore he must not be
foot-bound, but have one ready for every service wherein he shall be employed,
the other standing steadfast and immovable, in earnest prayer and humble
supplications: and we are therefore bound to follow God commanding, and to obey
his will, because we are his servants. Thus David acknowledges, that he would
do his good will, for he had prepared or pierced his care: Psalm. 40 6. which
form of speech is taken from those solemn ceremonies, used among the Jews
when one sold and gave himself into the service of another; which what they
were under Moses we may read, Exodus 21. 5. when a servant loving his Master,
and will not go out free, he is brought to the Judges, and set to the door or
post, and his Master shall bore his ear through with an awle, and then he
shall serve him for ever; that is the Theodoretus in exodus quaestione, 45.
Paulus Phagius in suis annotationibus ad Chaldeum Paraphrasstem.
year of Iubily; the boared ear signifying his attention to listen to that
which is commanded, and the standing at the door, where this is done, that he
should not go forth without the leave and permission of his master.

motives inducing to this duty, secondly, the signs or tokens manifesting the
same. For the Motives they be diverse.

1 Let us set before our eyes, Christ Jesus our Lord, who was obedient to the
father unto the death, even of the Cross, Philip. 2. 7. and in his Agony
prayed with a submission, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me, but if I must drink thereof, thy will be done, Mat. 26. 39. 42.

2. We must behold the examples of the Saints; as of David, 2. Sam. 16. 26.
For when he was persecuted and driven out of his kingdom by his own son,
he thus resigneth himself over unto God, willing the Priests that bare the
Arc before him, to carry it again into the City, not doubting, but if he
found favor in the eyes of the Lord, he would bring him to see it, and the
Tabernacle hereof: but if he have no delight in him, then he should do, as to
himseemeth good, etc.

3. Let us but look upon the Creatures, for they are obedient; the Angels do
his will, Psalm. 103. 21. the sea stays his waves, and passes not the
appointed bounds, Job. 38. 11. God speaks to the Whale, and he casts out
the runnagate Prophet upon the land, Jonas, 2, 11. and Psalm. 105. 34. in the
plagues of Egypt, the Lord spoke, and there came Locusts, and darkness, and
tempest, etc. all at the day appointed: yea oftentimes they obey contrary to
their nature, the Moon waits, standing still, Joshua, 10. 13. and the Sun
goes back, 2. Chron. 32. 31.

4. Hear the blessings promised from mount Gerasimsim; Deuteronomy. 28. 1. 2. (for in
keeping the commandments, there is great reward: Psalm. 19. 11.) and listen to
the curses denounced upon Mount Ebal. Leuit. 26. 14. besides al which, after
this life remains eternal punishment for the refractary and disobebient, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

The signs of true obedience, among other, are these. 1. If we persuade our
selves, that we do not therefore please God because we hear him, but that we
do his will, Psalm. 119. 11. Ioh. 10. 27. Math. 7. 26.

2. If we obey in such things, to which no law of man does enforce us, and
whereof God only, who is the knower of the heart, can be Judge. Job. 32. 22.

3. If that thing which is commanded be contrary and repugnant to nature, and
yet notwithstanding, even in this we do obey. So Moses goes up to the mount,
and contented to see the land of Promise, willingly there dies, as the Lord
had told him, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. And Abraham hastneth to sacrifice his only son,
according to the commandment, Genesis 22. 3. of which action, thus Zeno Bishop
of Verona, Zeno Verenensis, sermon depatientia. Basilius Isauriensis, sermon
de Abrahamo.
O strange spectacle, and worthy whereof God should be the beholder, in which
it is a hard matter to determine whether the sacrificer, or the sacrifice were
more patient: the countenance of neither once changed; the one stretched forth
his sword, the other his neck; the one builds the Altar, the other brings
the wood, whereon he was to be burned, and both are joyful: under the fear,
not of humanity, but of nature it self, both show a wonderful example of
glory; a pearlesse and unmatchable pattern of Gods worship to succeeding
ages. Those who walk after this Rule, peace and mercy is upon them, and the
Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16.

Woman behold thy son. If we balance and weigh considerately in our hearts
that which is here spoken, so many words, so many miracles. For could not
Christ sooner provide for his mother? out of all doubt he could, (he is the
Lord of the whole world, the earth is his, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.
1.) would he not? God forbid, that such a thought should ever enter into the
heart of any Christian, once to conceide a thing so blasphemous: (for now in
the extremity of his unexpected sorrows and tortures, and that
incomprehensible joy, whereinto he was presently to enter, and whereof he
made the thief partaker, Luc. 23. 43. is mindful of her.) But in the secret
of this deed, there is an especial thing, whereof he would have us take
knowledge; to wit, this virgin was descended of the blood royal, the stock
of David, and mother of the son of God manifested in the flesh, yet has not
of her own wherewith to live, but is poor, and therefore committed to
another, by whom necessary sustenance should be procured. And the truth
hereof, how mean her estate was, may thus appear, both in that she was
despised of all in the time of her travel, (thrust Saluianus de Gubernatione
Dei, lib. 6. and l. 2. contra auaritiam. Nulla domus ambitio nisireclinatorium
in stabulo; matter in faeno, filius in praesepio: tale elegit mundifabricator
hospitium, huiusmodi habuit delicias sacrae virginis puerperium; pa^niculi pro
purpura, pro bisso in ornatu regio laciniae co^geruntur. Cyprianus in sermon
de Natiuitate Christi.
up into an outroome a stable, not vouchsafed a more convenient place in the
Inn;) and when she had brought forth her first borne Infant, wrapped him in
ragged cloutes, and laid him in a cratch for want of cradle: Luc. 2. 7. But so
it must be; for he came into the world, that he might bring man cast out of
Paradise for sin, into his heavenly Country; and when (according to the
prescript of Moses law) she was to be purified, brings a pair of young
pigeons, (an undoubted proof of her poverty) Leuit. 12. 8. For God (having
respect of the poor) in stead of a Lamb permitted them to offer a pair of
turtle doves or young pigeons. Thus is he poor in his birth, ( Bernardus de
natali Domini, sermon. 4. and idem apud Anselmu^. Tribus exemplis viam nobis o
stendit, qua eum sequi debemus, 1. Paupertatis, quia in hoc mundo diuitias
habere noluit. 2. Humilitatis, quia mundigloriam spreuit, 3. Pattentia, quia
mala sustinuit.
wrapped in rags) poor in his life (he had not where to lay his head;) poor
in his death (spoiled of his garments, divided by the Soldiers, and for which
they cast lots.) Thus did he sanctify holy poverty. Be of good comfort
therefore, be of good comfort, such as are borne in the baseness of poverty:
for God himself is poor with you.

Doctrine. Poverty and want of things necessary for the sustenance of this
life, are not of that quality, for which we should either be utterly Optimi
viri, s^pe pauperrimi; bonae mentis soror paupertas: Petroni us. Arbiter in
satyrico. Aristophanes in Pluto. Exemplum in Abdolomino, ^pud Q Curtiu^, lib.
4. causas erudi^^ persequ^^u^ Aristo^eles problematum sectione 24 problemate 4.
discouraged, or imagine that for these we are less in Gods favor, or that
he will not be so merciful unto us, as if our case were better in the
world. Job is stripped of all, yet beloved of God, who has of him an
especial care: Job, 1. 8. None more grievously distressed then Lazarus in his
life time: Angels attend him dead, and place him in Abraham's bosom: Luc. 16.
22. Great Elias, (who for the heat of his burning zeal, is said of the
ancient, to Epiphamu^ de vitis Prophetarum.
suck ^ire out of his mothers breasts; and bridle heaven Basilius Isau^iensis
Homili^ (...) Elia.
with his tongue, so that neither dew nor rainefell upon the earth, but
according to his word) when he flies for fear of Iezabell, breathing out
threatenings, is fed with a daily portion, morning and evening, first by the
Ravens, and afterward by a poor widow, 1. King. 17. 4. 13. Ruth a holy woman,
and one of the Grandmothers of Christ, Math. 1. v. 5. constrained by famine,
goes daily to gleane in other men's fields, where she might have leave; such
was her need: Ruth, 2. 2. They wandered in sheep skins and goats skins,
destitute, afflicted and tormented, of whom the world was unworthy: Heb. 11.
37. And Paul the teacher of the Gentiles, complains of hunger, of thirst, of
cold, of nakedness, 2. Corinthians. 11. 38. We read in the Ecclesiastical
hystories, Eusebius histori^ Ecclesiest. lib. 3. cap. 20
that when the kinsfolk of our Lord Jesus Christ were accused unto Domitian
for to be of the lineage of David (which he desired should be utterly razed
out,) after he saw their hands partly hardened and brawned, partly rent with
daily labor, in plowing and tilling the ground, contemned their poor
condition, and they escaped with life.

We are not to be overmuch grieved, or storm against God, if it please him to
lay poverty upon us, so that we want some things necessary for the maintenance
of this life: and means to appease our impatiency herein, be these.

First, the condition of that estate, to which we are all nature subject unto;
for we brought nothing into the world, neither shall we carry any thing out
thereof: 1. Timoth. 6. 7. Job dispoiled of all his goods, acknowledges so
much: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither
again: Job: 1. 21. and some have observed from the form and structure of our
bodies, that all the senses are placed in the head, the higher part, (feeling
only excepted, which is dispersed through all the members) as in a tower: the
feet are set in the lowest room; and that as an instruction, teaching that we
should trample under feet, and tread upon earthly things, and look up to
heaven, and the unspeakable treasures there reserved for us: seeking first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, Math. (...). 33. For no want or need
can exclude us from grace; yea God has chosen the poor, Ian^. 2. 5, and
hears their desires, Psalm. 9. 18. Ecclesiasticus, 21. 5. only let us be
patient in silence, Esaias, 30. 15. And God will for ever satisfy us, etc. Luc.
6. 21.

The second, take the witness of our own eyes; Let us look upon the
Patriarchs and Prophets: which of them all did ouerflow in wealth and
abundance? Jacob when he wandreth from his fathers house, has the earth for
his bed, a stone for a pillow, and heaven for his covering, Genesis 28. 11. Those
upon whom God set his love, went up and down in the vast deserts and
wilderness out of the way, and found no City to dwell in, but hungry and
thirsty, their soul fainted in them, Psalm. 107. v. 4. 5.

general, not to think it a strange thing, for the fiery trial, which is
amongst us to prove us, as though some new thing had come upon us, 1. Pet. 4.
12. in which Nicholaus de Cl^mangijs de fructu(...)m ^duersarum.
place of the Apostle, as else where in Scripture, tribulation is signified
under the name of fire, for the like and commendable effects that are found in
them: first, it is the property of fire to mount aloft, and ascend to his own
Region: and tribulation rayseth the soul, lying groueling upon earth: lifts
it up unto the Lord, and heaven from which it had the original. 2. Fire
heateth and enflameth, and afflictions kindles the heat of the Creator, in a
cold and fainting soul. Thirdly, fire shines, and gives light in darkness.
so trouble and calamity is the wholesome eye-salue to cure the dimnesse of our
sight: which the Angel of the Church of Laodicia is advised to buy, that he
may see: A poc. 3. 18. And it seemed that Nebuchadnetzar used this medecin,
who for his exceeding pride was turned from a man into a beast, and lost the
eyes of his mind, but recovered it after long time again, and then could look
up into heaven, and give thanks unto the most high, and praise and honor him
who lives for ever: Dan. 4. 31. Fourthly, the quality of fire is to melt and
make soft things that are hard: and the Spouse, Cant. 5. 6. says thus, my
heart was melted when my beloved spoke: now God speaks unto us by
tribulation, not by words, but by rods; and those hearts which are not
mollified by this fire, are altogether clay, which is hardened with heat.
Fifthly, fire tries the Potters vessels, and make them strong; and to this
purpose is that of the Wiseman, the furnace proves the Potters vessel,
tentation the righteous. And therefore not unfitly styled fire, in respect of
those, and other the like effects it works in sundry men, as fire does upon
sundry matters, etc.

Woman behold thy Son. The words are in meaning this much; this my disciple
shall take care of thee, as if he were thine own son; and therefore he says
not, behold thy guardian, or defendor, but thy son; and this he speaks, for
her further comfort: thou have now one son dying, and, ready to give up the
ghost, taken from thee: but another left; this in care and duty: him in nature.

God according to the measure of affliction sends the rules whereof are
these. That of David, In the multitude of the thoughts of mine heart, thy
comforts have rejoiced my soul Psalm. 94. 19. Another of Saint Paul's, As the
sufferings of Christ abounded in us, so our consolation abounds through
Christ, 2. Corinthians. 1. 5. And for examples, Jacob is consumed with grief, for
want of his son Joseph, whom he supposed to be devoured of some evil beast,
(for so the rest of his children would have persuaded him) rejoices at the
news brought that he was living: made haste to go down into Egypt to see
him, Genesis 37. 34. and 45. 28. The Israelites for a long time groan under the
heavy yoke of bondage; but when the determined four hundred and thirty years
are fulfilled, they come forth with triumph out of the land of their
captivity, Exodus 12. 41. Joseph is sold by his brethren unto the Ismalites, of
them brought into Egypt, and there bought of Putiphar, and in his house
accused of his Mistress, who daily entised him unto unclean lust, and yet laid
to his charge that he would have offered her violence, (when he would not yield
to her unchaste allurements:) is cast into prison, hardly entreated, so that the
iron pierced through his soul, Psalm. 105. 18. (for he was held in fetters
thirteen years, seeing and suffering many extremities;) at the last is set
free, interprets the Kings dreams, is exalted to honor; for his iron chain
receives one of gold: for the cloak left behind in the escape from his wanton
mistress, a vesture of silk; for the loathsome filthiness of the prison, the
high dignity of the government; is made Viceroy of the kingdom, fourscore
years managing all the affairs of the estate: so that his glory did six times
He lived 110. years; is sold when he is 17. year old, when 30. stands
before Pharaoh, and interprets his dreams: so his bondage was 13. years his
honor 80* and six times 13. make 78.
exceed his misery, compare Genesis 37. 2. and 2. 28. and 41. 46. and 50. 22. Job
after the rifling of his goods, the driving away of his cattle, the murdering
of his servants, the crushing in pieces of his children (by the ruin of his
house, while they were banqueting) and thesmiting of his body with biles, from
the crown of the head to the Hanc Iobi calamitatem duodecim menses perdurasse
tradunt Iudaei in Sedar Otani sieve Chronico maiorum.
sole of the foot, is blessed of God with doubled riches, plentiful issue,
length of days, and the latter end is more happy the^ the beginning. Job 42.
12.

Let us cast our care upon God, he cares for us, 1. Pet. 5. 7. Use.
for though great be the troubles of the righteous, yet the Lord will deliver
him out of them all. Psalm. 34. 19. and, do one of these things for us, either
grant full and perfect deliverance from all evil, (as he did the three
children, D^n. 3. 26.) or mitigate the sharpness of the trial: (so he dealt
with the Israelites in the captivity of Babylon, and sent his Prophets to
comfort them, Ezech. 36. 8.) or sustain them by the inward grace of his holy
spirit, (as he did Stephen, in the midst of that deadly and Per tot l^pides
Pe^rae co^u^gitur v^i. ^rator lib. 1. in Acta Apostolorum.
stony shower, Act. 7. 56. who saw Christ standing at the right hand of the
Father to behold his Ambr^sius epistolarum lib. 10. epist. 82. Augustinus
quaest. 88. in nouum Testam^^tum.
champion, and ready to crown his Martyr.) and ^ath promised, that he will
graciously be present with all tha^ are his: so that if they pass through the
waters, the waters shall not ouerwhelm^ them, if they walk through the fire,
they shall not be burnt, neither shall it kindle upon them, Esaias 43. 2.
Wherefore let us only commend unto him our cause by earnest and humble prayer,
who is able to do exceeding ab^ndantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power which works in us. Ephesians. 3. 20.

Then said He to the Disciple: Behold thy Mother. This Disciple is John, who
leaned De veterum accumbendi more vide Ciacconium de Triclinio. and ^^luij
Vrsini ad ^um appendi^em. and Hyronimum Mercurialem de art Gymnastica lib. 1.
^ap. 11.
upon Christ's breast at his last supper, and from thence drew the heavenly
waters of saving knowledge: and now has another prerogative granted him.
Neither did Christ this because he distrusted his other Apostles, or doubted
either of their love or faithfulness toward him: but now, (such was their
infirmity,) they all fled, this only pers^uered and followed him even unto the
death; and therefore commits the care to provide for his Mother, to him
standing by the Cross.

They only are to be accounted true friends, in whom (...).
times of our estate. The poor is hated of his own neighbor, but the friends
of the rich are many Prou. 14. 20. It was a wise sentence of the Ancient,
Prosperity gets, adversity proves friends; more worship the Sun rising
then setting. Of this number was that crafty Ziba, who to curry favor with
David, basely forsook his Master Mephibosheth, and falsely accused him, 2.
Sam. 16. 1. and those, who sometime dazeled with the shining brightness of
Hamans advancement, honored him with all respective care; so soon as they
perceived the King offended, no one became a suitor for his pardon, but all in
word and deed furthered his overthrow; and, after the manner of the Persians,
covered his face (a Drusiu^ in locum.
forerunning ceremony of his death) Hester 7. 8. 9. But what need I stand to
make this manifest by gray headed testimony of antiquity? there is no age,
but will afford more then sufficient proof. Those who pulled the boughs from
the trees, spread their garments upon the ground, enterteined Christ entering
into Jerusalem with all observance, (crying Hosanna in the most highest,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Matthew. 21. 8. 9) the next
day cry louder, crucify him, crucify him: and instantly desire of Pilate,
that Barrabas a thief, (who for raising an insurrection and committing
murder, was cast into prison,) might be delivered Luke 23. 19.

Be not too hasty to entertain friendship with any: look diligently Use.
whom thou may love; trust after try all; for there be many lurking holes,
and secret corners in men's minds; many (...).
sorts of friends, as the Wiseman distinguishes of them. For

First, there is a time-seruing friend, who like the Swallow will in the summer
of thy fortunes cherish himself in the heat thereof, but in the cold of
winter, will treacherously forsake thee; never Isodorus de summo bono lib. 3.
cap. 29.
longer continuing then he may get some gain.

Secondly, many be false hearted friends; and these will counterfeit love, only
to this end and intendment, that so they may get knowledge of thy Scire v^lunt
secreta domus atque inde timeri.
secrets, and by this means keep thee in awe, and hurt at their pleasure;
effecting that by close and secret craft, which they never could bring to pass
by force and violence.

Thirdly, there is a masked counterfeit: whose plots are for the advancement of
himself, and increase of his own gain, and murdereth under the visard of
dutiful kindness; such an one is all lyme, his words are lyme, his gestures,
his countenance: rises by thy fall, and profits by thy loss. This and much
more you may read Ecclesiast. 6. ver. 7. 8. 9. etc. Therefore it is good, not
to be too hasty, to believe every one, that seems smooth and perfectly
complementall; for there be but a few, who when they salute thee with the
tongue, All hail, say in their hearts, take heed: poison is never given but
with some pleasing and sweet mixture; wickedness is committed, but under
pretense of virtue; and therefore it stands men in hand, to be
heedfully-warie, and circumspect: which the Apostle long before prophesied of;
that they should be evil, and dangerous times, because of men wanting
natural affection, truce breakers, having the show of godliness, but denying
the power thereof. 2 Timoth. 3. 4. 5.

And from that hour the Disciple took her home unto him. In this place is set
down the event, and effect of Christ's speech, which is the ready and prompt
obedience of the Disciple; and in this clause every word has his especial and
particular force. For first herein is the deed it self, (He took her.)
Secondly, the alacrity to perform the commandment given, (the same hour)
presently. Thirdly, the care and diligence used (unto his own*) It is idle,
and without any sure ground, that some trifle and confidently affirm,
concerning the great wealth of John. For it is not here said that he took the
virgin into his house, but into his own; to make provision for her as he was
able, in which the great love and faith of the Apostle is manifest. For he
excuses not himself, from the taking upon him this burden, under the pretense
of want, and disabilitie to undergo the same: neither does he cast doubts, how
or by what means he should maintain her, but obeys the commandment given,
nothing doubting but that God will be present and a helper.

Those who undertake any work imposed of God, or Doctrine*
are employed in any kind of life acceptable and approved unto him, are no way
to doubt of help. For his eye of providence, shall ever watch over them. Elias
takes his journey at the appointment of God, the Ravens (who unnaturally hate
their Isidorus Pelusiot^ lib. 4. epist. 43.
own brood) morning and evening bring him bread and flesh, 1. King. 17. 5. 6.
Daniel and his fellows refusing to eat of the portion allowed from the Kings
table, (partly, because it was consecrated to Idols, partly, for that they were
such meats as were forbidden the Israelites to eat of,) his countenance
appeared fairer, and he better liking with pulse and water, then the rest of
the children which did eat the portion of the Kings meat, and drank wine:
Dan. 1. 12. 15. And the widow of Sarepta, in that long continued famine of
three years and a half, Luke 4. 15. has abundantly for her self and hers;
for neither did the little meal in the barrel, nor oil in the cruse waste in
all that time, until the Lord sent plenty. 1 King. 17. 11. 16. But what do I
reckon up these ancient testimonies? God at no time has left himself without
witness in doing good Act. 17. 17. Aretius, a Problematum Theologicoru^ part.
2. loc. 119. Anno Domini 1570. 14. die Iunij.
Divine of good note, does confidently affirm, that in some places of Austria
and Bauaria, it rained wheat, which the people gathered and made thereof
wholesome bread. And when Rochell was besieged, in the heat of the civil
wars in France, raised against the professors of the reformed Religion, and
their store began to fail; miraculously a certain Anno Do^. 1573. histori^ de
statu religionis and Reip. in regn^ Galliae. lib. 11. sub Car^lo 9.
kind of fish every day in great multitudes cast themselves upon that shore;
which so soon as the Kings power was removed, departed also, and afterward
were not seen there. And thus is fulfilled that of the Prophet, Nothing
wanting to them that fear God: the Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but
those that do seek the Lord, shall want no good thing. Psalm. 34. 9. 10.

We may then from hence learn, not to be dismayed and too much cast down, in
the straitest and hardest times. And this is a doctrine most profitable in
every condition of life; for our affections are vehement, fierce and unruly:
neither do we any thing (for the most part) but upon assuredness of good hope;
now hope makes the mind always doubtful: from whence fear rises and
distrust. But against this immoderate care (so we use honest and lawful means
for to procure our good, because we are to labor, and diffidence not diligence
is forbidden) our blessed Savior does strenthen us by many perswasiue
arguments Matthew. 6 26. etc. of which the first is taken by comparison from the
greater to the (...) vitae d^t^r, and dator es^ae est. Pruden^ius in Psych
m^chia, in au^^itiae and largstatis p^gna.
less, The life is more than meat, God has given that: therefore, he will
not deny this.

The second, from the fowls of the air, and in particular of the Ravens, Luke
12. 14 David Psalm. 147. 9. and Job ^9. 3. for these when they have hatched
their young, neglect to Gregorius Magnus moral. lib. 30. cap. 8. Genebrardus in
Psalm 147. Pierius hyr^gliphic^^ lib. 23. sed ve^^similtor est op(...) Vale^^ de
sacra philosop^ia cap. 55. and ^^^^sangi Franz ij in historia animali^ sacra.
part 2. cap. 14. qui trad^nt cor^os v^i primum volandi potest as est, pull^s
su^s nido ^ijcere, qui quod infirm^ sint, ni^^l possunt aliud q^^m hu^ and il
^c vagan^es, querislos ^^^m ^res in a^re sundere: quod n^hil aliud est, qu^m
ipsum r^rum on^^^^ pa^^nt^m, De^m na^^ra^^^^ inv^care. Aristoteles de h^st.
an(...)m lib. 9. cap. 31.
feed them, until they be ^ethered and wax black like themselves: in the
mean time they are nourished either with the deaw from heaven, or the flies
which houer about them, or of worms which breed of that heap of matter which
their dams have gathered together in the nest, before they left them.

The third is from an impossibility; thus, None by all his labor and
industry, can add any thing to the stature of his body; therefore not to the
nourishment. Nourishment is ordained for the Cub^^^ meminit, non quasi nos, aut
palmam, aut digitump ssemus adijcere, sed quis m^nsura hominis r^spondet
quadruplae propor^imi cubiti eius. Est autem cubitus, interuallum a flexu
b^^^^ij, ad suprem^m pariem medij di^iti: and si quis, maxim indignetur,
m^rm^r^t, and qu^tidiana (...) itud^^^ se ^^cruci^t, nih^ tamen (...): ^^cut
^^im ^^rius and de(...) modus mensurae in statura cui^^ attributus est: ita
certam mensura^ fortunae and successus in alijs nego(...) defi(...) D^us ^^ra
quam progr^di non pot^^^, vtu^ (...). Enthimius.
increase and growth of the body; then, if we cannot procure or further this;
neither is the other in our power. Therefore the care of both is to be left
unto him, who made the body, and determined it should be of such a bigness.

The fourth, is framed from the example of the flowers, and by name, the
lillies: whose natural beauty without any labor of theirs, does far exceed
the glory of Solomon, wherein was wanting nothing that either art or industry
could afford: now, if the flowers, Quod sericu^? quae Reg^ purpura? quae
pictura, textura potest floribus comparari? quid ita rubet vt Rosa? quid ita
candet vt Li^u^? Hieronymus.
grass, and herbs, which to day are green, to morrow cast into the furnace,
are so adorned of God it cannot be, that the heavenly Father should be
careless, to cloth men, his children.

The fifth, This torturing care for food and raiment, is heath^nish. For the
Gentiles who have no hope of a better life, nor look for the joys of the
world to come, put their happiness in these temporal things, and (according to
the style of the holy Ghost,) are men of this world, Psalm. 17. 14. but
Christians seek for things to come, Heb. 13. 14. and know that the fashion of
this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. and, that they brought nothing into the
world, 1. Tim. 6. 7. neither, when they die, shall they carry any thing from
thence. Psalm. 49. 18.

The sixth is deduced from the providence and foreknowledge of God our eternal
Father. He is a Father therefore will; heavenly, therefore can supply our wants.
For this is an infallible truth, that God who knows and made nature,
understands our necessities, far better then we our selves, who are pinched
with them. And therefore (as we learn of Moses, in his records of antiquity)
before he created man, he framed the whole world, and every Nazimzenus in
oratione de T^^^logi^. N^ss^nus de opificio homini^.
part thereof, and furnished them with their several endowments; and then,
after the palace was builded seated the King therein, whom he had fashioned
after his own image, preparing all things Philo Iud^us de mundi fabrica.
necessary, for his use and delight. And therefore he will never be defective
in any thing belonging to the good of those that are his, since he had such a
respect of them, while they were yet hidden in Adams loins. Wherefore, let us
commit our ways unto him, etc. Psalm. 37. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 7. he cares for us.

THE THIRD WORD, A WORD of Love, Grace and Comfort.
LVKE, 23. VER. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. And one of the evil doers which were
hanged, rayled on him, saying, If thou be that Christ, save thy self and us;
but the other answered, and rebuked him saying; Fear thou not God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation? we are indeed righteously here, for we
receive things worthy of that we have done; but this man has done nothing
amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom: Then said Jesus unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou
be with me in Paradise.
ANALYSIS.
THis is the third Word of Christ. In which are to be observed the speech or
word it self, and certain antecedents; and these are things spoken: that is
to say, the different speeches of the two thieves, who were crucified together
with him: One, of him hanging at the left hand, which is contumelious and
reproachful; in it these particulars, 1. the^ fact (he rayled on him) 2. the
form of his reproach (if thou be son of God, save thy self and us:) The
other is the speech of the thief upon the right hand, partly ^^prehensiue of
his fellow, (sharply reproving his impudent sauciness; and in it are
manifestly showed, his faith and obedience: his obedience first appeared in
checking his fellow (fear not thou God?) 2. in the acknowledgement of his
own sin, (we are indeed rightly here) and this is illustrated from the
cause, wherein his patience is showed (for we receive things worthy of that we
have done) and by way of opposition, in respect of Christ, (but this man has
done nothing amiss) 2. his faith, for he confesses Christ in this woeful
plight to be a Lord, (Lord remember me) partly petitory, desiring help and
mercy of Christ (Remember me) enlarged by the circumstance of time, (when thou
come into thy Kingdom.) The second general point, is the word it self,
and the answer of Christ made. In which is a promise consolatory, (Thou shall
be in Paradise,) and this laid forth, first from the time and speedy
performance thereof (To day) 2. from the company or society which he shall
enjoy there (with me.) 3. from the certainety, for the promise is confirmed by
an oath, (verily, I say unto thee) And this is the sum of the whole.

And one of the evil doers which were hanged, rayled on him, etc. Before I
come in particular to open these words, a doubt is to be removed. For S. Math.
27. 44. and Marc. 15. 32. do constantly affirm, that both the thieves
reproached Christ. But we may thus answer, that this is spoken by a Figure,
which is called of the learned Synecdoche, when one number is put for another,
the plural for the singular; which manner of speech is very frequent, and
often used in the Scripture. As when Paul says; They shut the mouths of the
Lions. Heb. 11. 33. it is to be understood of Daniel alone; So when Peter
knocked at the door they opened; Rhode in the act, the rest (it may be) by the
commandment, Act. 12. 16. And I^pth^ is buried in the Cities of Gilead, that
is, in one of them: for in a many at the same time, he could not: Judge 12. 7.
So Luke here expounds Matthew and Mark. Or we may say (which is S. In Luc.
cap. 23. and potuit sic fuisse in princ^pio, s^d vnus conuersus^st, Ioh. Gorson
in Monotessaro. vel Hebraismus tantem est, vt illud Ionae ca. 1. 6. Drusius
H^braicarum, quae stionum, l. 1. quaest. 5.
Ambrose his judgment) there is to be understood a change of time; that first
both the thieves ^ayled, but one suddenly was converted, and did repent. We
read in the Gospel, that many Primumgemu fuit sedentium, qui ^um obseruabant,
secundum praetereuntium qui blasphemabant T^rtium sacerdotum and seniorum.
Quartum pendentium latronum: ^udol^^us de^ i^ a Christi, part 2. cap. 63.
reviled Christ, and rayled on him most bi^terly: as the passers by, who nodded
their heads and said, ah thou that destroiest the temple, and buildest it in
three days, save thy self; if thou be the son of God, come down from the
Cross. The chief Priests, Scribes, Elders and Pharesies in this manner, he
saved others and cannot save himself, If he be the King of Israel, let him
come down, and we will believe in him; he believed in God, let him deliver
him, if he will have him. So now this thief, If thou be that Christ, save thy
self and us: Math. 27. 39. 40. etc Marc. 15. 29. 30. And all this they said,
supposing it impossible to be done; and that only upon none other ground, but
reasoning from his present estate, hanging now upon the Cross, in shame and
extreme torture; and therefore concluded he could not be that Christ, sent of
God to save others. But herein they were far mistaken, and greatly erred; for
that Cross was the only way to obtain perfect glory and true happiness; Then
did he destroy the Temple, that he might raise it up again in three days, by
his glorious resurrection, 1. Corint. 15. 4. Then did Christ truly execute his
Sacerdotall office, (as a Priest offering his body upon the Altar of the
Cross: 1. Pet. 2. 24.) yea* by the Cross upon the Cross, triumph over his
enemies, Coloss. 2. 14. and by death overcame him, (that is the Devil) who had
the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. Thus it may be apparent, how wretched men are
blind to judge aright of this mystery of the C^osse.

We must not then determine of spiritual things according to humane reason:
for as the eyes of an O^le understanding in the apprehension of
matterscelestiall. The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. 1. Corinthians. 2. 14. So the Jews pass their
judgment of Christ, (as the Prophet foretold it should be:) that he was
despised and rejected of men, that he was a man of sorrows, and had experience
of infirmities; And they hid their faces from him, that he was despised, and
esteemed him not, but deemed him plagued and smitten of God, Esaias 53. 3. and 4.
Jobs friends condemn him for an hypocrite, and dissembler, when they see his
afflicted estate, and peremptorily affirm, that his children oppressed with
the ruin of the house (wherein they banquetted) were justly sent into the place
of their iniquity, Job, 8. 4. but God acquiteth them of this imputation, and
gives a very honorable testimony of Jobs uprightness, cap. 42. 7. Neither is
it to be marvelled at, that these men should be so grossly mistaken, with whom
that axiom Plinius secundus.
goes for current, that those are no better then fools who believe such
things as be above the ordinary course of nature* and unto which reason cannot
attain.

Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy, and vain
deceit, Coloss. 2. 8. and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ, 2. Corinthians. 10. 5. Chrisostom^^ in cap. 11. ad Romans
A mystery is a thing unknown, and unutterable, full of wonder, and of a
Justinius Martyr, in expositione fid^^, de Trinita^e.
higher nature, then can by any humane understanding or reason be apprehended:
and therefore as men of right mind do take hold of hot iron with tongs, not
with their hands: so the godly do embrace the determination of the Church, not
by the scantling of their own capacity, but the light of faith; Wherefore we
may not judge sinisterly or evil of any in (...) Chrysosto^us
regard of the outward things of this world, for the best me^ for the most part
find the worst entertainment here. Righteous Abel is murdered of reprobate
Caine; he flourishes, builds Cities, inuenteth Arts, and wants nothing:
Genesis 4. 17. 18. 19. etc. Israel groneth under the heavy yoke of bondage in
Egypt: Pharaoh lives at ease, and enjoys all kind of pleasure, Exodus 1. 10.
14. Innocent Naboth is falsely accused, and unjustly condemned, 1. King. 21. 12.
13. While Herodias daughter danceth (abloudy Idem Hemilia (...).
whelpe of a cruel Lioness) the (...). and Basilius Isauriensis homilia.
(...).
devil leading the round, John Baptist, the bright shining light of the world,
is beheaded in prison, Math. 14. 10. And oftentimes so grievous and afflicted
is the estate of the Saints on earth, that if there were not another life
beside this, then were they of all men most miserable, 1. Corinthians. 15. 19. but
God has prepared Augustine(...) de Ciuitate D^^. lib. 1. cap. 8.
for them good things, whereof the wicked shall never be partakers; and then
shall they know by happy experience, that this light affliction which is for a
moment, causes a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory: 2. Corinthians. 4. 17. Thus the Apostle opposes present things to future: a moment,
to aeternity: lightness to weight; affliction to glory, for which cause we
must by faith, hope, and patience willingly bear and sustain, and overcome
all those evils and tribulations which are incident to our calling; for the
sufferings of this k Rollocus in cap. 19. Iohannis
time are not worthy the glory which shall be reueiled: Romans 8. 18.

And one of the evil doers which were hanged, rayled on him. If we weigh this
diligently, we shall find that whatsoever now is objected unto Christ, both by
others and this graceless thief, is nothing else but the same, whereof he
was accused, and for which condemned, and at the last nailed to the Cross. For
Math. 27. 40. thus they maliciously spoke unto him: Thou that destroiest the
Temple, and buildest it again, if thou be the son of God, save thy self and
come down: And this is that which the Jews do so vehemently enforce before
P^late, that they have a law, by which he is to be put to death, who makes
himself the son of God, John 19. 7. Bu(...) for their sakes, and at their
instance, he was crucified, and did undergo those extreme torments; then this
might have contented them who had obtained their desires; but the death of the
holy and innocent cannot quench the insatiable thirst of blood, which is the
enemies of Christ, and his grace; yea they never cease to tear them with
scornings and reproaches: that if it were possible, they would not destroy the
body alone, but drive the soul into despair, yea after death they spare not
to persecute their very ashes and bones: so bitter, so unappeasable is their
hatred.

What doctrine is from hence to be gathered, and the use we are to make
thereof is, before mentioned in the first word of Christ, praying for his
enemies.

And one of the evil doers that were hanged, reviled him, saying, If thou be
Christ, save thy self and us. This blaspheming thief is an example of a man,
whose heart is hardened, and is not amended by any corrections of God, but
becomes worse; such were the Jews of whom the Lord complains, the people
returns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of
hosts, Osea, 9. 13. And Jeremy, cap. 5. 3 speaks thus, Oh Lord thou have
smitten them, but they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction, etc. So by Hipp^crates Aphoris. lib. 2.
Aph^rismo 6. Galenus rationem reddit in suis ad eu^ commentarijs Cornelius
Celsus, lib. 2. cap. 7.
degrees God proceeds to punishment, and by them the sin is increased, and
the offenders brought to insensibility and want of feeling. For as the cause of
the patient, or sick man is desperate, who feels not the force and violence
of his disease: so they are near to the death of the soul, who perceives not
the rods of God when he strikes. And there is in the reproach of this thief,
somewhat special and proper above the rest, when he thus speaks (if thou be
Christ) save thy self and us, me and my fellow; in meaning thus much: Show
forth now thy power that we may have trial thereof, by which hitherto th^^hast
helped many. And herein bewrays his impatien^^ no abiding the sharpness of
the punishment, from which he would be freede, and breaks forth into open
blasphemy, as though God could not deliver him: therefore says, if thou be
that Christ, the anointed, and sent of the father to save mankind, why then
do so much for thy self and for us. But he understands not, that Christ
must suffer those things, and so enter into glory, and open the gates of
heaven; that those who belong to him, may enter thereinto: no more then did the
chief of the Priests, Scribes and Pharesies, who scoffed at him, and
tauntingly willed, if he be the King of Israel, that he should then come down
now from the Cross, and they would believe in him: Mat. 27. 41. 42. But this
is the voice of the sons of the devil, and herein follow their Father, whose
request this was (when in the Chrysostomu^ de passione.
wilderness he tempted him) if thou be the son of God, cast thy self down
headlong. But Christ did a greater matter then this, when he arose from the
dead, yet they believed not, but with bribing the soldiers, in a manner bought
their infidelity. And therefore Christ did not descend from the Cross, because
he came into the world to be crucified. And thus thou have forgotten (O Jew)
what thou have heard, that the Lord reigned from the tree, and do deny thy
King, because he tarried Justinius Martyr in Dialogocum Tryphone Iudaeo, fals^
accusat Iudaeos, quod ex Psalmo 95. secundum 70 Interpretum versionem:
eraseru^t illa verba, a ligno (...), and prodicite in Gentibus Dominus regnauit
a ligno: legunt mutilate^dicite in Gentibus Dominus regnauit: reliqua
omittent^s.
upon the tree, and did not refuse the title of his Kingdom, nor lay down the
scepter of his Empire, the Bernardus in Dominica sancta Paschae de (...)
signaculis.
government is upon his shoulder, Esaias, 9 6. And if he had come down from
the Cross, he had then saved none; Augustinu^ tract at. 37. in Iohan^is
Euangellum.
and therefore he continued there, leaving the same when it was his pleasure.
For what great thing had it been for him to come from the Cross, who was able
to come out of the grave? if he himself had not been willing, he could not
have suffered: if that blood of his had not been shed, the world had not
been rede^med. Let us therefore be thankful to the power of his Deity, and
the compassion of his infirmity, and to his secret working, which the Jews
knew not.

Calam(...) and tribulations, except God vouchsafe to sa^ctifie the(...)to men
(for upon that word must the accent be(...)ey break forth into blasphemy,
either against his power, or mercy. Against his mercy; so Cain cited,
arraigned, examined, convicted and condemned, for the unnatural murder of his
brother, despaired of pardon, supposing his sin to be greater then could be
forgiven, Genesis 4. 13. And Saul enclosed in a straight, and seeing no way to
escape from his enemies, falls upon his sword, and is his own untimely
executioner 1. Sam. 31. 4. I^das when he knew what he had done, in betraying
innocent blood, hangs himself hopeless of mercy, Act. 1. 18. Caium
terra^que perosus, In^^r vtrumque p^rit. Arator his^or. Ap^siol. lib. 1.
Against his power, and of this we have an example in that Prince, who in the
time of a long and grievous famine, when the Prophet promised abundance, and
plenty of food, distrusted of the performance, though God should make windows
in heaven. 2. King. 7. 2. and the Jews (as though the Lord had not been able
to bring them from captivity, into their own country again,) contrary to the
express prohibitiue commandment, fearful and dismayed, fly into Egypt for
refuge and safety; and therefore against them is a heavy judgment denounced.
Ier. 43. 7. 11. 12.

Wherefore let us entreat God by earnest and humble prayer, Use.
that he would make his rods and chastisements profitable unto us. Augustinus
in Enchiri(...) cap. 96.
For he is so good, that he would suffer no evil, except he were so almighty
and of such sovereign power, that he were able to bring good out of evil.
Therefore, for the cherishing of Christian patience in our hearts, these few
remembrances may be effectual.

First, we must be resolved, and persuaded that whatsoever does befall us, is
before decreed and determined of God. Therefore David, when Shemei ^ayled upon
him, and Abishai would be revenged, thus represseth his purposed intendement,
God has bidden him curse David, and who shall then say, why do thou so? 2.
Sam. 16. 10.

Secondly, we are to think, that the greatest extremity we suffer, is far
less then our desert; for the merciful Lord would rather spare, then punish;
he deals no^with us according to our sins, neither rewards us accord(...)
to our iniquities. Psalm. 103. 10. wherefore when A(...) re^enteth (though but
as an hypocrite,) deserved vengance is deferred, 1. King. 21. 29. and the Lord
mitigating the sharpenes of the sentence against the house of Eli, (least his
eyes should fail, and his heart be discomfited) adds this clause of mercy,
nevertheless I will not destroy every one of thine from mine Altar, 1. Sam. 2.
33. For he Nicephorus Calistus lib. 17. cap. 3. E^agrius hist. Ecclesiast. lib.
7. cap. 6.
whetteth the sword of his anger with the oil of mercy; he is good and
merciful and of great kindness Psalm. 76. 5. slow to anger, and repents him
of the evil, Joel. 2. 13.

Thirdly, this is steadfastly to be held, that unto such as do belong unto
him, God turns all things to good, Romans 8. 28. And therefore the Prophet
acknowledges, It is good for me O Lord that I have been afflicted. Psalm.
119. 71. and the truth hereof the faithful have always found by happy
experience. For when he sends calamities, by them, either their dull prayers
are whetted, (and so is made a more devout dependence upon God) 2. Chron. 33.
13. or sin is repressed, (for our proud flesh by such sharp and corrosiue
salt is to be abated) 2. Corinthians. 12. 7. or our constancy is at the last
crowned (^ob 42. 10.) Blessed therefore are they that be tempted: and such
ought to rejoice, though for a season they be in a heaviness; that the trial
of their faith being far more precious then gold that perishes (though it be
tried with fire,) may be found to their praise, and honor, and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 4.

But the other answered, and rebuked him saying, fear thou not God seeing
thou art in the same condemnation? Hitherto something has been spoken of the
blaspheming thief, hanging at the left side of Christ; now we are to handle
the words of the holy and repentant thief, crucified on his right hand: who
brake not forth into the like offense, with his fellow, neither was provoked by
the manifold example and number of reuilers, or enraged with the rigor and
grieuousnesse of his punishment, but reprehendeth him, and labors to bring
him to repentance. And herein shows Christian charity, reproving his fellow
Ioh. Hussus de passione Christi ex quatuor Euangelistis.
offender: and (as beseemed the witness of Christ) professed his true faith in
a Arnoldus Carnotensis de septem vltimis Domini verbis.
public auditory; and by a new kind of profession, (unmindful of his own
torment) disputed with that blasphemer, of righteousness and the fear of God,
etc.

The wrongs and injuries done to God, are by no means x Aquinas 2ae. 2ae. q.
33. artic. 2. Danaeus Ethices Christianae lib. 3. cap. 6. Ioh. Gersen in
tractatu de correptione prox.
sharply to reprove transgressors. And therefore the precept, thou shall not
hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor,
Leuit. 19. 17. For if the suppling oil of admonition will not prevail, to
heal the wounded (that is, such as securely go on in their sins) then must
we use sharper medicines, and pour in the wine of compunction. So Moses
expostulateth vehemently with Aaron, for making the golden Bernardus in Cantica
sermon. 44.
calfe Exodus 32. 21. Elias is not afraid to set before Achabs eyes, both his
exorbitant sins, and the heavy wrath and vengeance of God for the same, 1.
King. 21. And John the Baptist tells Herod Antipas boldly, that it was not
lawful for him to have his brothers wife, Matthew. 14. 4. Paul withstandeth
Peter to his face, when he dissembled and went not with a right foot De hac
Petri reprehensione sunt Augustini and Hieronymi Epistolae.
Gal. 2. 14. And there be many weighty causes which may enforce this duty upon
every Christian.

First, the earnest desire and zeal, to advance, and preserve the glory of
God: of which David, the zeal of thy house has consumed me, Psalm. 69. 9. And
Elias, I have been very zealous for the Lord of hosts, because the children of
Israel have broken thy covenant 1. King. 19. 20. Nehemias rebuked the Princes
and Rulers when they oppressed their brethren with usury, and he set a great
assembly against them, Neh. 5. 7.

Secondly, the profit and benefit arising from thence; for if thy brother hear
thee and thy reprehension, thou have gained him, Math. 18. 15. And in this
regard, we are charged, with fear to pull some out of the fire Jude 23. For
there be no bowels of mercy in him, who can weep for a body from which the
soul is departed, and does not lament that soul which God has forsaken.

Thirdly, the danger of neglect in this case; and that both in the offender,
and the sparer to reprove. For the sparer is hereby made, through his
conniuencie, an accessarie to the transgressor, and to all the Agapetus in
Capitulis admonitorijs ad Iustinianum. Augustinus de Ciuitate Dei lib. 1. cap.
9. Gregorius Mag. in pastorali.
sins which he commits, and might by his means have been hindered. And
this is that which God said to Eli the Priest, how he would judge his house for
ever, for the iniquity which he knew: because his sons ran into a slander,
and he stayed them not: 1. Sam. 3. 13. For they which behold evil done, and
be tongue-tyed to find fault, do deny to apply remedy to those wounds which
they might heal. In the offender, for hereby when in the beginning there is no
restraint, he is heartned to go on and increase in his wickedness. Absalom,
who had no punishment for the unnatural murder of his brother Ammon, falls
into a relapse, and commits parricide, seeking to take away the life and
kingdom of his Father, 2. Sam. 13. 28. and 15. 13.

In Paedagog. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Clemens Alexandrinus very fitly calls the Chirurgerie of the soul,
Augustine a In Enchiridio cap. 72.
spiritual alms: that we may apply and bestow the same to the recovering of
health, and increasing benefit unto others, these two rules are to be observed.

The first, that we labor to bring the offender to the knowledge of himself
and his fault, that he may understand how grievous it is and displeasing unto
God. Thus Nathan the Prophet dealt very cautelously with King David, setting
before him his offense, first under the covert and veil of a Parable,
afterward showed him (the curtain pulled aside) in his true shape the
ugliness of his adultery and murder: whereby forthwith confessing his
wickedness fled unto God for mercy, entreating pardon, by most earnest and
humble prayer, 2. Sam. 12. 7. 13. Psalm. 51. 12. etc.

The second is, that when the transgressor once knows his wickedness; we
strive to obtain thus much of him, that he may be heartily sorry for the same,
and endeavor by all means to amend it, and to reform himself; whereof there
is a singular and clear example in the Corinthians, whom the Apostle sharply
reproved for tolerating and bearing with an incestuous person amongst them, 2.
Cor. 7. 8. 9 10 for thereby they were made godly sorrowful: that is, seriously
fearing judgment and vengeance, wrought by the sentence of the law, accusing
and revealing sin, and the wrath of God against the same, yet not dispairing,
but comforting themselves upon the confidence of a Mediator, and for his sake
craving mercy: from whence proceed many sweet and pleasant fruits: Wenrichius
in locum.
.

1 Care, in amending those defects which the Apostle reprehended.

2 Clearing of themselves, desiring pardon (an undoubted proof of their
unfeigned repentance and amendment.)

3 Indignation, an holy anger against the incestuous person, author of the
public scandal.

4 Fear of the anger of God, and heavy punishments which be always attendants
upon sins, when they are not turned away by true conversion.

5 Desire to see and embrace Paul, who with so fatherly and tender a care
labored to procure the salvation of this Church of Corinth.

6 Zeal, which is such an affection, whereby the heart is stricken and pierced
with that offense which is committed and wrong offered to a person beloved, and
specially when the glory of God, and salvation of the Church is in question:
And this was now most vehement in these Corinthians, in witness and
confirmation whereof they excommunicated that wicked one.

7 Revenge, the effect of zeal, and has reference to the excommunication of
the incestuous party: whereby they defended the glory of God, and maintained
the honor and reputation of their Church. And by this example terrified others
from committing the like sin.

8 Demonstration of their innocence, disallowing both that present
uncleanness, and all other disorders by which the Church of Corinth was
defiled and stained. And upon those, by whose industry and labor offenders are
brought to stand thus affected, the blessing of God rests, Prou. 24. 25.

Rebuked him saying, fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation. The solemn form of the good thieves reprehension is expressed
in these words; and that for which he rebukes his fellow, is not so much his
outward blasphemy, which with an unclean mouth he spewed forth against
Christ, as the puddle and filthy sink from whence that came, which was the
want of the fear of God in his heart.

Those who fear not God run headlong into all kind of wickedness; and
therefore the Apostle after the rehearsal Romans 3. 18. And the self same does
the kingly Prophet affirm of Hypocrites and Epicures, setting down their shape
(as it were) unto the world thus: Wickedness says to the wicked man, even in
my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes, Psalm. 36. 1. And
Abraham when he went from the valley of Mambre into Palestina, and soiourned in
Gerar, dissembled Sarah to be his wife, because he thought the fear of God was
not in that place, and therefore they would kill him to enjoy her a beautiful
woman, Genesis 20. 11. 12. And such in Scripture are named sons of Belial, who
casting off the yoke, let loose the raynes to their own lusts, and defile
themselves with all manner of wickedness, and think nothing unlawful, Deuteronomy.
13. 13. cast away God, and seduce others also: Judge. 19. 22. The men of Gibeah
in Benjamin, impudently defend their execrable filthiness, and without all
respect of shame desire to abuse the Leuite, coming as a stranger amongst
them. O detestable wickedness, thereby manifesting that they were the
scholars of the Sodomites. And it is said of the sons of Eli, that they were
wicked, knew not the Lord, took the portion due to the Priest by force, from
those who came to offer sacrifice, and lay with the women that were assembled
at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, 1. Sam. 2. 13. 22. But in
whose hearts the reverent fear of Gods name is ingrafted, there shines in
their lives, spotless innocence, for it is holy, Psalm 19. 9. And therefore
very aptly does Augustine Tractatu. 9 in Iohannis Epistolam primam.
compare it to a needle, which when any thing is sowed, makes a passage, and
draws the thread after it: and this once entered into the soul, carries
with it the whole Cassianus Institutionum. l. 4
rank of virtues, and is the introduction to all religious duties, and
therefore every where fear and obedience are joined together. So Job is said
to be a just and upright man, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil, Io,
1. 1. And it is the commendation of Simeon, that he was a just man, and feared
God, Luke, 2. 25. that is, watchfully careful not to offend. And this was the
effectual reason that moved Joseph to set his brethren free (upon a certain
condition) who had deserved so evil of him: and the only engine whereby he
overcame the daily entisements of his wanton mistress, soliciting him to yield
to her unchaste desires, Genesis 39. 9 and 42. 18. and that which encouraged
Obadiah, steward of Achabs house, to hide the Prophets of the Lord, (whose
blood persecuting Iezabel thirsted after,) and fed them daily with bread and
water: he feared God greatly: 1. King. 18. 3. 13.

Sanctify the Lord of hosts, let him be your fear, and let him be your
dread, Esaias, 8. 13. and (as the wise man concludes his book,) Fear God and
keep his commandments, for this is the whole man: he will bring every work
to judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good or evil, Eccles. 12.
14. 1. For his power is invincible: hen he will punish, none can deliver; and
this is proounded to men, that the should consider thereof, Psalm. 50. 22. For,
by the confession of proud Nebuchadnetzar, his power is everlasting, and his
kingdom from generation to generation: and according to his will he works
in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay
his hand, and say, What do thou? Dan. 4. 31. 32.

2. His wisdom is infallible; all things are (...) de natiua huius vocabuli
significatione, Faber in Agonistico, lib. 1. cap. 11.
naked and open unto him, Heb. 4. 13. hell and destruction are before his eyes,
much more the hearts of the sons of men, Prou. 15. 11. He knows our down
sitting and vprising, and understands our thoughts afar off. Psalm. 139. 3.
4. Wherefore he pulled off the vizard from the face of dissembling Ananias and
Saphira, who dealt closely as though God had not known the heart, (but men may
lie to him, yet cannot deceive him) and they both perished by sudden death,
Act. 5. 5. 10. He shows his Prophet all the abominations of the people,
committed in secret, Ezech. 8. 5. 6. And this is that whereof David gives
Solomon warning upon his deathbed, 1. Chron. 28. 9. For he knows what every
man does, he sees them inwardly, examineth them inwardly, Augustinus Tractatu
26. in Iohannis Euangelium.
and accordingly does either condemn or crown them.

3. His Justice is inflexible; he is not corrupted with bribes, nor deceived by
craftiness; to him nothing is secret, nothing unpunished. Therefore Saint Paul
terrifieth sinners with former examples, 1. Corinthians. 10. 4. 10. and also Peter,
2. Pet. 2. 4. 13. And Joshua taking his last farewell of the Israelites,
exhorts them in this manner, fear the Lord, and serve him in uprightness
and truth: Joshua 24. 14. For that that man is blessed who fears the Lord,
and delights greatly in his commandments. Psalm. 112. 1. etc. And indeed
this fear is a rich and fruitful Paradise, yielding abundant blessings; some
whereof the Divines have reckoned in this sort.

1. Saving knowledge; for the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom Psalm.
111. which Aquas 2. 2. quaest. 19. artic. 7.
is not to be considered only as it is speculatiue for knowledge, but also as
practique for direction of life, whereby men do reverence God and obey him.

2 The repressing of sin, Eccles. 1. verse 21. For from whence comes it,
that so many arc hardened in their wickedness? only because they have no
fear of God: Romans 3. 18. But happy is that man whose heart is filled with this
Bernardus in sermon. 55. in Cantica.
threefold fear, first, for grace received, secondly, for grace lost, and
thirdly for grace recovered. And he that does thus, is one of that stone water
pots in the marriage house, where Christ was present, filled up to the brim,
containing not two, but three measures, that so he may obtain the blessing of
Christ, who turned water into the wine of gladness.

3. The avoiding of sin; for the fear of the Lord is to hate evil, and
pride and arrogance, and the evil way, Prou. 8. 13. As the Sun beams
coming in at a little chinke or crany of the house, do manifest the Johannes
Climachus.
least things that are in it, even the smallest dust that flies up and down;
so the fear of God settled in the heart, bewrays all the faults thereof,
though they lurk in never so secret corners: whereby a man is made wary and
circumspect in his ways: And in this respect, the spirit of fear (as Barnard
Sermon de primordijs medijs and nouissimis nostris and sermon 6. in Psalm. Qui
habitat.
affirms) is more forceable to withstand sin, then either shame or sorrow;
for it Laurentius Iustinianus in tractatu, de ligno vitae.
reformeth the offender, abandoneth wickedness, and prepares the will
continually to do well. The Gregorius Magnus, moral, lib. 6. cap. 24.
weight of fear is the anchor of the soul, so that such as tremble at the
thunder of Gods wrath, though they had Giges Plato de Rep. lib. 2. Hom. Iliade
5. et in eand em Eustathius. Nonnus, in (...) seu (...) historiarum quibus vsus
est Nazianzenus in prima oratione contra Iulianu^, cap. 54. 55. Caelius
Rhodinginus Antiquarum, lib. 6. cap. 11. 12.
Ring or Plutoes helmet, that they might go invisible, and have fit
opportunity, yet would they not be provoked to do any thing amiss.

4 Gods mercy, for as a father has compassion on his children, so has the
Lord on them that fear him. Psalm. 103. 13. and looks on him that is poor,
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his word, Esaias, 66. 2. Nothing more
sweet then this promise, nothing more effectual to comfort a languishing
soul; especially, such who feel the griefs and calamities: unto which our
nature is subject. For if God carry a fatherly affection toward us, then there
can be no sin so heinous, no Mollerus in Psalm. 103.
adversity so great, which may shut up this way, whereby Gods mercy should come
unto us, so we be found among the number of those who fear him: that is, rest
in him, ask pardon of sins and mitigation of punishment.

5. A sufficiency of those things which De his omnibus consulatur Dictionarium
Pauperum.
belong to the sustentation and maintenance of this life. Therefore fear the
Lord all ye his Saints; for nothing wants to them that fear him; the Lions
do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want nothing
that is good, Psalm. 34. 9. 10. He feeds those who contemn him, shall he
neglect those that fear him? This were injustice, but there is no
unrighteousness with the Lord; Godliness has the promise of this life, and
that which is to come: etc. 1. Timoth. 4. 8. He then who would have a
perpetual and infallibly-true prognostication of all events which can fall out
in the world, let him look into the 26 of Leuiticus and the 28. of
Deuteronomie because the things mentioned in them are not fore told by
starre-gasing Augustinus de doctrina Christiana cap. 21.
Astrologers, nor Nativity casters, who (sell unto men miserable bondage, and
bring the cursed thing of Ierico into Origenes in Iosuam.
Jerusalem, and defile the tents of the Lord) but of him who is not as man,
that he should lie, nor as the son of man that he should repent, Number. 23. 19.
All whose words in respect of the Philo Iudaem.
certeinty are of like force with oaths.

6. Everlasting life and glory; for it shall go well with them at the last and
in the day of their death who fear the Lord, Eccles. 1. 13. And excellent is
that goodness which God has set apart for those that fear him. And in that
great day of retribution, wherein all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and
burnt up, and have neither root nor branch left, to such as fear the Lord
shall the sun of righteousness arise, and health be under their wings,
Malach. 4. 2. Serve the Lord therefore in fear and rejoice in trembling, kiss
the son least he be angry and ye perish in the way: when his wrath shall
suddenly burn, blessed are all those that trust in him: Psalm. 2. 11. 12.

Rebuked him saying, fear thou not God seeing thou art in the same
condemnation. Condemnation by a Synecdoche is here put for punishment; and the
whole speech is thus much in sense and meaning, as if he should have said,
Fear thou not God, but addest this to the rest of thy outrageous sins
formerly committed (to increase the number and heap threof) thy heinous
blasphemy? and that now, when thou art to stand and be arreigned at the
judgment bar, where thou must give an account both of all thy life before
passed, and of this present impiety. And thus the good thief shows a just
cause of his former reproof, by an argument taken from the likeness of the
condition, in respect of punishment.

When the hand of God lies heavy upon us, specially submit our selves humbly
under the same. And so David, thrust out of his kingdom by the subtle
practice of his disloyal son Absalom, yields himself to be disposed of,
according to Gods will 2. Sam. 16. 10. was dumb and opened not his mouth
because the Lord had done it, Psalm. 39. 9. Ezechias after he received the
message, to set his house in an order, (for he should not live, but dye,)
chatters like a Quoties expendimus, quae a nobis perpera^ facta sunt, pro cantu
cum columba gemilum edamus. Hiru^do ore patente, in nido pict a auxilij
implorati est Hieroglyphicoy. Picrius in lib. 22. Hieroglyphicis
Crane or a Swallow, mourns like a dove, lifts up his eyes on high unto
God, and desires comfort, Esaias 38. 14. Aaron when he is commanded to go up to
the mount Hor, and disrobe himself of his Priestly garments, and put them upon
Eleazar his son, and so resign over his office, and there be gathered to his
Fathers, obeys. Numb. 20. 26. Just it is, that we should bear the wrath of
God, because we have sinned against him. Micah 7. 9.

Use. In all our calamities therefore how grievous soever they be, let us
acknowledge. God to berighteous; we have sinned and committed iniquity and
done wickedly (says that great Historiographer of the world, now a captive in
Babilor, yea we have rebelled and departed from thy precepts O Lord, and from
thy judgments, etc. Righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open
shame, Dan. 9. 5. 7. And David, Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy
judgments: Psalm. 119. 137. which verse of the Prophet, Integra historia extat
apud Zonarum, Annalium tom. 3. and Glycom, Annaliu^ suorum part 4.
Mauritius the Emperor then uttered, when he saw his wife and children put to
death before his eyes: and fitting himself to lay his own neck upon the
block, confessed that he had deserved thus to be dealt withal, who might
for a small sum have redeemed the life of his soldiers taken by the enemy,
and would not, but suffered them all to be put to the sword. For as Gregory
truly, the Patient that knows the rottenness and putrefaction of his ulcer,
is willing to be lanched by the Chyrurgion; and he who understands rightly
the number and greatness of his offenses, thinks all which he suffers to
be less then is deserved; entreats for mercy, and willingly bears the
chasticement imposed, Ierem. 10. 24. For if God should enter into Judgment
with his servants, no flesh could be justified in his sight, Psalm. 143. 2.
And therefore we must appeal from his justice to his mercy, Heb. 4. 16,

We are indeed righteously here (for we receive things worthy of that we
have done) but this man has done nothing amiss. The blaspheming Jews Arnoldus
Carnotensis, de vitimis septom Christi verbis.
sharpened their poysonful tongs, and with one consent cried out against Christ,
spewed forth taunts and reproaches, vaunted as though they had overcome him,
now hanging upon the Cross. The Apostles fled; the cursed multitude only
hartned with wicked speeches of others, made themselves sport, by scoffing at
him; and the other thief consented, vpbraiding that he could neither save
himself, nor others, and scorned his fellow, who looked for help of him,
which was in the same plight and punishment that they were, and thought it a
vain and idle thing to believe that he was a King and God, who suffered the
same torment and ignominy which they did; so one of them was a scoffer, the
other a Confessor; he reproacheth, this prays, hops, loves; and between
those two, is present a Judge to decide the controversy; who pronouncing the
sentence, condemns the blasphemer to hell, and appoints the Confessor to
the kingdom. This thief of whom we now speak, is of a meek and mild
heart, such as beseems the witness of Christ; he brings forth proofs of
his faith before the public Auditory: and after a new manner of instruction,
not mindful of his own torment, disputes with the blasphemer of
righteousness, and the fear of God. For thus he speaks (Fear thou not
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation. We are indeed rightly here, for
we receive these things worthy of that we have done, but this man has done
nothing amiss:) he believes and confesses, gives testimony of Christ's
innocence, rebukes the slanderer, spares not himself; is his own accuser,
and pronouncing a true sentence against himself, the condemnation is like, but
the cause differs; for he (meaning Christ) is appointed unto this, performing
obedience unto his Fathers will; we according to our deserts, for our
offenses. But from whence had this thlefe so sudden a change wrought in him?
who a little Tanlerus in meditationibus, de vita Jesus. cap. 43.
before was a blasphemer, now become a Confessor, that he was able to discern
good from evil, accusing the trespasser, excusing the innocent. O sweet Jesus,
this was the soddain alteration wrought by the power of thy right hand, at
which he now hanged: this inwardly touched him, and presently turned him into
another man; O Lord thou did hereby declare thy divine omnipotency, who so
speedily of a stone, did make a son of Abraham; he received this light
from no other means, but that which was set in the candlestick of the Cross,
and shining in darkness, turned the night into day. And what was this else,
but that the Lord Jesus of his infinite and mere goodness beheld him with the
eye of mercy, in whom was no merit? for so it was his good pleasure. For as
God of his only love gives that to the Elect, which he owes not unto them;
so according to the Rule of his Justice, he repayeth that to the wicked, which
is due unto them. Therefore this thief, before the Lord shined upon him with
the beams of his grace, was as deep in blasphemy, as the other his fellow:
and thereby showed, what he was then of himself by nature, and what he was now
made by the work of grace.

The conversion of a sinner is the free work of Augustinus in Enchiridio, cap.
32.
grace; children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. conceived of unclean seed, Job. 14 4.
corrupt with iniquity from the womb, Psalm. 51. 7. carrying about with us the
image of earthly Adam, 1. Corinthians. 15 49. deprived of the glory of God, Romans 3.
23. the frame of whose heart is only evil, Genesis 6 5. and wicked, Ierem. 17.
7. the understanding blind, Ephesians. 4. 18. the will rebellious, Romans 7. 15. and
8. 7. having no power or aptness to that which is good, 2 Corinthians. 3. 5. but
it is God who works both the will and the deed, and that of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2. 1^. August, de bono perseuerentiae, cap. 13. and 17.
This we must believe with the heart, and acknowledge with the mouth this is
holy, this is true, that so there may be humble and submisse confession, and
all ascribed to God, who does not only Idem Epist. ad Iulianum.
reveal knowledge, that we may understand what to do, but inspire charity,
that we may live according to that which we have learned. For no man comes
unto Christ except the Father draw him, John 6. 44. and this is the great
commendation of Idem in Euang: Iohannis tractatu 26.
Grace, etc. if we have need to be drawn unto Christ, then are we
unwilling of our selves to believe, then are we enforced by a kind of
violence; and the will not only raised up and wakened. and they are said to
be drawn, Caluinus in 6. c. put. Iohannis.
whose minds God enlightneth, and boweth, and frames their hearts unto
obedience. This term of drawing does not imply any violent or outward
compuision, yet signifies an effectual and powerful working of the holy
Ghost, whereby the unwilling are made willing. And the truth hereof is to be
seen in all the degrees of our conversion. For 1. the beginning it self is of
God from whom comes every good gift, Iam. 1. 17. he takes aaway the flinty
and stony heart, Ezech. 38. 26. by his preventing grace making us willing, and
by his subsequent grace enabling that our willingness be not vain and to no
purpose. For that which is borne of flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3. 6. and without me
(says Christ) you can do nothing: Ioh. 15. 5. Least any should think that
the Augustinus in Euangelium Iohannis tract. 81.
branch could bring forth some fruit though little (for he persisteth in the
borrowed resemblance taken from a vine) he says not, that without me ye can
do but little, but nothing; therefore whether little or much, neither is done
but by him, without whom nothing can be done: the divine grace following,
helps forward a good purpose, but that should not have been at all, except
grace had gone before. A good endeavor begun is furthered by grace, but even
Idem contra duas epistolas Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 9.
that is inspired by him who works the will and the deed, etc. Phil. 2. 13.

2. That we rest in any wholesome and good inspiration, this also comes of
the Lord; for faith is his gift, Ephesians. 2. 8. 1. Timoth. 1. 12. And of Lidia it
is said, when she attended to the word which Paul preached, that God opened
her heart, Act. 16. 14. For this is to be holden as an undoubted truth, that
we have no Fulgentius ad Getam cap. 20.
power to will, or work that which is good, except we receive it from the free
gift of Gods mercy: who Augustinus in Enchiridio cap. 32. Aquin. 1 ae. 2 ae.
quaest. 109. articulo 6.
prepares the will which is to be helped, and helps it once prepared, etc.

3. He gives the grace of obedience, inspiring both the affection and the
Augustinus epist. 105.
effect. Therefore David's request is, O Lord open the eyes of mine
understanding, that I may see the wonders of thy law, Psalm. 119. 18. and
Salomons speech, Bow our hearts unto thee, that we may walk in all thy ways,
and keep thy commandments and thy statutes, and thy laws which thou have
commanded. 1. King. 8. 58.

4. From him also proceeds Bernardus de aduentu Dom. sermon. 7.
perseverance and continuance in any good; for the best and the most perfectly
regenerate, living in this region of the shadow of death, in the infirmity of
the body, and place of temptation, are easy to be seduced, weak to any holy
work, frail to resist; if they would discern between good and evil, they
are deceived: if do good, they faint: if withstand evil, they are overcome.
Therefore God must strengthen the endeauours of such as are sanctified, or else
they will fail Ephesians. 4. 13. he susteyneth those that run, that they fall
not, but go forward till they obtain 1. Corinthians. 9. 24. He directs and
governs their course, that they go not astray Psalm. 119. 11. Therefore David
elsewhere prays, leave me not, nor forsake me O God of my salvation, Psalm.
27. 9. And the Apostle expresses this spiritual blessing in the form of a
prayer: thereby teaching, where we must ask, from whence we must look for
it, and that in most choice words: desiring the God of all grace, which has
called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, to make you perfect,
confirm, strengthen and stablish you. 1. Pet. 5. 10.

1. If then there come into our Granatensis in postillae part 1. concione 1.
feriae 4. post Dominicam passionem.
mind any good thought, Use.
or do proceed from our mouth any holy word, or we perform any religious
work, if we can send forth any hearty figh for sin, or have any sanctified
desire, if any sparkle of Gods love, if any spiritual comfort, if any fear of
hell, or care of eternal life be in us, if we overcome any temptation of the
enemy, let us remember, that these are the sweet drops of the deaw of Gods
mercy falling from heaven and making us grow up into eternal blessedness.
Wherefore we must ascribe nothing to our selves and our own power, but all to
his grace: and say with the Prophet, unto thee O Lord my strength will I sing,
for God is my defense and my merciful God, Psalm. 59. 17.

2. Because these Chemnitius in lecis The^ ^^gicis titulo de viribus humanus.
gifts are not ours, but wrought in us by the holy Ghost, therefore let us
yield our selves obedient to his motions, and quench them not 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
David felt after his fall, when he prayeh, make me to hear joy and gladness,
create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me,
restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit,
Psalm. 51. 8. 10. 12. And the Apostle after many both exhortations unto special
virtues, and dehortations from sundry vices, concludes with this admonition,
Not to grieve the holy spirit of God, by which we are sealed up unto the day
of redemption. Ephesians. 4. 30.

3. From hence arises comfort unto us, who live in the weakness of the flesh
and rebellion of the law which is in our members; not the flesh, but the holy
Ghost has begun this work, (our conversion) therefore he will perfect it,
Phil. 1. 6. For his gifts and graces are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. and,
whom he loves, those he loves unto the end. Ioh. 13. 1.

4. When we find in our selves any happy beginnings of faith, love,
repentance, and the like, let us not be reachlesse, and without care, or puffed
up therewith, but continue in humble and constant prayer, and be earnest
suitors unto God for the continuance of his mercy; because we can neither
procure any spiritual blessing which is wanting, nor increase that which is
bestowed, but by him alone without whom we can do nothing; for every good gift
and every perfect giving comes from above, from the father of lights, Iam. 1.
17. And God who has commanded to ask, has promised to give. Matthew. 7. 7.

We are indeed righteously here, (for we receive things worthy of that we have
done) but this man has done nothing amiss. There is in this clause an
Occupation or the preventing of a doubt, which the blaspheming thief might
make, reasoning thus; that because it was said, they all were in the like
condemnation, suffered the same torment, that therefore the desert of them
(crucified together) was one and the same. To which his fellow answers by a
distinction, Thou and I suffer righteously, and receive, by the sentence of the
Law, things worthy of that we have done, but this man is innocent, unjustly
condemned, undeservedly punished.

In all chastisements, how sharp and grievous soever he deals not with us
according to our sins Psa. 103. 10. Secondly our transgressions are the
enforcing causes of all the evil which we suffer; I will bear the wrath of
the Lord, says the Prophet, because I have sinned against him. Micah 7. 9. For
except he were provoked, he had rather spare than punish; and when he is
provoked, remembers Saluianus lib. 1. de prouidentia and gubernatione Dei.
mercy in justice. Therefore albeit the whole people had trespassed in making
the golden Calfe, yet vengeance came not upon the whole, but the merciful God
stroke one part with the sword, that he might amend the other by that example;
showing unto all both his severity in punishing, and pity in pardoning. But
of this point I have spoken before.

Let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God 1. Pet. 5. 6. and, when
he strikes with his rod, cry, spare Lord, Joel 2. 17. for it is his mercy that
we are not consumed, Lament. 3. 12. Therefore Eli when he heard the determined
punishment against his house, for the wickedness of his sons, submissiuely
thus said, It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever pleases him, 1. Sam. 3. 18.

Secondly, let us, sinful and miserable wretches, subject to infinite
miseries, justly inflicted, make our whole life a continual practice of
unfeigned repentance; and, for the better effecting hereof, these
considerations, are to be meditated upon, by every Christian soul.

1. The commandment of God himself; for thus he speaks unto Israel, return
and I will not let my wrath fall on you, for I am merciful, and will not keep
my anger. Ierem. 3. 12. And, John the voice of the Word cries in the
wilderness, Repent, bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Math. 3. 8.

This doctrine began and was first preached in Paradise, when God rebuked Adam
and Eua, by the law, and comforted them with the Gospel, Adam vbies? per hoc
quod vocat, signum dat, quod ad paenitentiam reuocat, quod requirit, aperte
insinuat quod damnare iure possit peccatores. Gregor. Mag. 2. Moral. Tertull.
lib. 2. aduersus Marcionem.
Genesis 3. 9. 11. LEX.


2. The threatenings denounced and the examples of vengeance executed upon the
rebellious and disobedient should be unto us powerful admonitions for
amendment; and to this end are urged by the two chief Apostles Paul 1. Cor. 10
5. 6. etc. and Peter, 2. Pet. 2. 3. 4. etc. for he who is merciful to bear
with weak sinners, is just to punish stubborn contemners; and so he did
manifest himself to Moses Exo. 34. 6. and as it were thundering from mount
Sinai, God judges the righteous, and him that contemns God every day: except
he return, he has whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready.
Psalm. 7. 11. 12.

3. The certeinty of the last judgment; for because the heavens shall pass
away with a noise, and the elements melt with heat, and the earth with the
works that are therein be burnt up, Euangelium. Ponam inimicitia^ interte etc.
and hic incipit liber bellorum Domini. Rupertus de victoria viri lib.
Premittitur Christus qui destruat opera Diaboli 1. Ioh. 3. 8. and hac de
venturo semine (...) primos parents afflictos and maerentes erexit Deus.
etc. what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godliness? 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11. For we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things which are done in this
body, according to that he has done whether it be good or evil, 2. Cor. 5.
10. And if any other thing, then much more the remembrance of this may strike
terror into men's hearts: For it shall be a day of wrath, a day of trouble and
heaviness, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity, a day of
clouds and darkness, a day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced Cities
and high towers etc. Zeph. 1. 15. a day of revelation Romans 2. 5. and therefore
is elegantly called by one of the Fathers, Gods Macarius homilia 4. nam hoc
mense herbaru^ radices quae in terra quasi sepultae iacebant, resurgere and se
ostendere incipiunt. and inde nomen habet quod tunc tellus recludatur ad
profundendum fetus varios hieme conceptos.
April. And then, on the one side shall stand accusing sins, on another
terrifying justice; beneath the gulf of hell opened, above an angry Judge:
within a stinging conscience; without, the world burning: the just shall scarce
be saved, the wicked thus overtaken, whether shall he turn himself? It is
impossible to escape, intolerable to appear. Therefore what remains, o
sinner, but that thou should with tears bewail thy life all thy life time.
(...) Anselmus de miseria hominis.


4. The sweet fruits and benesits which spring and arise from true and
seasonable repentance (for God receives such who turn unto him) as pardon of
sins, reconciliation, the gift of the spirit, tranquillity and peace of
conscience arising from faith, the hearing and acceptance of our prayers,
mitigation of punishments, and at the last blessedness in heaven: for God does
assure, unto such as truly repent, mercy confirmed by his oath Ezech. 33. 11.
Therefore let him that will receive life (which be Augustines words) change his
life; for repentance is the medecin of sin; and effectual is that religious
admonition of Gregory, to Gregorius, and apud eundem multa sunt huc
pertinentia. Homil. 25. and in cap. 10. primi Regum.
nourish good hope in us: David fell, let no man presume of himself and be
high minded: David rose again, let none be too much cast down and despair.

But this man has done nothing evil. This thief hitherto has used two
arguments of reproof against his fellow; the one taken from the paritie of
their condition, (thou art in the same condemnation,) the other from the right
of their desert, (we suffer things worthy that we have done) now adds a third
reason, from the innocence of Christ, (but this man has done nothing evil)
which is in sum thus much: none of all those things which he suffers, has
he procured should be laid upon him, for he never committed act worthy of
death; wherefore, is there no fear of God before thine eyes, who do so
impudently reproach this innocent, whom we see undeservedly punished: and by
this malapertnesse show, that thou art void of all piety? And God did
indeed sundry ways manifest, the unspotted innocence of his son; as by the
testimony of Pilate himself Matthew. 27. 18. 23. 24. John 19. 10. of his wife,
by sending a message unto him when he sat upon the judgment seat,
admonishing that he should do nothing against that holy man Matthew. 27. 19. the
mournful lamentation of the women of Jerusalem, who followed him unto the
cross, Luke 27. 37. the confession of the Centurion, when he beheld the
miracles at his death Matthew. 27. 54. and the commendation of this thief; for
such an High priest became us, who was holy, blameless, undefiled, separate
from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, Heb. 7. 26.

Besides other instructions which the diligent meditation for he did no evil,
neither was there any guile found in his mouth Esaias 53. 9. he knew no sin 2. Corinthians. 5. 20. And such he is by the quality of his nature, because he was
conceived without spot by the holy Ghost, lived always purely and incorruptly,
and so he never offended in word nor deed; and therefore his name is Jehovah
the Lord our righteousness, Ierem. 23. 6. the most holy, Dan. 9. 24. shadowed
under the type of the Paschall Lamb, which must be without blemish, Exodus 12.
6. From whence the Apostle frames his exhortation, to keep the feast not with
old leaven, neither in the leaven of malitiousnesse and wickedness, but with
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1. Cor. 5. 8. And Saint Peter his
admonition, that therefore we should be holy, knowing that we are not redeemed
with corruptible things as silver and gold, from our vain conversation
received by the tradition of the Fathers, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb immaculate and without spot, 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. And the
Angel sent to Mary (a maiden and a mother) when she put the question how she
should conceive, since she knew not a man, thus resolves her doubt, The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall ouershadow
thee, therefore also that holy thing, which shall be borne of thee, shall be
called the son of God, Luke 1. 35.

First, from hence we may gather an undoubted assurance of Use. 2
our salvation. For as by the offense of one (which is Adam) the fault came
upon all men to condemnation, so by the justifying of one, (Christ Jesus) the
benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life: and, as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of that one,
shall many also be made righteous, Romans 5. 18. 19. He has delivered us Heb. 2.
14. and blotted out the hand writing which was against us Coloss. 2. 14. Let us
therefore strive that we may be found in him, not having our own
righteousness, but his. Philip. 3. 9. For the Lord paid the servants debt,
the just suffered the offenders punishment, he bare our sins upon his body on
the tree, and by his stripes we are healed. 1. Pet. 2. 24.

unspeakable comfort, the body and soul of Christ our mediator was sanctified
in the conception, therefore are they a holy and spotless sacrifice, whereby
all our corruption is purged; and his blood does cleanse us from all sin, 1.
John 1. 7. By which we that once were far off, are now near, etc. for he
has reconciled unto God both Jew and Gentile by his Cross, Ephesians. 2. 13. 16.
Christ his death has freed us from death, his life from error, his grace from
sin, etc.

the fullness of his salvation and innocence does cleanse our poliuted Mass,
and at the last shall wholly and perfectly deliver us from corruption; and by
the same spirit, wherewith the word sanctified his own soul and body, shall
he in the time appointed of God restore also our souls and bodies unto his
image, 1. Corinthians. 15. 49. 50. For flesh and blood, ( Tertullianus de
resurrectione.
understanding the sinful quality, and not the essential substance,) cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Sweet are those words of Bernardus in
sententijs.
Barnard; Mankind was sick of a threefold disease: in his beginning, middle
and end; his birth unclean, his life wicked, death dangerous: Christ was
borne, lived and dyed: his birth has cleansed ours, his life instructed ours,
his death destroyed ours.

Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. There is in these words
an Arnoldus Carnotensis de 7. vltimis Christi verbis.
Apostrophe, wherein the holy thief turns his speech, from reproving his
fellow, and offers up a supplication to Christ; and becoming a famous
Preacher, offers the sweet smelling odours of prayer and confession and put
his blasphemous fellow unto silence, requires the reward and honor of his
victory, and faith, Remember me O Lord, etc. This petition is mystical,
Gueuara de monte Caluar. part 2. cap. 21. and 22.
and full of zeal; for in sense and meaning he says thus much: Oh holy In hac
^ratiou^ ista adprime notanda sunt: 1. Quiseam fudit, latro. 2 Cui Christo in
(...) vna pendenti. 3. Vbi, a cruce in qua ipse pepe^dit. 4. Quando, cum tam
morti vicinus esset, etc. Arnoldus Carnotensis.
Prophet, O blessed Lord Jesus, I do adjure thee by the blood which thou
sheddest, and entreat thee by the love in which thou suffer, that when thou
come into thy Kingdom, thou would be mindful of me; And herein may we
behold a wonderful faith; if we consider either the person of this
petitioner, or of Christ, to whom he makes his request: Of Christ, he now did
hang upon the Cross, the most despised amongst men, most shamefully entreated,
laden with tauntes and reproachful contumelies; yet this thief acknowledges
him whom the Disciple Maximus Episcopu^ sermon, qui est inter Ambrosianos, 44.
Leo primus de passione, sermon. 2. Ioh. Hussus in Harmonoa passionis ex quatuor
Euang^lijs.
denied: honored him suffering, whom Judas kissing betrayed; of him the sweet
witness of peace is treacherously tendered; of this the gri^uous wounds of the
Cross are honored. If the person of the Petitioner, that which we here
read, is Idem, ibidem.
miraculous; 1. he confesses his sin, 2. the innocence of Christ, 3.
^raueth mercy, is not withdrawn or held back, neither by fear of the Jews,
standing by, nor of his own torment, nor his fellows blasphemy, nor the
apparent infirmity of Christ: but beleened in him, whom he beheld dying in
humane weakness (as a frail man) whom the Apostles denied, though they had
seen him work miracles by divine power. And in the course of his forepassed
life, no Leo primu^ de passione, sermon. 2.
exhortation persuaded, no instruction taught, no Preacher kindled this faith:
he saw none of those things which Christ before had done, the healing of the
sick, the giving sight to the blind; the raising of the dead now ceased; he
was not brought up in the School of Christ, but in the d^nne of thieves, where
he lost (if ever he had any) all sense of humanity and godliness; and yet now
acknowledges him to to be a Lord and King, whom he saw partaker of the like
punishment; asks and looks for a Kingdom of one crucified: glory from a
man extremely dishonored: salvation from one condemned; And indeed this
consideration may astonish any; For Abraham believed God, but speaking from
Chrysostomus sermon de l^trone. Iansenius in concordia Euangdica, cap. 143.
heaven, Genesis 12. 16. Esaias, but setting upon his throne of Glory. Cap. 6. 1.
Moses, but appearing in the bush that burnt, and was not consumed, Exodus 3. 4.
5. others believed Christ, but when he was yet alive, and being present saw
him call the dead out of their graves: John 11. 45. But this beholds him
dying, and prays unto him, as setting in heaven, and makes supplication unto
him as a King, Tanlerus in meditationibus, de vita Jesus Christi, cap. 43.
whom the Jews (who knew the Law and the Prophets) despitefully crucified:
acknowledges that it is in his power to give the Kingdom of heaven, and that
then, when his own Disciples either denied or forsook him. Wonderful
therefore was this faith, running from that cluster of grapes, which was wrung
from under the Wine Press of the Cross. I speak not this to the end, that
any should too much admire this wretched man, but worship and embrace Christ,
who at this time, so debased in the eye of the world and according to the
outward show, declared so great power, and vouchsafed such mercy unto him;
that, so whosoever does rejoice, might learn to rejoice in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.
30.

So rich is the mercy, and so great the love of God toward repentant sinners,
that he does not only forgive their trespasses, but furnish them (...).
Manuel Paleologus Imperator, oratione senta.
also with special gifts and endowments. What were the sins of Manasses,
and how outrageous we may read, 2. King. 21. from the second verse to the
senenteenth; yet God showed mercy, and employed him in the restoring of both
religion and policy decayed, 2. Chron. 33. 14. who more offended Christ then
Peter, whom he denied simply in word, afterward by oath, and cursing that he
knew him not, Math. 26. 70. 72: 73. yet when he rose from the dead, as his
especiallcare, would have his resurrection by name, and in particular told
unto him Mar. 16. 7. that so he might comfort Georgius Wirth. de vita Christi
ex quatuor Euangelistis, lib. 5. c. 66. Si hune Angelus non n^minatim
exprimeret, qui magistrum negauerat, venire inter dis^ipul^s non a^deret:
vocatur ergo ex nomine ne desperet ex negatione, Gregor homilia 21.
him, lest he should be discouraged for his denial, and conceive that he was
utterly cast off, and deprived of his Apostleshippe: and does most graciously,
as it were, confirm again unto him his dignity, and commit his sheep and
lambs to be fed of him: John 21. 14.

What benefit we are to receive from this so great and tender mercy, Saint
Paul teaches us by his own example, when he says, It is a faithful saying,
and worthy by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners; for I my self was a persecutor, a blasphemer, and an
oppressor; nevertheless for this cause was I received to mercy, that Jesus
Christ should first show on me all long suffering, unto the example of them,
which should in time to come believe in him unto eternal life: 1. Timoth. 1.
15. 16. And is all Augustinus de his verbis, Apostoli.
one, as if he should, thus have spoken to every spiritually-sicke person,
dispairing of himself: he who healed me, sent me unto thee, and bad me go
and tell thee how long I was diseased, and how soon healed; how he called unto
me from out of heaven, and with one word cast me down, with another raised me
up, with the third, freed and crowned me: what fear you? why do you doubt? I
who am now sound, standing and secure, speak to you sick, weak, and
distrusting; Are you diseased? come and be healed; blind? come and receive
sight: and you that are recovered, be thankful. And the Evangelist does
propound unto us this unspeakable love of Christin three Parables: of the
wandering sheep lost, gr^^t, and prodigal child; in the first whereof, as the
cause of default, may be noted infirmity: in the second, ignorance. in the
third, stubbornenesse: yet the wandering sheep is sought up and brought home,
the lost groat found, the unthrifty child received at his return; for there
is no malady so great, but that the Almighty and merciful Physician, will and
can heal Luke, 15. And therefore calls the wearied and heavy laden to come
unto him, and promises rest, Math. 11. 28. Est inter G^rsonis opera de hac
Christi sententia tractatus noninutilis.
that where sin has flowed, grace may ouerflow, Romans 5. 20. Of this point
more has already been delivered.

Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Hitherto some thing has been spoken of the good thieves reproof of
his blaspheming fellow, and his own Petition made unto Christ: now follows
Christ's answer, and grant made unto the same. Wherein he promises to give
him Paradise; and this promise is illustrated from the circumstance of time
(this day) from the society of those with whom he shall converse there (with
me) from the certainty of performance, confirmed by an oath, (V^rily I say unto
thee.)

Verily I say unto thee. This Amen D^ vocabulo Amen, Angelus Caninius, de locis
Scripturae Hebrai^is, cap. 5. A Christo vsurpatur in Euangelio Iohann^
quinquagie^; ab Apostolo Paulo decies and octi^s, in Apocalypsi quinquies: in
Epistolis Iohannis ter.
here used, and Englished verily, is a vehement asseueration, and frequent with
Christ, oftentimes doubled in the Gospel, according to Saint John; and an
Hebrew word now received every where, and is (as it were) made a free Denizon
in all languages, derived from that Root, by which fidelity and truth is
signified: and the use thereof is twofold; first, in wishing or desiring, and
is translated by the 70. Interpreters, So be it, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. As in those
solemn blessings and cursings, to which all the people answered, Amen.
Secondly in earnest affirmations; and is as much as truly, and steadfastly,
without any doubt: and has the force and power of an oath, Esaias 65. 16. Math.
6. 18. Job 14. 12. And is added in the shutting up and ending of public
prayer, when the whole Church, the Minister pronouncing the words, testifies
thereby their assent, 1. Cor. 14. 16. And Respicit Ap^stolus ad moren and
consuetudinem ve^^ Ecclesiae, in qud praeeunte voce Ministri pepulus cu^
precando tum gratias agendo respondebat Amen. Andre^^ (...) lud (...).
Chrysostom. Homilia, 35. i. (...). Episiol(...) ad Corinthios: and sao tempore
ait Hyronimus Ecclesiam, instar tonitrui rebo^re Amen. (...) G. lat^s.
in this place it is a strong and forceable affirmation, whereby erernall life
is assured unto the thief. Neither did Christ begin the tenure of his pardon
unto him (for any other cause) with this Amen, or verily I say unto thee, but
only to secure his soul, that whatsoever he promised, should accordingly be
performed. It is the Gueuara de monte Caluariae part 2. cap. 22.
usual practice amongst men, first to make a bare promise, afterward to add
an oath, for greater strength: but the son of God does here the contrary;
first, swears, then promises Paradise. The reasons, why he did so, are
these: 1. The thing promised was excellent; 2. the thief to whom it was
promised, a great sinner, 3. the promiser seemed to the world, but of small
credit, who did now hang upon the Cross in shame and torment. 4. there was
present at the same time the dregs and base off-scowring of the people, and
the malicious Jews; wherefore seeing the stubbornenesse of the Jews was
inflexible, and the faith of the thief yet weak and tender, Christ added an
oath, then his promise, that so all occasion of doubt and mistrust might be
removed,

Christ is not only merciful unto those that belong Platzius in luco succiso
errorum Pontificiorum loco 30. Sadael contra Monachos Burdigalenses Articul.
33. Ioh. Scharpius de Iustificatione heminis coram Deo controuersia 4.
unto him, but will have them also resolved of his love and kindness;
therefore, surely (says the Prophet) he has borne our infirmities, and
carried our sorrows, Esaias 53. 4. And, as I live (the Lord himself speaks) I
desire not the death of the wicked, but that he return from his way and live,
Ezech. 33. 11. And to this end offers to our view breathing examples; for he
Bernardus sermon de festo Magdalenae^ and super Cantica. serm^ 23.
disdained not the sinful woman's tears, the Cananitish supplication, the
thieves confession, the woman taken in adultery, the denying Disciple. nor the
persecutor of his Disciples: For it is a saithfull saying, and worthy to be
received, that he came to save sinners, etc. 1. Tim. 1. 15. And the thief
Idem Epist. (...). ad Brunonem Coloniensem.
having this advantage of a short way unto salvation, content with the bridge
of the Cross, passed over from the region of death to the land of the living;
from the mire and clay of this world to the pleasant delights of Paradise.

Use. Wicked therefore and irreligious is that Achademicall opinion of
doubting, full of danger, the forge of despair, the gulf of hell, confirmed
by the late council (or rather assembly) of S^ssione 6. c. 12.
Trent, against God admonishing Nam in fine Sessionis tertiae, habuit p^am de
Iustificatione concionem fraterculus quida^ Carmelita Antonius Marinerius, in
qua docebat perspicue eos qui Christi Iustitia nituntur per dubi^ationum
labyrinthos non errare: Gentiletus in examine consilij Tridentini, lib. 2.
sessione 4.
the contrary: taught of Cardinal Bellarmine Lib. 3. de Iustificatione, cap. 3.
with others, but very Flacius Illiricus de sectis, dissentionibus and
contradictionibus doctrinae, religionis, scriptoru^ and doctorum Pontificiorum.
Cassander in consultatione articulo 4.
uncertainly: For Catharinus Archbishop of Compsa, and Dominicus a Soto, a
Spanish Divine, for diverse years together, did write sharply one against
another, about some weighty points of Religion, (and the books are yet extant:)
Among the which, the first of five (for so many were questionable between
them) was this, concerning the full assurance of the favor of God, of doubting
and despair. The sum of the Chemnitius in examine consilij Trident: part
prima, titulo de fide Iustificante. Platzius in Luco succiso errorum
Pontificiorum, in titulis, 74. 75. etc.
Church of Romes doctrine is this; That the godly in a general are not to
doubt of the promises of God, of the power and merit of the death of Christ, of
the virtue of the Sacraments: but concerning the application to every
particular man, (considering his own indisposition) they ought to fear,
becausE none is able to know by the certainety of faith, that he stands in
the favor of God; so he may hope well, and promise to himself all good, but
must leave it tossed in the unquiet waves of uncertainty, without having any
assured confidence; and there be strong reasons, why they strive so eagerly in
the maintenance of this position. For they Tregedinus in locis.
know full well that all the gain of Popish Merchandise depends upon it; for
the conscience seeking some certain and stayed comfort, hearing that even
faith apprehending Christ in the promise, must doubt of the pardon of sins,
begins to bethink her self of some other means, whereby she may be
assured; and for this purpose, besides the duties commanded of God, are
devised, will worships, vows, Pilgrimages, inuocat on of Saints, undue works,
and of supererogation, and that gainefull traffic of buying and selling of
Masses; and in a word, the whole puddle of Romish superstition. But if all
these will not serve to quiet and appease the troubled conscience, then they
are put off to the benefit Pargatorium est instar foci, missa^llae. Milius in
expli^atione Augustanae confessionis partesecunda.
Luther deeply considering these abuses, affirmed boldly, that if there were no
other cause why we should forsake the Church of Rome, yet this one were
sufficient, their doctrine of doubting. Wherefore that this so dangerous an
error may both more plainly be discovered, and also removed out of the minds
of such as be truly religious, these few considerations are soberly and with
reverence to be weighed. 1. The holy Ghost Tilenns Syntagmatis Theolog. part
2. titulo 43. de Iustificatione.
does testify that those, who be justified by faith, are reconciled to God,
their sins paerdoned, and shall be partakers of eternal life, and witnesses to
our spirits that we are the sons of God, Romans 8. 16. and is the earnest of our
inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14. Wherefore, seeing there is a double certainety, one
plain and easy to be known (of those things which may be perceived by the
light of sense and reason, of which sort are the first principles and
conclusions deduced from them, and matters taught by experience) another less
apparent and evident (of such things which do rest upon the credit and
reputation of a true witness, so that the greater the authority of the witness
is, the assent of the believer is more firm and strong) therefore it must
follow of necessity, that such things as are assured unto us by the testimony
of God, whose authority is the chiefest, are without all question infallible,
and do beget in the heart of man the highest degree of assurance. And for this
cause, whosoever does believe and knows that he belieueth, must resolve with
himself, that as certainly his sins are pardoned, as he does believe the
Gospel, which promises this grace and gift of God to the faithful: otherwise
he makes God a liar, Ioh. 5. 10.

2. This Popish doubting is Chemnitius in Exam. Concilij Trident. part I^itulo
de fide iustificant^.
contrary to the nature of saving Faith, which is not an opinion or conjecture,
or wavering, but an immovable Bernardus Epistola contra Abailardum Hereticum:
No^ne si stuctuat fides, in anisest and spes nostra? stulti ergo martyrs
nostri sustinentes ^am acerba prop^er incerta, etc.
ground of things hoped for; (because Faith is the substance of those things,
which depending in expectation, seem to be without any essence, and by
believing are made to appear, and to be in a sort present. And in this respect
is called a conuincing argument and demonstration of things not scene; and
therefore the Tilenus in Syntagmatis Theologici part. 2. titulo 43.
evidence which by the light of nature is incomprehensible, is made clear and
manifest by the light of grace;) and a full persuasion of the heart, upon which
whosoever rests, he quenches all the fiery darts of the devil, (among
which the sharpest are these; distrusting, doubtings of the favor of God, and
deceits of unconstant conjectures, and as a purified instrument of sense
discemeth black from white, sweet from sour, so does it know divine truth,
from humane vanities, and the assurance of faith from fleshly security. For he
is taught by the holy Ghost, to understand what blessing God has bestowed upon
him.) The safe and strong anchor of the soul; for it stays and holds us
fast amidst all the waves of doubting, arising in the Sea of this world; so
that our ship is brought at the last by a right course to the quiet haven of
heavenly tranquillity Heb. 6. 19. and 10. 22. and 11. 1. For the Hilarious
Canone 5. in Matthaum.
kingdom of heaven, which the Prophets spoke of, John preached and Christ
professed, and was in his power to bestow, must be perfectly hoped for without
any doubting, else no justification at all, if faith be inconstant and variable.

3. The use of the Tilenus ibid. vt supra.
Sacraments should be unprofitable, and not without suspicion of mockery, if
that grace whereof they are seals unto the believers, be doubtful and
uncertain; neither can or may he who receives the signs of the body and
blood of Christ, certainly believe, that that body was crucified, and that
blood shed for him, and that he does now and shall live ever by the power of
his death. But, all that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. For
baptism is properly the sacrament both of the new birth, and adoption and
investiture of the sons of God, Galath. 3. 27. and the Cup of blessing which
we bless, is the communion of the blood of Christ. 1. Corinthians. 10. 16. into
whom through faith by the power of the holy Ghost, we are ingrafted, as
branches into the vine, members to the head, and shall be made partakers of
eternal life and glory. For Sacraments are the seals of righteousness, Romans
4. 11. which the Lord has added to his promise of grace, thereby to strengthen
the weakness of our faith; and to be (as In locis communibus class 1. cap.
31. de Sacramentis.
Luther speaks) the day star, upon which we look, pointing at the rising
of the sun of grace.

4. This doctrine of theirs charge the holy Ghost with untruth, who does in
particular testify to every believer the forgiveness of his sins; whom God
has sent forth into our hearts, and by whom we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. who
also has sealed us, and given us the earnest of that his spirit in our hearts,
2. Corinthians. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 14. Now sealing is used in such things which we
desire should be safely and assuredly conveyed to those unto whom they do
belong; and that to this end, that all suspicion, and the least doubt which may
fall out, may be taken away. And an earnest is a pledge or caution put in,
whereby a promise given is so ratified, as there be no place left for doubting.
And yet we cannot deny, but that faith is oftentimes tried and shaken with
temptation, for there is a strife between the spirit and the flesh, even in the
holiest and best sanctified, Romans 7. 19. etc. And justifying faith is not
always a bright burning lamp, but sometimes a smoking flax, yet Christ who is
full of mercy and compassion will not quench it Matthew. 12. 20. neither must we
judge of our selves at all times according to the present feeling of spiritual
comfort and joy; for often God does deny that to his dear children, whose
judgments are a great depth; but if there abide in us an endeavor and a
desire, it is enough. So he accepted of P^^er, in whose heart faith failed not,
but Amabatintus quem negabat foris, tametsi affectus metu, constrictus
torperet. Leo primus sermon. 9. de passione. Mansit files actu primo, secundum
intercepit periculi^^ metus.
confession of his mouth. In a moment and for a little while God may forsake
his, but with great compassion will he gather them, Esaias 54. 7. Therefore let
every faithful one Augustinus de verbis Dom. sermon. 28. and in Psalm. 88.
presume not of his own merit, but of Christ's mercy, for by grace we are saved
Ephesians. 2. 8. To publish that which thou have received is not pride but duty, and
because the promise is sure, not according to our deserts but his goodness,
therefore none should fear to tell of that whereof he cannot doubt.

5. Neither small nor few absurdities would follow, if we be unresolved of the
assurance of the forgiveness of our sins. For first, if by doubting we
Son^ius tom. 2. expositionis articulorum confess. August. articulo 4. de
iustificatione.
could apprehend eternal life, or if it did justify a man, then no promise
more fit and convenient for the same, then that of the law; which, by reason of
the vnperformable condition annexed thereunto of perfect obedience, and
fulfilling the same, does leave the conscience in continual doubting.
Secondly, if justification and pardon of offenses be uncertain, or if
believers are to doubt thereof, then should we not pray with the Apostles, Lord
increase our faith, Luke 17. 5. nor with the Father in the Gospel, I believe,
Lord help my unbelief, Mark. 9. 24. Neither the Apostle rightly admonish us,
to prove our selves whether we be in the faith, and examine whether Christ
Jesus be in us, except we be reprobates. 2. Corinthians. 13. 5.

6. This doctrine of Tzegodinus in loc^s, titulo de dilectione Dei.
doubting is to be avoided, and hated of every Christian, as many ways
hurtful. For first, it nourishes and mainteyneth that proud confidence which
arises from the conceit of our own righteousness. Secondly, it is the very
butchery and torment of weak consciences. Thirdly, it offers occasion to
despair of Gods mercy. Fourthly, it extinguisheth the truth and sincerity
both of faith and love toward God. Fifthly, it takes away the patience and
constancy in suffering persecution, for the name of Christ, and witness
bearing unto his Gospel. Away then with this unsettled doubting, let it be
removed out of the hearts of the faithful, which makes God a liar Ioh. 5. 10.
for Chrysostomus de compunct.
true faith and constant hope is the groundwork of our salvation, and the
guide unto everlasting life. It is a worthy speech of an ancient Bernardus in
sermon. de fragmentis septem misericordiaru^.
Father, I consider three things in which my whole hope consists; the love of
Gods adoption, the truth of his promise, and power of performance: now then
let my foolish thoughts murmr so much as they will, saying, who art thou? how
great is that glory? what merits have thou to obtain it? I will answer
confidently, I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded, because he has
adopted me in his exceeding love, who is true in his promise, and able to make
performance, can do whatsoever he pleases. And this is a threefold cord,
which can hardly be broken, (which I beseech you let us take fast hold of,)
and is let down unto us from heaven our country, unto earth our prison; this
draws us up into the presence of the great God who is blessed for ever. AMEN.

Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Christ in
mercy prayed for his enemies, in love provided for his mother and disciple, now
in truth swears unto the thief, and by oath assures entrance into Paradise
etc. O how great is this bounty of God, how Idem in meditationibus.
unspeakable the change wrought by the power of the hand of the most highest!
yesterday thou were a thief in darkness, to day a Saint in brightness of
light, yesterday in the mouth of the Lion, today in the hand of the Mediator:
yesterday in the gate of hell, today in the joy of Paradise. Now this name of
Paradise is of a twofold acceptance or signification; the one according to the
letter, a material and terrestrial place wonderfully situated Tertull. in
Apologet. cap. 43. Lact^nt. lib. 2. August. lib. 8. super Genes. ad literam
cap. 10. and de ciuitate Dei l. 13. c. 21. ^asilius (...) hom. 11. Suidas in
v^ce Paradiso. Bar-Cephas in suis de paradiso libris tribus. Isidorus
Hispalensis in Etymologico. Francisus Iunius in exposi^^ 3. prim. cap. G^neseos.
toward the East in Eden, (the very storehouse of all delightful pleasure,)
under a sweet climate and influence of heaven, and wished temperature of air,
replenished with ever green and flourishing trees, casting forth most pleasant
smell, full of light, far exceeding all the delectable beauty and grace which
sense is able to comprehend. A divine place, wonderfully fitting that honorable
estate of man, wherein he was created, etc. and in which before the fall God
set him, as in a stately castle or palace.

The other Leo primus sermon. de conuersione latronis.
figurative and mystical, that heavenly receptacle wherein the faithful shall
enjoy eternal bliss 2. Cor. 12. 2. 4. Apoc. 2 7. And Christ has opened unto
us the way Arnoldus Carnotensis de ^ltimis septem Christi verbis.
into this garden, by the key of his cross and death, that so we may be made
partakers of those good things which neither eye has scene, nor ear heard,
nor can enter into the heart of man: 1. Cor. 2. 9. And this is that Paradise
which Christ here promises to the thief; and this promise far exceeds all
humane possibility to make it good, and is uttered not from the wood of the
Cross, but the throne of power: for now he who complained before Nam sunt qui
hoc Christi verbum, quarto in loco pronunciatu^ existima^t.
that he was forsaken, does not entreat the Father in behalf of the thief,
but by his own authority taking away the guilt of all offenses, presently
sanctifies the wicked, exalts him to heaven, and places him in glory.

Christ Jesus our Savior is not a bare and naked man, Chimnitius in locis
communibus part 1. Danaeus Isagoges, part 1. l. 1. cap. 41.
titles given him do euince this truth; as when he is styled Jehovah, Esaias 8.
13. Zach. 12. 10. Lord of Lords, Apoc. 17. 14. our righteousness, Ierem. 23. 6.
the wisdom of God (which is in God his Essence, and therefore must Christ be
the son by nature) 1. Cor. 1. 24. the searcher of the reins and heart, Apoc.
2. 13. by his infinite knowledge foretelling things to come, Math. 24. 2. Marc.
13. 2. and this is proper to God, 1. King. 8. 39.

2. His works do testify his Godhead; for he created the world, Ierem. 17.
10. all things in heaven and earth, visible and invisible, Coloss. 1. 16. and
without him was made nothing that was made, John 1. 3. he saves us, Titus 3.
5. and gives eternal life, John 10. 28. he does the same works which the
Father by equal power, not by commandment from another, but of his own
authority.

3. His astonishing miracles are demonstrations of his Deity, John 14. 11.
neither does he work them himself, but gives others also power to do them
in his name: and this power is from God alone: 1. Corinthians. 12. 9. Math. 10. 28.
Act. 3. 6. And that it should be so, was long before told by the Prophet, Esaias.
61. 1.

4. He is eternal, and therefore God; (this consequent was held to be most
certain by the Jews, who believed that Christ must abide for ever, John 12.
34. Ezech. 37. 25) Infinite, and in all places; Math. 18. 20. sustaining and
preserving all things by his providence, and bearing them up by his mighty
word, Heb. 1. 3. But I cease to add more reasons for the confirmation of this
point, whereof none amongst us makes any question.

Let us oppose the power of Christ, against all the attempts of wicked men, and
temptations of the diueil whatsoever: for, who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? It is God who justifies, Romans 8. 33. neither can we
doubt of his merit or power: not of his merit, for he is the beloved son,
Ephesians. 1. 6. not of his power, for thus he comfort his Church; My sheep
hear my voice, and they ^^ow me, and I give them everlasting life, and none
can pull them out of my hands Ioh. 10. 28.

2. We are not to be ashamed of Christ, or by any fear drawn Use, 2.
from our faith and confidence, neither in respect of the multitude, or
greatness of those, who in the world set themselves against him; Wherefore
that exhortation of Saint Paul, to his scholar, is most excellent: I charge
thee in the sight of God which quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ,
who under Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep this
commandment, to follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience
and meekness: fight the good fight, and lay hold on eternal life, without
spot and unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1.
Timoth. 6. 13. 14. And does himself openly confess, that he is not ashamed of
the (...) of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to ever none
that believes, Romans 1. 16. And Basilius Homilia de 40. Martyribus. Eusebius
hist. Ecclesiast. l. 8. cap. 3.
hereof proceed^^ that speech of the Christians so often uttered, when
p^^cuting Tyrants endeavored, either by the allurement of sweet promises, or
threatenings of dreadful torments to draw them from their holy profession, (We
are Christians.) And Ignatius Iguatius.
stood so resolved, that (if the choice were offered) he had rather be a
Martyr then a Monarch.

Our whole trust and confidence must be settled on no man, nor Angel
whatsoever, but Christ alone, who is only able to save us: for he is the way,
the truth and the life, and no man comes to the Father but by him, John 14.
6. neither is there salvation in any other name, Act. 4. 12. for it pleased the
father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and through peace made by the
blood of his Cross to reconcile to himself all things both which are in
earth, and which are in heaven. Colosse. 1. 19 20. who is made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption (as it is written) let
him that rejoices rejoice in she Lord: 1. Cor. 1. 30. 31.

Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Christ
heard the Bernardus de passione Domini cap. 9.
request now, not of a thief, but his confessor, his spouse, and comfort
him with a fitting promise according to the petition made, (verily, in truth, I
say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise,) To thee, who
did hang upon the Cross in torment; with me, thou shall now be in the
Paradise of pleasure: wonderful love! exceeding goodness! for he says not,
thou shall be (...) Paradise, but in Paradise with me; thou shall be satisfied
with the fruition of him whom thou desire: thou shall behold him in
Majesty, whom thou did confess when he was in infirmity: neither do I
delay to perform that which I promise, but to day thou shall be with me, etc.
Thus sweet (...) hears, promises, gives speedily, etc. This Con(...) not
put over to Arnoldus Carnotensis, de septem vltimis Domini verbis.
Purgatory, (to sin revenging (...)) to dark and obscure places: none
contrary affected dare presume to allege ought against this vouchsafed favor.
The punishment of the Cross, (nay grace not punishment) abolisheth all
offenses, and the soul now hastening to leave the Tabernacle of the body,
willingly departed; neither did any fear of punishment molest or grieve the
conscience, which knew she was washed with the abundantly-flowing blood of
Jesus Christ.

The Souls of men so soon as they be loosned from the prison of the body, are
z either received into heaven (do enjoy y Laurentius Humfridus contra Campianum
Ratione prima.
endless bliss) or thrust down into hell (be afflicted with eu erlasting
torment.) For there be only two ways, the broad and the narrow; two gates, the
wide and the straight, Math 7. 13. Luc. 13. 24. two different conditions of
men, sheep on the right hand, and goats on the left; two rewards after this
life, the crown or condemnation; two places, the bosom of Abraham for
Lazarus, or the gulf of hell for the glu^ton; no Augustinus Hypognosticcon,
lib. 5.
third can be found in Scripture; and he that is Idem de peccatorum meritis
and remissione, cap. 28.
not with Christ, cannot be but with the devil; For the holy word of God
propounds unto us but Tilenus Syntagmatis Theolog. part 2. Titulo de
Purgatorio.
a twofold time, one of the race, another of the goal; of sowing and reaping,
of seedetime and harvest; of labor and rest, of the battle, and the victory,
of the fight and triumph: whereof that is limited within the bounds of this
life, Romans 8. 18. Gal. 6. 10. and therefore this presently begins when we
once have ended the other. And the Schoolmen themselves understand none other,
under the name of their Viatores or Travelers, then such as yet live in the
world.

Meteor or Ignis fatuus Purgatorij.
imagined fire of Purgatory, vanishes and comes to nothing; which the
curious Chemnitius in Exam. Consilij, Trident. part 3. tit ulo de Purgatorio^
Plato in Phedone, and de Repub. lib. 10.
speculations of Philosophers, ( Tertullianus aduersus Hermogenem.
Patriarchs of heretics) the doubtful Chemnitius plenissime in examine
consilij Tridentini, part 3. Titulo de Purgetorio.
disputations of some Fathers first kindled, the vain toies and fables of lying
Hom^rus Odyssea: 11. Virgilius Aenead. lib. 6.
Poets, tickling the ears of foolish men, afterward nourished; fained
apparitions of Ghosts, Platzius in Luco suceiso errorum Pontifici^rum loco. 76.
and spirits, and idle dreams of well fed Monks. increased; and at the last the
Chemnitius, loco superius citato.
Schoole-Diuines quickened when it was dying; whose learning proceeded from the
Sorbon of Paris, and consisted upon a mixture of Scripture and Philosophy, much
like a double formed Cornelius Agri^pade vanitate scienti^rum, cap. 97.
Carni^cina Vtopiana.
Centaure; and these hucksters of Gods word (especially the latter sort)
violently wresting the scriptures unto a strange sense with their Questions and
Quodlibets, have exposed our holy faith and profession to the scorn and
dirision of Epicures and worldlings. For of this Vtopian shambles of men's
souls, no one title can be found in the books of the old and new testament
rightly understood, which notwithstanding they strive to hale by enforcement to
the confirmation of their opinion. Therefore for the removing this error out of
men's minds, who are not besotted with their own follies, the strength of
arguments, the authority of Fathers, the confession of the Patrons hereof
themselves may be effectual. Of all which something shall be said, but very
briefly: following the manner of those, who when they will sell a great
Athenagoras in Apologia pr^ Christianis.
quantity of corn, or any other commodity bring but a little for a sample of
the whole; or make trial of wine or honey by the tasting of a small portion, or
of Cosmographers, Florus in prologo historiae suae. Arguments.
who describing the globe of the habitable world, comprehend the whole in a
narrow table. 1. Death takes Lectius in praescriptionibus Theologi^is contra
fabrum.
away all the means of procuring salvation afterward; for when we are once
departed from hence, there is no place left for repentance, satisfaction is to
no purpose; life is here either lost or Cyprianus ad Demetrianum: Justinius
Martyri^ Dialogo cum Tryph one Iudaeo.
kept; as God finds thee in the day, when he calls thee out of the world,
so shall he judge thee in the last; and this is the utmost bound of things
Augustinus de Fide, ad Petrum Diaconu^.
belonging to happiness; for the time to obtain everlasting life, God has given
men only in this; in which repentance also is auailable. For a man may here
forsake his sin, and amend it: which whosoever does not now, in the world to
come he may have a sorrow for his offenses, but shall find no pardon at Gods
hands; there may be a provocation to grief, but no amend mentiof the will;
therefore the dead can receive then no benefit from the care either of
themselves or of others.

2 God in Christ has pardoned the sin and removed the punishment; it is
therefore mere folly that any should be disquieted in his mind, seeking by
what means of satisfaction he may deliver himself out of Purgatory: for the
death of Christ is the remission of sins, the abolishing of transgression, the
freedom from error, and the receiving of grace; therefore let us then boldly
without fear come unto our Redeemer, who by undergoing the punishment without
taking the offense has removed both the offense and the punishment. And though
God exercise with sundry afflictions those his children, whose sins he has
forgiven, yet they be chastis^ments not punishments, (inflicted for admonition,
Augustinus tractatu 1 24. in Iohannis Euangelium.
not unto condemnation) and wholesome medicines, which are applied to this end,
for the manifestation of our deserved misery, amendment of our slippery life,
subject to falling into offenses, and exercise of necessary patience.

3 If we grant that there is a Iohannis Chassanio in locis communibu^, l. 2. c.
3. de commentitio Purgatorio.
Purgatory, then it is to be supposed to have been, either before the coming
of Christ or after, but neither of these can be proved, and therefore there is
none: That there was any such place before Christ, wherein the souls departed
the body were tortured, there can be found neither testimony nor example, in
the Law or Prophets to aver and confirm the same; and if we yield that such
tormeuts were first appointed under Christ, then is the condition of Christians
far worse then that of such, who lived under the law: and so much should be
derogated from the benefit of our Savior, whose grace is opposed to the law of
Moses, Ioh. 1. 7. for by it we are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. And God sent his son into
the world, not to condemn the world, but that it might be saved through him,
Ioh. 3. 17. Neither could this agree with that promise; whereby he assures
refreshing unto those who labor and be heavy laden, Mat. 1 1. 28. but it should
rather lay more burdens upon us then release any; and not take away but retain
sins, to be satisfied for, and to be purged after death. And so the death of
Christ should be frustrate, of no moment or power. But to think or speak
this, is absurd, and contrary to all godliness, for he himself has purged our
sins, Heb. 1. 3 and his blood does cleanse us from all our transgressions, 1.
Ioh. 1. 7. and Revel. 1. 5.

4 If the faithful be justified (which none can well deny, but he who denies
the scripture to be true) then have they peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Esaias 57. 2.
and the spirit pronounces them blessed who die in the Lord; for presently they
rest from their labors; and there is added a N^^.
particle of consent, (even so;) Apoc. 14. 13. But to be in peace and rest from
labor, and to suffer hellish torments for some years together, are
incompetible, and cannot stand together, whatsoever the Tridentine council
has decreed; of which it may truly be said in way of admonition which was to
the Trojans of the Virgilius 2. Ae^^d. haec in v^stros fabricata est machina
mur^s. Ips^ d^li fabricator Epaeus.
Grecia^ horse. (This engine is made to be the destruction of your City,) and
of the Pope, as of Epaeus (he is the deuisor of that fraudulent work.) For
there be no disputations which were had there, extant (as was the use in
ancient and lawful councels) but a few ^rotestatio concionatorum aliquet
Augustanae Confessionis aduersus Concisium Tridentinum. Gentile^us in examine
Concilij Tridenti^^, lib. 5. Carolus Molinaeus in consilio super actis Consilij
Tridentini sectione 99. Pluressi quis desideret ratioones, petere eas licet in
Apologia Graecorum, (...) in Synodo Florentina habit^. Authority of ancient
fathers against Purgatory. Justinius Martyr lib. quaes^^on^ and res^onsion^m ad
Orthodoxos, quastione, 75.
naked decrees and Canons published, because for the greatest part they were
devised at Rome by the Bishop of that See, and (his fit instruments and
creatures) Monks and their Sophisters: and so continually sent up and carried by
the swift messengers, who went to and again from Rome to Trent: so that it
grew to be a common Byword, that shortly the Post would bring the holy Ghost
in a cap^ase or budget from Rome, whereby the irreligious dissembling of these
Tridentine deceivers was scoffed at; who pretended that by earnest prayer,
disputations and conferences they searched out the truth, and so as the holy
Ghost inspired them penned and made Canons, when as in very truth those holy
Fathers, every one in his order, did nothing else, but with a grave nod confirm
the decrees of their Jupiter of S. Angelo, pronouncing one word only (but that
very mystical) Placet it likes us.

After the x departure of the souls from the body the righteous are forthwith
separated from the unrighteous, and brought by the ministry of Angels to their
appointed places; the souls of the righteous unto Paradise (where they enjoy
the company and sight of Angels and Archangels and of Christ Jesus the Savior
of the world) the souls of the wicked into the pit of hell; and every one kept
in his deserved place until the day of the resurrection and recompense. In
what Olympiodorus in 1 1. caput E^lesiasiis. Fulg(...) rem(...)ne peccato r^m
lib. 2. (...). 8
place soever a man is taken, when he dies, whether light or dark, that is,
whether in the filthy puddle of sin, or in pure holiness, of conversation; in
the same degree and order shall he continue for ever; for either he does rest
in the light of endless blessedness with the righteous, and Christ our Lord; or
shall be tormented in darkness with the wicked, and the devil, Prince of this
world. God when he heals our sins, and suffers no skar, no token of any
wound to remain; but with the cure gives also beauty, and comeliness; for so
soon as he freeth us from punishment, he bestows also righteousness; where
is mercy, there is forgiveness, where forgiveness, no punishment. And,
describing the funeral rites and ceremonies of his time, speaks elegantly in
this sort, Tell me what means the burning torches at burialls? why are
Psalms and Hymns then sung? Is it not because we thank and glorify God who
has crowned him, who is deceased, delivered him from sorrows, grief and
labors, and keeps him freed from anguish and fear of death with himself?
Are not Psalms and Hymns for this end? for all these are the actions and
exercises of such as be glad and do rejoice. Remember what is then sung, O my
soul return^ unto thy rest, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee. And
again, I will fear none evil, because thou art with me, He that departs,
goes to rest, (for death is the haven of quietness;) and being Gregorius in
lib. 5. expositionis ad 13. cap. 1. lib. Regum.
redeemed by the mercy of our Creator, we have this heavenly gift, that when we
are taken out of the earthly tabernacle, we be placed in a heavenly mansion;
neither is there any forgiveness, but in the bosom of our mother the Church,
before the day of our departure from hence: for now is the acceptable time, now
is the day of salvation, etc. 2. Corinthians. 6. 2.

If we behold Christ with the right eye of faith, who was P. Lombard. lib. 3.
sentent. distinct. 19.
crucified upon the tree for us, we are then loosned Confession of the
adversaries.
from the fetters and chains of the devil, so that he cannot find any thing,
wherefore after this life he should punish us; for by his death (the only true
sacrifice,) what sin soever there was, in regard whereof the devil held and
made us liable to punishment, that has Christ taken away: so that he cannot by
his temptation prevail against us, no not in this life.

Though there be Petrus a Soto in Iustitutionibus Christianis. and Roffensis
contra Lutherum de Purgatorio.
nothing in Scripture which do plainly prove a Purgatory, yet many things are
to be believed which are not written. But whatsoever has not authority from
the Scriptures, we may so justly deny it, (which be Ieromes words) as it is
affirmed. We know, that so long as we live in this world, we may be helped by
the counsel and with the prayers one of another; but when we shall once come
and be cited to stand at the Tribunal and Judgment seat of Christ, then
neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah can entreat for any. With what probability
then do the Tridentine Fathers decree, that the souls held fast in Purgatory
may be released through the intercessions of the faithful? but especially
relieved by the acceptable sacrifice of the Mass? Lib. 2. de Purgaterio cap.
7. and 14.
Bellarmine does ingenuously confess, that the Church has not yet determined
where this Tantu^ ab^sse hunc ignem a purgandis peccatis putarunt Graec^, vt
ijs augendis maxim conducere receptam de illo opinionem putarunt. ideoque
explosam illam condemnatam^ fuisse a Sancta Quinta and universally Synodo,
(...). Apoligia (...) philosophia
medicinable place should be, whether in his green and flourishing meadow, or in
some Noblemans house, an honorable prison, or in a dark and straight dungeon.
And indeed it is hard, even for those, to find a place for that which is no
where, who by their refined wits can underprop accidents to stand without
subjects. Dialog. lib. 4. 40. and 55. Beda histor. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
Eugubinus de lib. 10. cap. 27.
Pope Gregory, who carries the title to be Great, dare not presume to define
any thing thereof upon the sudden; yet some other boldly affirm, that it is
in Historia Lombardi^a, Legenda 157. and Danaeus Isagoges Christianae lib. 5.
c. 51.
St. Patrickes hole in Ireland; others, that it was found out by one Odillo to
be in Aetna a mountain of Sicilie; or in the Popes kitchen, in which a true
fire is well maintained by the revenues of this imaginary flame. But I take
my hand from the table, and recall my self, least I should commit like folly
in confuting this monstrous and idle fiction, as the authors did in devising
it; and that which seems to be spoken to the honor of God, should tend to his
injury: for no man can ever persuade these fellows to forsake their conceived
errors, but (like the Giant Antaeus) when they be cast down, take
stubbornness for strength; or as Eutolida, who are so far in love with their
own sancies, (as she was with her beauty, when she saw herself (instead of a
better glass) in the water) that they object continually their old
wornesophistications g De his omnibus copiosissime nobiliss. and dectiss.
Pl^ss^us, de sacrificio Missae supposititio lib. 3. cap. 8. 9. 10. 11. Et
Eusebius Captiuus in Actis primi diei, titulo De Purgatorio.
and cauills, and repeat so often over, that they become loathsome. No end of
disputation can be had with these, neither will they suffer any moderator to
take up the question, and therefore I leave them to themselves.

This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Who is this that shall be in
Paradise, and with Christ, and this day? even the thief, not only not brought
up and instructed in the school of Christ, but by committing detestable
murders, and unnatural bloud-shedding, had enraged himself, and endeavored to
extinguish all sense of humanity: yet nevertheless, he who for his wickedness
was condemned to shame, is by his faith translated into glory: and the cross
was rather to him an occasion of salvation, then a place of torment. A blessed
thief therefore, who while he suffered deserved punishment, obteyneth the
heavenly kingdom! for unto him (a man poenally crucified, and humbly
confessing,) the Lord says, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Arise
therefore, o man, learn to forgive others Arnoldu^ Carnotensis de vltimis
septem Christi verbis. Agebat mysterium, qui soluebat precium, in Petro
demonstrans, non in se Iustum quicqua^ debere praesumere: In latrone nullum
impium posse perire. ^imeat bonus ne pereat per superbiam (...) desperet malus,
de multa malitia sua. August. lib. 2. de symbolo and in Psalm. 68.
increase not the number of transgressions, defer not the time of pardon, the
mercy of God is not straightened toward any, nor so soon ended that he cannot
take away many transgressions: let there be one to ask, there will not be
wanting one to hear; let there be a repentant offender, there will be a
gracious forgiuer. This Poenitent is not enjoined fasting for many years, to
go barefoote, or wear sackeloth, but at one instant confesses, is justified,
is glorified. Consider the time, mark the person: it is the last hour, and a
sinful person; many were his offenses and of long continuance, mercy in a
moment takes them all away; grace and pardon does not successively (by little
and little) file off, or eat out his trespasses, but the holy Ghost by asound
suddenly made from heaven, discendeth; and all the putryfied rottenness of his
sins is dried up: neither does there remain any token of a corrupted wound,
which is cleansed with the waters of mercy. Lazarus buried four Idem de
resuscitatione Lazari quatriduani: de verbis Dom. in Euangeli^m secundu^ Johan.
sermon. 52.
days, and lying in his grave stinketh; now raised, languisheth not with any
feebleness, comes forth, is loosed from his bands, sets at the table, and
eats: Simon is cleansed, no stayne of the leprosy appears in him, no
deformity disfashioneth his countenance, he enterteyneth Christ, and offers
no sign of fear or infection to such as attended their Master, and eat with
him. Mary Magdalen falls down at Christ his feet, Quot in so habuit
oblectamenta, tot de se invenit holocausta; convertit ad virtut^m numerum,
numeru^ criminu^: vt totum seruiret Deo in p^nitentia, quicquid ex se D^u^
contempserat in culpa. Gregor. Mag. hom. 33.
weepeth, prays, washes them with her tears, wipeth them with the hair of
her head, kisseth, and annointeth them with ointment; he does not cast in her
teeth, her former lewd and infamous life, nor vpbraid her by that which he had
forgiven; whatsoever he does, the holy Ghost speedily perfitteth: seeks
supply of help from none other; instructs presently whom he enlightneth,
makes upon a sudden fishermen, fishers of men; the ignorant able to teach. In
this grace, expectation is not discouraged by delay, neither is there any
distance of time between prayer and performance: David says, I have sinned,
the Prophet answers, the Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die.
What should I mention the Ninutites, whose repentance found the reuersion of a
denounced sentence against them? What should I speak of those two
transcedent-sinning Kings Achab and Manasses, whose repentance (such as it was)
God infinite in mercy refused not. And among other examples of mercy, this
thief (of whom we now speak) offers himself a testimony of pardon; an
example of hope: who mournefully seeking, finds; and asking, obteyneth; This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. He came to the cross, besmeared with
the Tanlerus in meditationibus vitae Jesus Christi cap. 43.
blood of others, is washed with the blood of Christ; he came bloudily
affected, and enflamed with cruelty, but was made mild hearted,
compassionate, all possessed with love etc. He had but one member or part of
the body free, and came at the last hour of the day into the vineyard, and yet
so plied his work, that he did his stint, and received the wages before the
other etc. His prayer was humble and wise, (asking nothing but grace and
mercy:) God therefore who knows the secrets of all hearts, in his eternal
wisdom, heard him, and opening the abundant rich treasures of his mercies,
gives more then was desired: O Lord how incomprehensible is thy goodness! how
graciously have thou showed, that thou would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should turn and live! And by this showing of love, God has gotten
unto himself a Granatensis postill. pa^te 2. f^ria 5. in c^na Dom. canone 2.
new name; for before, he was called the God of the righteous, (as the God of
Abraham, of Isaac and Jacob) and says, that this is his name, and memorial
for ever, from generation to generation; and was named their God, because he
showed his sweet love and almighty power in comforting and defending them,
after an especial manner: but now, when he says, that he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 19. 13. is not only the God of
the righteous, but of sinners also, as those whom he has saved by his death,
healed by his wounds, and redeemed by his blood. Thus he opens his bowels,
thus he offers to his the abundance of his mercy. Add this if you think so
good, Christian Reader, to the like whereof I have spoken before in the first
word, and tenth observation or doctrine; where also the use and application is
set down: yet I would not let pass this exposition, containing both matter of
wholesome instruction and much comfort.

This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. It is not to be passed over
slightly that Christ promising heaven to the thief, yea confirming it by
oath, yet does neither ease in any part, nor take away that corporal torment
which he suffered. For now he hangs pale and wan, with a torn body, waiting
for the last office of the hangman executioner; and a little after the
soldiers came and brake the legs of him and his fellow, to hasten their
death, Ioh. 19. 32. because it was the day of the preparation before the
Sabbath, and that the bodies might not remain upon the Cross, on the Sabbath;
for which there was a particular and special law, Deuteronomy 21 23, and observed of
Joshua. cap 10. 26. yet trusting in their own righteousness, by unrighteously
murdering of Christ, they brake the whole law of God, streyning a gnat, and
swallowing a Camel. Math. 23. 24.

We are not to measure the greatness of Gods love Lutherus in locis, class.
3. titulo de cruce and calamitate.
distinguishes of Tribulation, into the beginning and the end: and this
direction must be ours, and not follow herein our own conceit, which thinks
every evil we suffer to be infinite, and of every Mathematical prick,
makes an endless line, so unskillful is our reason; death, pestilence,
famine, hatred, contempt of the world, and such like are indeed evil, and if
we do make reason judge in these, we must of necessity faint under the
burden; but for help, we are to lift up our eyes unto the hills, and listen to
that voice, I am the Lord thy God: and therefore we must judge of the Cross,
as it is in relation and reference unto Gods saving help, and loving
kindness: for when the Lord does sometime hide from us his favorable
countenance, this is no argument of direction, that he has forsaken us, but
of dispensation, disposing all things to our good and benefit, who absent and
present works our salvation, Job. complayneth, 9 17. (he destroys me with a
tempest, and wounds me without cause, he will not suffer me to take my
breath, but fills me with bitterness,) yet nevertheless the man so
perplexed is tenderly beloved: cap. 42. 8. 12.

twofold; first this may serne to abate the over rank censures of wanton
heads, who judge all castawayes and rejected of God, that are afflicted; and
from this imagination, was that outcrie bred, which some made against the
Galilaeans, (whose blood Pilate had mingled with the goare of the beasts
sacrificed; and those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell) that they
were more grievous sinners then all the rest. But Christ represseth this
malepert and over saucy censure, by adding a wholesome admonition, that they who
brought this tidings should themselves speedily repent, lest they also perish,
Cursuos affligi patitur Deus rations a Chrysostomo vndecem afferuntur in
Homiliae 1. ad Antiochenos de verbis Apostoli, vtere pauco vino, etc.
Luke 13. 1. 2. For the calamities which befall any one, should be sermons of
repentance unto eueryone; because they are inflicted, that by them we might
conceive the sharpness of Gods severity against sin. For all who are
distressed, are not to be thought, without difference, wicked, because whom the
Lord loves he does chastise, Prou. 3. 10. and by many tribulations we must
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Act. 14. 22.

instruction, teaching us to seek out some, certain signs and tokens,
whereby we may be assured that in all our sufferings, God does remember his
mercy, and even then when he seems to deal most rigorously with us; and of
many, these few may give some contentment.

1 When he enableth us to bear whatsoever burden is Grineus in commentarijs ad
Prophetam Abacuc.
laid upon us by him: Micah 7. 9. David, Psalm. 39. 9.

2 If we retain in our hearts love toward God, and faith in him, (so Job 13.
15. though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, and reprove my ways in his
sight.)

3 If we continue constantly in the true worship of God, and do not suffer
our selves to be withdrawn from the same, either by alluring promises, or
dreadful threatenings, whereof there is a very remarkable example in the three
children, Dan. 3. 17.

4 When God leaves us not to our selves, that (induced by the example of
others, desperately minded) we offer violence to our bodies, as Saul did, 1.
Sam. 3 1. 3. 5.

5 If the Lord denying earthly help and comfort grants inward and spiritual
consolation, (a change of brass for silver:) so was it with Ambros. Epist. l.
10. Epist. 82.
Stephen, the first Martyr of the new Testament, Act. 7. 56.

6 When God performs his purposed work by contraries, as to give liberty by
imprisonment, to bring to honor by shame, to deliver by oppression, to quicken
by death, which is most apparent in Joseph; for God brought him into Egypt
through the envy of his Nazianzenus.
brethren, tried him there by the wantonness of a woman, honored him by the
distribution of corn, instructed him with knowledge of interpretation of
dreams, for which he was esteemed of Pharaoh. For the divine wisdom knows
long before, how to lay the foundation of weighty and great successes to
follow, and to dispose and bring to pass things, by means seeming contrary:
so this Gregorius Magnus, moral. lib. 6. cap. 12.
Joseph was therefore sold of his brethren, that he might not be reverenced
or honored by them; but therefore is he honored, because sold; Thus Gods
counsel and decree, while it is avoided, it is fulfilled, and man's wisdom
when it resists, is entangled, Genes. 37. 19, etc. 42. 6.

Verily, I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. The
thief desires Christ that he would be mindful of him when he comes into
his Kingdom; Christ promises the fruition of his Kingdom unto him, and
enjoying of his company there: and this to be performed without delay, or
deferring of time: To day thou shall be with me in Paradise; and therefore
secureth it unto him by an oath.

God is more bountiful in Ambrosius in 23. Lucae.
giving, then man is desirous he is rich in mercy toward all, Romans 10. 12.
Jacob prays,, and the whole of all his petition is bounded in this narrow
compass; Deliver me O Lord from the wrath of my brother Esau, (who had sworn
in the days of mourning for his Father, to solemnize two funerals at once) but
God superabundantly changes his mind, makes him of an enemy a friend; a
defender of a destroyer: Genesis 32. 10. and 33. 4. Solomon requires but an
understanding heart for government, there is added an admirable increase of
honor and riches, such as none of all the Kings in his days should be like
unto him, 1. King. 3. 9. 13. Ezechias receives the message of death, is warned
to set his house in an order, and dispose of the succession, at this he
turns his face to the wall, prays, weepeth, desires to have the sentence
reuersed; his petition made with the sighs of his heart only, is accepted,
and not life alone, but certain life of fifteen years addition to his days;
and as an overplus, the removing of Senacheribs host, who then beleagured
Jerusalem, Esaias, 38. 5. 6. The thankful Leper in the Gospel asks but the
clensing of his body, his soul also is washed, Luke 17. 13. 19. And the woman
of Canaan tenderly affected toward her daughter thinks this full
satisfaction, if she may be dispossessed of the Devil; but continuing
earnest in prayer, receives an honorable commendation and a promise so large
as heart could wish; (great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou will,) and
has her desire fulfilled, her daughter healed in the same moment: Muth. 15. 28.

Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your request be known unto God. Philip. 4. 6. And come
with holdnesse unto the throne of grace, not doubting to obtain favor in the
time of need, Heb. 4. 16. For the whole Trinity furthereth our prayers; God the
son sets us down what form of words we should use, Luke 11. verse 2.
And, because we know not what to ask as we ought, God the holy Ghost helps
our infirmities, and himself makes intercession for us with gronings which
may not be uttered, Romans 8. 26. God the Father receives our supplications, and
most lovingly grants them, John 16. 23. Wherefore thrice happy we were, if
we could as readily go unto God in our necessities, as he is willing to
accept us; for he is nigh unto all that call upon him in truth, he will
fulfill the desires of them that fear him, and will hear their cry, and will
save them, Que est misericordia. Deus non tantum postulata tribuit, sed
interdum etiam non sperata largitur. Tanteque, si dicere licet, mayor est
loominibus humanitate, and beneuolentia, quanto potestate and natura. Saluianus
Epistola quarta.
Psalm 145. 18. 19. To him then that is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, be
glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end,
Amen. Ephesians. 3. 20. 21.

THE FOVRTH WORD.
MATTHEW. 27. 45. 46. Now from the fixth hour was there darkness over all the
land until ninth hour, and about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud
voice saying, ELI ELI LAMMAHSABACTHANI, that is, my God my God why have thou
forsaken me.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis is the fourth speech or word which Christ our Savior spoke upon the
Cross; and some of the ancient Consule Pelargum de septe^ Christi verbis in
cruce pronunciatis.
Fathers, have not without just cause affirmed, that there never was a more
doleful or sorrowful speech uttered in the in the hearing of any man, then is
this lamentable complaint of Christ. For the former were words mooising to
repentance, showing piety, and manifesting power: but this is a testimony of
the greatest humility and infirmity that can be. Before, he prayed for his
persecutors, spoke to his Mother and beloved Disciple, and with the thief
hanging by him; now, after three hours silence, when he felt the wrath of God,
and heavy burden of sin, (not his but ours, the ransom whereof he paid,)
then powered forth with great vehemency thismournefull complaint out of the 22.
Psalm, which he at that present then rehearsed, with the rest unto the 32.
verse, as we may read in Saint Jerome. For when he was a man of sorrows, and
sustained torments inconceivable to any humane understanding, and inexpressible
by any earthly tongue, (now left desticute of all worldly comfort, yea and of
Gods also,) complains, and says that he is forsaken, because he was now in
the hour of darkness, given over to the will of his persecutors, and had none
to help him, Esaias 63. 5. stuck fast in the deep mire, Psalm. 69. 2. compassed
about with the sorrows of the grave, and overtaken in the snares of death
Psalm. 18. 5.

And in this word are obseruable two things, first the word it self uttered,
secondly, the precedent miracle. The miracle was the supernatural and
prodigious eclipse of the Sun, (for so S. Luke in express terms. Cap. 23.
45. the Sun was darkened:) and it is described by the greatness thereof
(darkness was over all the earth; or as some translate it, over all that
region,) by the continuance (from the third hour unto the ninth.)

For the word it self, the second general point, that is illustrated, first,
from the adiunct of time, in which it was spoken, (about the ninth hour.)
Secondly, from the formal terms, in which it was delivered, and those,
expressed both in the original tongue, (the Hebrew, or rather, Syriacke,) and
in the Greek, by interpretation, (Eli Eli Lammahsabacthani; that is, my God my
God, why have thou forsaken me?) And in them are considerable, first the
person complaynant, (Christ hanging upon the cross.) Secondly, the person to
whom the complaint is made, God the Father (my God.) Thirdly, the matter of the
complaint: desertion, (why have thou forsaken me.) Fourthly, the grieuousnesse
of the sorrow then felt, expressed in the affectionate doubling of the words,
(my God, my God.) Fifthly, his faith and patience, signified in this pronoune
(my) yea manifestly declared, while he confesses that he is his God of whom
he is forsaken.

Now from the sixth hour was there darkness over all the land, unto the ninth
hour. For the better and more full understanding of this place, we must know
that the Jews in the latter times, (for before the captivity of Hospinianus
de origin and progress^ sestor^ apud Iudaeos lib. 1. cap. 1.
Babylon there is no mention made of hours in the Scripture) divided the
Cens^rinu^ do die natali c. 23. Ioh. Garcoeus de sphera mundi and t^mporum
ratione.
natural day, which comprehends the day and the night, into four and twenty
hours, and these again into two Cur in 24. horas dies distribuatur. Mestlinus
in Epit^me Astronomiae lib. 3.
twelues; so as they reckoned twelve from the setting of the Sun to the
rising, and so many again from Sunne-rising to Sunne-set, whereof our Savior
Christ says in the Gospel, John 11. 9. are there not twelve hours in the
day? so their six a clock is our twelve, or noonetide. And concerning this
eclipse, it was not natural, but miraculous. For first, no eclipse of the
Sun Augustinus epist. 80. Chitraeus in 27. Matthaei. Lucas Gauricus in
Calendari^ Ecclesiastico. Sethus Cal^i^ius in Isagoge Chrono^. cap. 48.
Garcaeus de Sphera. Elias Rousuerus in Isagoges historicae lib. 1. Mestlinus in
Epitome Astronomiae lib. 3.
falls out but at the new moon in the conjunction, when she comes to
those imagined knots, which the Astronomers call the head and tail of the
Dragon, and is interposed diametrally between the Sun and our sight; and,
receiving in her thick body the sun beams, keeps the light from us, and
causes, by her shadow, darkness in some climates. But this eclipse fell out in
the time of the opposition of these two lights. For the Jews solemnized the
feast of Passover the fourteenth day of the first month, Exodus 12. 6. and
they use Mensisdicitur quaudo luna lustrata cursu suo, solemn est consequnia,
vnd^ and Hebraeis (...) nominatur: ficut Graecis (...), and nos month
appellamus. Henricus Wolphius de tempore lib. 1. cap. 3. Lalamantius de tempore
and cius partibus. Varro de lingu^ Lat^^a lib. 5.
Synodicall months, the first day of which, is the conjunction.

2. No eclipse of the Sun is universal, Lucas Gauricus in Calendario
Ecclesiastico e^ Nicephor^ Calisto. L^cus est historiae suae lib. 1. cap. 31.
but this covered the whole earth with darkness, and that by the space of
three hours. For knowing that the body of the Moon is less then the Sun,
the shadow it makes is sharper above then below, in form of a spire, and
covers but a small part of the earth; so that they who dwell without the
compass of it, do feel either none or very small defect of light: but at
this time the inhabitants of the whole earth were enwrapped in darkness; for
Diomsius Areopagita epist. 7. ad Polyca^ pu^ si modo e^us sunt, quae illi
attribuuntur opera. Vide and i^ eundem Georgij Pachymerae paraphrasin: and
Maximi Scholia: de his and S^^das, and Johannes de sacro B^sc^, and Iuncti^us,
^^^as vinctus, and Hero in suis ad i^^um scholijs.
Apollophanes being now with Dionisius Areopagita, in Heliopolis a City of
Aegipt observed it, and examining it according to the tables of Aridaeus a
famous Astrologer in those days, which he composed of the eclipses of the two
lights the Sun and the Moon, perceived that it was miraculous.

The constitution of Heaven at the time of the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who was crucified in Jerusalem. In the 34. year of his age, but
according to the vulgar account in the beginning of his 33. year, the third
day of April at high noone, when the 4000. years after the fall of Adam and
Eua our first Parents were exactly complete and finished, Gal. 4. 4.

God said unto the serpent, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed, it shall break thy head and thou shall bruise
his heel, Genes. 3. 15.

Christ was partaker of flesh and blood etc. that he might destroy through
death, him, that had the power of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2. 14.

The Sun contrary to nature lost his light in the midde heaven at high noone
not farte from the Dragons head, when the Son of God brake the head of the
Dragon; at the full Moon, at which time the Sun cannot naturally be
eclipsed, and therefore that darkness was supernatural.

The Moon cannot shine except she receive light from the Sun, therefore the
same now being eclipsed, she at the same time under us was bereft of her light
among the Antipodes in Magellaneta, near the tail of the Dragon, when our
Lord Jesus Christ felt the stinge of the venomous dragon or old serpents tail
upon the altar of the Cross: Saturn now began to arise upon our horizon, with
a qua^tile malignant aspect, and beheld the eclipse of both the lights, and by
these we may gather how terrible the face of heaven was at this present.
Henricus Buntingus in Chronolog. and in Itinerario sacro.



3. All total eclipses of the Sun are not only seen but to some part of
the earth, but also be of a very short continuance; for the Moon being carried
with a continual and swift motion from the West toward the East, cannot long
ouershadow the body of the Sun; but this eclipse continued by three hours,
and therefore was not natural.

4. The Sun M^stlinus in Epit^me Astronomiae lib. 4.
begins to loose his light, on that part of his body which is toward the
West, because the Moon by her proper motion, going from the West to the East,
in the beginning of the eclipse, touches the westerly brim of the Sun, with
the Easterly skirt of her body, and k Dionisius Areopag. epist. 7. and Thomas
Ambrosius in suis ad eam Co^mentarijs. Nicolaus Lyr^ Ma^th^i.
so by little and little passes under the Sun, while at the last leaves him
of the East side: but now that part of the Sun toward the East was first
obscured, and last recovered his light again; and so the Moon began to depart
from that side of the Sun, which she had last covered; and this is above and
contrary to nature.

This strange darkening of the Sun, contrary to the course of nature, was an
apparent token, signifying the Exodus 10. 22. 23. And so the Sun and Moon
shall lose their light before the dreadful day of judgment, and dissolution
of the world, Math. 24. 29. For this is the usual manner of Gods dealing, to
warn before he strike, and (to borrow that speech from the spoils of the
Polybius. (...). Herodotus in Musis, lib. 6.
Gentiles) he sends his Heralds to proclaim war, before he makes it: or (to
use Origens Lib. 4. contrae ^^lsum. Richterus in Axiomatibus Ecclesiastitis
Axioma^e, 46.
words) punishes none before that he admonishes him, threatens judgment,
and denounces the ensuing danger. For threats and menaces are premonitions of
following vengeance to be powered upon obstinate sinners: no otherwise then if
a man should liken threatenings to the Physicians practice, who use thus to urge
their Patiens: If you observe not my rules and keep not that diet which I
prescribe, then I must be enforced to come unto launcing and apply corrasiues
and sharper medicines, and put you to more pain. Now the most merciful Lord
does sundry ways premonish.

1 By the public Ministry of his word; so he gave Noah the preacher of
righteousness to the old worid, and holy Lot to the unclean Sodomites, 2.
Pet. 2. ver. 5. 6. And sent to the Israelites by the hand of his messengers
(whom they laughed to scorn and contemned) before he raised up the King of
the Chaldeans to come up against them, 2. Chron. 36. 15. 16. And by his Prophet
denounced destruction unto the Ninevites except they did speedily repent,
Jonas, 3. 2. For wisdom Vide Mercerum in sui^ ad cum locum commentarijs.
cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, O ye foolish how
long will ye love foolishness, and the scorners take pleasure in scorning,
and the fools hate knowledge? turn you at my correction, Pro. 1. 21. 22.

2 By Signs and wonders; of which sort was the earthquake in the days of
Vzziah, Zach. 14. 5. a blazing star Iose phus, (...), lib. 6. cap. 31.
Cornelius Tacitus historiae, lib. 5. Dionisius (...) refer^ in Illirico esse
duo saxa, quae cr^pitante^ concurrunt, cu^^ aliquod impe^det incolis malum.
Gregorius Magnus Homilia primae in Euang elia: priusquam Italia gentiligladio
ferienda traderetur, in coelo, acies vidimus. ipsumque qui postea, humani
generis qui fusus est sanguin^^ ^^ruscantes. Ambrosius de funere Theodosij
signa quaedam narrat precedentia. Et Cladem Varnensem, in qua gra^e accepit
vulnus Christianus orbis, mult^ precesserunt prodigia. Callimachus Experiens in
sua Attila. De prodigijs and ostentis Integri sant libri Iu^^^ Obsequentis, and
Lycosthenis de signis Iulij Caesaris necem antecedentibus, Virg. lib. 1. Georg.
like a sword, which hung over Jerusalem, a whole years space, the Eclipse of
the Moon for twelve nights together; horses and chariots, and armed troops of
men seen in the air, and appearing in the clouds; a voice heard in the
temple, the night before the feast of Pentecost, (Let us depart from hence;)
the constant clamors of one Jesus the son of Anani a Countriman, (for a long
space continued) crying, Woe to Jerusalem. Of which and others the like,
Josephus has written at large, and they went before the coming of Titus and
Vespasian the Roman Generals, as was foretold, Math. 23. 38. But the Jews not
regarding these things, perished in their folly and stubbornness; and the
remainder of those who escaped the sword, the famine, the plague, and sedition
which was in the City, are scattered over the face of the world, and remain
until Ioh. Lunclaius in pandectis historiae Turci^ae scribit inter hord as
Tartariae, versus parte^ cius magis Aquilonarem, n^nnullas nomina Dan, Zahulon,
Nepthali retinere, and in Regae vicini^ esse nationem quandam barbaram
Lettorum, qui perpetuo in ore quasi lament^tionem quanda^ habent, quam
^ociferando per agros assiduo repetunt. Iure Mascalom; quibus verbis Ierushalem
and Damaseum intelligere creduntur, hanc Israelitici Regni (...), illam Iudaici.
this day a dreadful example to all flesh; so that blood of Christ, as they
desperately wished, is fallen upon the heads of them and their children, Math.
27. verse. 25.

3 By tragical and lamentable examples; Among which, may be ranked those
eighteen who were crushed to death by the sudden fall of the Tower of Siloam:
and the cruel murder of the Galil^ans committed by Pilate, so that the goare
of the beasts which they sacrificed, and their blood ran mingled together, Luc.
13. 1. 2. 3. 4. And this our age will furnish us with plenty of such mournful
accidents, if men had eyes to see, and hearts to understand them.

4 The untimely death of eminent men, and endued with rare qualities, whether
they be in the Church or common wealth: so it is observed, that Hieronimus de
Hebraicis traditionibus in Genesin 16. Cedrenus in Annalibus.
Methusalem (the longest liver amongst men) died the year when the
all-destroying flood came; Enoch styled a God among the people, being first
taken up into heaven: and when Josiah was slain in Megiddo, Manc sed corrupt
n^^rat Herodotus in lib. 2. historiae Euterpe; mundu^ipse defleuit eu^
principem (Theodosium) continuo rapiendum, per quem dura mundi istius temperari
solerent, cum criminum p^^as Indulge^^a pr^uenire^. A^bros^us oration^ de ^^rte
Theodosij.
2. Chron. 35. 25. not long after followed the captivity of Babel, and
Zedechiah the King of Judah was taken, his eyes pulled out, and bound in
chains, Ierem. 52. 11. and in that grave wherein he was interred, the liberty,
glory and peace of Iewry lay also buried* This is the same whereof Esaias
speaks, cap. 57. 1. the righteous perishes, and no man considers it in
heart, etc. and are taken away from the evil to come.

5 By gentle and fatherly corrections; for eftsoone God takes his rod in his
hand, and sets before us the infection of the plague and other like evils,
that taking warning by these, we may be turned unto him, and escape further
vengeance. And thus the Lord rich in mercy dealt with wicked Pharaoh; for after
the Orosius lib. 1. cap. 10.
conversion of the waters of Egypt into blood, (offering to the thirsty more
grienous remedy of their punishment, then it self was;) after the
loathsomefilthinesse of the frogs, (creeping upon all things clean and
unclean,) after the fiery stinging flies, swarming over the air and
unavoidable; after sudden death and general ruin of their beasts and
cattle; after the furious boyles and runningsoares, breaking forth of the
whole body; after the hayle mixed with fire, destroying man, beasts, trees:
after the cloud of Caterpillars, eating up every green thing, and destroying
the roots of that which was sown; after the palpable darkness, wherein
hideous and dreadful apparitions presented themselves; after the vnsparing and
uniform death of the first borne in all the land; followed the choking of the
profane king with all Quinquag inta milli^ Equitum and ducenta millia peditum
armatorum numerat Josephus Antiquitatum, lib. 2. cap. 6.
his in the red sea: which made an end of this Tragedy, Exo. 14. 28. And Amos
to the same purpose, c. 4. 8. I have smitten you with blastings and mildew,
your great gardens, and your vineyeards, and your fig trees, and your Olive
trees did the palmer-worm devour: yet you have not returned unto me, says the
Lord: Pestilence have I sent among you after the manner of Egypt, your young
men have I slain with the sword, and taken away your horses, etc. I have
overthrown you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. And thus rising by
degrees from the less to the greater.

6 By the degeneration of all things; Memoria dignum est, qu^d v^tere^ quidam
tempora mundi si^ distribuer^nt, iuxta prae^ip^a^ parts quae s^n^ in homine,
Ita dicunt initio in genere human^ praecipue regnasse (...), id^st, excel^uisse
sapientiam, cum arts inuentae sunt, etc. secunda aet^s sui^ (...), in qua
sortitudo dominabatur in bell^ and imperia censi^ tuta sunt, etc. a N^^ro^^o ^d
Iulium Caesorem, in hac regnat (...), ^t si enim insenecta mundi ^^ltum est
bell^r^m, ^amen non geritur res sim^li vigore animorum and labor Carrion in
Chronicorum, lib. 1.
Godliness, religion, discipline, order, fruits of the earth, the faculties
of soul and body: For we may behold with our eyes, how all things languish
daily, and have not that power and virtue in them now, which they had some few
years agone: they are en^eebled, frail, corrupted, without any vigor and
strength; the s^asons of the year have not the same temper which their nature
requires; the Sun S^lis (...) minor iam iam est, qnam ^uit Hipparchi and
Pto^^maei temporibus, quae res pro^ecto admiratione digna est* dubitari eu^m
p^test, virum propter sen^ctu^em mundi, quasi dila^atur sol (factus langui^ior,
paulatim ruente natura rerum*) an vero in hac sen^cta terrae tanquam ess^^iae
epus sit vicini^re positu solis ^am ^ouentis, etc. Philippus Melanthon
Physi^^s, l. 1.
seems not to shine, and cast forth his bearnes with such brightness now as
heretofore; the fruits, herbs and plants want their former pleasant
sweetness; yea the whole frame of this world, and all things in it seem to
lie a dying, and fetching the last gasp; those ever honored moral virtues,
Constancy, Fortitude, Patience, Truth, Chastity, Temperance and the rest are
become bare names; we may read of them in books, that once they were, we
cannot see them now in practice among men, etc.

Veteres Rithmi.
Recessit hoc tempore Lex a Sacerdotibus. Iustitia a Principibus. Consilium a
Senioribus. Fides a Populo. Amor a Parentibus. Reuerentia a Subditis. Charitas
a Praelatis. Disciplina a Literatis. Studium a Scholaribus. Religio a Monachis.
Deuotio a Monialibus. Honestas a Iumoribus. Timor a Senioribus. Fidelitas a
Militibus. Concordia a Ciuibus. Comitas a Rusticis. Veritas a Mercatoribus.
Largitas a Diuitibus. Castitas a Virginibus. Maeror a Viduis. Pudicitia a
Coniugatis, etc.
acknowledge the all-ruling providence of God, who disposes every thing
according to his own pleasure, Esaias 44. 24. And to his will works he in the
Army of heaven, and inhabitants of the earth, Dan: 4 32. Psa^. 135, 6. that men
may say, verily there is a fruit for the righteous, doubtless there is a God
that judges the earth, Psalm. 58. 11.

wonderful and exceeding mercy of God, who had rather spare then punish, and
is slow unto wrath, Romans 2. 4. and therefore before hand warns, threatens,
exhorts, etc. for as he lives, so will he not the death of sinners, but
that they should repent and turn from their evil ways, and be saved, Ezech.
33. 11.

wicked are made inexcusable in the day of anger and vengeance; Valerius
Maximus, lib. 1 cap. 2.
for he goes on slowly unto revenge, but recompenseth the slacknesse of his
coming, with the greatness of his punishment; he does not strike so soon as
we offend, but for the most part long after, and when we have forgotten our
misdoings Agathias de Imperio and rebut gestis Iustiniani, lib. 4. Est elegans
Plutarchi libellus, (...). consulatur Caelius Rhodinginus Lection^^ A^^iquarum,
lib. 3. cap. 14.
and evil deserts. Therefore I seal up this place with that earnest and
hearty request, God grant of his unmeasurable and infinite mercy, that we may
hear him so now warning, fear him threatening, obey him teaching, patiently
suffer him chastising, as by him at the last we may be made partakers of
those good things, which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter
into the heart of man, but such as he has prepared for them that love him, 2.
Cor. 2. 9.

Now from the sixth hour, was there darkness over all the land, unto the
ninth hour. The Jews despised Christ the light of the world (for he is the
true light which lightneth every man that comes into the world: he was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not; he came
among his own, but his own received him not, John 1. 9. 10, etc. yea, so much
as lay in them, endeavored by their uttermost to extinguish it, for they
denied the Holy one, and the Just, and desired a murherer to be given unto
them, Act. 3. 14.) and therefore are they, according to desert, now overwhelmed
in blindness of their mind, and understanding; and upon their Land (though
not alone) darkness was ouerspread at this present, when Christ hung upon the
Cross: which betokened the darkness of their hearts, Leo primus de passione
Domini, sermon. 2.
upon whom the Sun went down at noone, Amos, 8. 9. and the glistering
brightness thereof, mantled over with thick darkness, changed their day
into night.

This is a mystery. Without Christ the Sun of righteousness, thick fogge of
darkness, both in the mind and understanding, and also in the will and
outward actions. In the understanding; for such as are ignorant of Christ, are
named darkness it self in the abstract, Ephesians. 5. 8. And therefore when he
came into the world, he is said to give light to those that sat in darkness,
Luke 1. 79. and when he departed from thence, and ascended to heaven, he
appointed the Ministry of the Gospel for this end, to open the eyes of men,
and bring them from darkness to light etc. Act. 26. 18. And hereof it was,
that the ancient Fathers called Christians, (though unskillful in other
literature, and unlearned in Arts) Illuminated, in Justin. Martyr in dialogo
cum Tryphone Iudaeo. Et est Cyristi Catechismus.
respect of that light and knowledge: and the Heathen, (howsoever they diued
into the deepest secrets of nature, and were furnished with extraordinary
knowledge and science) they named Blind. So distinguishing the condition and
dignity of the faithful from the faithless; of the godly from the wicked; of
the righteous from the unrighteous; as Matthew. 15. 14. Romans 1. 29.

In the will and outward actions; For those who are not enlightened of Christ,
and into whose hearts the Gospel has not shined, they fall from virtue to
vice, go from one sin to another, from the less to greater; until they
come to the height of all iniquity. And hereof proceeded those outrages we
read of: as that the Moabi^es (most beastly without any Josephus pluribus
historiam persequitur Antiquitatu^ l. 4. cap. 6.
regard of modesty,) prostituted their daughters, Number. 25. 1. 2. 3. And the
Cananites, so surcharged themselves with uncleanness, that their land spewed
them out, Leuit. 18. 25. It is said of Manasses, that he did much evil in the
sight of the Lord to anger him therewithal, such was his desperate
wickedness, 2. Chron. 33. 6. Corinth, the Dio^ Chrysostomus oratione 37. qu^
inscribitur Corinthi^^a. Strabo Geographiae lib. 8. and de Comana vrbe lib. 12.
wantonest City (once) of all other, and most lascivious, maintained to the
honor of Venus, (who made their bodies common for gain) above a thousand
harlots, and yet daily prayed for the increase of them, and enlarging of their
Athenaeus Dipnosophiston, lib. 13. cap. 11. Alex. ab Alexandro dierum
geminalium lib 6. ^ap. 26. Et hinc (...) in diuerso genere fl^gitiorum
dicebatur apud Graecos, vthodie Florentizein apud Itales, de ijs qui lustris
and vagis libidinibus indulgent. (...) Stephanus de vrbibus in Corintho. and
videtur haec lasciuia fuisse omnium Gentilium morbus (...) Nam and adelescentes
Athenis viuentes admonet Dicaearchus, summa^ in vitandis meretricibus
adhibendam esse diligentiam; ne quis per imprudentiam malo suaui intereat: in
Geographias cap. 3. ab Henrico Stephano editae.
stews. And therefore does Scint Paul justly affirm of all who know not
Christ, that they are given up of God, to their hearts lusts, unto
uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves, which turned the
truth of God into a lie, and worshipped the creature forsaking the Creator who
is blessed for ever, Amen. For they did change the natural use into that which
is against nature, etc. being full of all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness etc. Romans 1. 24. having their understandings darkened, and being
strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the hardness of their hearts. And being past feeling, have given themselves
unto Inverecunde and plane portentesae obscaenitatis and caecitatis stupendae
exemplum refert, cuiu^ ipse (...) fuit, Ioh. Leo lib. 3. descriptionis Africa:
and turpissima^ Proculi libidine^ atro carbone notauit Vopiscus in Proculo.
Similia multa his exempla passim leguntur in histori^s, and antiquis and
recentioribus Ethnicorum, vt in Linscoti nauigatione a^ Indos Orientales and
alios.
wantonness, to work all uncleanness even with greedines, Ephesians. 4. 18. And
for this cause are their deeds in Scripture styled the works of darkness.

1. In respect of the efficient cause or author the devil, the spirit of
darkness; who as he flees the light himself, so teaches his slaves and
vassals to hate the same. He entered into the heart of Judas before he betrayed
his Master, Ioh. 13. 2. and fills the minds of Ananias and Saphira, that
they should lie to the holy Ghost and keep away part of the price of the
possession they sold. Act. 5. 3.

2. Of the matter; for they be especially done of those, whose minds are
blinded and covered with the thick clouds of darkness, so that they cannot
se^ the clear light of the truth, Ephesians. 4. 18.

3. Of the form; for their works are very darkness, which breed nothing but
fear and Omne malum aut timore aut pudore natura profudit.
dread; so Adam and Eua, entangled with the slippery and fraudulent promises of
the old serpent, and eating the forbidden fruit, fly at the Hic primum pallori
and pauori templum est conditum. Bucholcherus in Prolegomen is ad suam
Chronologiam.
voice of God calling, hide themselves in the thicket of trees, and confess
they were afraid, Genesis 3. 8. But in vain do they flee from him whom they
cannot escape: who is all eye, all hand, all foot, to see, punish and overtake
them.

4. Of the end; for those who are given over to such actions, at the last by
them are brought to utter darkness.

Let us listen to the Apostles counsel and advise, The Use.
night is past, the day is come, cast away the works of darkness, and put on
the armor of light; so that we walk honestly as in the day; not in gluttony
and drunkenness, neither in chambering and want onnesse, nor in strife and
envying: but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts Augustinus ex huius (...) lectione totus est conuers^s, vt de
se scribit (...)essionum (...)essionum lib. 8 c. 12.
thereof, Romans 13. 13. 14. that we may be pure, Phil. 1. 10. such as can abide
to be tried by the (...).
sunne-light; and in all humble submission acknowledge, how deeply we are
engaged to Christ our Lord, King and Teacher, by whom we are taught true
undefiled religion, and, abandoning the errors, and barbarous customs of
Paganism, do worship the living God; and, rejecting the toys and follies by
which the Heathen were misled and deceived, do rightly apprehend his benefits,
and show forth the virtues of him who has called us from darkness unto his
marue^lous light, 1. Pet. 2. 9.

Now from the sixth hour was there darkness over all the land unto the ninth
hour. (...).
Some interpret the words of the Evangelist ( Sixtus Seuensis biblioth. sacr.
lib. 6. cap. 124. Caluinus in Ha(...)ni^ Euangeliorum. Bez^ in notis matoribus
ad nouum Testamentum. Tossanus in Harmonia. Andreas Libanius de vniuersitate
and originibus reru^ lib. 5. ad op^s diei 4. Hexameri.
over all the earth) by a limitation, over all that Region, understanding only
Iud^^; but, without the prejudice to any other, or detraction from their skill,
we may understand them, that this eclipse was universal, miraculous and
supernatural; observed by Apollophanes and Dionisius Areopagita, when they
were in Aegipt in the City Heliopolis: of which more afterward. While the
wicked do unjustly murder the just, and lay violent hands upon the Bernardus
in feria 4. hebdom^dae paen sae. Augustinus Sermon de tempere, 114.
son of God, (most merciless and cruel murderers) at this their impious
and detestable fact, the whole frame of the world changes countenance, looks
pale and wanne; Every Athanasius ad Epictetum.
creature withdraws it self, and will not behold the death of their Lord:
and is abashed at his Saluianus de gubernatione D^i, lib. 6.
hanging on the Cross; now the Sun in his height, possessing the
Midde-heauen (for the sixth hour from the rising thereof, by the account of
the Ancient, Breche^s in Commentarijs ad Titulum digesti de verboris
significatione lege 2. 1.
is our noone) withdraws his light, and, as it were clothed in a mourning
robe, shows (in that sort he can) compassion and sorrow for his Creator, so
distressed, so tormented; as though the Father, whose nature is subject to no
affection, nor can be touched with any grief, nor shed tears, did command
the Creature to lament and perform the funeral rites of his son in his
stead, and join it self a second mourner with the Tanlerus in meditationibus
vitae Jesus Christi, cap. 48. Ludolphus de vita Christi, part 2. cap. 63.
unspotted virgin, who then alone bewailed the passion of Christ. And this so
strange an obscuration of the Sun was famous among the heathen, Phlegon
author exactus Olympiadum apud Origin^m, lib. 2. aduersus Celsum: and Easebium
in Chronico cuius fragmenta edidit Graece Lumen il^ud literarum Iosepbus
Scaliger, apud quem and Africans quoddam de ea Eclipsi testimonium extat, quem
consule, and ad Eus^bium illius animaduersiones.
who left it to memory by writing to have been so great, that the stars
appeared in heaven. And Tertullian Orosius lib. 7. cap. 4. Apologetici. cap. 21.
boldly charge the Romans, that they had this strange wonder of the world
registered in their Records: Neither could Pliny be ignorant thereof, who kept
a diligent memorial of all the Roman estate, and events befalling in the same,
(but yet would never open this, which he knew the Princes and Emperors would
have to be kept secret, and smothered up in forgetfulness.) For the Lib. 4.
De Ass.
doctrine of Christ was nothing plausible (among those proud and haughty minded
men, given to pleasures and delights) which teaches humility, patience, and
suffering affliction. And at this time indeed Christ was extremely dejected and
cast down, and as it were trampled under the feet of death; neither could
there be devised a lower degree of abasement, then that wherein now he was:
yet at this very instant, the father left him not without testimony of his
innocency as we heard before (to say nothing of the free and ingenious speech
of Pilate) in the confessor thief; and now the Deity which dwelt in Christ,
though it showed not itself, in freeing the manhood from death (for that was
not expedient, because appointed by the immutable decree of the father that he
must die) yet brake forth into Iansenius in Harmonia, cap. 143.
astonishing miracles; undoubted witnesses, that this man who in so great shame
and reproach did hang upon the Cross, was the Lord of glory and life; and
Gl^rificat^s est Christus in conspectuseniotum in Jerusalem, quando fuit
crucifixus. Petrus de la Cauelleria in tracta^u cui titulus Z^lu^ Christi
contra Iudaeos and Saracenos, etc.
therefore senseless and unreasonable creatures, least they should seem to
be wanting in duty to their Creator, do (as they are able) yield him all
honor.

Doctrine.
In the extremest disgrace and basest contempt, God begins to honor his
son, and so will he do unto all his, whom he has adopted through grace,
and made the members of Christ Jesus; Joseph is taken out of prison, advanced
to the highest top of dignity, receives for his iron fetters a chain of
gold, for his cloak cast off to avoid his mistress enforcing allurements, a
roabe of silk; for his servile condition, a ring, the sign of freedom;
changes the filthy prison for a stately palace; his base dishonor is turned
into glorious soueraignety, Genesis 41. 42. Pharao despises Moses; his servants
and Courtiers have him in great reverence, Exodus 9. 20. Daniel and his
companions are carried captives into Babylon, sundry times accused through
Envy, brought into danger of their lives; God is present with them, and they
exalted to manage the greatest affairs of state in the land of their thralome,
Dan. 3. 28. and 6. 28.

Wherefore, let us always submit our selves unto God, and Use.
serve him in all holiness and righteousness; for he will honor those who
honor him, 1. Sam. 2. 30. and that in life, and in death, and after death. In
life, beautifying them with inward gifts of the mind, as of illumination. Thus
the name of Solomon is spread over the world for his divine wisdom; so that the
Queen of Sheba came from the uttermost ends of the earth to hear him, 1.
King. 3. 12. and 2. Chron. 9. 1. 23. Math. 12. 42. of sanctification; when
according to the promise made he does write the reverent fear of his name in
their hearts, and by the effectual power of his holy spirit bow them to
obedience, Irem. 31. 33. etc. With the outward endowments of the body, and
things belonging to this life; as Abundance of riches; Job. 1. 1. 2. Comfort of
friends, Genesis 33. 4. for when the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make
his enemies to be his friends, Prou. 16. 7. Dignity and honor, as is manifest
in Joseph, the first of the posterity of Abraham, who is advanced to the
Kingdom, Genesis 12. 2. and 41. 42. 43.

In death; When old Jacob had blessed his children, as a father, and
premonished them of things to come, as a Prophet, he sweetly falls a sleep:
Genesis 49. 33. The Jews bury Iehoida in the sepulcher of the Kings, in the City
of David, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and his house, 2.
Chr. 24. 16. Jeremiah honored the funerals of Iosiab with compassionate
mournings, and all singing men and singing women, and all Judah and Jerusalem
lamented for him, etc. 2. Chron. 35. 25. After death; for their memory shall be
blessed for ever: Prou. 10. 7. Lazarus is carried into heaven by the Ministry
of Angels, the rich glutton is tormented in hell, Luke 16. 22. Wherefore if any
will be happy, let him be religious; for godliness has the promises of this
life, and of that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. which Aphorism of the
Apostle, S. Beda in suis collection^bus ex Augustin^ in Epistolas Pauli.
Augustine styles the heavenly marriage-song of Christ, and the Church his
Spouse: and what says the Bride of her beloved? his left hand is under my
head, and with his right hand he does embrace me, Cant. 2. 6. for God will not
be wanting to furnish his with gifts temporal for necessity, and will bestow
eternal blessedness upon them hereaf^er. Do you desire supply of wants in
things belonging to this life? seek first the kingdom of God (that is, the
right hand) and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto
you, Math. 6. 33. And in another place Wisdom thus speaks, length of days
are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory, Prou. 3. 16. And
so at the last shall enjoy the benefits of the throne and the footstool,
heavenly and earthly.

And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli,
Lammah sabacthani; My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? There is nothing
here lightly to be passed over, nothing superficially to be considered; let us
therefore come to the complaint of Christ, in which two things diligently are
to be considered; first, the circumstance of time when, secondly the quality,
how it was made. Concerning the time, about the ninth hour, says the
Evangelist (which is answerable to our three a clock in the after noon) Jesus
cried with a loud voice, when now he was near unto the point of death, after
he had given testimony of great and admirable patience, undergone the sentence
both of the Ecclesiastical Consistory by the high Priest, and at the temporal
tribunal of the Roman Judge, after his scourging, crowning with thorns,
spitting upon, beating and carrying his Cross, of the scorning and bitter
taunts of the Princes, and people, after the division of his garments made by
the soldiers. And before this, all that while, we read not of any thing
spoken either by Christ hanging upon the Cross, or the Jews who stood
beholding his torments; for it is very probable, for the space of those three
hours, in which the Sun was darkened, they were amassed and silent: but Christ
all this while powered forth in his heart earnest prayers, with vnexpresfable
sighs, both for us and himself; so performing the office of a true Priest.

God does not presently, and at the first, disburden his Abraham had a spirit
of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could not lift up
her self in any wise, Luc. 13. 11. and another is held in with a languishing
sickness eight and thirty years, waits for health, lies daily at one of
the porches of the Poole D^piscina h^c ^ide Iu^^^m in 3. Nehemiae, and B. zamin
maicribus annotationitus ad 5. caput Iohannis.
Be^^^hesda, and could not obtain the help of any man to put him into the
water when it was moved, whereby many before were healed of their diseases,
John 5. 5. 7. and one continues a Criple from his mothers womb (above forty
Distu^t De^^^ san^tionem eius vt op^ra fil^^ D^^ manif^starentur in ^o. Sunt
autom morbi aut poena p^cca^orum ^e Dent. 28. 59. ^ut fide^ probationes, Job.
2. 67 aut gloriae Deiillustratio, Ioh. 9. ver. 3. Georgius Wirth de vita
Christi, ex 4. Eu^ngelistis, lib. 2. cap. 1.
years) until his feet are restored to strength by Peter in the name of
Jesus, Act. 3. 17. and 4. 22. And God has his reasons, why he does oftentimes
delay and defer his help. Of which the first is, because he has appointed
in his s^^ret counsel, definite times, and immutable seasons, in which he
will do that which he has purposed. So after the accomplishing of four
hundred and thirty years, even the same day God brought his people out of
Egypt, the land of their captivity, Exodus 12. 21. And when the seventy years
were fulfilled, Israel returns from the captivity of Babylon: and the same
night Balshasher is deprived of his life and Empire by Cyrus the Per^ian, Dan.
5. 30. De hoc Babilonis excidio, and Imper^^ ^^^astatione, and edicto Cyri,
Xe^^^phon. lib. 7. de Institutione Cyri.
whose spirit God stirred up, by his proclamation to grant freedom unto the
Jews, and liberty to return to their own Country; to repair the decayed walls
of Jerusalem, and build up the ruins of the temple, Ezra: C. 1. V. 1. 2. which
seemed a thing so incredible unto them, that they supposed the Edicts when it
was published, to be but a dream, Simile qui^ accidit and Graecis, Philippo
R^ge, Macedonibusque deuictis cum Senatus R. and T. Quintius Imperator liberos
immunes suis legibus osse iubet. Nam audita voce praeconis, m^ius gaudium fuit,
quam quod vniuers^m homines cape^ent; vix satis credere se Quisque audijsse,
al^ al^os intueri mir^bundi velut somnij vanam speciem, quod ad quemque
pertine^et, suarum aurium fidem minimum credentes, proximos interrogabaent.
Liuius Decad. 4. lib. 3.
Psalm. 126. v. 1.

The second is, the trial of his children, Deuteronomy. 8. ver. 2. and the awakening
Acr^bus condimentis irritatur appetitus cibi, mora ex^imulat and a^get in nobis
desider^um consolationis and opis diuinae.
their drowsy spirits, provoking them to earnest prayer; for in trouble men
visit the Lord; and power out their supplications, when his correction is upon
them, Esaias, 26. 16. And from hence proceeded that holy stubbornenesse of the
Cananitish woman, who against all a^saults of hard temptations, showed an
undaunted mind, and continued stiff in her purpose, and after two repulses
presses on the third time (for if God does not grant presently at our first
request, he does not despise his suppliants, Augustinus in Psalm. 65. and
tractatu 6. 10 primam Johan. epistolam.
but whetteth their desires) at the last neareth that wished voice woman great
is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, Matthew. 15. 28.

The third, that he might try their constancy, and as it were cleanse them with
the Hieronymus super Abacu^ Prophetam.
fire of tribulation, and make them appear more pure. Thus stood the case with
Job; whom neither the driving away of his flocks, nor the loss of wealth in
his heardes, nor the sudden death of his children by the ruin of a house, nor
the loathsome and ouerspreading botches wherewith his body was covered, could
withdraw him from patience; and the devil (but to no purpose, and all in
vain) assaulted him: for by none of these calamities was he alienated from
his obedience due unto God, but stood steadfast and immovable. An example and
Tertullianus de Patientia.
witness unto us in the spirit and flesh, in his soul and body, of true
patience, that neither for the loss of worldly goods, nor of our most dearest
beloved, nor for the troubles and griefs of our own bodies, we should faint
or fall from God. For what a pegeant did he in that man make of the devil!
what a trophe did he erect to his glory by him the enemy of his glory! who at
all the lamentable messages which were brought, never uttered word of
coffeehouse, but ever answered blessed be the name of the Lord; and reproved
his wife as a foolish woman, wearied with afflictions (one rushing in upon the
neck of another) and persuading him to unlawful means, for the avoiding and
ending of his suffered miseries, etc. As the fining pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold, so the Lord tries the hearts, Prou. 17. 3. Iam. 5. 11.

Fourthly, God in the slownesse of bestowing his benefits commends them;
Augustinus. Chrysostom. him. 67. in cap. 20. Matthaei. Afflictiones sunt 1.
(...). 2. (...). 3. (...). Gemistus Pletho (...). Et de his olimplura scripsi
ad Psalm. 130.
for such things as we have for a long time desired, are most delightsome and
pleasant unto us, when they are obtained; in a moment and for a little season,
he may hide his face from us, but in everlasting mercy will he have
compassion, Esaias 54. 8. for he will surely come and not stay, Abacuc 2. 3. the
later, the more comfortably; therefore ask, seek, knock, Matthew. 7. 7. God
keeps that for thee, which he will not give at thy first demand, that thou
may learn to be an earnest suitor, and so obtain great things at his hand.

Use. Then, let us not utterly be discouraged and grow Use.
heartlesse, if God do not presently (when we even with passionate and
enforced prayers desire comfort, and deliverance) answer, and hear our
petitions, but defer his help, and seem to pass by our petitions offered.
For it is usual with the Lord, to (...). Theocritus.
recompense the slacknesse of his coming with abundance of comfort; and he
that is resolved to be a devoted servant of God, must believe things to flesh
and blood incredible; hope for things delayed: and love God, though he show
himself an enemy: and notwithstanding all these continue constant to the end.
Let us therefore commit our ways unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he
shall bring it to pass, Psalm. 37. 5. And for ourselves not be sluggish and
drowsy in prayer, Luke 18. 1. For God does many times effect his determined
purpose by means which seem contrary. So when he will make supply of the
best wine, he commands that water should be filled, Ioh. 2. 7. he first
kills, then quickneth; carries down to hell before he brings up to heaven,
1. Sam. 2. 6. Joseph must be worshipped of his brethren, (this God had long
before so appointed;) but to prevent it, they sell him for a slave; yet the
same means by which they sought to Gregor. Mag. m^ralium in Iobum lib. 6. cap.
12.
avoid the decree (manifested by a dream) furthered the fulfilling thereof,
and they honored him whom they hated. And this is one of Gods (...).
Haeliodorus in Aethiopicis.
wonders, to bury his children as it were in the grave of miseries, and then to
raise them up from death to life. Thus the three children are cast into the
fiery furnace, extraordinarily heated; and Daniel into the Lions den, yet these
are delivered and advanced to the greatest and most high places, Dan. 3. 28.
and 6. 28. Thus God shows himself wonderful in his Saints, Psalm 4. that is,
leads, governs and delivers them from dangers, by admirable means, which
pass the apprehension of our reason, and the deepest reach of our
understanding. For Gods divine help recouereth forelorne humane hopes; and
supplying grace Philo Iudaeus apud Eusebium Historiae Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5.
begins, where heartlesse nature ends.

And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, lammah
sabacthani, that is, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Cried with a
loud voice; In this clause the quality of Christ his complaint is expressed,
and that it was exceeding vehement, uttered with great and earnest enforcement
of speech: for in the days of his flesh he did offer up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him who was able to save him
from death, Heb. 5. 7. And, out of question, the Apostle had an especial
respect in these words, unto those which Christ in his passion with Paraus in
locum.
compassion now uttered.

Christ took upon him (in respect of the essence) our humane nature, soul and
body; and therewithal the blameless natural and uncorrupted affections of
both; of the soul; as natural Damascenus Orthodoxae fidei lib. 3. cap. 20.
Nicetas in thesauro l. 3. c. 37. Ambrosius de incarnationis Dominicae
sacramento cap. 7. Danaeus in Isagoges part 1. cap. 43. Polanus in Syntagmate
Theologico lib. 6. cap. 15.
ignorance: for he increased in wisdom and stature, Luke 2. 52. And thus he
knew not that there was In hac (...) explicanda multum se euercuerunt Patres,
sed facilis est omnium quaestionum responsio, non requisiuisse Christum maturas
ficus (...), nam non erat earum tempus, sed prococes sieve grossos. Aretius in
quaestionibus, in Euangelium Marci quaest. 48. de varietate fructuum ficut
arboris. Theophrastus de causis plantarum lib. 5. cap. 1. and Julius Scaliger
in suis ad cum commentarij^.
figs upon the tree, until he beheld it, and for want of such fruit as it
might have had, was cursed: and so is also said to be ignorant of the day and
hour of the last judgment, Mark. 11. 13. and 13. 32. to be heavy and
sorrowful even to the death, Matthew. 26. 38. to rejoice with gladness, Ioh.
11. 15. (...) be astonished with admiration, Matthew. 8. 10. to be stirred up
with anger, Ioh. 2. 17.

Of the body; and those common to the whole nature, not appropriate to the
person of man. For he is weary with travel, Ioh. 4. 6. hungry after fasting,
Matthew. 4 weepeth in compassion, Luke 19. 41. Which Augustinus de ciuitate Dei
lib. 14. cap. 10.
affections by the grace of dispensation Christ assumed, when he would; as,
when he would, he became man; for in all things it behooved him to be made like
unto his brethren (sin only excepted) that he might be merciful and a
faithful High Priest i^ things concerning God, and make reconciliation for the
sins of the people, Heb. 2. 17. Therefore the difference of these Tilenus
Syntagmatis Theol. part. 2. disputatione 1. Zacharias Vrsinus de filij Dei
incarnatione lib. 2.
passions which are in Christ and us, stands in these points. First, in the
subject, or (at the least) the cause thereof; for our affections are seated
either in the irascible faculty of the soul, or the concupiscence; and, for
the most part prevent, or very Christi affectus differunt a nostris.
1 A ratione imperante. 1 Praeter ratione^ irrep^t in^pinantibus etc. 2 Christi
affectus sunt. In sola obiecta licita. 2 nostri In obiecta illicita feruntur. 3
Non turbulenti aut rationem de grada deijcientes. 3 Traecipites sunt and
rationem a statu suo deijciunt. hardly obey reason: but those of Christ,
though, Aquin. summa part. 3. quest. 14. per totum. Clictomenus Damasceni
commentator ad lib. 3. cap. 20. orthodox. fidei.
we place them in the sensitive, yet, (because he is without the least touch
and infection of sin) did always obey the direction of the understanding and
reason, and was led rather by it, then by appetite. Secondly, In the objects:
our affections are oftentimes carried to that which is evil, his only is good.
Thirdly, in the measure thereof; for ours by reason of that Bonduenturae cap.
8. Breniloquij.
disorder which is in us, do, not seldom, exceed and break order; but his
were ever tempered with a sweet harmony and concent. Therefore two sorts of
passions there be, not incident unto him; one of those which are not natural,
nor do arise from the general sin of man, wherewith all are defiled; as be
sundry diseases, (agues, Johannes Langius Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 13.
leprosy, gowte, blindness, and the like) which God inflicteth as due
punishments, reuengers of transgressions: The other, such as be culpable and
sinful; as for example, untowardness to that which is good, readiness to
do evil, etc. From these, and all of the same kind, Christ is free; for
Extitit Iustiniani temporibus circa annum Domini, 536. Apthartadocitarum and
Seueritarum h^resis, dicentium quod c^ quam ex virgin Seruator noster
assumpsit caro, ante passionem fui^ incorruptibilis and (...) id est, omnis
infirmitatis, and Interritue expers; and opini^n^^ h^^^ a^plexus est Iust^ianus
ipse qui far no^ potuit, propter amorem suum in Christum, vt quispiam diceret
corpus eius esse corruptibile: Quare and edictum sanciuit, quo Corpus Domini
incorruptibile appellauit, and in quod null^ omnino passiones caderent: At illi
res^iterunt, eamque illius opinionem veri^ati contrariam esse liquido
ostenderunt Anastatius, Antiochenus, and Agapetus Romanus Episcopus, Euagrius
historiae Ecclesiast. lib. 4. ca. 39. and Niceph. C^l^stus, l. 17. cap. 29.
Aug. de Heresibus.
they be nothing pertinent to that shape of a servant, which in mercy he took
upon him for our sakes.

Use. The first is, a demonstration manifesting the truth of his humane nature;
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
but he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, Philip. 2. 7. not Bernardus.
of a servant only, to be subject, but of an euillseruant, for our sakes to be
beaten.

The second, an example of patience and meckenes in suffering all kind of
misery, for the advancement of the glory of God, and procurement of man's
salvation, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 12. 3.

Thirdly, his suffering in soul and body; was sustained and undergone for our
sakes, and for the purging of our sins, surely he bare our infirmities, and
carried our sorrows, and was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for
our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed, Esaias, 53. 4. 5. Assumpsit Christusdefectus nostros, 1.
propter pretium nostrae salutis, 2. propter exemplum virtutis, 3. propter
fulcimenrum nostrae fragilitatis: Pretium salutis, quia proposuerat nos
redimere, non auro and argento, sed pretiosissimo sangui^e suo, and animam sucm
po^ere pro animabus nostris; ad h^e autem non esset idoneus, nis^ naturam
deficientem and passibilem assumpsisser: and pr^inde defectus n^stros and
poenalitates, debuit in seipso habere: propter exemplum virtutis, specialiter,
humilitatis, patientia and pietatis: Propter ^ulcim entum nostrae fragilitatis,
in quafacultas animae Rationalis habet in se difficultatem ad cred endum vera,
and Irascibilis ad speranduns ardua, and co^cupiscibilis ad amand^m bon^, etc.
Benauentura in lib. 3. senten. distinct. 15. Aquinas in summa part, 3. Quaest.
14. Articul. 1.
.

4 The fourth may serve for the comfort and strength of our faith; for when we
wrestle with many calamities, and be tried with sundry temptations, Christ
Jesus our Lord does suffer with us in the same; We have not such an high
Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was
in all things tempted in like, yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. therefore when
Saul persecuted his members upon earth, he the head complayneth in heaven, Act.
9. 4. and says of them, whosoever touches you, he touches the apple of mine
eye: Zach. 2. 8. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we
may receive mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Heb. 4. 16.

Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, Lammah sabacthani, that is, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? There is no speech of Christ, nor of any
other in the Why Christ uttered this speech in two several languages.
history of the Gospel, uttered and recorded in two several tongues besides
this one; and the reason doubtless is this. The holy Ghost would therefore set
it down in the Syriacke (which Christ then used) that both we might better
Tossanus in consensu Euangelistarum. C^lminus in Iocum.
conceive the cause, why the Roman Soldiers and other standers by, said, that
he then called for Elias; in respect of that affinity, and likeness of sound
the words, Eli and Elias: as also, that it might make a deeper impression in
the minds and memories of Men. For it is as much, as if he should represent him
speaking the self same words in the same manner, which he did hanging upon the
Cross; wherefore they are the more advisedly to be weighed, for in them is
lively described an Musculus in Math. 27. and Psalm. 22.
express Image of the qualities of hope and faith, wrestling against despair;
and how it encreas^th, and by what degrees it waxes, and cannot in any
resemblance, either more fully or better be expressed, then in this temptation
of Christ. For; first, he willingly enters into the beginning of his bitter
passion, and therefore when the time thereof drew near, and he was to eat
the last Paschal Lamb with his Disciples (himself the true Lamb ready to be
sacrificed) thus speaks unto them, with desire have I desired, (or heartily
longed) to eat this Passover with you before I suffer, Luc. 22. 15. And that
heavenly discourse which Continetur ille sermo, cap. 14. 15. and 16. Iohannis
he made with those his Apostles, partly at supper time, partly after it was
ended, (when now the hour of his death was at hand, so appointed by his
Father) with what prompt readiness and cheerfulness of mind he undertook it,
that one clause is sufficient proof, As the Father has commanded so I do,
John, 14. 31. showing apparently the truth of that position, he made his soul
a sacrifice for sin, and was so offered because he so would, Esaias 53. 10.
Heb. 10.

Secondly, in the Garden, stricken with fear, and entering as it were into the
Lists, to combat with death, and sensibly feeling the infirmity of the flesh,
which he took, falls flat upon his face, and prays: Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, that I drink not of it: but that we
may know how this was the voice of weakness, not unwillingness, he recalleth
it by a spiritual correction, yet not as I will, but as thou will; And lest it
should enter into the heart of any to conceive, that this was not uttered in
earnest; he three times repeateth it, three times resigneth himself over to
his Fathers will, Math. 26. 36. 39. 42. etc.

Thirdly, the temptation increasing, he begins to feel a grievous agony and
incredible torment of mind; sorrow melting the soul, whereby the body is not
only dissolved into sweat, but trickleth forth upon the ground in congealed
drops of blood: and, extremely weakened in all the powers thereof, vtrereth
so lamentable a complaint, as is vnmatehable, and unheard of in all the world
before this. For now the tempest of Gods wrath rushed upon him, the whole
burden of our sins lay heavy upon his soul, he was touched with the
sensible feeling of all that woe and misery which all mankind had deserved: and
therefore cries out, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? yet not
desparing, but tempted with despair; apparent in this, for he does in the very
extremity, acknowledge that God to be his God, who seemed to have forsaken
him. And therefore does not charge the Father, as though he had exposed him
without cause to the shame, ignominy and torment of the Cross, but of his
own accord spreads his arms, and stretches forth his hands to be fastened
unto it with iron nails: and how great and Arnoldus Carn^t^nsis de s^ptem
vltimis verbis D^mini.
entyre this obedience was, he then manifested, when he showed how he was
les^er and equal unto him.

Thus stands the case with the godly in the sharp assaults ready and
contented to bear all extremities, whatsoever it pleases God to lay upon
them; as Paul, not to be bound only, but to dye for the name of the Lord
Jesus, Act. 21. 13. And this was that resolute mind of those choice and
devoted soldiers, the first planters of religion, who enlarged the territories
of Christian profession on every side among the Gentiles, and made an honorable
and worthy on set upon the difordered and fierce multitude of Barbarous nations.

Secondly, when the heat of temptation increases and the devil, (that Lion
seeking whom he may devour, no less then destruction will satisfy him)
violently throws out his fiery darts, they begin to feel the weakness of
flesh and blood, and horror of death; yet so, as they refuse not to bear the
most grievous things which can be laid upon them. And this is ^t whereof
Christ put Peter in mind, when thou were thou girdest thy self, and wentest
whether thou would, but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth
thy hand, and another shall girde thee, and lead thee whither thou would
not; signifying by what death he should glorify God, etc. Ioh. 21. 18. 19. For
Nicephorus Calistus lib. 2. cap. 36. Calui^us in 21. Iohannis. Georgius Wirth
in Harmonia lib. 5. cap. 73.
whether he endured the pains of the Cross (as some think.) or any other
kind of torment, yet in him the flesh did just against the spirit: for death
is one of the last most terrible things, the king of fears, as Bildad names,
Job 18. 14. Therefore the Apostle gives this precept to his scholar, to be
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God, 2.
Timoth. 1. 8. that which he gives; for both believing and suffering are
gifts, Phil. 1. 29.

3. In this force and rage of trial that suspicion does sometime creep into
the minds of the most righteous, and grievously affright them, that their
faith and hope whereby they rely upon God and trust in him, is vain and
fruitless, because they see no present help, no light of comfort to shine
forth unto them. Thus Job cap. 11. 17. 18. powers out his distressed soul,
and complayneth himself unto God, thou renuest thy plagues, and increasest thy
wrath against me, changes and armies of sorrows are against me, wherefore
have thou brought me out of the womb? O that I had perished, and that no eye
had seen me. And David by a strong asseueration, certainly I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, for daily have I been
chastised and punished every morning, etc. Psalm. 73. 13. 14. The whole Church
of Iudaea, after a most humble and affectionate petition for mercy, being now
overwhelmed with the swelling waves of numberless tribulations, at the last
breaks forth as hartlesse and despayring of any relief: I have powered out
before thee O Lord my wounded heart, wherefore do thou forget us for ever?
and forsake us so long time? Turn thou us unto thee O Lord and we shall be
turned, renew our days as of old: but thou have utterly rejected us, thou art
exceedingly angry against us. Ierem. Lament. 5. 20. 21. 22.

doctrinall, teaching, that we should take knowledge of our infirmity; and so
withstand, with all our best endeavor, the lusts of the flesh, and help
forward the spirit, (striving and wrestling against the same) by earnest and
hearty prayers unto God. And this is the same whereof Christ puts the
Apostles in mind of: Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation, Matthew.
26. 41. for the spirit is ready, the flesh is weak. This flesh therefore is to
be mortified; the flesh of the understanding, which oftentimes greedily
receives falsehood in stead of truth, truth for falsehood: for the natural man
is not capable of those things which are of the spirit of God, 1. Corinthians. 2.
14. The flesh of the will, which is only and continually carried unto that
which is evil, Genesis 6. 5. The flesh of unbridled lusts; whereof Job a singular
pattern, in that golden legend of his own; wherein among other particulars,
thus; I have made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think on a
maid? for what portion should I have of God from above? does he not behold my
ways and tell my steps? Job 31. 1. 2. 4.

Secondly, consolatorie; that being privy to our own manifold Use 2.
weaknesses, should not be too far cast down upon the consideration
thereof: for in the most entirely beloved children of God, and the absolutest
Saints among men, who ever were from the beginning of the world (after the
fall) no few nor small defects are to be found, but in many things all do
offend, Iam. 3. 2. And the flesh lusts against the spirit, and these are
contrary one to another, so that they cannot do those things that they would,
Galath. 5. 17. Romans 7. 16. Wherefore, let us always, casting our eyes unto
Gods will, (searching what he requires,) and our own corruption (hindering
the performance of obedience) pray unto him with inward sighs, Teach us thy
way O Lord, that we may walk in thy truth, knit our hearts unto thee that
we may fear thy name, Psalm. 86. 11. And deeply consider the exceeding
goodness of God toward those who are his, and does pity them as a Father his
children. Psalm. 103. 13.

And, because he is faithful, will not suffer them to be tempted above that
they shall be able to bear, but will give the issue with the temptation, 1. Corinthians. 10. 13. Further we may mitigate and allay the grief of our misery by
making a special induction unto our selves, of all the holy men in former
ages. For what one of them had not his wants? did not fall? was not overtaken
with humane imbecilitie? Abraham (that great Patriarch the father of the
faithful,) to free himself from the danger of death, dissembleth, and
instructs Sarah his wife to do the like, fearing lest the Egyptians (among
whom now he soiourned) should kill him for her sake (a woman of singular and
extraordinary beauty etc.) that she might be taken into Pharaoh the Kings
Court: Genesis 12. 11. etc. Elias flees into the wilderness, and dare not abide
the threatenings of Iesabel, and there in great distress and anguish desires
to have his soul taken from him; and complayneth that he is left alone, not
another in the world, who makes any care to serve God, 1. King. 19. 10. There
was a great eclipse and obscuration of the light of faith in Ieremies heart,
when he brake forth into those impatient terms: Cursed be the day wherein I was
borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed; cursed be the
man who showed my Father, saying: a man child is borne unto thee, and comforted
him, etc. Ierem. 20. 14. 15. 16. etc. Medici completa est praedictio, and
aegroti conuicta praesumptio. Augustinus tract. 1 13. in Johan. Euang. Nemo de
sua virtute audeat confidere, quando mutabilitatis periculum ne quidem Petrus
potuit effugere. quid enim est homo sine gratia Dei, nisi quod fuit Petrus cum
negauit Christum? Idem lib. 1. contra Pelagianos.
Peter thrice denied his Master, first, in the High Priests hall; after in the
porch (adding an oath for confirmation,) that he knew not Christ: and both,
being charged only with the speech of a maid: lastly, by banning and cursing,
when he was asked of them, by those which stood by, Mark. 14. 66. Therefore
disauowing and distrusting our own strength, let us humbly and desirously come
unto Christ, who will not break a bruisedreede, nor quench the smoking flax,
Matthew. 12. 20.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The suffering of Christ for us,
was of two Tilenus Syntagmatis disputationum Theologicarum part. 2. disput. 5.
Pelanus in praelectionibus ad Psalmum 22.
sorts; inward or spiritual, and outward or corporal. I call that outward,
which was perceiuable by sense, (as when his sacred name was reproched, his
head rent with thorns and smitten with reeds, his face defiled with spitting
upon it, and bruised with strokes, his ears pierced with scoffs and
reuilings, his eyes sorrowfully afflicted at the sight of his dear Mother and
beloved Disciple, his tongue parched with thirst, distasted with gall, his feet
and hands dug through with nails, his body spoiled of clothing, torn with
whippes and despitefully hanged up between two thieves:) By the spiritual and
inward passion, we are to understand that most grievous, dreadful and
intolerable burden of Gods wrath, which pressed him so heavily, (taking upon
him our sins) that it wrung from his body, a sweat of blood, and from his
mouth a lamentable complaint, crying out that he was forsaken of God. Now this
desertion or forsaking implies two things: a separation from all good, the
fountain and offspring whereof is God, and the ouerwhelming in all evil;
wherewith Christ, by reason of the dispensation of his office undertaken for
us, was to strive, that so he might free us from our deserved punishment. Among
which, this is the chief and greatest, to be forsaken of God; yet while in
this complaint and expostulation, he calls him his God; it is a sufficient
evidence, testifying that he was not utterly swallowed up, and drowned in this
deluge and gulf of miseries, but should at the last swim out and escape safe
from the same, and triumph over all temptations; and show, that in the midst of
the raging heat of these assaults, still God remained his father, and therefore
was not simply and altogether forsaken, but respectively, and in some sort
only: that is, in regard of the end, ordained for the accomplishment of the
mystery of our Redemption; which dereliction Lib. 2. de Orthodoxa fide, cap.
31. Plura si libet, petere licet ex Clictonaeo veteri illius commentatore, and
varias desertionis species plenissime recenset Polanus; Syntagmatis Theologi.
lib. 6. cap. 4. Et consulendi sunt Arnoldus Carnotensis de 7. vltimis Christi
verbis. Iraeneus apud Theodoretum Dialogo tertio. Leo primus sermonibus de
passione 16. and 17. Cyprianus de passione Christi. Epiphanius haeresibus
contra Ariomanitas. Elias Cretensis in Nazianzeni orationem secundam de filio,
vbi quatuor ponit modos desertionis generales, 1. Explorationis causa, vt in
Job. and Iosepho, quo ille tanquam fortitudinis, hic castitatis columna clarus
fieret, 2. Ad castigationem, vt in Apostolo, quo semel demittendo and
humiliando, summam illam Gratiam conseruaret, 3. Per auersionem; vt in Iudaeis,
quo puncti ad poenitentiam flecterentur, 4. Supra hos omnes restat mod^^ ille
desertionis, in administratione Domini pro genere humano, vt perillam quae
videretur esse desertio, nos primo deserti, deinde recepti per incarnationem
Christi, cruciatibus ipsius saluemur.
Damascene therefore calls dispensatiue; when, as he was man, left for a
while the Dietie (resting, and not showing it self, in the time wherein he was
crucified, tempted and died) yet ever united to the humanity, that he might
overcome, rise again, justify and redeem us.

Therefore when we are plunged in the sea of the greatest calamities,
ouerloaden with the heauiest burden of manifold tribulations, when those
complaints are wrung from us, (How long will thou forget me O Lord? for ever?
How long will thou hide thy face from me? will the Lord absent himself for
ever? and will he show no more favor? is his mercy clean gone for ever, does
his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be merciful, has he
shut up his tender mercy in displeasure? Psalm. 13. 1. and 77. 7. 8. 9.) and
crusheth our bones as a Lion, Esaias 38. 13. that we know not what to do: 2.
Chron. 20. 12. even then let us submissuely power forth our hearts before God;
and like humble suppliants, fly to his mercy, as our only Sanctuary; for the
Lord does hear the desire of the poor, and makes his ear to attend, Psalm.
10. 17. he neither can nor will forsake his. And therefore, thus does he
refresh Sion (weeping and mourning as though God had left his) Can a woman
forget her sucking babe, that she should not have compassion on the son of
her womb? yea they forget, yet I will not forget thee: behold I have graven
thee upon the palms of mine hands, and thy walls are continually before me,
Esaias 49. 15. 16. And is also said, to see the afflictions of his people in
Egypt, and to hear them cry, by reason of their taskemasters, and to know
their sorrows, and come to deliver them from the hand of the Egyptians, and
bring them out of that land, into a good land flowing with milk and honey:
Exodus 3. 7. 8. And what can be added to this tender, or rather officious and
serviceable care of God, whose eyes watch, ears attend, hands are ready, and
feet hasten, to help those who belong unto him, that they might not be too
much wronged? but if there may be any addition, the holy Ghost does express
in these most sweet words, saying, that the Lord raised up to the Israelites
Judges when they were vexed of their enemies, and was with the Judge and
delivered them all the days of the Judge (for it repented the Lord) because of
their gronings, by reason of those who oppressed them, Judge. 2. 18.

no reason then why we should imagine that the favor of God is the less
toward us, when we are exercised, though with many and great afflictions; for
whom he loves, he does chastise, Prou. 3. 10. and as he seems to forsake
them for a while, but to their benefit, 1. For their trial; as in Job and
Joseph; the one whereof was a pillar of patience, the other of chastity. 2.
for their correction; of this is the Apostle an example, who was humbled, that
he might preserve the grace bestowed. 3. by withdrawing his comfort to move
them to repentance; as he dealt with the Jews. Of this more in the former
words, and upon the 130. Psalm.

O my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The Redemption which Christ
purchased for us, was not external of the body alone, but internal of the
soul also; and therefore did not only offer up his body unto the Father to
reconcile us, but the soul likewise suffered the punishment we had deserved:
and as though he had been the guilty person, stands out at the Bar before
the Judgment seat that we might be absolved.

Then sin is a dangerous evil, and which God hates. Gen 6. 7. and 7. 21.
The cry of Sodomes iniquity ascended up into heaven, a revenging shower of fire
and brimstone descend down to earth, devoured the offenders, turned their
Cities into ashes (an example to them that hereafter should live ungodly:) 2.
Pet. 2. 6. The earth opens her jaws, and swallow up rebellious Corah, Dathan
and Abiram; they, their tents, theirs, and all go down quick unto hell,
Numb. 16. 31. Canaan speweth out her inhabitants, because of their abomination,
Leuit. 18 25. Of all that infinite multitude that came out of Egypt, Exodus 12.
37. only two, Caleb and Joshua entered into the land of Promise: Numb. 14. 38.
the rest perished in the wilderness, because they provoked the Lord. And at
this present, the Jews hated, despised, scattered, and wandering over the face
of the earth, remain a visible example of Gods wrath against sin; the
greatness whereof shows it self in the variety of the punishments, Leuit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28. 15. in the generality, Genesis 7. 23. Osea, 4. 2. 3. in the sharpness,
2. Chron. 21. 18. 2. King. 9. 36. In the suddaines of the execution, Dan. 4.
30. Act. 12. 23. These and the like testimonies of Gods anger against sin and
sinners, are registered in holy Scripture. But the undeserved death and bitter
passion of his only and beloved son, by which alone his justice could be
satisfied, does far exceed them all; which if he for us had not once tasted,
we must have felt eterually.

Let us avoid sin, lest we pull vengeance upon our own heads, and tread
under foot the son of God, and account as as a profane thing, that sacred
blood by which we are justified, Heb. 10. 29. For all sin is (to speak it
in the words of the Schoole-Diuines)

First, injurious to God, Dionisius Carthusianus in Tractatu de Grauitate, and
Enormitate peccati, cap. 1.
and wronging the most holy. For we despise his commandments, who would have
us 1 Deo iniuriatinum.
holy as he himself is holy, Leuit. 11. 44. And therefore every one that
calls upon the name of the Lord, must depart from evil, 2. Timoth. 2. 19.
For when we were not, he created us, Genesis 2. 7. When we were lost, he
redeemed us, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. etc. and sanctifies, being redeemed, that we
should not live according to our own will, but his, 2. Cor. 5. 17.

Secondly, joyful to the Devil, (who teaches evil and 2 Diabolo
laetificatiuum.
delights in filthiness) and that three ways; 1. in regard of subjection;
for he that commits sin, is the servant of sin, John, 8. 34. (nothing
more base:) 2. of assimilation, or likeness; and of this, murdering Caine is
said to be of the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, 1. John, 3.
8. 12. 3. of inhabitation, for such the devil possesses and dwells in them;
so an evil spirit is said to vex Saul, 1. Sam. 16. 14. and in the Parable,
when he goes out of a man, to return again, and bring seven other worse then
himself, there to take up his lodging; and his end shall be worse then the
beginning, Math. 12. 43. 44.

Thirdly, most hurtful to man; for without repentance it 3 Homini sum
nociuum.
depriueth of the blessing of grace present, and of future glory; Of grace; If
the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commit impiety according
to the abominations of the wicked man; all the righteousness that he has done
shall not be remembered, Ezech. 18 24. And this is the threatening to the Church
of Ephesus; who unless she remember her fall, and rise again by repentance,
and do her first works, the Candlestick shall be removed out of his place,
Apoc. 2. v. 5. that is, she shall cease to be any longer a Church. I purpose
not, to heap up either more confirmatory testimonies or examples; yet may not
let pass that one so famous a miracle of judgment, upon the abuse of a
miracle of mercy; which is, that in the persecutions of the Christians in
Africa (raised by the Arrians) when their tongues were pulled out by the
roots, and notwithstanding spoke distinctly, and uttered both the miseries
they endured, and the truth of their profession. Among whom, two dishonouring
their profession, by committing uncleanness with women, were stricken
Iustinianus Imperator ipse (...) Cedicis, lib. 1. titulo 27. de officio
Praetoris Africae: lege quas Gratias; Marcellinus comes in Chronico, qui and
illud addit, precepisse Hunericum adolescentis linguam a natiuitate muti,
praescindi, eundemque mox loquutum esse, gloriamque Deo in primo vocis exordio
dedisse. Paulus Diaconus, lib. 16. non procul a fine: Procopius Caesariensis
Vandalicorum, lib. 1. Aeneas Gazaeus in Theophrasto.
dumb, and could speak no more for ever: God would not have them declare his
ordinances, nor take his covenant (any longer) in their mouths, etc. who were
partakers with the adulterers, Psalm. 50. 16. 17. 18. Of Glory; for no unclean
thing shall enter into the new Jerusalem. Apoc. 21. 27. Neither shall any
unrighteous person, nor fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of
God, 1. Cor. 6. 9. Fulmen est hoc terribile, quo innumera heminum multitudo ad
infernum deturbatur; and capienda est Apostoli sententia disjunctive, no^
copulative, vt de singulis (...) intelligatur comminatio: sed nec eo trahenda
est oration, quasi qui vnius vel plurium reus factus est, exolui reatu nulla
ratione queat; and notandum probe in hunc sensum referri etiam ebrietatem cui
hodie dediti sunt fere omnis loci and ordinis homines, and in qua laudis and
laetitiae materia vulgo quaeritur.
The sentence of condemnation is passed against all and every one of these
offenders, except it be reuersed by repentance, and amendment of life.
Therefore let us listen unto that admonition of the Wise man; Fear God and
keep his commandments, for this is the whole man. and the Lord shall bring
every work into judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil, Eccl. 12. 13. 14. and we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
Therefore let us endeour (waiting and looking for that day) that we may be
found of him in peace without spot and blameless, 2. Pet. 3. 14. For the Via
peccati ingredientes contaminat, progredientes obstinat, egredientes
exterminat. Bernardus in sententijs.
way of sin in the first entrance thereunto defiles, in the progression,
hardneth, at the going out, destroys.

THE FIFTH WORD A WORD OF want and distress.
JOHN 19. verse. 28. 29. After this Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst; now
there was set a vessel full of vinegar, and they filled a sponge with vinegar
and put it upon hysop, and put it to his mouth.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis is the fifth word (I thinst.) And this thirst of Christ, is described
from the circumstance of time, when he suffered it, (when he knew that all
things were accomplished.) from the end, (that the Scripture might be
fulfilled) from the manner, how it is quenched (with vinegar,) from the persons
who offered the same, the soldiers; propounded generally, (they filled a
sponge with vinegar.) particularly, by the instrument, (a sponge filled with
vinegar.) and the application (put to his mouth) from the occasion: There was
set a vessel full of vinegar, etc.

After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished. Christ now
shows, that none of all these things, which he suffered, fell out by chance,
or fortune, but were long before determined, and set down that they should be
so.

And here arises a question, how it may truly be said, that all things were
fulfilled, seeing Christ, was not yet dead, nor risen again, and nevertheless
these are specially required to the perfecting of our redemption; for he was
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification, Romans 4.
25. which manner of speech, does not exclude the merit of Christ's death, from
the act of our justification, but by a figure, called Synecdoche, comprehends
all those things, which Christ did, and suffered, for our sakes. Now because
there is a twofold Duplex est Imputatio, vna (...) qua videlicet peccata, non
imputautur. Altera (...), quaimputatur institia.
imputation, one, by the remoouing of the contrary, whereby our sins are not
laid to our charge, another, by way of position, whereby we are accounted
righteous, therefore when the several benefits, are distinguished, and each
appropriated to his special cause, it is truly affirmed, that his death
overcame our death, and his return unto life, purchased life for us. And
because whatsoever befell Christ, in life and death, had been unprofitable, and
to no purpose, except he had overcome death, therefore is our justification
ascribed to his resurrection, for it is the complement and fulfilling of all
whatsoever we hope for. 1. Cor. 15. 17. 1. Pet. 1. 3. 2. Timoth. 2. 9.

Then the doubt propounded may be thus resolved.

1. It is usual by the phrase of Scripture, to speak so of things which are
in the doing, as if they were done and perfected.

2. All things were Augustinus in tractat. 47. and 119. in Johan. Euang.
fulfilled, as was prophesied should be performed before his death, therefore
Christ uses here both his knowledge, and power; for he did not yield up the
spirit, until he had perfected whatsoever was appointed should be imposed
upon him hanging on the cross: for, he lays down his life, himself, no man
takes it from him, but has power to lay it down and take it again, Ioh. 10.
17. 18. And therefore now asks drink.

The instruction from hence to be gathered, is in a more seventh and last ward.

After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. The Scripture mentioned here by the Evangelist,
is written, Psalm. 69. 21. And Christ, that he might manifest himself, to be
the same, whose person David sustained, and of whom he was a type, would now
drink evineger, for the quenching of his thirst. For besides the other
injuries, which the Jews offered unto him, they added this, contrary to all
sense of humanity and the custom even of most barbarous nations, that they
gave him (now already torn in the Judgment hall, and beaten with scourges
till life failed,) vinegar to drink for further torture; who should rather
have offered wine, to refresh his languishing spirit and comfort his decayed
strength, Prou. 31. 6. But all this he was willing to undergo, for the
confirmation of our faith, because the hand of God and his counsel, had
determined before, that these things should be done, Act. 2. 23. and 4. 28.

The doctrine of the Gospel, is no new nor lately deulsed invention, but most
ancient, from the beginning; for whatsoever befell Christ, both for the matter
and the manner was foretold. As,

That he should come to Jerusalem riding upon an Ass, Zach. 9. 9.

Be entertained of the children with Osanna, a joyful shout and exclamation,
Psalm. 118. 26.

Be sold for thirty pieces of silver, Zach. 11. 12. Matthew. 27. verse. 3.

His death conspired both by Jews and Gentiles, the chief rulers and people,
Psalm. 2. 1. 2. Act. 4. 25.

Betrayed of his friend and disciple, Psalm. 41. 9.

Taken spitted upon, reprochfully handled, Esaias 50. 6.

Forsaken of his Apostles, Zach. 13. 7. Marc. 14. 27.

Accused by false witnesses, Psalm. 55. 11.

Hanged upon the tree, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Between two thieves, or malefactors, Esaias
53. 12. Marc. 15. 27.

Have his side opened with a spear, Zac. 12. 10. Apoc. 1. 7. And rise again,
Psalm. 16. 8. 9. Act. 13. 35.

the third day after his death; whereof Jonas was a type, Matthew. 12. 40. For as
Georg. Wirth in Harm (...) Euangelij lib. 3. cap. 13. de t^iduana Christi in
sepulchro m^ra. Sic Augustinus Quaestionum Euangelicarum lib. 1. cap. 7. Prima
dies accipitur secundum par^em sai postremam. Secunda, s^cun. dum se totam.
Ter^ia, secundum part^m sui primam; sic sint ^res dies, and quaelibet suam
habet noctem.
concerning Jonas, there were three several degrees obseruable; his swallowing
up by the whale, his dot en^^on in her belly, and casting forth again. So the
swallowing of Christ was death; the grave his ^^tention; and his casting forth
his resurrection. Justinius Martyr. in quaestionibus ad Orthedoxos.
Thus the ^aw, is the Gospel promised; the Gospel, the law fulfilled. The
Augustinus in Psalm. 143. (...). Epi^^anius contra Epicureos.
grace of the new Testament, was vayled under the shadows of the Law, revealed
in the brightness of the Gospel.

1. Use. Therefore, in judging and disce^ning of matters holy and spinituall,
let us confine ourselves, within the bounds and limits of the Scripture; and
not presume to be wise, above that which is written, I. Corinth. 4. 6. for the
holy Scriptures are able, to make us wise unto salvation, through faith in
Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3. 15.

2. Use. Christ is the true Messiaes, and appointed Savior of the world, sent
of the Father, at the ^idnesse of time, Gal. 4. 4. as he promised Genesis 3. 15.
And unto whom all the Prophets give witness, that through his name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive forgiveness of sins, Hoc Petridictum notum
and comme^datum esse deb^t pijs omnilus: tum qu^a recitatur in prima concione
habita inter Gentes, and miraculo manifesto confirma^^ est and (...)
obsignatu^, and efficacissime refutat mult^s errores Pon^ficios, and ex
professo express consensum omnium Prophetarum in veteri Testamento citat: sed
de his plurain exemplari Latino.
Act. 10. 43. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell,
and having made peace by the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all
things to himself, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven, etc.
Coloss. 1. 19. 20. that is, the whole Church militant and tryumphant, for he is
the lamb, slain from the Dicitur Chrisius agnus mactatus a mundi origin. 1.
Respectu diuini decreti. 2. promissionis, Genesis 3. 3. typorum, Abelis, Abrahami
Isaacum immolaturi, Sampsonis, Dauidis, sacrificiorum, etc. 4. officaciae, naem
mors Christi profuit aneequaeam fuit, and aeque veteris Testamenti fidelibus ac
noui; vnde Abrahamus, di^m Christi vidisse, and laetatus esse dicitur. Ioh. 8.
56.
foundation of the world, Revel. 13. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever. Heb. 13. 8.

After this, Jesus knowing, that all things were now accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. He, Pelargus in septem vltima
Christi verba.
who was the fountain of living waters, and quenched the thirst of the people
in the wilderness, from the rock Number. 20 11. gave Sampson drink out of the
iawebone of an ass, Judge. 16. 19. who can only bestow that water, whereof
whosoever tastes, shall not thirst any more, John 4. 14. and leads the
wearyed unto the still waters, Psalm. 23. 2. now amidst his anguish and
sorrows, and boiling desire to perform the work of man's redemption,
complayneth of thirst. And this his thirst was natural, and mystical;
Natural, for from midnight, (at which time he began to be in an agony in the
garden, and his sweat was like great (...).
drops of blood trickling upon the ground) consumed with grief, beaten,
crowned with thorns, scorned, drawn from place to place, laden with his
cross, and fainting under it, it was no Ianseniue in Concordantia Euangelita.
cap. 143.
marvel, if he were scorched with drought, both in regard of his body (over
wearied with labor, and loss of blood by reason of his many wounds) but
especially dried through the feeling of the heat of the wrath of God; so that
he became like unto a pot sheard, Psalm. 22. 15. for sorrow troubles the
natural heat, Cyrillus lib. 11. in Johan. cap 35.
wastes, the inward moisture, and burns up the bowels, by a fiery quality;
whereof, the usual proverb amongst us (Sorrow is dry;) And we read that
Melancthon de anima.
Marquess Casimire, when he was dead, and bowelled, had his heart withered
like a dry pear; and the cause thereof supposed to have proceeded from those
cares and manifold griefs, he sustained: whereby that moist (...) vocat Galenus
de vsu partium lib. Hyppocrates (...), lib. 6. de cord. Fernelius de partium
corpo ris humani descriptione c. 8. Laurentius historiae Anatomicae lib. 9. c.
9. and quaest. eiusd. lib. 5.
humor like unto water was consumed, which nature had enclosed in the skinny
casket, which covers and compasses the heart, lest it should be scorched up,
with too much vehement heat in his perpetual motion. Of the mystical thirst,
afterward.

Doctrine. Christ was true man, subject to the same affections, unto which we
are. Arguments proouing his humanity are the Chrysostom hom. 7. in Matthew.
swathing bands wherein he was wrapped, and the cratch wherein he lay; and is
called in the Scripture flesh, Ioh. 1. 14. The son of man, Matthew. 8. 20. the
seed of David, Psalm. 89. 36. the son of the virgin, Esaias 7. 14. borne of a
woman, Galath. 4. 4. partaker of flesh and blood, as the children, Heb. 2. 14.
found in the likeness of man, Phil. 2. 7. and, to comprehend all in one word,
nothing differing from us, but that he was without sin, he Cyprianus sermon. de
natinitate Christi.
had not sinful flesh as ours is, yet the same in nature; for sin is not
Cbrysost. in 8. ad Romanos. Damascenus orthodoxae fidei lib. 3. cap. 20. Vide
plura argumenta veritatem humanae naturae in Christo confirmantia Zachariam
Vrsinum lib. 2. de incarnatione cap. 2. quaest. 2. Thesi. 1.
natural, nor the work of the Creator, but infused by the suggestions of the
devil, and proceeding from the corruption of our own will yielding unto his
alluring and deceitful intisements.

Use. First; the great, and unspeakable love of Christ, offers it self to
our diligent consideration; who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery, to be equal with God, but he made himself of no reputation, and
took upon him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was
found in shape as a man, Phil. 2. 6. 7. and gave himself for us, to be an
offering, and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, unto God. Ephesians. 5. 2. A
deed without example. humility without measure, love without merit.

2. Use. Secondly, from this arises, an assured ground of the certeintie of
our salvation; for Christ, has fulfilled all the parts thereof, and done
whatsoever was requisite for purchasing the same; he dyed for our sins, and
rose again for our righteousness, Romans 4. 25. his Augustinus sermon. de
tempore, 101.
vnde served death has overcome our deserved death, and he delivered those who
were justly guilty, unjustly slain for them: so he has paid the price of
our redemption, and sustained the punishment of our transgression; for the
death of the son of God, is the all sufficient remedy for the sin of the
whole world: and his holiness and purity of nature, avails against the
stain and corruption of our iniquity, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 31.

That the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. This thirst of Christ
was both natural (of which something has been already spoken) and mystical;
wherein Arnoldus Caruotensis in vltima Christi verba. Tanlerus in
meditationibus vitae Jesus Christi, cap. 47.
he does not so much desire drink, as man's salvation; for he could not expect
any comfort and benefit from his persecuters and scorners, who were more ready
to add grief to his sorrows, then show pity and compassion unto him: and
although they contemned that price which he now paid for sin, yet (the old
serpent being swallowed up) he hastneth to the fountain of living water,
therewith to wash his enemies, dies for the wicked, adopteth the disobedient
and rebellious unto the right and honor of sons, and bestows so great a
benefit upon the Bernardus de passione, cap. 13. Ludolphus de vita Christi,
part 2. cap. 63.
unthankful. And hereby declares his earnest desire, that all might be
saved. Christ says, I thirst, and not I suffer; O Lord what do thou thirst?
your faith, your salvation, your joy: the care of your souls does touch me
nearer, then the torment of mine own body; have pity upon your selves, if you
will have none upon me. When he says I thirst, he desires their Augustinus
in Psalm. 68.
faith for whom he prayed; Father forgive them.

Christ does vehemently desire the salvation of mankind; with desire have I
desired to eat this Passeoner with you before I suffer, Luc. 22. 15. and there
is in the doubling of the word (Desiring with desire) and in the Article (this)
the last when he knew he should be sacrificed; John 13. 1. great force, and
singular declaration of the love of Christ toward us, and our salvation which
he shows.

First, by his most sweet and gracious inuitation, Esaias. 55. 1. And, come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, I will ease you, Math. 11. 28. Come
Johannes Gersouin tractatu de bis verbis Euangelistae.
unto me; wonderful loue^ that he should in treat us to come unto him, whose
duty is, to be humble suitors, he would vouchsafe to accept us. All that are
weary and laden; for he can raise up the dead carkase four days lying in the
grave, and stinking, And I will ease you; he does abhor no sins, no
wickedness, be it never so great; no bonds of custom in evil, but he can
loose, although exceeding strong, and at the last will give grace and glory:
Grace now of a happy departure from hence, and hereafter glory and eternal
blessedness.

Secondly, by Bernardus sermon in vigilia Natiuitatis Domini.
his coming down from the bosom of the Father into earth, for our sakes, for
he came to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. Receive health
of him, you that are deseased; who heals those that are contrite in heart
with the ointment of his mercy. Rejoice you that desire comfort, the son of
God is descended unto you, that he migbt make you partakers of his Kingdom:
he came Georgius Wirth, vita Christi, eu quatuor Euangelistis. lib. 5. cap. 4.
willingly (by his incarnation, passion, death, and resurrection), to seek (by
the preaching of the Gospel) and to save that is lost; to deliver from sin,
death and hell; and to restore them to righteousness and everlasting life.

Thirdly, by the sending of his servants to preach the Gospel the power of God
to salvation, unto every one that does believe, 1. Corinthians. 1. 24. The
ministry, whereof is, to open men's eyes, that they may turn from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
remission of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith.
Act. 26. 18. Therefore when he, that great Prophet had opened the will of the
Father, Luke 4. 18. 19 etc. and accomplished the work of Redemption; ascending
up into heaven, gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the repayring of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. No benefit greater then this, none more precious. For, the
word taught, is a word of salvation, a Lutherus in locis a Theodosio Fabricio
collectis, titulo de Euangelio, seu verbo promissionis.
word of Grace, a word of comfort, a word of joy, the voice of the Bridegroom,
and the Spouse, a good word, a word of peace, the Chariot wherein Christ is
brought unto us with his righteousness, and all spiritual blessings.

Fourthly, By the threatening of wrath, and foretelling of punishment, against
the unfaithful and disobedient; that by this means, as with a strong hand, he
might draw them unto him: so he admonishes the Jews unto repentance by the
example of others, lest they also perish, Luc. 13. 3. 5. And there is nothing
more usual and frequent in Scripture, then this manner of dealing, as Leuit.
26. 14. 2. Sam. 7. 14. Osea. 4. 1. 2. 3. etc.

Let us therefore, thirst after our own salvation, that as the Heart pants
after the water brooks, so our soul may pant after God. Psalm. 42. 1. For as
Aristoteles de historia animalium, lib. 6. cap. 9. Lucretius lib. 6. Nicander
in Theriates. Opp^^um, lib. 2. de venaetione. Drusius Miscellar^orum centuria,
1^. 2. Ioaohimus Camerarius Symbolorum and Imblematum Centuria 2. Emblem. 40.
42. etc.
the searchers into Natures secrets have taught. Hearts either pursued by dogs
in hunting, by reason of heat and loss of breath, hasten to the Rivers, or
wearied in fight with the Serpents (whom they draw forth with their breath) or
stung and wounded by them, while they lie and rest themselves upon the ground,
seek to some cold fountain, whereby the infection of the venom received,
may be abated. Even so, snch as are wounded, and stricken of the old Serpent,
must have recourse unto Christ, to behold him with the eye of faith, that they
may be healed, John 3. 14. For he Bernardus in die Natali Domini de fontibuc
seruatoris semon, 1.
is the abundant wellspring of mercy, from whence do now the waters of
remission, to wash away sins; of Wisdom, yielding waters of discretion, to
quench our thrist; of grace where we may draw waters of devotion, to
mainetaine the render plants of good works, of Charity, sending forth waters
of zeal, to boil our corrupt affections.

Now there was set a vessel of vinegar, and they filled a sponge with vinegar,
and put it upon hysope, and put it to his mouth. This Evangelist speaks this,
as of a (...) in locum, B^za in maioribus annota^ionibus ad nouum Testamentum.
thing usual, for there was now ready placed a vessel full of this liquor (as
some think provided by devout women, upon compassion, to hasten the death of
the offenders if necessity so required,) And Saint Matthew, 27. verse 34 gives
us to understand, that there was offered unto him before this, vinegar mixed
with gall; or as Saint Mark speaks, wine mingled with De hoc myr(...) p^cul^
ex Ribbinis, Galatinus de aromis Catholica ver(...), lib. 8. cap. 19. (...).
Myr^he, cap. 1^. 23. (...) which, and the other, we must make a difference:
for the wicked Soldiers, as before they pierced his head with a Crown of
thorns, so now in (...) and contempt, they compass and bind a sponge round
about, with a wreath of hysope, (and that according to the manner used among
the heathen, D(...) coronandis: Homeros Odyss^a prim^, (...). Vide Fustathium
ad locum illum. Sic and Virgibus, Aeneid. lib. 1. Crateras magnos ^^atuunt, and
vina coconant, ad quae verbo (...). Coronant autem, est aut implent vsque ad
marginem, aut quia Antiqui coronabant pocula, etc. Johannes Stuckius
antiquitatum conuiualium, l. 3. c. 13. and 16.
whereof there is much mention in ancient Writers) and this they put to Christ's
mouth upon (...), who now was aloft upon the cross and by this cup, which
they wantonly and (...) him (never dreaming of any such thing) was (...)
shadowed out, both the sharpness and bitterness, as also the saving power of
his death and passion. For the gall and myrrh mixed with vinegar and wine, was
a signification of his bitter death, Psalm 69. 21. And therefore (if so it
were the will of the Father) prayed that he might not taste of that cup: and
the hysope wherewith it was compassed, did singularly express the saving power
of his passion and bloudshedde upon the cross. For hysope in the ceremonial
Law of Moses, was often used. First, in the sprinckling of the Lintell, and the
cheek posts of the doors of the houses of the Israelites the might before
their departure out of Egypt, with the blood of the Passover Lamb, that the
destroying Angel might passover those houses, Exodus. 12. 22. 23. Secondly,
in the cleansing of the Leaper, Leuinus 3. Lemnius de herbis biblicis cap. 26.
Leuitious 14. 4. Thirdly, in the sacrifice for transgression or sin
offering, Numbers 19. 6. Therefore this ceremonial hysope was a type and
figure of the blood of Christ, when purges and cleanses those which believe in
Christ from all their sins, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. and does refresh and comfort them,
affrighted and cast down with the remorse of their sins, Psalm 51. 9. 1.
Peter 1. 2. Hebrews, 9. 19. and 10. 12. Thus Christ was Cyprianus de bono
patientiae.
sedde with gall, who is the heavenly food, and given vinegar to drink who
has offered to us the cup of salvation.

God does oftentimes give over his dear and beloved Caine prevailed against
Abell, Genesis, 4. 8, Pharao did so unmercifully oppress the Israelites that
they were weary of their lives, Exodus, 1. 14. Zacharias the son of Iehoiada,
was evil required of King Ioas; notwithstanding his Fathers kindness showed;
and his own faithful admonition given unto him, 2. Chron. 14. 21. Religious
Josiah falls by the sword of Pharo Necho, 2. King. 23. 29, Herod Antipas
murdered John the Baptist, and Agrippa James the Apostle, Matthew, 14. 10. Act.
12. 1. 2. And those Saints of whom the world was unworthy, are tried with
diversity of torments, Hebrews 11. 36. etc.

think upon these things.

First, Grinaeus in Propheta^ Aba^ne.
that this comes not to pass, without the especial providence, of God; for
two Sparrowes are fold for a farthing, and one of them does not f^ll unto the
ground without the will of our Father, Matthew, 10. 2^. So David when he was
constrained to fly, for fear of his unnatural Son Absoiom, who rose up
against him; he submits himself in that humble form, If it please the
Lord, 2. Samuel, 15. 26. for none falls into the hands of men but such whom
God gives over unto them, Psalm. 66. 12.

Secondly, let us also know, that God has just causes, why he so does; for by
this means, (to the glory of his mercy and justice) he does either proud us,
as he did Job, by the Chaldeans, Sabeans, and the Devil. Job. 1. 14. 15. or
profitably humble us, and bring us to the better knowledge of him, and our
selves; and thus he gave Rehoboam and his people into the hands of Sheshacke,
that they might know a difference between his service, and the service of the
Kings of the earth; 2. Chron. 12. 8. or he does thereby mildely as a father,
chasten and correct those, that are his; and therefore we read so often in
the book of the Judges, that he delivered his people into the hands of their
enemies, but had pity upon them, and sent Saviors, as Chapter 3. 8. 9. and 9.
4. 16. and 6. 1. 14. etc.

Thirdly, howsoever for a season God seem to hide his countenance, yet in due
time, and when it is the best, he will send deliverance. Thus Paul says, that
he was taken from the mouth of the Lion (meaning Nero) Eusebius historiae
Eccles. l. 2. 6. 22.
2. Tim. 4. 17. for he is the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, 2.
Corin. 1. 3. whose bowels are troubled, and surely will have compassion,
Jeremy, 31. 20. Only let us cry unto him in our affliction: for he sees our
trouble, and beholds our miseries, and will hear in a time appointed,
Psalm, 9. 10. and not suffer us to be tempted above that we shall be able to
bear, 1. Corinthians. 10. 13. nor the righteous be moved, Psalm, 55. 22.

THE SIXTH WORD A WORD OF Perfection and Perseverance.
JOHN 19. verse. 30. Now when Jesus had received of the vinegar, he said, It is
finished.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis word of Christ is a Commentary of the Deuteronomium secundu^ ^^cat
Arnold^^ Carnotensis in praefatione ad septem ^ltim^ Christi verba. Theodorus
Beza homil. 32. in hist. passionis.
old Testament, and sum of the New; and therefore worthy of diligent, and
earnest consideration, and whereof careful application is to be made for the
comfort of our whole life. For in it is expressed that office and charge, which
he received of the Father; wherein is contained the real, and actual
execution or performance of those things which were requisite for our
deliverance from death, and obtevning of everlasting life: which was promised
unto the Fathers immediately after the fall, and successively figured and
shadowed in the whole form of the ceremonial worship. And in it two things be
obseruable. 1. The speech it self, (It is finished.) 2. The time, when it was
pronounced, (after he had received of the vinegar.)

Now when Jesus had received of the vinegar. Both the fact of Christ, that he
received of the vinegar, and the time of receiving, hitherto deferred; are
diligently to be weighed; for therefore now he tasted thereof, because God had
so decreed; and he had performed all those things which were enjoined him: and
in this declared the highest degree of obedience to the Father, both in his
suffering, and also in the order, and manner of suffering; and gives us an
example, in all things to obey God; and not depart one jot from his
commandments. But of obedience I have spoken already, in the former words.

He said, It is finished. This is Christ his song of triumph, ouercomming death
by dying, preuayling in suffering, and finishing the whole work of redemption.
For he being the Priest, and the sacrifice, after he had offered himself unto
the Father, by his own blood entered in the holy place, and obtained eternal
redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. And that nothing should be defective, or wanting
to the perfection of this propitiatory sacrifice, he ends this holy action
performed upon the cross with that clause (It is finished.) You see the
Augustinus tractat. 31. and 47. in Euang. Iohannis.
power of Christ dying; for he willingly expected this time, until all those
things were fulfilled, which were foretold he must do before his death: after
they were done, he said, It is finished. Thus he departed from hence by his
power, who came not hither of necessity: and because Arnoldu^ Carn^tensis de
vltimis septem Christi verb^^.
it was written in the volume of the book, that the Son should do the will
of the Father, and this thing was long delayed and in sundry sorts praefigured:
he brought that to light, which in so many ages had laid hidden; and suffered
not the people laden with sin, any longer to be burdened with superfluous and
unprofitable worship. For this had not been religion, but superstition, to
mingle the dregs of old ceremonies, with the pure wine of the Gospel. And also
would have them understand, that not only the end of his sufferings was come,
but also of those legal obseruances; and that the truth being present, the
shadows must vanish; that the Ephod was to be folded together, and the
Teraphim no more applied; whatsoever Aholiab and Bezaleel either embrodered or
engraued, was to give place to lively instructions; and the typical robes, to
the truth showing it self in his own and perfect beauty. Therefore in the end
of Christ's suffering, was the end of the law; and whatsoever it commanded
anciently to be performed by the blood of goats and calves, etc. orincense or
sacrifices, for the explation of sins, that grace has brought to a
compendious sum: and, shortning the tediousness of so long a journey,
appointed one blood, one incense, and one burnt offering, containing all the
rest; with such moderation, that how poor soever the man be, he should have
sufficient to purchase this; neither does place or person exclude any from the
access unto so great a benefit. The Chuch therefore has one lamb, etc. For
now being at the point of death, he showed that whatsoever was promised to the
Fathers, shadowed under the types of the Law, foretold of the Prophets by
divine inspiration, is accomplished: and therefore now no other sacrifice, no
other help needful, for the Bezaein historiam passioni^ homilia 32. Vide
antea ad verbum quintu^ in initio, de simili loquendi formula.
freedom of mankind from death and condemnation. But yet there is a scruple
which must be removed, how Christ is said to have perfected all things, when
as yet his burial, ascension, resurrection, and full glorification remained,
articles to be believed unto salvation. And how the Fathers who lived before
the coming of Christ in the flesh, weresaued, seeing the salvation of man does
rest upon this fulfilling of Christ. But the answer is easy, that all these,
his burial etc. with the rest, are, by an usual (...)
figure comprehended in his death, which is the equivalent ransom for our
sins, a sacrifice powerful to procure salvation, abundant to pay the price,
and sufficient to make satisfaction, etc.

By the merit therefore of the death and passion of Jesus he was wounded for
our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Esaias 53. 5. And, it
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and (having made
peace by the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile all things to himself,
Coloss 1. 19. 20. For he has delivered us both from the corruption, and the
guilt; from the material, and formal of sin: in respect whereof, his blood
is said to purge us from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. (and is the true Vide
Bibliandrum de misterijs salutiferae passionis, page 19 and 20. Panacea, de
panace, and eius speciebus Dioscordes, l. 3. (...).
All-heale of offenses;) And he, to be made a curse for us Galath. 3. 13. So
that there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. And
hereof, he is styled our ransom, 1. Pet. 2. 5. wisdom, righteous^^esso,
sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. 30. De hoc Apostoli Aphorismo,
Grinaeus problematum, lib. 3.
For as by the desobedience of one man, (Adam) many are made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, (Christ) many are made righteous, Romans 5. 19. We must
therefore know, and believe in him; that in believing we may have life through
his name. John 20. 31. who with one offering, has consecrated for ever, them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. and given eternal pardon. And for our
assurance and certeinty thereof, has uttered his seuenwords, nailed hand and
Alexius Rharturus, (...). Cuius extant Homiliae, mixabarbara Graecorum dialecto
conscriptae.
foot unto the cross etc. Hasten, hasten, o people, to eat the crummes
falling from this table of Christ crucified; and lay them up in your hearts
with Ma^y his mother etc. These are the patheticall words of Alexius
Rharturus, in one of his Sermons to his auditors; with whose and the like
testimonies I am much delighted: and do give so great and humble thanks unto
Almighty God, as my heart can conceive, that at this day he does preserve in
the midst of Mahumetis^ne, some relics of Christianity, and so forth.

Untrue then is that, which Lib. 5. de ^ucharistia, qu^ est primas de sacrific^
Missae cap. 5. and lib. 2. de Missa, cap. 2. etc. 7. 8.
Bellarmine teaches by the Use.
authority of the Sessionis 22. cap. 2.
Tridentine Council, That the Mass is a true, outward, real, and
propitiatory sacrifice, not only for the satisfying of punishment, but for
taking away also of the filthiness of sins, and not those light and venial,
but such as be the most grievous; serving not alone, to obtain spiritual
benefits, but likewise temporal: and therefore may justly be offered for the
living, upon earth, the dep^^ted in Purgatory, and the Saints which do reign
with Christ in heaven. But against this so foul an error, or rather
blasphemy, amongst almost the infinite number of arguments, used by ancient
and later Divines, these few may stand in stead of a more full confutation.

1. First, by the coming of Christ, all Chrysostom. hom. 16. and 17. in Acta
Apostolorum.
sacrifices are taken away, for the Church must not rest upon shadows, when
the body is present, nor in types and figures, when the truth is exhibited; for
the Altar of the cross, was the end and dissolution of all other Altars: and
we must so conceive of the sacrifice offered upon it, as of that solemn
sacrifice, wherein Aaron, once a year, carried the blood of the beast offered,
into the Sanctuary, Heb. 9. 7. Exodus 30. 10. Leuit. 6. 14. For as that
sacrifice, was not thought fully done, until the Priest came forth out of the
holy place, (the people in the mean while standing, and praying,) neither was
there any other sacrifice all that time offered, so Christ after that he had
sacrificed himself upon the cross, entered into the sanctuary of heaven, and
there offered his own blood, neither shall there be any end of that oblation,
until he come again in the day of judgment. Which coming, while we wait
for, let the Church continue praying, and celebrate the remembrance of his
passion, in the Sacrament of his last Supper: and abstain from all
propitiatory sacrifices, not daring to renew that offering once made. And
therefore Christ when he departed from us, did not ordeyne any sacrifices,
neither willed, by any oblations to appease God, nor commanded to build altars;
but did celebrate his last Supper upon a table, not an altar, Luc. 22. 14. And
hereof came that admonitorie speech of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. v. 21. you
cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils. For the
better and more clear understanding of which place, you must know that the
Gentiles De ^is Ethnicorum Epulis plenissime Gulielmus Stuckius. Antiquitatum
conuiualium, lib. 1. c. 33 and in libro sacrorum sacrificiorum, Gentilium.
Tertullianus de Idololatria; and Herodotus in Clione de Cle^bis and Buteonis
conuiuio, etc.
custom was (after their sacrifices ended) to feast, not only at home in
their own houses, but also in the Temples; as is manifest in the same Epistle,
c. 8. v. 10. And this banquet, the Apostle calls the Table of Di^els, and
opposes it to the Table of the Lord. The issue and point of the question is
this, that the sacrifice of the Cross, or the death of Christ, is the only
ransom for sins: now the Mass is not this sacrifice, nor this death, and
therefore no price of redemption.

Secondly, the sacrifice of the Cross was bloody, sharp, visible, performed
in one place, but the Mass (according to the determination of the Romanists)
is unbloody, invisible, and without all pain, and may be offered in a thousand
sundry places, in one moment. Then these two must needs be contradictory.

3 Further, in the sacrifice of Christ, he is wounded, and dies, and his side
being opened, water and blood issued forth; in the Mass no such matter is
performed.

4 Add further, the virtue of this sacrifice is infinite, the power of the
Mass is little, and the value small: for a thousand Masses will not serve to
release one soul out of Purgatory; and they may be purchased for a groat or
two; and at every corner of the Scribit Gabriel Biel, sibi a quibusdam,
subleuandae memori^ causa, traditum esse modum, per omnes omnium declinationum
casus applicandi, hoc modo. In Nominatiuo Missa pro. S^ipso. Genetiuo. Patre,
matre. Datiuo Fundatoribus and benefactoribus. Accusatiuo Inimicis and
accusa^oribus. Vocatiuo Peccatoribus, and infidelibus. Ablatiuo.
Obtrectatoribus and maledicis. nos singul^ pe^e ades suas priuatas habuerunt
aras, ad quas pro exiguastipe sacerdos aliquis missa^ caneyet.
streets, stand Priests, who may be hired for a little reward, to sing Mass
in a corner.

5 Again, in the sacrifice of the Cross, Christ offered himself to the
Father: in the Mass, a Priest usurpingly takes upon him this office.

6 Christ is a Priest for ever, to reconcile us to the father by his own
facrifice, Psalm. 110 4. Heb. 7. 16. And then he either obtained his purposed
end, and so was perfect, to which in the same kind nothing may be added, or
else he failed thereof, and so is imperfect, which once to conceive in thought
is wicked and irreligious. But because it is as great a commendation to know
how to end, as to begin; Debis Hospinianus histor. Sacramentari^ lib. 5. Sadeel
de vnico Christi sacrificio. Georgius Milius in Augustanae confessionis
Explication; parie 2. Artic. 3. de Missa. Quo sensu incruentam dicatur
sacrifici^m Ritherhusius docet in suis ad Guntherum notis, de rebus gestis
Frederici Barhar^ssae.
Let us for conclusion, hear the spirit of God, teaching us by his Apostle,
Heb. 10. 14. With one offering be (Christ) has consecrated for ever, them that
are sanctified; and least we should dream of any iteration, he said before,
ver. 10. the offering of his body was once made; and cap. 9 ver. 27. 28. as it
is appointed for man, that they shall die once, and then comes the judgment:
So Christ was once offered, to take away the sins of many, and unto them,
that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin unto
salvation. Words demonstratiuely proving, that the offering can no more the
second time be reiterated, then our death, which is a thing contrary to reason:
yea, and in the 22. verse, he said, that without bloudshedding there is no
remission of sins, then the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, must needs prove
idle, and unprofitable for this purpose. And albeit they bestirre themselves,
and strive by all means to persuade that these passages are meant, and must
be understood of the sacrifices legal, and the old Testament; yet these
slippery Proteusses, Proteus quis su and cur ^^gatur mutare for mam suam,
Diodorus Siculus bibliotheca lib. 2. cap. 62. Natalis Comes Mythologiae lib. 8.
cap. 7. Homerus Odysseae, 4. Proclus Licius de dictis aduersus Homerum, cap. 7.
and Heraclides Ponticus Allegorijs in Homer^^bulas de Dijs.
though they can turn themselves into all shapes, are faster bound, then that
they can escape. For the Apostle says not, that there was no remission, but
that there is no remission without shedding of blood; and therefore affirms,
that in the time wherein he lived no pardon of offenses could be, but by that
bloody sacrifice. And if the sacrifices of the law were not propitiatory, but
through his blood, why shall that of the new testament be deprived of this
prerogative? These things are clearer then the day, and as bright as the Sun,
and of such efficacy and power, that the adversaries are constrained to
acknowledge the same truth we profess, and closely to take our part, that the
Mass is but the application and commemoration of the sasacrifice of Christ: so
from this premisse it follows: therefore no sacrifice: for the applying of:
plaster to a wound, or the laying of the rule to the timber, is not the rule,
nor the plaster; neither the commemoration of a battle, is the battle: no
more can the application and commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ, be the
sacrifice it self. But how unhallowed this Romis^ sacrifice is, they may
^a^ily understand, who will but take the pains to read over the learned
Treatises of Calvin, noble Mornay, Lord of Plesses, Chrastonius, Hosp^^anus,
Polanus, Tilenus, Lectius, Musculus, Whitacherus, Humfeedus, Sutlinius, etc.
Petrus Molineus, sieve quis alius in tract^tu de Perigrinationibus, altaribus,
and sacrificys. Lutherus de captiuitats Babilonics, and missa abroganda, etc.

He said, It is finished. He speaks, of that wonderful work, now in hand,
which was the redemption of mankind, and says it is finished, because he had
performed, and fulfilled all those things which the Law praefigured in the
sacrifices and holy rites, or the Prophets foretold, or God from all eternity
decreed.

The passion of Christ, which he suffered for the salvation predestined of
God, by his eternal decree; and that for the manifestation, both of his mercy
and justice. Therefore Peter concerning this point Act. 2. 23. and 4. 27.
affirms that Christ was delivered by the determinate counsel, and
foreknowledge of God, after he was taken with wicked hands, crucified and
slain; And against his holy son Jesus, whom he had anointed, both Herod and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel gathered themselves
together, to do whatsoever his hand, and counsel had appointed before to be
done. And this is one of Gods admirable Augustinus in Enchiridi^ cap. 100.
works making a good use of the evil (because he is the chief good) to the
condemnation of those, whom he has justly predestined unto punishment, and
the salvation of them, whom he has mercifully chosen unto glory. For, so much
as lay in them, they did that which God would not; but in respect of his power,
by no means could do that. And therefore even from the beginning of the
world, the Lord propounded this comfor^ to our first Parents, presently after
the fall, the seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent, Genesis 3.
15. And when the fulness of time was come, he sent forth (this seed) his son
made of a woman, and made under the law, that he might xede^^e them ^h^t were
under the law, and receive the adoption of the sons, Galath. 4. 4. 5. who for
this cause, humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, the shameful
death of the cross. Phil. 2. 6. 7.

For application, hereby we are taught, religiously and Use.
with reverence to meditate upon the passion of Christ. Now the meditation is
threefold.

First, historical, testifying that Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary
crucified, and dead under Pontius Pilate, is the true Messiah, promised to the
Fathers, foretold of the Prophets; in whom all things are exactly fulfilled,
who redeemed the world, and gave a price of Huius sanguis tam potens ad
priuilegium, tam dives fuit ad pretium, us si vniuersit as captiu^rum in
Red-^^ptorem suum crederet, nullum plane tyrannica vincula retinerent. Leo
ferm. 7. de passione Dom.
greater value, then the world. And in this part of meditation these
circumstances are remarkable: first, who suffers. 2. what. 3. where. 4. when.
5. why. even that he might deliver man from sin, the wrath of God, and
eternal death, and bestow upon him blessing and everlasting life: for there is
one God, and one Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, 1.
Timoth. 2. 5.

The second spiritual, Lutherus in concione de Christi passione meditanda.
when we considerately, and deeply discuss, the impulsive, and small causes,
of his passion, with the effects, and fruitful application thereof: which
being rightly balanced in our hearts, do represent before our eyes: 1. The
severity and rigor of Gods justice, which Christ (perfectly obeying the law
and susteyning the punishment due to mankind) has fully satisfied. 2. The
grieuousnesse of the wrath of God against sin, which could not be mitigated
and appeased, but by the blood and death of his only begotten son; the
greatness of the medicine, shows the greatness of the wound, Esaias 53. 5. 3.
The abundant riches of the mercy and love of God, who so loved the world, that
he sp^re^ not his own (and only) son, but gave him for us all, Romans 8. 32.
Ioh. 3. 16. 4. The Vul^era Christi, Civitates Refugij. Fidenter dico, quod ex
me, mihideest. Vsurp^ mihi, ex vulneribus Domini. Bern. sermon. 6. in Cant.
exceeding love of the Son toward us, who willingly (the Dietie resting and
not showing forth it self) did undergo so many miseries, and laid down his
soul for our sake;. Ephesians. 5. 2.

The third exemplarie, that we should imitate his virtues, obedience toward the
Father, love toward his Church, huntilitie, mildness, patience, faith, and
hope of endless glory; as both himself and Apostles exhort, Matthew. 11. 29.
Ioh. 13. 14. Phil. 2. 5. 1. Pet. 4. 1. etc.

THE SEVENTH AND LAST WORD, a Word of Obedience and Devotion.
LVKE, 23. VER. 46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said,
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, and having said thus, he gave up
the Ghost.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis is the happy End of Christ his passion, and as it were a triumph, wherein
he does profess God, to be the faithful keeper of his soul; and is the last
word he uttered upon the Cross. In which, two things offer themselves to our
consideration; the word it self, and the circumstances thereof.

The circumstances, are partly precedent, partly consequent: Precedent two, one
of time, (when he had cried) the other of the manner, how it was pronounced
(with a loud voice;) Subsequent; and those twofold, first of time (having
said thus) second, of an Action following, (he gave up the Ghost.)

The word it self; in which be obseruable, 1. the person commending his soul,
necessarily implied in the verb of the first person, Christ Jesus; (I commend)
2. the commend (if I may frame such a word;) God, (Father:) 3. the thing
commonded (my spirit:) 4. the place of keeping that which is committed, (Into
thy hands.) Or, according to the usual distribution of circumstances, Who,
what, to whom, when, where.

And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice. This speech Theophilact calls a
word of freedom (whereby he procured liberty for us, taken out of the prison of
hell;) and was not natural: for men who are afflicted with long and grievous
torment, drawing near unto death, do usually faint, and speak with a
languishing, and scarce audible voice, their strength being consumed and
wasted. Barnardus sermon in ^eria 4. hebdomadae penosae.
To die is great infirmity, but to die thus, great power: he alone could lay
down his soul, and take it up again.

Doct. Christ willingly, and by no constraint dyed, Ioh. 10. 17. and therefore
the Prophet by a peculiar phrase of the Hebrew tongue, unusual in other
languages, expresses the same, when he says, that Renue^herus in 53. caput
Esaiae. (...). Alexius Rharturus (...).
his soul made it self a sacrifice for sin, Esaias, 53. 20. and in the
Gospel, commending his love toward us, he does it under the figurative name
of Baptism, Luc. 12 20. I have a De varia vocabuli Baptismi acceptione:
Dam^scenus fidei Orthodox, lib 4. cap. 10.
Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I strayned until it be accomplished?
thereby manifesting his vehement and earnest desire, and therefore foretells
his Disciples, how he must suffer, and goes up with them, unto Jerusalem, the
place appointed for his death, Math. 20. 17 If he would not have undergone his
Georgius Wirth de vita Christi ex Euangelijs, l. (...). cap. 39.
passion, he might have avoided it (which he foreknew) and easily made
frustrate all the the plots, and utterly overthrown the power of the Jews,
Math. 26. 53. but he yielded, and therefore, first, goes into the garden, well
known to Judas the traitor; Secondly, meets his enemies, who came to
apprehend him; thirdly, asks whom they seek; fourthly, opens himself unto
them, unknown before; fifthly, by his word strikes them to the ground, and
suffers them to rise again: sixthly, reproves Peter, using the sword in his
defense: seventhly, admits not the assistance and protection of Angels,
which he might have done: eighthly, exercises not his almighty power, for his
escape and safety (which he showed in healing of Malchus) but suffered
himself to be taken, led away unto Caiphas and Pilate, Ioh. 18. 1. 2. 3. etc.
For so it Non ex necessitate passio Christi fuit, sed voluntaria; ne^ captus
est a Iudaeis, sed a seipso ^bl^tus: quando vult, ^apitur, quando vult
elabitur, quando vult suspenditur, quando vult tenetur. Ambros^n 4. Lucae.
was requisite, both for the effecting of our justification, Romans 5. 6. 7. and
making the atonement with God, 2. Cor. 5. 19.

The use of this doctrine is, that we should willingly give our selves again
to him, who gave himself for us. So Paul, I beseech you brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service; and be not conformed to
this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove,
what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 1. 2 For in
that he died for all, they that live, must not from henceforth live to
themselves, but unto him, who died for them, 2. Cor. 5. 15. And the holy
Apostle, inflamed with this so great love of our blessed Savior, does joyfully
embrace bonds and all afflictions whatsoever for Christ's sake; neither counted
he his life dear, so that he might finish his course with joy, and the
Ministry he had received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God, Act. 20. 24. And Epis. 4. ad Tarsensi^.
Ignatius, condemned to be devoured of wild beasts, brake forth thus; I
nothing esteem these punishments, neither do I value my life at such a price,
that I would love it more then my Lord; wherefore I am ready to suffer fire,
beasts, the sword, the cross, so I may behold Christ my God and Savior, who
died for me. And when he was now at point to be torn in pieces, I am Epist.
12. ad Ro^^anos.
Gods corn, let me be grownde between the teeth of the Lions, that I may be
fit to make pure bread: then shall I be a true scholar, and Disciple of
Jesus Christ, when their bowels are become my grave, and my body be no more
seen. And Eusebius histor. Ecclesi. ^st. lib. 4. c. 15.
Polycarpus, now tied unto the stake, and beset round about with faggots, (for
he was adjudged to be burnt) praised God, that vouchsafed to bring him to
that day and hour wherein he might be partaker with the Martyrs, and taste of
the cup of Christ. These were divine speeches, beseeming the Auditors, and
Successors of the Apostles; And every Christian must stand so resolved in his
soul, that neither tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution, nor famine,
nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, etc. can be able to separate him from
the love of Christ, whether we understand it actiuely or passiuely, Romans 8. 35.
36. etc.

Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Christ seeing, that he could not
prevail with men, calls now upon his father; and doubts not of his
affection and love toward him, in the extreme pangs of death, but shows that
he is, and ever was, his beloved son. And his speech is in effect thus much:
I Ferus in part 4. Dominicae passionis.
have passed over the deep and tempestuous sea of tribulations, with great and
undaunted patience, I have made known thy name unto men, glorified thee upon
earth, finished that work thou gave me to do; and now I come unto thee,
giving thanks for thy gracious assistance, and offer up my self upon this
Altar of the Cross, an acceptable sacrifice. And this saying the ancient
Divines call a word of perseverance. Christ twice cried out with a loud voice
upon the Cross; once, enforced by the sensible feeling of extreme torment, My
God, my God why have thou forsaken me? again, of a tender affection, and
having gotten the upper hand, and overcome that agony, and fulfilling the will
of the father, Coloss. 1. 19.

Doctrine. In every good and holy work, we must continue until it be
perfected: only Barnardus Epist. 129. Prorsus absque perseuerantia, neque qui
pugnat victoriam, nec palmam victor consequitur; toll perseuerantiam, nec
obsequium merc^d^m habet, nec b^^si^ium great(...) ^^ec laudem fortitudo. Saul
cum esset paruulus in oculis suis, Rex est super Israel constit^^us, non
perseuerans in humilitate, and Regnum amisit and vitam; Si ^aucela S^mpson, si
Solomon^^ de^^^io, perseuerantiam retinuissent, nec is profecto priuaretur
sapientia, nec ille viribus.
Perseverance strives lawfully, only is crowned, is the sole daughter of the
great King, the perfection of virtues, the treasury and storehouse of all good
things, without which, no man can see God. Who would bear with that tree,
which only in time of year buddes and blossoms, but brings forth no ripe
fruit? What is more cowardly then for a man to put on his armor at home, and
when he comes into the field, in the face of the enemy, refuse to fight? Is
there any thing more foolish, then to lay the foundation of a house, to raise
the walls, and go no further, but neglect to cover it with the roof? What
benefit is it to sail safely a long time, to escape many dangers by sea, and
make shippewracke in the harbor? To what end shall it be for the virgins to
buy oil, to trim their lamps, and then to be unprepared when they should
enter with the Bride into the Chamber? Is it any praise to make a glorious
profession of Religion, to ascend up to heaven, to walk with the sons of
God, and again to descend into hell; and of a young Saint to degenerate into
an old devil? Hyronimus Epistola ad Furi^^.
Not the beginning, but the ending is commended in Christians. Judas was
numbered among the Apostles, went forth with the rest, preached the word,
wrought miracles, but at the last betrayed his master, and perished miserably,
Act. 1. 18. Lots wife, escaped the shower of fire and brimstone, which consumed
Sodom and Gomorrha, but when she looked back, was turned into a pillar of
salt, Genesis 19. to Augustinus de Ciuitate Dei lib. 16. cap. 30.
season others by her example. Demas for a long time followed Saint Paul the
Apostle; but to no end, for he left him, embraced this present world, and went
to Thessalonica, 2. Tim. 4. verse. 10. Wherefore let us remember him, who loved
us unto the end, for our sakes remained upon the Cross; until all was
finished; for none shall be saved but he that continues unto the last, Math.
24. 13. Many run in the race, one gets the garland, he that comes to the
goal, 1. Cor. 9. 24. and can truly say, I have fought the good fight,
finished the course, and kept the faith. 2. Tim. 4. 7. I have spoken heretofore
of this point, in the exposition of the 130. Psalm.

B

First, earnest and humble prayer unto God; for it is a gift of grace, not an
endowment of nature, and therefore to be asked of him, from whom comes
every good thing, Iam. 1. 17. Men Aquinas 2. 2 quaest. 137. ^rlicul. 14.
R^inerius in summa, part 2. titulo de perseuerantia. c. 6.
easily transgress and offend, of their own, accord fall into sin, but
cannot of themselves rise again; and therefore lie still in evil, but
continue not in goodness. David privy unto himself of this our corruption,
prayed; Teach me thy will O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth, knit my heart
unto thee that I may fear thy name, Psalm. 86. 11. And Curopa^ates, de
officia^^us Palatij Constantino politani, and in eum Nadabi Agmonij notae.
to signify the necessity of continual prayer, the Patriarch of
Constantinople had always a cushion carried about with him.

Secondly, careful and diligent meditation. Things of small continuance, are
of little value among men; for they are contented to carry flowers in their
hands, Spectaculi and spiraculires: Tertullianus de Resarrectione.
matters of sight and sent) so long as their sweetssmell and delightful color
continues, but when these are lost, then be cast unto the dunghill. And God
vsoth a like example concerning his own people, resembling them to a basket of
summer fruit, soon ripe, soon rotten Anios; 8. 2.

Thirdly, the danger of recidiuation: for the case is alike as in the body, so
in the soul; that, if it fall into relapse, after a sickness recovered, has
small hope of amendment; because, weakened by the former disease, is now
disabled to bear the remedies of physic prescribed: this once healed and
offending, hardly or never rises again; for the transgressor is made more
unfit to repent, wickedness gets greater strength, and becomes harder to
be resisted and the devil returning, will not so easily be removed. The
Parable in the Gospel is well known, Math. 12. 43. and the dreadful censure
of the Apostle, concerning such who have escaped from the filthiness of the
world, through the acknowledging of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ,
and are entangled again therein, that the latter end is worse with them then
the beginning; for it had been^ better for them, never to have known the way
of righteousness, then after they have acknowledged it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them, 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. etc.

Fourthly, call to mind the singular effects of perseverance; As, 1 It
obtains of God what it will, Luke 11. 8. When the rest of the Gregorius
magnus in Euangelia H^milia 25.
Disciples, after Christ was buried, departed from the Sepulcher, Mary Magdalen
tarried still, and therefore alone saw the Lord, whom she sought; for the
perfection of a good work is perseverance.

2 It keeps the blessing obtained; So the woman of Canaan possesses her
daughter in health, Math. 15. 28. And the thankful Leper continues cleansed,
both inwardly and outwardly, Luke 17. 19. And the wise men going on still in
their purpose to seek Christ, have the direction of the same star renewed,
which first appeared unto them, Math. 2. 2. 9.

3 It makes all things, though difficult and distasteful, easy and pleasans.
He that comes suddenly from ease to labor, from a private and retired life,
to action and busy employments, thinks every work grievous and burdensome:
but after he is once inured with them, that seems easy, which before was
thought impossible to be done.

4 It leaves nothing imperfect. A small kernel, in continuance of time
grows up into a tall and great tree. A traveler, though sick and weak in
body, yet every day going forward, by a little at a time, accomplisheth a long
journey. Nothing is softer then water, but, by assiduitie and often falling
upon it, peireeth through the hard flint.

Lastly, cast thine eye to the promised reward; this will put new life and
strength into thee, and kindle afresh thy fainting and dying spir^ts. Thus
Christ hartneth the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Be faithful unto the end,
and I will give thee, the crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. And it is said of
Moses, that he refused to be called Pharaohs daughters son, chosing rather
to suffer affliction, with the children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ, greater riches, then the
treasures of Egypt; forsook that country, feared not the fierceness of the
King for he endured, as he that saw him which is invisible, Heb. 11. 24. 25.
26. Wherefore for a Adhuc in aci^ constituti sumus, de v^^^ nostra quotidie
dimic^mus; danda ^pera est, vt posti^^tia, ad incrementa perveniatur. Parum est
adipisci aliquid po^nesse, pl^^ est, quod acceptum est, posse seruare etc.
Cyprian^^ lib. 1. epist. 5.
conclusion of this point; Let us go forward in every holy duty, with an
unwearied endeavor and an undaunted courage break through all opposite
hindrances; for to those who with patience in well-doing, seek glory, and
honor, and immortality, shall be everlasting life, Romans 2. 7.

Father; into thy hands I commend my spirit. There be many speeches in the
Hilarious de Trinitate lib. 6.
Scriptures, which attribute unto God (who is a spirit) something which is
corporal; for they descend to our capacity, and speak to us, after the
mariner of men; teaching things invisible, by those which are visible, and
spiritual, by corporal. And it Dionisius Areopagita cap. 1. de ^^lesti
^ierarchi^.
cannot be, that man should attain to the knowledge of heavenly matter,
except his understanding be informed by plain and familiar examples.
Therefore oftentimes, ascribes unto him, both the Augustinus de ciuitate Dei
lib. 15. cap. 25. Gregor. Magmoral. lib. 2. cap. 24.
affections of our humane minds, and parts of our natural bodies, in which we
must hold the rule of Dialogo ^^ae Trinitate.
Athanasius, to understand those things, which are spoken according to the
apprehension of man, as is beseeming the majesty of God. For the Epiphanius in
Audiani^. Augustinus de heresibus, cap. 50.
Anthropomorphites, men of dull conceit, brought up in the cells and cloisters
of Monks, wanting all elegancie of learning, leading an uncivil and rude life,
could conceive nothing of God, but that which was earthly, gross, and
sensible; and therefore dotingly determined, that he had the parts of the body
like unto ours. Zanchius de natura and attributes D-i, lib. 3. cap. 4.
Wherefore, the passions of the mind which we attribute unto God, are not
affections, but effects. As, when he is said to repent, Genesis 6. 6. this
signifies no change in his will, and decree, but in the thing he either
promised or threatened. Dam ^scenus fidei orthodox^ lib. 1. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus de s^^ro-sancta Trinitate cap. 12.
Forgetfulness is nothing else, but the delaying, to send help, or execute
punishment, as Psalm. 13. 1. Anger and hatred of sin, implies the due
punishment thereof, Number. 25. 3. Matthew. 3. 7. And so his eyes are the tokens of
favor and love, as Elihu in Job, 36. 7. Ears, of hearing and accepting our
petitions, as Psalm. 34. 15. Hands, of help, liberaelitie, power, and
protection. So Exodus 13. 9. Nehemiah, 2. 8. Esaias 51. 16.

When we are overwhelmed with calamities, and can find no comfort or relief
in man, then let us disburden our griefs into the bosom of God our Father,
resting upon the hope of his gracious promises, and call upon him in all our
trials and afflictions. Thus Jacob, when he feared the rage, and festered wrath
of his brother, I pray thee, O Lord, deliver me from the hand of Esau, Genesis 32.
11. And David, thrust from his kingdom, by his rebellious son Absalom, Thou
art a buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my head, Psalm. 3. 3.
Iehosophat, environed with the great, and sundry troops of his enemies, There
is no strength in us, to stand before this multitude, that comes against us,
neither do we know what to do; but our eyes are toward thee 2. Chron. 20.
12. And the Jews, who presently and out of hand should have been utterly
rooted out, by the subtle plots and devises of Haman, betake themselves to
prayer and fasting, as their only refuge, Hester 4. 16. Great are the troubles
of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all, Psalm. 34. 19.

Let us then be patient in all tribulations, submitting our Use.
selves humbly under the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. And, as the eyes of
servants look unto the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a maid unto
the hands of her mistress, so should our eyes, wait upon God, until he have
mercy upon us, Psalm. 123. 2. For we must depend on him alone, in him repose our
selves, and roll our ways upon the Lord, Trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass, Psalm. 37. 5. none is such a Father, none so tender over us, and
loving. Tertullianus de Patientia.
Commit thy wrongs done, unto him, he will be the revenger: thy loss, he will
restore it: thy sorrow, he will comfort: thy life, he will raise thee up from
death.

Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit. Christ uses here an especial
(...)
term of Lexicon Iuridicum ex Brissonio, Hotome^no, aeijs collectum, in
vocabul^ Depositum.
speech, and of singular efficacy, I commit my spirit: for it signifies to
lay down, as a precious thing, presently to be required again; and he to whom
it is so committed, is bound to a careful and diligent keeping thereof, and to
restore the same.

Christ has bound up, in the Athanasius de susceptione humanae naturae
bundell of life, not only his own soul, but of all the faithful likewise,
and together commended them unto God, and to be quickened by him. For we are his
members; and therefore it is without any question, that the souls of the
righteous loosed from the body, pass into eternal life, and the company of
the triumphant Church in heaven. For to be in heaven, with Christ, in the hand
of God, in Paradise, in Abraham's bosom, are phrases aequipollent, of one and
the same signification. We know therefore (says St. Paul) that if our earthly
house, of this tabernacle, be destroyed, we have a building given of God; that
is, an house, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, 2. Cor. 5. 1.
And for this cause, desires to depart, that he might be with Christ, Philip.
1. 23. And Stephen in the last conflict, prays, Lord Jesus receive my spirit,
Act. 7. 59. Lazarus after he is dead, is said, by the Angels to be carried into
Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. And Paradise is promised to the confessing and
believing thief, Luke 23. 43. John saw the souls of the faithful, under the
altar in heaven, Revel. 6. 8. The holy Ghost pronounces them blessed, who die
in the Lord, Apoc. 14. 13. And the wise man, distinguishing of the two parts of
man, (the soul and the body) expresses the dissimilitude of their condition
thus, dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the Epicharmus, Sapient is
ver^^ expressit, (...). Apud, Plutarchum in oratione Consolatoria ad Ap(...):
and similem Xenarchi iocum, quo nec Graecorum quisquam nac R^manorum ^sus est,
obseruauit vir clarissimus Isaacus Casaub^nus in s^^^ ad Athaene^^ animaduersi
nibus lib. 13. cap. 3. qui* est, (...). quomodo and Da^id loquutus est Psalm.
119. Anima mihi assidue est in manu mea.
spirit, to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. My purpose is not, more fully to
prosecute this point; the sum of all is this, the souls of the just are in
the hands of Sic mors nihil est a^^d, quam ^xi: us anim^ d^c^r^^re, finis
exilij, laboris consumm^^o, ad por^um applicatio, pereorinati^^is fini^^o,
^neris grauissimi dep^s^^io, de domo r^inos^ lib. ratio, aegri^^dinum ^m^ium
terminatio, reditus in patriam, ingressus in gloriam. Holco^^s in 3. cap,
Sapi^^^^^.
God, Wisdom. 3. 1. in peace and rest, in their beds, Esaias 57. 1. 2. Jerome
thus speaks of Blesilla, that having cast off the burden of the flesh, the
soul hastened to her Creator, and being a pilgrim long in earth, came at the
last to her ancient possession.

Use 1. First, by this, are overthrown the fantastical conceits of natural
men, and the wicked blasphemies of Heretics. of which sort were the Diogenes
La^rtius. Herodotus in Euterpe. Malchus de vita Pithagorae. Ter(...) d^ a^^^^.
and in Apologetico cap. 8. Hieronymus ad^ersus Ruffin^m. Lacta^i^s lib. 3. cap.
18. A^^^ o^^^ de bon^ mortis cap. 10. Tbeodoretus in haerotico^^m fabularum
compendi%, and in Epit^me (...) de^retoru^
Pythagorians, and Valentinians, who imagined a wandering of souls out of one
body into another: with which idle dotage, Julian the S^^rates hist^r. (...)st.
lib. 3. cap. 21.
Apostata was possessed, and therefore boasted, that sometime he had been
Alexander the great: Empedocles could remember when he was a fish: and among
the Jews, the Phari^ies were bewitched with this heathenish folly. Josephus
antiquitatum lib. 18. cap. 2^ and de bello Iudaico lib. 2. cap. 8.
Herod Antipas, seems to have ^asted of this error; for when he heard of the
fame of Jesus, persuaded himself, that it was John the Baptist, whom he had
put to death, Math. 14. 2. And in this rank, the Anabaptists are to be
marshalled, who have devised a new kind of soulesleeping, and think they are
held in this drowsy Lethargy, (being once separated from the body) until the
day of judgment, when they shall be awakened. But the souls of the godly are
said, after death when they are departed, to pr^^s^ the Lord, Revel. ^9. 1. 2.
to return unto him, Eccles. 12. but this cannot be, if they be cast into a
deep sleep. Furthermore in this mortal life, while the body sleeps, the
soul never rests, but is occupied: much more then, when it is free, and
unburdened of the Caluinus de (...). Petrus Martyr in 1. Cor. 13. Danaeus
Isagoges part 5. l. 1. cap. 19.
flesh. But I will not bestow more time to confute this absurd, and senseless
opinion: against which, many learned Divines have written so plentifully.

A second use; and that serves, both for instruction, and also for comfort,
that we always cast our selves upon God, and depend on him. For it is
blasphemous that the Papists have done, In Psalterio bea^ae Mariae.
corrupting the words of that Psalm, from whence this testimony is alleged,
turning them, thus, O Lady in thy hands I commit my spirit, understanding the
virgin Mary. And let us not doubt, what shall become of us, when we are dead,
as the Heathen, who have no future hope: so Spartianu^ in Adrian^.
Adrian the Emperor, (now at the point of death) is reported to have made
these verses:

Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in locae?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec vt soles dabis iocos.
which a Renerend Doct. King now Bishop of London, in his 8. Lecture upon the
Prophet Jonas.
Prelate of this land thus sometime englished

My floting, fond, poor darling,
Bodies guest, and equal,
Where now must be thy lodging?
Pale and stark, and stripped of all,
And put from wonted sporting.
But we be taught, by the holy Scriptures that there is a kingdom prepared for
us, Matthew. 25. 34. and immortality purchased by Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
Therefore let every one make Dionisius prayer his own: Sweet Lord Jesus, thy
last word upon the cross be my last word in this life; and when my speech is
taken away, that I can utter no more words, accept the sighs and desire of my
heart: so that I may rest among those, who shall come from the East and from
the West, and s^t down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven. Mat. 8. 11.

Thirdly, we must not listen, and give ear to the patrons and Use 3.
defendors of the apparition of Ghosts and spirits: which they themselves
(first mis^ed) do imagine, that they be the souls of men departed, now
broyled in Purgatory, or tormented in hell, and would persuade others to
enterteine the same error. But it is without all controversy, that neither the
souls of the godly, nor wicked, after they be once dissolved from the body,
do wander in earth, for there is no return from death, Job 20. 9. the spirit
passes and comes not again, Psalm. 78. 39. and, in what place the tree
falls, in the same it lies, Eccles. 11. 3. So David answers the demand of
his servants, asking why he mourned not for his young son, being now dead,
when he was before so sorrowful, Can I bring him again any more? I shall go
to him, but he shall not return to me, 2. Sam. 12. 23. These visions then and
apparitions, are nothing else but the deceits, and illusions of Satan.
Augustinus de Ciuit. Dei lib. 13. cap. 8.
For the souls of the godly are at rest, the souls of the wicked in torment,
until the bodies of the one shall rise again unto eternal life, and of the
other unto everlasting death. Neither of Tertullianus de Anima.
their own accord, nor by the commandment of any else, do they wander up and
down; but evil spirits practice this craft, to feign that they are the souls
of the departed; and if a Chrysostom. in 8. Math. hom. 29. and sermon. 4. de Lazaro.
cry be heard, I am the soul of such an one, this Proceeds from the fraud
and treachery of the devil. For God does not permit, that any one once dead,
should come again, and tell the living what things are there done: and to this
end, that we should rather believe the Scriptures, then any other reports. And
indeed from hence Athanasius quaestionibus ad Antioch^nos, quaest. 11.
arises many gross errors; for the devils, can take upon them the shape of
men, and by this means spread abroad their lies. Therefore the voices, which
some say they do hear, are nothing else but old wives fables, and childish
mockeries; no small number whereof have been devised by the crafty iugling and
Insigne exemplum de Monachis Aureliane^sibus recita^ S^^id^nus lib. 9. (...)
annum 34. Et alterum Chitraeus de Parocho quod^m: lib. de vita and morte. hanc
flultitia^ and nim^am hominum credulitatem salse deride^ Erasmus in Exorcismo,
sieve Spectro. and similes olim in Pag^nis sa^erdotilus frauds deprehensas
fuisse, and patefactas, refert Theodoretus lib. 5. histori^, cap. 22. S(...)
plura desideret, consulat Aretium problematu^ part. 2. loc. 146. Titulo de
spectras: and ^auaterum de spectris, lemuribus etc.
cosening impostures of Baals Priests, whereof both the records of our own
times, and the histories of former ages, will afford plentiful examples. I
conclude therefore with that religious and discreet admonition of Saint
Augustine, De vnitate Ecclesiae. cap. 16
Let no man say, that therefore it is true, because he or she affirms, that
sleeping or waking they have seen such and such a vision, but remove far out
of your minds, these either forgeries of deceitful men, or wonders of lying
spirits.

Father into thy hands I commit my spirit. I commend my spirit, that is, my
soul; for the word spirit is oftentimes in Scripture used in this sense; as
Eccles. 12. 7. 1. Corinthians. 2. 11. Heb. 12. 23. and does aptly express the
nature thereof, that it is spiritual, and therefore immortal.

The soul is not subject to death, neither does it perish with the Tertul. de
resurrectione carnis; Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 63. 64. 65. Cyprianus de duplici
Martyrio. Ambrosius de fide resurrectionis, cap. 31. 32. Fulgentius ad
Mominium, lib. 1. Barnardus in 8. versu^ Psalm: 91.
body: wherefore they are manifestly distinguished, Genesis 2. 7. where Moses thus
speaks; The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his nostrels the breath of life, and man became a living soul: In which
sentence, there be included three arguments, confirming this truth; the first,
the soul is not made of the earth, but inspired of God: the second, that it is
called an Pelargus in locum. Phagius in suis ad Paraphrasin Chaldaicam notis.
Imbreathing, a divine and heavenly thing; the third and last, in the word of
the (...).
duall number signifying, not life, but lives (long life) this present now, and
the future hereafter. Again, when Cain had murdered. Abel, his blood is said
to cry unto God, Genesis 4. 10. and the word there used in the (...).
Original, is, as much as to complain for exceeding Martyrium Abelis ad omnia
mundi tempora pertinet, and nostras mentes de animae immortalitate, futuro
iudicio, and poenis, and de vita aeterna conuincit. Buchalcherus in Chronologia.
grief: where there is no mention of the body, but the blood, the receptacle
of the soul: if therefore it does make complaint, then lives with God, and
accuses his unnatural brother. And so the souls of them, that were killed
for the word of God, * (...).
and for the testimony which they maintained, are said to cry with a loud
voice under the Altar for vengeance; Revel. 6. 9. 10. Furthermore, it is an
usual phrase in Scripture, concerning the dead, that they are gathered to
their people; (as of Abraham, Genesis 25. 8. and Aaron, Numb. 20. 24.) therefore,
that people is, and lives; for this cannot truly be affirmed of the bodies
laid and rotten in the graves, because they be no people but carkases, and so
come not to the company and society of the Saints. And for this cause the
Jews call the place of burial, the house of the living. (...)
Therefore the souls of the faithful departed, do live eternally in the
sight of God: And that testimony of our Savior Christ is most pregnant,
whereby he does strengthen and comfort his Disciples against the terror and
cruelty of persecutors, in this sort; Fear ye not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul: Math. 10. 28. And beside all this, the dead
are often in Scripture styled (...) inter mortem and somnum ista est, 1. Somnus
obrepit nescientbus. sic mors. 2. Somnus quiete^ praestat laboribus, mors curis
and miserijs omnibus, 3. Somnus non anima^ sed corpus occupat, Mors non animam
sed^ corpus occidit. 4. Somnus alijs laeta, alijs tristiae offert somnia: Mors
alijs solatia, alijs tormenta. 5. Somnus habet ^esurgendi^spem, mors
resuscuandi. 6. Somnus recreator est corporum (vt Tertulu^anus de anima)
redintegrator virium, probator valetudinis, pacator operum, medicus laborum:
ita morsrenouat, and recreat, and reparat hominem. 7. Somnus facile cedit
inclamanti; mors Christo excitanti. Et apud virtus^ lioguae authors Grecae,
and Latinae, Mors somnas appellatur, (...) Nam sic Lycophron in Cassandra,
(...). Orpheus in Argonauticis, (...). In Eumenisi Aesehili; mortui (...)
dicuntur. Callimachus Epigramate 14. and 21. Moschus Iudillio. 3. Virgilius 10.
Aeneid. Dura quies, ferreus somnus. Horatius Carminum lib. 1. 24. Perpetuus
sopor.
sleeping, as 2. Sam. 7. 12. 2. Chron. 9. 31. Dan. 12. 2. 1. Corinthians. 15. ver.
18. Iairus daughter, Math. 9. 24. of whom it is remarkable that Saint Luke
says, cap. 8. 55. how when Christ raised her to life, her spirit came again,
therefore it was not extinguished with the body. And Paul desired to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 22. Lastly, to conclude, our Lord and
Savior thus reasons against the Saduces, who denied the resurrection from
the dead, and the immortality of the soul, Math. 22. 32. Those whose God the
Lord is by an everlasting covenant, they must also live everlastingly; for he
is not the Zanchius de operibus creationis, Part 3. lib. 2. cap. 8. Hemingius
in Syntagmate; loco, De statu animae post mortem corporis.
God of the dead but of the living: And the reason is, for no eternal covenant
is made or kept, but with those, who live also eternally: because if one part
of the confederators utterly perish, then the league made, cannot be
perpetual, but cease. For how can it perform that which it has promised,
or how can God make his promise good unto it, except he preserve it alive? But
God is the God of Abraham, Isaacke and Jacob, and therefore they live. And so
much hitherto of this: for it were needles, to heap up many arguments and
proofs for confirmation of that whereof no Est integer liber Augustini de
immortalita. te animae: and Aeneae Dialogus de eadem. Nicetas in Thesauro lib.
(...). cap. 16.
Christian doubts; much less fitting, to add the reasons of Philosphers, Si
cui animus sit Philosophorum rations cognoscere, quibus animae immortalitatem
confirmant, consulant Platonem, l. 10. de Repub. and l. 10. delegibus ^eiusdem
etiam Phe^onem, Axiochum, and Apologiam Socratis. Ciceronem, Quaestionum
Tusculan. lib. 1. Xenophongem Institutionis Cyri, lib. 8. Macrobium. Cardani
etiam de hac materia, Integrum tractatum. Marsilium Ficinum Antonij Poli libros
septem de veritate animae rationalis ad Gregorium 13. and Bodinum, in Theatro
Naturae.
among which, it cannot be denied, but that some are demonstratiue, yet many
thorney, and hard to be understood, and scarce intelligible even to those, who
are most conversant in their writings: Therefore to end with the words of
Nemesius, Lib. de natura homini, cap. 2.
Let the doctrine of the holy Scriptures suffice and content us, whose proof
is infalliable, because inspired of God.

This may be a powerful motive to stir us up to the practice of holiness,
and abstinence from sin, and all uncleanness, knowing, that after this life,
the soul shall return, and be reunited to the body raised from death; and so,
either enjoy eternal happiness, or be tormented with endless punishment:
for there is a double sentence; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, appointed
for the devil and his angels: or, Come ye blessed and possess the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world, Math. 25. 34. 41. and, they
shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil, into the resurrection of condemnation: John, 5. 29. for
the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven, 1. Corinthians. 6. 9,
neither any unclean thing enter into the new Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 27. And
indeed, this is the only or chief reason, why men run headlong into all
kind of wickedness, and defile themselves with most vile and base
uncleanness, because this opinion is deeply settled in their hearts, that the
soul and the body do perish together, Wisdom, 2. v. 3. 4. And by this you
may easily judge, what spirit it is, by which the Bishops of Rome are led: For
it is reported of Grinaeus.
Leo the tenth, that he procured two famous Philosophers to dispute before him;
the subject matter of whose discourse was, touching the state of the soul
after death, the one reasoning so strongly as he could, for the immortality
thereof, the other against it: and the determination being referred to
himself, (as the chief moderator) took up the controversy with this
conclusion, that the speech of the former seemed to be true, but the latter
better pleasing, and made a more cheerful countenance: adding that the old
verse of Redit in nihilum, quod fuit ante nihil.
Cornelius Gallus liked him well, -- That which sometime nothing was, nothing
becomes again. But we must hold this for an unquestionable and undoubted
truth, that God is just; rewards the righteous, and punishes the wicked: For
many of them that sleep in the dust, soall awake, some to everlasting life,
and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Dan. 12. 2.

And having thus said, he gave up the ghost. The death of Christ is expressed,
by three several forms or manners of speech in the Gospel; he (...).
breathed out the spirit in this place; Christ cried with a loud voice, and
yielded up the Ghost, Math. 27. 50. he bowed down the head, and gave up the
Ghost. Which variety of words, are therefore more seriously to be weighed,
because in them is expressed a great difference, betwixt the death of Christ
and others: for his alone was willing, and therefore he laid down his soul,
John 10. 18. so that the Centurion at this wonderful sight, is moved to
believe, and utters so much in plain terms, that he was the son of God,
Marc. 13. 39.

Crying with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. He did not 1 (...).
now speak as other men do, when the time of their dissolution is come, and
be ready to cast forth the last breath, but of his own accord, with a loud
voice calls upon death, not daring otherwise to presume for to come: he
yielded the Ghost; at his own pleasure fulfilling all the Arnoldus Car(...) de
vltimis septem Christi verbis.
legal sacrifices, and making an end, of all the dark and obscure ceremonies;
Who, so sleeps? who, so puts off his garments? who, so departs from any
place when he will? as Jesus dies, vnclotheth himself of the flesh, and
leaves this 2 (...).
world?

Bowing down Tanl^rus de meditati^ ^^us vitae Jesus Chris^i cap. 51.
his head; giving his last farewell, and bidding adieu to the earth, and
offering the kiss of peace. In Ge^gius Wirth in Harmoniaex Euangelijs, lib. 5.
cap. 59.
us it is otherwise: we first dye, then dow down the head, but he boweth down
his head, then dies; declaring that he is the Lord of death, and does all
things according to his own will: he gave up the Ghost, being obedient unto
the death.

He left to breath, He gave the last breath: his holy soul passing out of
his undefiled body.

Christ died not in Her^tici nonnulli veter^s ficte and putatiue tantum pass^^^
blasphemed euerunt; vt Simoniani, Siturniani, Basilidiani, Marcionitae,
Manichaei. Alij diuinitatem passam esse tradideru^t; v^ Theopaschitae,
Eutuchiani, Seueritae, Arm^niani: de quibus Epiphanius, Augustinus, Theod^^ctus.
show and a false appearance, but in truth, the soul being locally parted and
separated from his 3 (...).
body; yet the deity forsook neither, but continued hypostatically united to
them both: the Son of God died not Pet. 3. 18. for otherwise neither could
the justice of God have been satisfied, nor his truth answered: as has been
more fully handled in the first word.

Use. The benefit and fruit which we receive from this his death is manifold.

1. First, Justification, and the pardon of our sins, that they come no more
into the sight of God. Christ is exalted and lifted up unto the Leo primus
depassione Domserm. 10.
cross and so turned death upon the author of death; and by opposing his
passible flesh, has broken all principality and adverse power: being content
to admit the boldness of that ancient enemy against himself, raging against
that nature which was obnoxious unto him, and presuming there to be a
challenger of the debt, where he could not find the least sign or token of any
sin. Therefore that general and deadly handwriting, of our thraldom and
misery, is cancelled, and the bond of our captivity is come into the hand of
the Re^eemer, whom the Father sent to be a propitiation for our offenses. 1.
Ioh. 4. 10.

2. Secondly, deliverance from the power of the devil; for the seed of the
woman has broken the head of the serpent, Genesis 3. 15. and loosed the works of
the devil, 1. Ioh. 3. 8.

3 Thirdly, the restitution of our peace; for by his blood we are reconciled,
Coloss. 1. 19. and, he has broken down the partition wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. and
tasted of the deadly cup for our sakes. The blood of the Augustinus de 5.
heresibus.
Physician is shed, and made the curing medicine of the phrentique patient.

4 Fourthly, the destruction of death, and fear thereof; so that it is to the
godly no more but a bare name, yea the birthday of life, the entrance into
heaven. Threfore the Apostle tryumphingly, asks, O death where is thy
victory? O grave, where is thy sting? The sting of death is sin, and the power
of sin is the law, but thanks be unto God, who has given us victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ, Osea. 13. 14. I. Cor. 15. 54 For he took upon him the
nature of mankind, that the Cyrillus lib. 4. in Johan. cap. 12. Leo primus
sermon. 2 de Natiuitate. and hac similitudine videntur multum delectari Patres;
nam ea ^si sunt Nazianzenus, cratione de Paschate: Gregor. Magnus, hom. 25. in
Euangelia. Damascenorth* dexae fidei, lib. 3. cap. 27. etc.
devil, the first author of death, might be overcome by his own invention:
for swallowing the bait of his manhood, he is stricken with the hook of his
Godhead. Heb. 2. 14.

5 Fifthly, the regeneration and restitution of our nature by the holy spirit;
for Christ has not only by his death, obtained the pardon, but the purging
also of our sins, and is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, redemption and
sanctification, 1. Corinthians. 1. 30. Once dead, that we might for ever dye unto
sin, Romans 6. 6. and live now, no more according to our own will, but his who
has died for us, 2. Cor. 5. 17. De his, vide plura in Dictionario pauperu^.
Thus have I finished the Augustinus de Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 30.
task of this work (such as it is) small in volume, great in labor. If any
think I have spoken too much, let him pardon that: if sufficient, give thanks,
not to me, but to God.

Amen.
CERTAIN RVLES and directions, teaching every Christian how to die well,
according to these seven last words of Christ.
Vt of these last words of Christ, some very denoute and religious persons,
have collected and framed an Art how to die well; which I will, (as it were) in
a little table (Christian Fredericus tertius Imperator, aliquando interrogatus,
q^^ in (...) prae^ip^am operam ^om^ in hac ^^ta ponere deberet, respondit, in
agnitione Dei, ^^arte mori(...).
Reader) represent unto thy sight, that we may learn to number our days
aright, Psalm. 90. 12. and end our lives with comfort. Therefore, 1. Let us
forgive our enemies; as Christ here did: for if we do not, neither will our
hea^e^ly father forgive us, Matthew. 18. 35. And it is not enough, thus to do in
word, but the tongue and the heart must concur in one,

2 Let us, take order for our outward estate, and dispose thereof. Thus Christ
commended his mother to the care of John the Evangelist, by him to be provided
for: And, God commands Ezechias now sick, to set his house at a stay, Esaias,
58. 2. And this has always been the practice of the godly; (to prevent
thereby future inconveniences, which might ensue:) as appears in Abraham,
Cen. 25. 5. 6. and David, 1. King. 1. v. 33. 34. etc.

3 We must acknowledge and bewail that time of our life, which we have
formerly misspent, (so did the good thief) not trusting in any works or merits
of our own, but crave pardonat Christ's hands, for all our offenses committed.
(It is a righteous confession of Bernard: I have lived wr^tchedly, forgive O
Lord my transgressions, it is sufficient for ^e, unto all righteousness, to
have thee merciful, against whom I have sinned.) And repent speedily; life is
here either lost or gained; No repentance is too late, so it be true, so long
as we continue in this world; yet put not off (deluded by vain hopes,) thy
conversion unto the last breath: for why should we appoint that time, in which
we are not masters of our own thoughts?

4 Pray fervently; Christ out of the 22. Psalm powered forth the complaints of
his soul unto the father. And for this cause, have in a readiness some choice
places of Scripture, and by continual meditation, make them familiar unto
thee, that they may be helps and furtherances in stirring up and kindling thy
devotion. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12. 1 (for
cursed is he that consecrateth the beautiful flower of his youth unto the
devil, and leaves the corrupt dregs of old and decayed age for God;) Hide the
commandments of God in thy heart, th^^ thon sin not against him, Psalm. 119.
11. The Gregorius magnus, homili^ sexta in Ez^chiel^m.
Word of God shows his nature in the reformation of thy life; excellency in
promises of reward; dread fullness, in terrors of punishment: ^t is holy in
precepts, glorious in promises, terrible in threatenings.

5 Thirst after the kingdom of God, and desire it as the Heart does the
forntaine^ of water, Psalm 42. verse. 2. For as those who travel in the night,
do long to see the morning arise, and the day dawning: so the godly, wandering
in the thick and misty darkness of the world, do expect with desire, that
blessed light of which the Prophet, In thy light we^ shall see light, Psalm. 6.
v. 9. Whereof they have some taste in thi^ life: (as Peter in mount Tabor,
Matthew. 17. v. 4. and Paul when he was taken up into the third heaven, 2. Cor.
12. v. 4.) in that to come, we shall behold the things themselves, and be
partakers of the joys which now are not seen; wherein no voice of mourning
shall be heard, Esaias 65. 19. but God shall wipe all tears from our eyes, Reu,
22. 4. and Christ our Lord set a crown of glory upon the heads of his
children, 1. Pet. 1. 4. Monacha, St, Augustines Augustine. Conf. l. 9. c. 10.
mother, discoursing of these and the like things with her son, raui^^ed by
the consideration thereof, brake forth; What do I here? I am delighted with
nothing of this life? let us fli^, let us fly from hence, out of the miseries
of this world, to the eternal joys of heaven.

6 When we are tempted of the devil, let us oppose against him this
Consummatum est of Christ, it is finished; and drive him baeke with the word:
It is that rod and staff by which we are comforted, Psalm. 23. verse. 4. and
sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. with which we may fight prosperously
against sin and Satan, and a shield to those that trust in the Lord, Prou.
30. 5.

7 Resign thy soul to God, and die in the midst of humble and hearty
prayers. As they who desire to sleep quietly, procure themselves a bed of soft
feathers: even so, those who would have an happy departure out of this life,
and rest sweetly in Christ, must be frequent, and continually exercised in
prayer. Lord Jesus, says Stephen, receive my spirit, etc. and he fell a
sleep, Act. 7. 60. And Polycarpus, standing at the stake, ready to be consumed
to ashes, gives God hearty thanks, that vouchsafed to make him worthy to
suffer death for his sake. John Hus led forth to the place of his Martyrdom,
yielded his blessed soul with these words; Jesus thou Son of God who did
suffer for us, have mercy upon me. It is reported of the Emperor Gulielmus
Zenocharus, de vite Char^li. 5. lib. 5.
Charles the fifth, that a little before his death, he had cominually in his
month, that of the Prophet: In thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me not be
confounded; deliver me in thy righteousness: Into thy hands I commend my
spirit, thou have redeemed me, O God of truth. And let us all continue in
prayer and supplications, and send Ioachimus A^eust in Postilla, and libelle
peculiari, de Artc ^^ori^nd^ conscripte.
forth unto God the sighs of sorrowful, and contrite hearts. These are the
heavenly weapons, the spiritual defenses, and the di^i^^ Armor.

FINIS.
AMa amorem illius, oui amore tui amoris, descendit in vterum virginis; and ibi
amorem suum amori tuo copulanit^ humiliando se, sublimando te; coniungendo
lumen suae aeternit at is, limo tuae mortalitatis.

Augustinus de catechizandis rudibus. MEditatio Dominicae passionis praecellit
omnia mundi huius exercitia, si cum deuotionis intimae feruore fuerit
continuata: conscientiam meditant is purificaet; intellectum, in omni
cogitatione verit at is illuminat; affectum, in Dei amorem suauiter inflammat;
facit omnia huius mundi oblectamenta contemnere, and nulla quantumlibet dura,
vel contraria formidare; libidinem exterminat; luxuriam, tam meant is quam
corporis edomat; invidiam fugat; gulam refrenat; auaritiam sedat; acediam
inflammat; iram mitigat; superbiam radicit us extirpat: Mentem denique, quam
passio Christi veraciter occupat, nulla rei carnalis passio fatigat.

Tritemius in Operibus spiritualibus; homil. 16. de Quadragesimae jejunio.
HOdie crux sixa est, and seculum sanctificatum est; Hodi^ crux fixa est, and
Daemones dispersi sunt; Hodie crux fixa est, and mors subuersa est; Hodie crux
vicit, and mors victa est; Hodie Diabolus vinctus est, and homo solutus, and
Deus glorificatus est.

Augustinus in sermon de Parasceue. FINIS.

