

THE Complete Cannoniere: OR, The Gunners Guide. Wherein are set forth exactly
the Chief grounds and principals of the whole Art, in a very brief and
Compendious form, never by any set forth in the like nature before. With
diverse excellent Conclusions, both Arithmeticall and Geometrical belonging
thereunto: As also sundry serviceable Fireworkes, both for Sea and Land
service. A Study delightful and very useful for men of the best Quality, and
embraced by the greatest Princes.

UIRTUS GLORIAM PARET.

Written by JOHN ROBERTS of Weston near Bathe, Gentleman, Practitioner and
Professor in the Art thereof.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks, and are to be sold by George Hurlock at his shop
in Thames Street near S. Magnus Church. 1639.

To the High and Mighty Monarch CHARLES By the Grace of God, of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, King, etc.
SIR,
BEing filled with an admiration of your Royal parts, and a declaratory Fame
of the Virtues and heroicke Actions of your Fame worthy Progenitors; and those
transmitted unto You, by a successive Lineal and Hereditary right, so that that
rare Conjunction of Castor and Pollux, I mean Majestas and ortu and Art, are
both happily conjoined in your most Sacred Personage. The curious survey of the
multitude of your Princely parts breed in me a number of desires so that I have
adventured to break the barren soil of my poor portion; that prosperous
success should rather want to my endeavors, then diligent endeavors to my
loyal determination. My submissive allegiance to Your Royal and Heroicke
Virtues, have been an encouraging cause to desire Your Majesty's gracious
Patronage of this little Treatise of Gunners Art; but how my unworthiness may
hope of your Goodness, I cannot find but in the Notes of Your transcendent and
gracious Disposition. Thus in the lowest humility of allegiance, I offer both
my self, and the employment of my undeserving Service freely to your Highness
acceptance, and do desire both to be and appear to be

Your Majesty's humblest and most devoted servant, John Roberts.

To the right Honorable MOVNTIOY Earl of Newport, Lord Mountioy, Master of
his Majesty's Ordnance.
Right honorable:
THe favorable countenance and furthering Respect which my Predecessors
received of that renowned General, and ever memorable and remarkable
Martialist the Right Honorable the Earl of Devonshire, of never dying Memory,
your Lordships late deceased Honored Father, together with the Duty and
Oblegiance, all those of my Quality owe unto your Honor; by reason of the
Place and Dignity most deservedly You are in, and called to; makes me of
Socrates Opinion, in acknowledging all my utmost not able to reach the half
height of your Lordships Favor: Wherefore laboring like the Be, sucking from
the choycest Flowers the best Honey I can gather, the night of rest being come,
I bring it to the Hive of your kind acceptance, and there leave it, as much
labor bestowed about little, till diligent employment may more amply increase
it. Right Honorable, I am loath to be troublesome, especially where affable
Gentleness out paceth any merit in my Self: Therefore presenting your
Lordship with this Treatise of Gunners Art, and my attendant Service, when it
shall please your Honor to employ me; and praying devoutly for the endless
prosperity of You, and yours, I humbly conclude

Your Honors, in all duty to be commanded. John Roberts.

The complete Cannoniere.
And first of principalls of Philosophy fit to be known.
ALl motions or things moveable ends in their rest or repose.

So all motions are made upon some quantity continually.

Every simple bodies is either bright and light, or else gross, dark, and
ponderous: and according to the variety and differences, it is always
naturally carried toward some one or other part.

The World has height as upwards, or depth as downwards; and the depth
depends upon the influence of the height.

All pure and rare Bodies ascend as the fire, more than the air; but the
thick and gross bodies descend, as the Eearth more than the Water.

Nothing works naturally in that which is wholly like, or wholly dislike, but
in that which is contrary to it, and more feeble.

The form working is aided by the quallities as the matter suffering, which
suffers by the quantity.

Nature is extremely curious as well of her perfection, as of her
conservation? and then when all things conspire.

As Well the action that comes from the Agent, as the passion from the patient
has proportion.

Accident takes his unity from the subject, and goetli not from one thing to
another.

Every Corporal thing reposeth in its natural place, motion may be made any
where within the Moons Orb, nature admits no Empress.

A body rarifying its self, the place thereof increases as the body
increases.

The resistance of the moved, proportioned to the mover furthereth the motion.

The longer the chase of a piece, the louder the report.

Also the force of the stroke depends on the swiftness of the course.

A Table of the Square. A Table of Cubes. 1 1 1 1 2 4 2 8 3 9 3 27 4 16 4 64 5
25 5 125 6 36 6 216 7 49 7 343 8 64 8 512 9 81 9 729

How to extract the square root.
SEt down any number as comes into your mind, as thus, 2 1 6 0 9. Then begin
at your right hand, and put a prick over the first figure, and then over the
third, as you see above done; and ask what is the square root of 2. which is as
many figures as you have under your first prick, and you shall find but 1. then
put that figure in the quotient, and substract that 1. out of 2. so remains
1. then double your quotient, and set that double under your second sigure,
dividing the number over by that double. But take heed you leave enough to
take the square of that figure last set in the quotient out of the remainder.
Lastly, double all your quotient, and divide as before; then square your third
figure in the quotient again, and substract it out of the remainder, so have
you done this sum. Look how often you have pricks, so often must you double
and multiply squarely, and substract also, so many figures also will there be
in the quotient, as there are pricks. And consequently of any number whatsoever.

To know the nearest root of a number not square.
IF any fraction remain, by diligent observation of this, you may come as
near you would desire in any practicke, to guess within less than ordinary
is known. Set next your right hand after your sum, either two, four, or
six ciphers, the more, the lesser your error; and the nearer by much shall
you come unto the root, observing the same manner in working as you did before.

And now I will show you by particular questions in the art Military, how
necessary it is for any one intending to be a complete martial man, to have
good judgment in the extraction of the square and cubicke roots, and also in
the depth of Arithmeticke, and what excellency of knowledge is attained unto
thereby, and how far they are from being Soldiers, as are ignorant thereof.

The first Question.
A General having 3 great Armies, would cast them into three square battles,
but he knows not how many men he shall set in the front of each battle.

The number of the 3 Armies are these, in the first there are 5625. in the
second 9216. and in the third 15129.

To do this, you must extract the root of every Army severally, so have you
your desire.

In the first you have 75. men square, in the second 96. men, and in the third
123.

If you were commanded to make a square battle of all three Armies, add them
first together, then extract the square root; and if any remainder be, you may
employ them where you please.

The second Question.
A King has a great Army in a valley that in marching, the front can be but
18. men, and the flank 44352 which he is desirous to cast into a square
battle.

Multiply the flank by the front, so have you the full number of the men: then
extract the square root thereof, so have you what can be desired.

The third question.
A General has 3 Armies in the Field, to the number of 28289. men, and none
of these three apt to make a square battle; the Serjant Major is commanded by
his General to set them in three square battles.

These are the 3 numbers of the three several Armies: In the first there are
10296. men: in the second 9493, and in the thire 8500 men.

Mark this seriously for it is not ordinary; you shall find more exquisite
work than you imagine, because the question is more difficult.

First, extract the several roots of the 3 Armies.

Then take the greatest squares of all 3 numbers, as 10201. and his excess 95.
together with his root, which is 101.

In the second the greatest square is 9409, and (...) ^cesse 84, and his root
97.

In the third, the greatest square is 8464, his excess 36, and his root 92.
And thus have I found the 3 excesses.

Now for to end the 3 defaults or wants, I add one to each root, and multiply
them squarely, and so of 1^2. I find the square to be 10404, and if I substract
the first number, which is 10296, out of it there will remain 108 for the
first want, and thus do by the other two, so your excesses and wants will be
as are here set down in particular.

A B C Excesses 95 84 36 Wants 108 111 149

Here I compare the excesses with the wants, to see if any two excesses will
make up the others want, and I see by a light proof it will not justly serve.

As for the wants, I do not compare them to the excesses, for every want is
greater than the excess: therefore two wants far too great for one excess.

Wherefore when this rule fails, take the two wants of any two numbers, and
add them first together, then abate them from the third number, and if the
remainder be a square number, you have gotten your desire.

As for example, take the wants of the first and second, which makes 219, and
that do I abate from the third number 8500, and there remains 8281, which I
see may be a square number, and 91 the root thereof.

Wherefore I say, that these three numbers following shall be the roots of the
square battles, as here I have set them.

The first battle 10404, and his Front 102. The second battle 9604, and his
Front 98. The third battle 8281, and his Front 91.
The sum total of all the 3 battles 28289 men.

The fourth Question.
A General having 3. Armies in three several battles, in the first 4900.
men in the second 2401, and in the third 2500. so that the greatest is as much
as both the other, except one man, and he is enforced to join all three
battles into one: but is in doubt whether he may have good and convenient
ground to encampe them in for^ of battle. Wherefore considering that all
three battles together are but double to the greatest of the three alone: The
Sergeant Major desiring a mere ground for his Army, so joined in one square
battle, is in doubt what square of ground will serve his purpose; but sure
he is, that it must be double to the ground, that the greatest Army of the
three did use, and that was every way 21^. foot: wherefore his demand is how
many foot square shall the side of that ground be, that is, double to the
former square, whose root was 210. foot.

First multiply 210. by it self, and so have I the just (...).
plat of ground of 44100 foot; that must I double, and it will be 88200. and
out of this number shall I seek (as before is taught,) the nyest square root.
For just square I see it is not, by reason that after the even ciphers, there
follows the figure 2. which is one of those figures that cannot begin any
square number, therefore (as I said above) you must seek the nearest square
root, which for brevities sake, and because I have sufficiently already treated
of, do leave it to your best leisure to practice. Infinite more questions
tending to this purpose, could I set down, but that time will not permit, or
my intended little volume contain, therefore I will proceed to show you the
extraction of the Cubicke root, which will be much to the purpose and subject
I am now to treat of.

How to extract the Cubicke root.
FIrst, begin at your right hand, and set a prick over the first figure, then
another over the fourth, so leave two figures unprickt, and prick the third
still until you have done thus, 79864345 As many pricks as are over the
number, just so many figures will there be in the quotient.

1 Then ask what is the Cubick root of the first prick, and set down that in
the quotient: and if it be so that root does not take all away of the number
from the first prick, substract as much as the root contains, and set the
remander over head the figures which stood there before, being cancelled.

2 Then triple your quotient, and that triple you shall set under the next
number toward your right hand, before that prick which you did last end.

3. Next, multiply that triple by the same quotient, and set it down under the
first triple, and that number shall be your Devisor.

4. Now must you look out a quotient that may declare how often the devisor is
in the number over it.

5. This being done, you must multiply the last figure in the quotient by your
devisor, and set it under your devisor, with a line between.

6. Then multiply the last figure in the quotient by it self, and then in the
triple, and set that product below the former one figure more toward your
right hand.

7. Lastly, multiply the last figure cubically, and set that sum also one
figure nearer the right hand: then add all these three multiplications
together, and substract it out of the first and second pricks; I mean out of
al those figures unto the second prick: this done, triple all your quotient,
and divide as before, and as you did by the first and second pricks after your
division, so do by the rest, and you have obtained your desire. Look upon
this following example.

To find the nearest Cubicke root not cubical.
You must do it by addition of ciphers (as is spoken of before in the square
root) in such sort that they must be always ternaries, as 3 or 6, or 9 or 12,
and then proceed forward with the like order of work, as before.

A question of doubling a Cube.
IF the side of a Cube be 3 foot, how many foot shall the side of that Cube
be, which must be double unto it?

First find the quantity of that Cube that is propounded, and then double that
quantity; lastly, extract the cubick root of that double number.

As for example, the cube is 3, and therefore the whole Cube is 27, whose
double is 54, and the Cubick root is 3 foot, and ^/100 and 1/7 of 1/100.

Cube of 2.


Cube of 5.


A question of two Cubes.
A Cube of brass of four inches square, does weigh 7. pound weight, what
shall a cube of brass of nine inches weigh?

The proportion of their sides are as 9/4, which I must set down twice, and
multiply them together as fractions should be, and so will it be thus 999/444
that makes ^/^.

Wherefore I multiply the weight of the lesser Cube, being 7. by 729. and it
makes 5103. and that do I divide by 64. and so find I 79. ^/^, whereby I may
know, that the weight of the greater cube is 79. pound, and near of a pound.

A question of a Gunne.
A Gunne of six inches diameter, does shoot a bullet of twenty pound weight,
what weight shall that bullet be, that serves for a Gun of 14. inches in
diameter.

All Globes bear triple that proportion, that their diameter does. So in this
example, the proportion of their diameters (...)
being as 14. to 6. or as 7. to 3. I shall triple it, and Some^ake more, as now
is sound.
then have I the proportion of their globes.

Wherefore I set the 3. fractions thus, ^/^ and they make ^/^, that is 12.^/^
when you have divided the Numerator by the Denominator. And so is the
proportion of the globes as well in weight as in bigness. Therefore I multiply
20. that is the weight of the lesser by the numerator of the proportion, and
divide it by the denominator. And so shall I have 254. ^/^ for the weight of
the greater bullet.

Another question of a bullet.
A Bullet of Iron of seven inches diameter, weighed 27 pound, what shall be the
diameter of that bullet, that shall weigh 125. pound?

I set down ^/^ and I see the cubicke root of 125. is 5, and the like root of
27 is 3; which numbers I set in the room of the other thus which declare the
proportion between the diamiters of the two bullets. The diameter of the lesser
is known to be 7. Therefore I multiply that 7 by 5, whereof comes 35: that
divided by 3, yields in the quotient 11.

The proof hereof.
Multiply both roots cubically, if their roots be in proportion as their
weights, then is your work true, else not. As for example, 7 multiplied
cubically, make 343, and 11 multiplied also cubically, makes 428 ^/^.

To multiply a fraction cubically, as 11 first reduce it, and make it 35: that
35. multiply cubically, you have your desire.

How to turn a whole number into a fraction of the like denomination.
SVppose 7 is the number you desire to turn into the like denomination, that
is ^/^ (as above) is of, Multiply 7. by 3. the denominater of the other
fraction, and it makes 21. that 21 multiply cubically, and it will be ^/^:
These few rules diligently observed, will much enable an Artest to perform many
things belonging to this subject, also much benefit, experience, and delight,
shall any man reap, that has judgment to try and practice the secrets
thereof.

A question of whole numbers and fractions.
A Faulcon of 2. inches in the diameter shoots a bullet of 3. pound, what shall
the Culvering shot weigh, whose diameter is 5. inches.

To answer this and all such questions that must be cubically multiplied, you
must reduce each bullet into his proper fraction. As for example, 2 makes ^/^
and also 5 makes ^/^ then I multiply each numerator cubically, and I find the
Cube of the lesser to be ^/^ and the Cube of the greater to be ^/^. Then I
set down 3, the Diameter of the lesser fraction like as before thus ^/^ which
being wrought punctually by the rule of three in fractions, you shall have for
the weight of the bigger bullet 20. pound, and almost.

How you Geometrically find out the Diameter of any bullet that weighs twice
so much as a known bullet.
TAke the true weight or diameter of the lesser bullet, whose weight you know,
and square the same as in the figure following: Then draw a line that may
divide the said square into two equal parts, in the 2. opposite angles, and
that line shall be the diameter of a bullet, twice the weight of the other;
then divide that diametriall line in 2. equal parts, setting on foot of your
compass in the Center, and with the other foot draw a circle. and that
circumference will represent a bullet twice as much in weight as the lesser.



To prove it Arithmetically.
THe diameter of the lesser bullet is 5. inches, the square 25. that sum double
is 50. the square root of 50. is 7. and somewhat more, and so much is the
diameter of the greater bullet.

By one bullet to know the weight of another, the Diameter given.
A Canon of 7. inches, shootes a bullet of 32. pound: I demand what weight that
bullet shall be of, that is 9 inches in the Diameter.

Multiply the Diameter of each Bullet cubically, as 7. times 7. is 49. and
seven times 49. is 343, then 9. times 9. is 81. and 9. times 81. is 729. then
by the rule of 3. say, if 343. give 32. pound, what shall 729. give? Multiply
and divide, and your quotient will be 68. ^/^.

How by the weight of one Piece, to know the weight of the other.
IF a Minion of three inches Bullet, weigh 500. pound, I demand how much a
Cannon of 8. inches bullet will weigh, that is able to receive his
proportional charge to the Minion. The Cube of 3. is 27. the Cube of 8. is
512: now by the rule of proportion say, if 27. give 512, what shall 500. give?
multiply 512. by 500. and divide that product by 27, and you will have in the
quotient 9481. ^/^ the true answer to the question.

The Cannon therefore that shall be able to carry a proportional charge to the
Minion, must have 9481 ^/^ pounds of metal: but because commonly those
greater sorts of Ordnance are not so massy of metal as indeed they ought to
be. The Gunners observe this for a general rule, that in all pieces of above
6. inches in bore, they abate ^/^ of their ordinary charge.

To know how many shots of Powder will be in a grand Barrel of Powder, for any
Piece.
SVppose a Culvering shoot 10. pound at one shoot, how many times will a grand
Barrel of Powder serve the Barrel holding three hundred weight?

Example.
Divide 300. by 10. the quotient is 30. your desire.

The proof.
Multiply 30. by 30. or 30. by 10. gives 300. so may you know for all other
sorts of Ordnance whatsoever.

By knowing what powder a Piece must have, to know how much a piece of another
bore will require; but, Cave.
IF a Minion of 3. inches the Bullet, requires 3. pound of powder for his
charge, what powder will a Cannon of 8. inches bullet require?

Multiply 512. the Cube of 8. by 3. the charge of the Minion, and it makes
1536. which divide by 27. the Cube of 3. the Diameter of the said Minions
Bullet, so have you in the quotient 59 ^/^, so many pound of powder is the due
charge of your Cannon, but by the rule aforesaid you find the Cannon has not
his proportional metal, therefore you ought to abate of the powder, so will
there remain 44. pounds, or near for your Cannons charge.

To find the superficies of a Bullet.
FIrst, by a pair of Callibres find out the Diameter, which suppose it be 7.
then must the circumference be near 22. but for speedy work, and to avoid a
tedious discourse thereof, being that no great error ensues thereby, take 22.
now multiply that number by 7. it produces the superficial content of that
Globe, ball, bowl, or bullet.

A Table showing the weight of all Iron Bullets, in Haberdepoize weight.
Height of the Shot, in inches and parts. Weight of the Shot in pound and
parts. Height of Shot incircles and. parts Weight of Shot in pounds and parts.
Height. Weight. Height. Weight. 2 1^/^ 5 19^/^ 2 1 5^/^ 22^/^ 2 2 5 25 2 3^/^ 6
29 3 4 6 32 3 5 6 40 3 6^/^ 7 46 3 7^/^ 7 52^/^ 4 9 7 56 4^/^ 10 7 64 4^/^ 12 8
70 4 14 8 76 5 16

To find out how many square inches are contained in a solid content of a
bullet, and consequently, how many pound weight.
THere is a bullet whose diameter is nine inches, how many square inches are
there in the solid content? Multiply the diameter 9. cubically, arises 729.
which multiply again by 11. makes 8919: that divide by 21. yields 381
inches and ^/^: so many inches are in a bullet of 9. inches diameter. Now to
know how many pound weight is contained in that globall body, multiply that
quotient 381 ^/^ by 4. and divide by 16. it will show how many pounds of Iron
that bullet weighs: for an inch square of cast Iron, weighs four ounces
fere.

To find the true content of a circle.
TAke the one half of his diameter, and multiply it in one half of the
circumference, and it produces the Area, or square the diameter, and multiply
the product by 11. and divide the result by 14. and it also shows the content.

Arithmetically to find out the mean proportion between two numbers.
MUltiply both numbers one in another, and then extract the square root, so
have you the mean proportional.



Suppose the line given is 12. and the perpendicular 9. now you must multiply
12. in it self, and it makes 144. then multiply 9. in it self, and it makes
in product ^. then add both the multiplications together, and it makes 225.
Lastly extract the square root, and it leaves 15. the justlength of the
hypothenusall sought.

Geometrically to find the mean proportiou between two lines.
EXtend one of the lines to the number of inches he is in length, upon the end
whereof erect a perpendicular to the just length of your other supposed line:
then that line which is the hypothenusall to them both, is the mean
proportional.

The hypothenusall and one side given, find the other.
MUltiply each number in it self: then substract the lesser out of the
greater: the square root of the remainder is the true length of the third side.

Arithmetically to know how much of every sort of metal is in a piece of
Ordnance.
FOr every hundred pound weight of Copper, to p^ in ten pound of Lattin, and
eight pound of Tin. I d^mand the quantity of each sort of metal is in a
Culvering of 5600. pound weight?

Note that I join all the several mixtures together, and they make 118.
pound, which is my Devisor: then I multiply the weight of the piece by each
mixture severally, and there arises of 100. of Copper 560000: the which sum
is to be divided by the Devisor 118. and the quotient is 4745. and ^/^ parts,
so much Copper is there in that Ordnance, and thus must you do to know how
much you have of the other two sorts of metal.

To prove this, add all three quotients together, if they make the sum
before mentioned, it is right.

The Lattin does incorporate, and causes the piece to be of a good color, and
the Tin does strengthen and bind the other mixtures together.

To find the superficial content of the hollow concavity of a piece of
Ordnance.
SUppose the diameter be 7. inches, and the cilinder 12. foot, what is the
content superficial?

Reduce the Cilinder 12. foot into inches, makes 144. which multiplied by 22.
the circumference of the muzell arises 3168. the superficial content of the
metal compassing the hollow cilinder.

To find the crassitude, or solid content of the Cilinder of any piece.
FIrst multiply one half of the diameter, in one half the circumference, or
else square the diameter, and multiply that product by 11. and divide the
result by 14, the quotient will show you the content: the which multiply in the
length of the Cilinder, the product is your desire.

If you desire how many foot in square measure it contains, divide the number
of inches in the solid content, by the number of inches in a foot square, which
are 1728. your question is resolved.

To measure any sort of Timber.
SUppose your timber be 8. inches one way, and 6. inches another way, and you
are desirous to know how many inches in length will make a foot square.

Multiply 8. by 6. and it makes 48. which number divide 1728. (because there
are so many inches in a foot square) and you shall have 36. inches in the
quotient, so many inches long will make a foot square of Timber. Thus of all
other cubically.

A Table how to weigh a great deal with few weights.
You may weigh any number of pounds from One to 40. with these 4. weights. 1 3
9 27
One to 121. with these 5. weights. 1 3 9 27 81
One to 364. with these 6. weights. 1 3 9 27 81 243



The pounds to be weighed, are weighed with as many namelike weights, to be
done either double or threefold: sometimes by adding one weight to another, and
sometimes by taking away and adding to the contrary balance.

To measure any sort of board, glass, pavement, etc.
FIrst multiply the breadth by the length, as a board is 17. inches one way,
and 139. inches another way, multiply 139. by 17. and it makes 2363, which
divided by 144. leaves in the quotient 16. foot and ^/^ parts of a foot. Note
that in flat measure there is but 144. inches in a foot, but in square measure
1728.

To measure Land.
MUltiply the breadth by the length (if square or long square) and divide the
product by 160. because there is 160. square perches in an acre, so shall you
come to the Area, but if your ground be irregular, you must cast it into
triangles; and if it be a right angled triangle, multiply half the
perpendicular by the whole base, and divide it by 160: but if it be an obtuse
triangle, let fall a perpendicular from the obtruse angle to the base, and
multiply half the length of that perpendicular by the whole base, and divide
by 160. as before, you have the content.

Also if you have a piece of Land to set out, as to know if it be 12. Perches
in breadth, how many perches it should be in length, say by the back ward rule
of 3. if 4. gives 40. what shall 12. give? multiply, 4. by 40. makes 160. which
divided by 12. and it gives 13, perches, and so of all such like.

To measure any irregular substance whatsoever, as a crown, Horse-head, or any
Image, or concaved piece.
TAke a vessel that is very stanch, and 4. square, and put water into it, and
when the water is setted, mark with your knife how high it rises in the
Vessel, and then put in your irregular form whatsoever it be, and mark with
a knife again how high the water then bears, or rises; then take out the
irregular form again, and measure exactly the space between the marks, and
multiply the breadth by the thickness, and observe the length, and you have
your desire.

^ow by knowing the weight of one Fathom of Rope, to know the weight of
another.
A Cable of 10. inches compass weighing 16. pound every Fathom, how much will
a Fathom of that Rope weigh that is 15. inches in the Diameter, and made of
the same stuff*

Multiply 15. the greater in it self makes 225, and that multiplied by 16.
the weight of a Fathom of the lesser Rope, makes 3600. which divided by 100.
being the square of the lesser rope, leaves in the quotient 36. pound, the
true content.

By the compass of any small rope, to find the Diameter and weight of one,
four, five, or six times as big.
SUppose the small rope is 3. inches compass, and that it is required to know
the height of another 5. times that compass, multiply the number 3. squarely
arises 9. which multiply again by 5. makes 45. then extract the square root
thereof, and you shall have 6. so much in Diameter is the greater, that done,
you may as before find his weight and circumference.

How to know what empty Caske will carry any sort of Ordnance over a river.
IT is thought sufficient, 5. Tun of Caske will sw^ a Cannon of 8. or. 9000.
weight, 4. Tun a (...), 3. Tun a Culvering, and two Tun a Saker, accounting all
provisions to be made fast the reunto, as plankes and ropes.

How, by knowing what powder a few pieces spend, being seldom discharged, to
know how much many of the same will spend being often discharged:
IF 4 Cannons be twice discharged, and shoot 24^ pound of powder, how much
powder will serve 5. Cannons, to shoot every one 6. shoot, work by the double
rule of 3. and say, if four Cannons shoot 240. pound, what shall 5. do? and
you shall find 300. then say again, if 2. give 300. what shall 6. give?
multiply and divide, and you shall have in the quotient 9^.

To know how much powder each Cannon spent in the former conclusion at a shot.
MUltiply 4. the number of Gunnes first propounded, by 2. the number of times
they were discharged, arises 8. by which divide 240. the quotient will be 30
which they spent at a time.

The proportions between Bullets of Iron, Stone, and Lead.
A Bullet of Iron to the like bullet of Marble, is in proportion as 15. is to
34.

A Bullet of Lead to the like of Iron, is in proportion as 28. to 19.

A Bullet of Lead to the like of Marble, is in proportion as 4. to 1.

By knowing the Diameter and weight of an Iron Bullet, to find the weight of a
Bullet of Marble.
ADmit an Iron Bullet weigh 9. pound, of 4. inches high, what shall a Bullet of
Marble weigh of like Diameter?

He shall have such proportion as 34. to 15; therefore multiply 9 by 15. the
proportion of the Stone bullet bears, and there arises 135. which divided by
34. the quotient is 3. pound, and ^/^ parts of a pound.

How to know Arithmetically where to place the Trunnions of any piece of
Ordnance.
MEasure the length of the bore of the piece from the muzle to the breech;
divide that measure by 7. and multiply that sum that comes of the quotient
by ^. the product will show you how many inches the trunnions must stand from
the lowest part of the concavity of the piece.

And farther note, that the trunions ought to be placed as ^/^ of the
circumference of the piece may be seen in that place where the trunnions are
set.

How much rope will make breechings and tacklings for any piece.
IT is a rule, though not observed by the vulgar, yet by the most experienced
Sea Gunners, that look how many foot your piece is in length, so many fathom
of rope must there be in one tackle for ordinary or extraordinary pieces, and
their breechings to be four times the length of the ^eece, with some overplus
for fastening at both ends. I have against stormy foul weather caused diverse
quoyners to be bored twice through with an angor, and nailed down upon the
deck, the thickest ends close as could be to the fore trucks, of purpose to
hinder (what might be) the stretching or straining of the breechings and
tackle, that the piece should not any way swerve. But if your piece
accidentally break her tacklings and breechings, you have no better way for
the present to prevent danger, but with expedition to dismount her.

Also I could wish the rammers and spunges made of small haser, should (for
lasting and for better service also) be armed close and hard with strong
twisted yarne from the rammers end quite to the sponge, which would much
stiffen, and make it more useful and lasting to ram both wad and bullet close
to the powder, especially being done in time.

I do advise all his Majesty's Gunners of the Navy, to take an especial
heed, and diligent care in the election and choosing of the Yeoman of the
powder-roome, by reason he is upon all occasions to be amongst the ammunition:
for by his negligence or dishonesty, infinite loss and danger may accrue;
therefore it is fit such a man should be first known to be a loyal subject,
and one that would perform the office with both care and diligence before he
be admitted the charge thereof.



The names of the principal members of a piece of Ordnance.
FIrst, the uppermost part round about the piece, may be called the Superficies
of her metal; the substance or whole mass of metal, the Body; the
hollownesse thereof, the Concave, Cillinder, or Soul: the whole length, the
Chase: So much of her Bore as contains her powder and shot, is the Chamber,
or charged Cillinder; the remainder her vacant Cillinder; the Spindals or Ears
are called her Trunnions; and the space between them, the gravity of her
Center; the pumell at her coil, the Casacabell, or her Deck: the little hole,
the Touchhole; all the metal behind the touchhole, her breech, or Coil, the
greatest Ring at her touchhole, her Base Ring; the next Ring, or Circle, is
the reinforst Ring; the next to that, the Trunnion ring; and the circle
foremost, her Muzzle Ring. Lastly, the Ring between the Trunons and Muzzle
ring, is called the Cornish ring; and all the Rings, Circles, and emenencies at
her Muzzle, are called the Frieze, as you may see in the figure just against
this matter.

What instruments are most fit for a Gunner.
THe Callabre Compasses, height board, inch sightrule, Gunners scale, Gunners
quadrant divided into 90. degrees, and into 12. points, and their minutes, with
a Geometrical square to take mountures, levels, heights, breadths, and
distancies: a pair of straight pointed Compasses, with a little brass level,
scales and weights, Priming Irons, moulds to make crosse-barre shot for
Muskets, a fair Book for your accounts, and an Iron with a Spring and a
Transome to dispart a Piece of Ordnance; let the Transome be to go up and
down, according to the diameter and thickness of any piece; let the Transome
be long enough to reach the Base-ring from the Touchhole. This Instrument is
very necessary, though not commonly known.

How to load and fire a Piece of Ordnance like an Artist.
HAving all things fitted, and in readiness prepared for ^vice, first, mark
the wind, and be sure to lay ^ur budge-barrell, and the rest of your powder to
wea^r your Piece, then place your Lindstocke to leawards, having cleared the
Touchhole, sponge her well, standing by the right side of the Gunne, and when
he draws out the sponge, strike two or three blows upon the muzzle, to beat
off the foulness of the sponge; then his assistant declining the
Budge-barrell aside, he shall thrust ^n the Ladle to fill it, striking off the
heaped powdes, and giving a little shogge, the better to settle the rest in in
the Ladle; so being filled and striked, stand by the right side of the Piece,
(as clear as he can from the muzzle) and put in the Ladle to the bottom of
the concave very steady quite home to the touchhole, and when it is arived to
the bottom of the bore, laying your right thumb upon the upper part of the
Ladle-staffe, turn^ the staff, until your thumb be quite under it, and give
a shake or two to free the powder from the Ladle, bearing him up, that non^ may
come out again: Then put the powder home softly with the (...) after which put
in a good wadde, and thrus^ whom (...) powder giving three or four hard
str^kes, which will gathe^ the scattered powder together, that it man fire the
better the ^ssistant having a thumb upon the Touchhole all the while, then
put in the shot, which with a Rammer h^ must put softly home, and afterward
another wadde and then give two or three good strokes with the Rammer more, to
settle all close together, that there may be no vacuity between powder, first
wadde, bullet, or las^ wadde: This done, place your Budge-barrell again to
wind-wards, and be sure to weather your Piece in the fiering, to prevent all
danger. Lastly, have special care in directing her to the mark, and in
priming her, let the powder come from the Touchhole to the base ring, so may
you fire there safely, without danger of the fire of the Touchhole to force
your Lintstocke out of your hand, provided you draw back your hand in the
fiering, your leg standing forwards, and so doing, the Piece will be laden,
and fier'd Gunner like. Some use to prime before the Touchhole forwards two or
three inches, and fire there; for the bigger the Touchhole is, the more care
must be taken in priming, and especially in fiering.

What powder is allowed for proof, and what for action of each Piece.
FIrst, I will begin with the biggest Pieces, as with all sorts of Cannons, for
proof and for service, o^ the weight of her Iron shot. For the Culverings, the
whole weight of their shot for proof, and foraction, ^/^ and for the Saker and
Faulcon ^/^, and for lesser Pieces, the whole weight in action, until they
grow hot; for then must abatement be made with discretion: But in proof the
lesser Pieces should have once, and ^/^ of the powder that the Bulletweigheth.

If Weights, Scales, and Ladles be wanting, how many Diameters of a bullet will
make a reasouable charge in powder for any piece named.
FOR the Cannons 2. for Culverings 3. and for the Saker 3. for the lesser
pieces, 4. Diameters of the Cillinder. For 3. Diameters makes ^/^ and 3. ^/^
makes ^/^ and four diameters and a half makes the whole weight of a cast Iron
shot, it being corn powder, which length will also serve for Cartredges for
the like pieces.

How Moulds, Forms, and Cartredges are to be made for any sort of Ordnance.
CArtredges are made of Canvas, or paper Royal; which prepared, take the
height of the bore of the piece, without the vent of the shot, and cut the
cloth or paper of the breadth of three such heights, and for the Cannon in
length three diameters, for the Culvering four diameters, for the Saker,
Faulcon, etc. of the height of their proper bores, and leaving in the midst,
at the top or bottom, one other such height, to make a bottom for the
Cartredge, cutting each side somewhat larger for the sowing and glewing them
together, having a due respect for the augmenting or diminishing of your
powder, according to the goodness or badnesse of the powder, and to the
extraordinary over-heating of your piece. Having resolved for what sort of
Ordnance your Cartredges are to serve, you are accordingly to have a former of
wood, turned to the height of the shot, and a convenient length longer than the
Cartredge is to be: and before you paste your paper on the former, first
tallow him, so will the paper slip off without staying or tearing. If you deal
with taper-bored Gunnes, your formers must be made accordingly tapred. If you
make your Cartredges of Canvas, half a diameter more is allowed for the
seames; but if of paper or ^/^ of an inch overplus for the pasting, will
serve, being lapt once about the former, having a bottom first fitted upon the
end of the former, which must be hard and close pasted to the lower sides of
the Cartredge; and then the bottom pasted also down hard round about: then dry
them well before you fill them, and mark every one with ink or black lead,
how high they ought to be filled, and let some want of their weight against
times they are over-hot, otherwise great danger may ensue.

To make Ladles, Rammers, and Spunges of all sorts of Ordnance.
IT is fit every Gunner should know how to trace, cut out, and also make up and
finish all manner of Ladles, Spunges and Rammers, and to direct others how they
should and ought to be severally fortified, made and distinguished, as
follows.

For double fortified Cannons to charge them with two Ladle fulls, they are to
be two diameters and a half of their shot in length from the head of the Ladle
staff, which shall be one diameter more of plate, which must go about the
said head. The brass plate must be in breadth two diameters unto the said
head, where each side must have half a diameter more to enclose the head of
the Ladle staff within the plate.

The Button or head of the Ladle staff must be one diameter, and of such
height or thickness, that it together with the brass plate, may be equal to
the height of the shot (due vent abated.) For Spunges their bottomes or heads
are to be made of soft fast wood, as Aspe, Birch, Willow, or such like, and to
be one diameter, and ^/^ in l^ngth, and not above ^/^ of the shots height. The
rest being covered with raw sheeps skins wool, and nailed on with copper
nails, so that together they may fill the concave of the piece.

The Button or head of the Rammer must be turned of hard wood, in length one
diameter, and of such height and thickness, that it may fitly enter into the
piece, the shots vent allowed: it were the better for fashion and strength, if
that next the staff were handsomely turned with abatement, and a Ferrill or
circle of brass fitted thereon to save the head from cleaving, when as with
force we shall ram the shot home. All these heads and buttons must be pierced
^/^ with a hole for the staff, an inch or more, whereinto the staff must be
fastened, let the staff be one foot longer then the concave of the Gunne.

For the ordinary Cannons the Ladles must be of the same breadth, but must not
surpass 2. diameters of the shot in length. And for the lessened Cannons, two
diameters only to load at twice, all according to the fashion and breadth as
before.

The Ladles for Culverings and Demi-culverings, have four Diameters of their
proper shot in length, and two in breadth.

The Sakers, Faulcons, and Faulconets, which may at one Ladle full be laden,
may have their Diameters of seven diameters and a half of their shot in
length, besides that coverture of the head of the staff, and of breadth two;
as all the rest have.

For Periors, which usually have Chambers with Orloes and less in bore then
their Chase contains, to them three times the diameters of their Chambers may
be allowed for the length of their Ladles.

How to make a Ladle for a chambred bored piece.
YOur Compasses opened to the just diameter of your chamber within part of an
inch thereof, divide that measure just in two equal parts, then set your
compasses to one of them, and with the one foot fixed on a paper or smooth
board, draw with the other foot a circle, the diameter whereof will be a just
quarter of an inch shorter than the diameter of the Chamber bore, by the
Circumference whereof you may find out the breadth of the plate of a Ladle that
is fit for such a Chamber bored Cannon, by the rule before set down how to
find the true breadth of the plate of any Ladle for any other piece in taking
the three fifts parts of the circumference thereof, the length ought to be
twice the diameter, and ^/^ parts to hold at two times the just quantity of
corn powder.

Example.
The diameter of the circle drawn for any Cannon whose chamber bore is 7.
inches, contains 6. ^/^ the Circumference whereof is near 21. inches ^/^ and
parts thereof is 12. ^/^ and so much ought that Ladle to be in breadth, and in
length 18. in the ^/^ parts. By this rule you may make a Ladle for any tapred
piece.

Take this for a general observation, that a Ladle 9. bales in length, and 2.
bales in breadth, will near contain the just weight in powder that the Iron
shot for any piece weighs.

How to find the height of the Chamber, and how to find the the thickness of
Metal round about the Chamber of any tapred piece.
TAke a straight piece of wyre, and bow the end thereof in the bottom so as it
may go through the touchhole, then put it to the bottom of the bore in at
the touchhole, and with any thing mark the wyre upon the upper part of the
Metal, then measure by your rule how long the wyre is from the stroke to the
end; Then put in the same wyre again, and put it up so as the bowed end may
rest within the Cillinder, and make another mark on the said wyre hard by the
upper part of the metal, round about the Chamber, the which abated from the
first stroke to the lowest end, the remainder is the Diameter of the Chamber
bore in that place. This needs no example.

To know whether the carriage of your piece be truly board, and how to make
them for any piece.
MEasure the length of the Cillinder of your Gunne, the plankes of your
carriage ought to be once and a half that length. Also measure the Diameter,
and the plankes at the fore end should be in depth 4. times the Diameter, and
at the end next the ground two times the Diameter, and in thicknes once the
Diameter.

How you may find whether a piece have any flawes, cracks, or honey-combes.
AFter you have cleared her, put a usual searcher made of two or three
springs, with points, like great pinheads bending outward, which being bended
together with your hand, until it will enter into the Piece, and put up to the
touchhole, or bottom of the Cilinder, turning it round in putting it in, and
pulling it out of the Chase, and if any honey-combes be therein, it will stick
with the points therein. Also in a Sunshine day with a Looking-glass, the
Sunbeams may be reflected into the Chase, as that the flawes, cracks, and
honey-combes may be discerned. But if the Sun shine not, a waxe-candle put upon
a half pike will also show them: If no flawes be found, proceed to her
proof, but if any be therein, the Piece is indeed very dangerous both in
fiering, and loading; and if it can possibly be prevented, not to be used at
all, but with great care and good respect first had in her proof.

The allowance for vent, comparing the height of the shot with the height of
the bore of the Piece assigned.
MAny Gunners hold, that a quarter of an inch space between the Bore and the
Bullet is vent suitable for all Ordnance, and not too much, nor too little. But
others maintain ^/^ part of the Diameter of the Pieces Cilinder is more proper
and correspondent for all sorts of Pieces whatsoever; take which you please.

To dispart a Piece of Ordnance.
TO dispart a Piece, is to bring the metal at muzle equal with the metal
at the base ring: In true founded Ordnance, the half of the Diamiter of the
Cilinder is her dispart: also you may put a priming Iron (such a one as I spoke
of before, with a Spring and Transome) into the Touchhole, to the bottom of
the concave there, and putting down the Transome hard upon the superficies of
the metal of the base ring, which resting there, apply the instrument to the
muzle, and place him upon the lower most edge of the concave perpendicular, and
raise your dispart from the Muzle-ring as high as the Transome, so you have
laid the metal at the Muzle in a Horizontall line with the metal at the
base ring. But for niceness I would make another dispart upon the Trunnions,
which may be thus done, Lay a piece of soft wax upon the Trunnions, and let
one raise it in height, I mean, make it longer or shorter, until that the
metal at the top of the base ring, the wax between the Trunnions and the
dispart on the muzle ring, be all three of a precise height, and in an equal
straight line direct.

If I were to fire a Piece of Ordnance at a mark, to gain credit indeed
thereby, I would have a twine silk thread that should touch both the tops of
the Disparts, and come to the upper part of the base ring upon the midst
thereof, by which thread I would direct my Ordnance to the mark many degrees
better.

I could wish that the Disparts should be skrew'd into the muzle ring of the
Pieces, that it might be used to that purpose, and had always in readiness
belonging to the same Gunne, and upon any occasion taken out at pleasure.

Also I could advise the Sea-gunners upon some occasions to use disparts
between the Trunnions of their Pieces, made of a just heights of purpose to
serve there: (...)
let them be tied about the Piece with a twine, because else at every shot they
will be to seek, when upon the sudden they should use them; which I can by
good experience speak, they will much avail, and stand you in great stead. I
could express diverse other ways to dispart a Piece, but these being
sufficient, I hold it needless to spend time, and fill this little treatise
with unnecessary Instructions.

The Geometrical finding the Diameter for the weight of any shot assigned.
SUppose your shot be one, two, or three pound weight of metal or stone
assigned, if of one pound divide the Diameter into 4. parts, and five such
parts will make the Diameter of a shot of the said metal or stone, that shall
weigh just two pound.

Divide the Diameter of a shot weighs just 2. pound in 7. equal parts, and
8. such parts will make a Diameter of a shot of 3. pound. And divide the
Diameter of a shot of 3. pound into 10. equal parts, and 11. such parts makes
a shot of 4. pound

Divide the Diameter of a shot of 4. pound into 13. parts, 14. such parts will
make a Diameter for a shot of 5. pound.

And so dividing each next Diameter into 3. parts, equal more than the next
lesser was divided into; and it will with one part added from a Diameter of a
shot, that will weigh just one pound more: So you may proceed infinitely
increasing, or decreasing by taking one part less then it is appointed to be
divided into.

To tertiate a Piece of Ordnance.
THere are three differences in fortification of each sort of Ordnance, be they
of Cannons, or Culverings; for they are either ordinary fortified, lessened, or
double fortified, as legitimate Pieces, bastard Pieces, or extraordinary
Pieces. For the Cannon double fortified, has fully one diameter in thickness
of metal at her Touch hole, and ^/^ at her Trunnions, and ^/^ at her muzzle.
And the lessened Cannons have at their Touchhole but ^/^ and at the Trunnions
^/^ and at the muzzle ^/^ whereas the ordinary fortified Cannons have at the
Touchhole, and at the Trunnions, and at the muzle. Now all the double
fortified Culverings, and all lesser Pieces of that kind, have one Diameter,
and at the Touchhole, and ^/^ at the Trunnions, and ^/^ at the muzle. And the
ordinary forified Culverings are fortified every way like the double fortified
Cannons. And the lessened Culverings like the ordinary fortified Cannons in all
points.

The difference between the common legitimate Pieces, and the bastard pieces,
and extraordinary.
COmmon or legitimate Pieces are such Ordnance, as have a due length of their
Chases, proportioned according to this height of their proper bores. Bastard
pieces are such as have shorter Chases than the proportion of their bore does
require. And extraordinary pieces are such Ordnance, as have longer chases than
the proportion of the bore allows: And these are called Bastard Culverings,
and extraordinary Culverings, so likewise of Saker and Faulcon.

To cool a Piece of Ordnance, when she is grown hot with overmuch fiering.
IF you cannot have time to rest her, because the Service is hot, as it was
with us at Bargen, in that case she must be coold with spunges wet in lee and
water, or water and vinegar, or with the coolest fresh or salt water, bathing
and washing her both within and without, until she come unto her due temper;
but if time would permit, rest her one or two hours in twelve, and cool her
as before every eighth or tenth shot.

Reasons that cause a Shot, though well directed, to err in her charge, and to
be either wide, short. or over at the mark.
MAny accidents may make a shot to deviate from the expected course, though
well directed. As if the soul of the piece lies awry in the body of her
metal And if the Trunnions also be not duly placed directly in a Diagonal
line with the Axis of the piece. If the platform be unequal. Also if the
Gunner shoot without a just dispart. If one wheel be higher than another. If
the naves be one longer and wider than the other. When one wheel meets with a
stone to stay it: or that one wheel reverseth in soft ground, and the other in
hard. The Carriage or Trunnion ears are higher one than another. If the
carriage be too wide, so that the piece lies not fast therein, but starteth in
her discharge. If the shot be not equally round, the wind, if vehement, may
somewhat hurt. The slight ramming, leaving space between powder, wad, and
bullet, may alter her course. These and many more, are true and infallible
causes of the failing of a shot at an assigned mark, yet the piece well
directed.

The difference between shooting by the met all of the piece, and the dispart.
THeir differences are uncertain, by reason there are seldom any constant
proportion held in the founding especially concerning the eminencies of their
muzle and base-ring: for laying the piece directly to the mark, with her due
dispart, and then take of that dispart, and lay her by the metal, observe the
difference with a squadrant, and you shall sometimes find that the piece will
be elevated more by the metal than by the dispart, four, five, yea
sometimes six or seven degrees. And so consequently will the randons of the
metal be more than the randons of the dispart, (which by the table of Ranges)
may for every elevation be made certainly known; but this take for an example,
on the level the metal rangeth near double the distance of the dispart in
most pieces.

To know at how many degrees of mounture a Piece will convey her bullet far
thest, called her best Randon.
THe approved best Artists of late times, maintain with good reason, that the
utmost degree of Randon is at or about 24. degrees of the quadrant,
nevertheless most ancient authors hold 45. being the middle or mean between
the level and the perpendicular; namely, the half of 90. degrees. But because
the piece rangeth a bullet but one tenth part of the utmost randon as it does
also at 84. degrees of the elevation, therefore it stands with more reason, and
experience also has found, that the utmost randon of any piece should be
(being duly charged and discharged) at 42. degrees, the half of 84 the
elevation.

A necessary Table of Periors and Drakes proportioned.
Names of Pieces. Height of the bore in inches* Length in Diameter. Weight in
^et. pound Weight of Powder. Length of the Ladle. Canon Pe^ior. 9. 10. 12. 8
3500 3, 3 4. 3 D. Canon Drake 6 16 3000 9 pound. 4 Culvering Drake 5 16 2000 5
4 D. Cul. Drake. 4 ^/^ 16 1500 3 4 Sa^er Drake. 3 18 1200 2 4 ^/^

A Table truly proportioned for our English Ordnance.
Bore. Height ^f Shot. Weight of Shot. Ladles length. Ladles breadth. Length of
the piece. Weight of the piece. Weight of Corn P^wder. Inches. Inches. Lib.
Inches. Inches. Foot. Lib. Li^. 8 7 63 24 14 12 8000 27 (...)
7 6 39 22 12 11 7000 18 (...)
6 6 30 21 11 10 6000 14 5 4 15 19 9 12 4300 10 (...)
5 5 15 20 10 4400 12 5 5 20 21 11 4600 15 4 4 9 17 7 11 2200 6 (...)
4 4 10 18 8 2400 7 4 4 12 19 9 2500 8 3 3 5 30 9 9 2400 4 (...)*
3 3 5 31 9 1500 4 4 3 5 32 10 1600 5 3 2 3 25 5 7 1200 3 (...)
2 2 2 22 5 7 700 2 (...)
2 2 1^/^ 18 3^/^ 6 500 1 (...)
1 1 11 2^/^ 4 300 (...)
1 ^/^ 9 2 3^/^ 202 (...)


A Table of Randous for the six first poyntr of the Quadrant.
1 2 3 4 5 6 ^once 375 637 795 885 892 900 ^aulcon. 550 935 1166 1254 1309 1320
Minion. 450 765 954 1026 1071 1080 ^ake 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 D.
Culvering. 725 1232 1537 1653 1725 1740 Culvering. 750 1275 159^ 1710 1785 1800
De^-canon. 625 1062 1^25 1425 1487 1500 Canon of 7. 675 1147. 1431 1489 1606
1020 Double Cau^n. 750 1275 1660 1710 1785 1800

The use of this Table.
FIrst, by this Table, having resolved upon the point of mounture, look
against the name of the Piece, and right under that point in the common angle,
you shall find the number of paces of her Randon sought.

A Table of the proportion of right ranges and first what a Range is.
A Right Range in any piece is indeed so far as the Bullet is carried
violently in a straight line, which by some Gunners of these our modern times,
is by them properly called the Right Range. This kind of shooting is so far
as a mark is within the straight line of a Piece, which for some elevations
and mountures is much more than for others: for that the more a piece is
mounted, the farther she conveyeth her shot in a right Range.

A Table of right Ranges.
0 192 1 209 2 226 3 243 4 260 5 277 6 294 7 311 8 328 9 345 10 362 20 532 30
702 40 872 50 1042 60 1212 70 1382 80 1552 90 1722

The use of this Table, with a plain Example.
HAving found by experience, that at 60 degrees of mounture the piece assigned
shot 200 paces in a right line, and would know how far the same Piece would
shoot in a straight line being mounted to 10 degrees, say by the Table, if
285, the number against 6 degrees, gives 200 paces, what will 354, the number
therein against 10 degrees give? Multiply 354 by 200, the product will be
70800, which divided by 285, produces in the quotient 283 paces, and ^/^ parts.

Of (...) at a Mark beyond the right line of the (...) (...), or right range
of the sh^t, and of the dead (...) of any Piece at every degree.
THe dead range consists of the addition of the right and crooked ranges
together into one, and that called the dead Range, which is the whole distance
from the plat-forme unto the first graze of the Bullets, whereby for the first
six points of the Gunners quadrant, you having the dead range of one shot made
out of any Piece; whether it be of a Culvering, (which is between 30. and 4^.
Diameters of her bore in length) by the range of numbers set against the letter
S. in the Table here underneath; or whether it be of the quality of a Cannon,
(that is between 18. and 24. Diameters of her bore in length by the rank of
Numbers set against the letter C. in the said Table) you may, having one shot,
by that shot, and by the rule of proportion, know the dead range of any other
point of mounting sought.

Example.
SUppose a Culvering that shoots level 260. paces, I would know how far
she would convey her shot upon an Horizontall plain, she being mounted to the
third point of the quadrant. Say by the rule 3. if 192. (the number against S.)
for the level range in the Table gives 2032, the number under the third
point, what will 260. give? Multiply 2032 by 60, and divide that product by
192, and you shall have in your quotient 2751 ^/^ for the number of paces she
will convey her shot, being so mounted.

The Table of dead Ranges.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Points S 192 985 1623 2032 2185 2281 2300 Paces. C 201 958 1600
1983 2135 2232 2250 Paces.

To know how the range of his Piece increases, or decreaseth from degree to
degree.
FIrst, you must find by the table of right Ranges how much your level right
Range of your Piece is, which number of paces divide by 25, and multiply the
quotient by 11, and the product will be the first and greatest digression,
which is between the first and second degrees, which divided by 40, the
degrees contained between the first degree, and 42 the utmost Randon, and the
quotient shows the number of paces that the shot shall loose at every
digression, from degree to degree, to the last Randon, and contrariwise for the
increasing digression from 42 degrees, the utmost Randon down to the first
degree.

How to find the right Line, or right Range of any Bullet for every elevation
by any one right or dead Range given for the Piece assigned.
AS for example, you are to seek the right Range of 30 degrees for that piece,
whose dead Range for 30 degrees is known to be 2200 paces, by it multiply the
tabular number of right Ranges for 30 degrees, which are 695, and divide the
product by 2150, the tabular number for 30 degrees in the Table of dead Ranges,
and the quotient will be 711 paces for the right Range of that piece mounted
and discharged at 30 degrees elevation.

Another Example.
SUppose the level right Range is given, and the right Range of 30 degrees
sought, say, if 192 the first number in the Table of right Ranges, give 695,
the tabular number thereof for 30 degrees, what shall 197 paces give, the level
right Range given be, multiply and divide, and the quotient will be 713 paces,
for the right Range sought.

To find how much of the Horizontall line is contained directly under the
right range of any shot.
TO find what partlyeth under the right Range at 30 degrees elevation, the
right Range at 30 degrees by the precedent example being found to be 713 paces,
and the right sign of sixty grades, the complement of 30 being 866, which
multiplied together, and the product divided by 1000, the whole sign leaves
in the quotient 621 ^/^ for the number of paces lying directly under the ^ight
Range.

To find how much of the Horizontall line lies under the crooked Range of a
shot made out of any piece of Ordnance at any elevation assigned.
THe crooked Range is so much of the course or way as the shot makes as it
goes Helically between the right Range and the natural motion, or before it
makes the first graze; And may be thus found by deducting of the level
distance contained directly under the right line, or right Range of any shot
made (found by the precedent Chapter) out of the dead Range thereof, found by
the Chapter before going. For the remainder will be the paces, or other
measures lying directly under the crooked Range.

To make a good shot in a piece not truly boared, and to know how much any
piece will shoot amiss, the metal thicker of one side than another.
SVppose a Cannon is said to be two inches thicker of one side in her metal,
than another, the distance to the mark suppose to be 500 paces. that is 2500
foot, the which divided by 9 foot, the just length of the Cillinder of the
piece, yields in the quotient 277 foot ^/^ that again being multiplied by
the superfluity of the metal being 1 inch, makes still 277 ^/^, which is the
true demand sought.

To remedy a Piece not truly bored.
SEarch the piece with an instrument to know which is the thicker side; then
divide the over plus of the metal in two parts, as before, suppose 2 inches,
setting the dispart of your piece on that part to wards the thickest side of
the pieces muzle, and bringing the middle part of the metal at the base ring
to that dispart and the upper part of the mark all in one line, fire her, and
without question you make a very good shot, care being taken in loading.

If the thicker part of her metal be above, then you ought to make your
dispart one inch more: if under, one inch less.

To choose a Piece to shoot at single mark, the course also to be observed
therein.
BY my will I would choose a piece as I had formerly practiced in, and well
examined her qualities; and when I came to load her, I would not ram home her
powder any thing hard, but very easy, least in taking fire, it should lie
blowing first, and cause the piece to start from her position, but let her be
duly directed by a true disparture, that the axes of her bore may precisely
respect the mark. And lastly, endeavor heedfully to prevent all impedimentall
accidents which otherwise may happen, and give fire.

Having found the first Shot faulty to the right or left hand, over or under,
to amend the next time, and make an effectual shot.
IF it were wide toward the right or left hand, I would place my eye on the
base ring at the next time, a little more to the same side accordingly more or
less; if it were too high, direct the dispart under the mark as much: if two
low, lay some small stone, or other thing, on the highest of the base ring, and
by that bring the dispart and the mark into one with discretion.

How to plant Ordnance in secret and double Batteryes, so they may not easily
be dismounted.
THey must be planted upon a platform that discendeth behind, that in their
reverse they may go under the vamure of the Tronier, the Tronier being vaulted,
they must by tackles be brought up above the vamure, and opened, and fire
given immediately at the opening, so in their reverse will they be again under
the vamure, and be free from dismounting, so long as the furnemouth and vamure
is able to keep from the ruin of Counter-batteries.

Take this by the way for a note, that a Cannon at 120 Paces, will pierce a
wall or rampart, meanly settled, only 10 or 12 foot, but in close sandy
ground, 20, or 24 foot deep: And that a Cannon may being well fortified and
discreetly managed, be discharged 100 times in one day.

Note that a Cannon with one shot will ruin more than a 100 hods of earth can
repair.

Further note, that 1000 shot made out of 10 Cannons will ruin more than 1500
shot can do out of made out of 5 Cannons: And less can the enemy repair the
first than the last; for a Cannon shot made every eighth part of an hour, at
100 paces distant, will make as much ruin as twelve men can keep in repair.

To make a shot in the night at a mark showed you in the day, how to prepare
for it.
I Would first lay the Piece precisely to the mark in the the day, then with a
chalk line, dipped in Gum-water, I would strike a right line on the upper part
of the metal, from the breech to the muzle, upon which I would apply a good
Magneticall needle, or fly with a chart exactly divided, and note the
intersection; then from the end of the line that was marked, or stricken upon
the metal, I let fall plumbe lines upon the platform, and at the places
where they touch, I knock in at each a small nail. Lastly, with a Quadrant I
observe the elevation of the concave, or else with some staff take the
perpendicular height of some mark made in the metal as well at the breech,
as at the muzle above the said two nails: and so you may again lay the piece
thereby, always to have the selfsame position, and so shoot as certain at
the mark by night, as by day.

To make a goodshot at an Enemies light in a dark Night, not having any
Candle, or other light by.
I Would light two pieces of match, the one as much longer as the other, as the
quantity of the dispart of the piece, and set the longer upon the upper part of
the Muzle-ring, and the shorter upon the base ring, still traversing and
quoyning the piece, until I have brought the light of the Enemies, and the
lights of the two matches all three into one line, and so give sire.

To order a Piece, to make a goodshot at a moveable Mark, as at a ship under
sail, Boat rowing, or Horsman riding.
TAke a piece that will reach the Mark in a straight line, then observe how
the Mark moves: Next, note the wind if it blows much, whether side-wayes,
with, or against you, and accordingly take advantage: Then with the dispart
considered, observe some cloud, or mark, or point of land that lies in the
course of his motion, and when according to the swiftness thereof he is come
so near it, as I guess the shot and he may meet at the Mark, I give fire:
wherein remember this secret of Nature, that any Piece will shoot farther from
Sea to Land-ward, than from Land to Sea-ward.

To shoot at a Squadron of men, and what Piece to choose.
ACcording to the distance, I would choose a Piece that in a straight line can
reach the mark, be it with Demi-culvering, Saker, or Faulcon, and plant my
piece if I could parallel to the Champion plain, that the shot may range to
shoot at girdle-height, unless the ground be stony; for then would I place my
shot short of them, that grazing amongst the stones, the stones may spoil them
more than the shot of it self can do by much; but in no case would I shoot
wide, or over them; for that were both loss, and foul shame for the Gunner.

To shoot farther than ordinary in one and the selfsame Piece with like
quantity of powder and shot.
I Will gently put home the powder, and wad the same accordingly, then the shot
being involved with paper, leather, okam, or such like, to fill close the
concave of the bore, I would drive the shot close to the powder with a good
wad, putting after it a Tampion of Cork, and with a sponge moistened with oil,
I would anoint the vacant Cilinder, and so barricadoe the piece, that it
should not reverse in the discharge.

Of Powder, Peter, and Match.
To refine Saltpeter wet.
TAke what quantity of Saltpeter you please, and put the same into a clean
Caldron, and put thereon a little fair water, and boil them together until
it raise the scum; which take off, and keep, and let it congeale and shoot in
coolers, as at first it did, and what remains, boil again with more clear
water until it congeale.

To know if Saltpeter be well refined.
TAke and lay it on a board, and put a coal unto it, if it raise an azure
scum, it is yet greasy, if it leaves pearls it is yet earthly: but if it
burn into the board, and leave nothing but a black color, and rise with a
long flamed ventosity and exhalation, it is well refined.

Several ways to know whether powder be decayed or no, whether by moisture or
age, in part or in whole.
IT is the practicke part of a Gunner really to know his powder, and whether it
be decayed or not, by mutation or corruption. And there are especially three
ready ways to find the same. The first, by the sight; the second by the
feeling, and the third and surest by fiering it. By sight, if it be not black
and dark, but bright, and inclining to a bluish tawny color. By feeling,
grasping it in the fist, if it run through the fingers quickly, and avoydeth
the handling, and cling not together. By fire, if fired, it rise quick, and
spread in a moment, smoke little, but rises in a clear flash: unto which add
further, if it leave no seezes, but carry all away, the powder is good, or else
the contrary may be judged.

To renew powder decayed in part.
OF tentimes in Forts, but most common and usually at Sea, powder gathers
humid vapors, which will in short time destroy the strength and vigority
thereof, and makes it of little, and sometimes of no use, without renewing it.
And sometimes it may decay by age. Let therefore the Gunner first prove the
powder by fire; and if it make a flame with a long tail, that is, if it sleep
in its burning, more or less, then for every hundred pound of powder, add
four pound, or six pound of refined Salt-peeter, mixing them well together,
and put them to be beaten and wrought for the space of three hours, and then
moystning, corning, and drying the same, as aforesaid, proving it in meal
dried, how it will rise by fiering; and so doing, the powder may be made
serviceable, if the coal be not corrupted.

To renew powder totally decayed.
IF it be wholly decayed, lay a Rayson frail, or mat in the bottom of a
bucking-tub, upon a faggot made of purpose, or lathe, set on edge, to keep the
mat from the bottom, and put in s^awlayd crosse-wayes: upon which power the
decayed powder, and warm water, being put thereon, and let it stand and
soaketen or twelve hours, that all the Salt-peeter may be assuredly
dissolved: then let out the liquor tap which congeale to Peter, and thereunto
add a due proportion of Coals and Sulphur, and make it into powder, as is
formerly taught for the Coals and Sulphur dissolving, will remain the straw,
frail, or mat.

To make powder that shall not wast with ^ime.
TAke what quantity of powder you will, and mix it with Aquavitae, and make it
up in balls, and dry them well in the Sun, or in a warm place, and keep
them in an earthen pot well glazed, until you have cause to use them. This
powder will not decay, nor waste with age.

To preserve powder that is good, and keep it from decaying.
I Would advise every Gunner to choose the dryest place he can possible, to
keep his provision and store of powder in, and every fortnight or three weeks
at the most, to turn his barrels upside down, so will the Peter be dispersed
in every place, and be in every part alike, otherwise, if it be let stood long
unremoved, the Peter will (as nature forces it to its proper element) descend
for the most part, to the bottom of the Barrel, and the upper part will want,
and be much weakened, and in time quite decay, and loose its proper virtue: for
one pound of powder in the bottom of any Caske, with long standing, will have
more strength than three at the top.

Also it were good discretion after you have put your powder in Cartredges, to
barrel them up, and some times to turn them, as aforesaid. I would advise you
likewise to place all those Cartredges that you keep and man for your pieces,
when they are hot, by themselves, that yo^ (...) have them to hand, when need
requires.

To make extraordinary Match to fire Ordnance.
TAke as many threeds of gross Cotton yarne, as has not taken Salt Water, and
work them bobbing-wise of a complete bigness, and boil them in Salt-peeter
water, and squeeze them, and roll them on a table, whereon mealed Peter and
Sulphur is spread: then draw them through the palm of your hand, and dry them
well. You may do it also with cotton match.

To make a match will resist fire and water.
TAke Saltpeter refined one part, Sulphire part, and put them into a pot with
part of Camphiere mealed with the Sulphur, and one part of fine mealed quick
lime, with so much linseed oil and a little liquid vernish to temper them well
together. Then take of Cotton bobbing match, as big as your little finger,
and put it into the mixture to soake over a fire until it be well imbibed, and
have soaked up the most part of the liquor, then take the feezes or remainder,
and put them into the palm of your left hand, and with your right draw the
match through it twice or thrice, clasping close your fist, that the match may
receive the substance of it thereinto: then dry it upon a line, and keep it
for special uses, for Vaults, Mines, and moist weather.

To make a very violent match.
TAke two ounces of powder, four ounces of Peter, two ounces of Aquavitae,
dissolve them over a fire, and put in your cotten-match, and soake it up: if
you imbibe the fesills for your ^ockets therein, it will be very proper; you
may roll and rub them in meal powder upon a table dry, and keep them in a
dry place, and it will be for your purpose.

Of Fire-workes.
To make certain Fire-workes, very necessary both for Sea and Land-service.
TO arm Pikes, to defend a Ship, or breach, or to enter the same, or to stick
in the sides of a ship, or other place, take strong canvas, and cut it in
length about a foot, or 14 inches, and six inches high in the Center, and let
the ends be both cut taper-wise, then fasten the canvas at both ends with
strong twine, and fill it with this receipt.

Powder bruised 8 parts, Peter in Roch 1 part; Peter in meal 1 part; Sulphur
in meal two parts, Rozen Roch three parts, Turpentine 1 part, Verdigrease
part, Bolearmonicke part, bay salt part, Colophania part, Arsnicke part, mix
them very suently together, and try them in the top of a Brass Candlestick
when the fire does burn furiously with a blew and greenish color, then fill
the canvas, and roll it over, being first armed with strong twine all over,
with this liquid mixture molten in a pan, Pitch 4 parts, Linseed Oil 1 part,
Turpentine part, Sulphur 1 part, Tar part, Tallow one part; and as soon as
this is cold, bore two holes in each of the same next the Iron an inch deep,
with a sharp Iron Bodkin, filling the same with fine bruised powder, and
putting in every hole a little stick of two inches long, which are to be taken
out when you would fire the same, this composition will burn furiously.

And remember you cut off the staff some three inches from the work, and put
thereon a brass socket of five or six inches long, and then cut the end of
your stasse to fill the socket, for when you fire your work, you may stick it
in the side of a ship, and pull the staff out again, so will not the work be
so easily avoided, as when the staff was on, and hangs at length, because the
very weight of the staff and length thereof, will be a means to weigh down
the work, or that the enemy may come, and thereby pull it out, or beat it off
quickly, let the c^position and work contain in weight about 7^ po^, then
will it do execution, and work a better effect, ^n if it were of less
weight, by much; by reason the composition else would be wasted, before it
comes to effect its execution.

To burn the sails of Ships a pretty distance, or to fire thatched houses,
Corne-s^acks, or any other cumbustible matter apt to burn, when you cannot
come to the same; it is good to have certain strong Crosse-bowes to bend with
racks or gaffells, and so shoot Arrows armed at the heads with wild fire,
made of the composition as above, and about three inches in length, and one
inch and a half in the Diamiter, tapred as before in all points: or you may
have long bows, but then let your arrows be also longer, which for diverse
services may do great good.

To charge Trunkes.
TO charge Trunkes to shoot little Balls of wildfire, either to offend or
defend, you must first charge him with two inches of good powder, and then with
a Ball of wild fire a little lower than the concave of the Trunk, ^et the Ball
be bored through crosse-wayes, and primed full of fine powder. Lastly, with
slow receipt, then with powder, then with a Ball again as aforesaid, until
you have filled the same within of an inch of the mouth, which would be filled
up with fine powder and receipt mixed together. Some do use to have at the
mouth two Iron stirts to stick them in the side of any thing, or to defend
ones self from the enemy from taking it off with a thrust while they do
execution.

To make the Ball.
THe Ball of wildfire must be thus made, Take untwisted match, tow, and hemp,
the which would be moystned in Aqua vita, or boiled in Saltpeter water: then
take of bruised powder six parts, of Saltpeter one part, of Brimstone finely
beaten, one part, of coal made of light wood moystned with a little linseed
oil and turpentine wrought together, one part: then lay the tow, or okam
abroad in thickness of the back of a knife, and as broad as great
Oyster-shell, put into the same as much as you can graspe together in your
sist, and tying the same hard with a packe-thread, coat it over with molten
brimstone, and when you would use the same, bore it through with a B^dkin, and
fill the holes full of fine powder bruised.

To make Bullets of wilde-fire to shoot out of a Trunk, which will be as hard
as a stone.
TAke Sulphur in meal six part, of Rosen in meal six parts, melting the
same in some pot over a slow fire: then take stone pitch one part, of hard wax
one part, of Tar part, of Aqua vitae part, of Linseed oil part, of
Verdigrease part, of Campheire part, melting all these together. Likewise
stir into the same of Peter in meal two parts, and taking it from the fire,
put therein four parts of bruised powder, working the same well together in
your hands, and roll it round of the bigness you mean to make your balls of,
boring two holes through the same crosse-wayes, which must be primed with
bruised powder. These balls being cold, will grow very hard, and fired will
burn furiously.

To make Hedge-hogges.
TO make Hedge-hogges, or Balls, you must fill them with the same receipts you
do your Arrows, and Pikes, and let them be five inches in the diameter, and
well armed with twine before you coat them, and after bored two holes, and
primed with fine powder: then put in two sticks, and using them, pull them out
again, and at the said holes fire them. The spikes ends of Iron must be like
Deaths arrow heads, five or six stirts a piece, to hang in the sails, or
stick in or upon any place assigned: and remember in the arming, to leave a
noose to throw him being fired, out of your hand.

To make Powder pots.
THey are made of black Potters clay, or thick glass, round Bottles with
ears to tie matches, lighted at both ends, the pots or glasses are to be
filled with dry fine powder, and thrown upon the decks, or other where, which
will much prejudice the enemy, and many times fire their own powder-chests.

To make Powder-chests.
THey are to be made first of three boords, two to be nayl^d together like the
ridging of a house, and one longer and broader to the bottom thereof: between
which three boords put your Cartredge, then make it up like a Sea-chest, and
fill it with stones, nails, and what such like you will: then nail the cover
on, and the ends to the decks, in such a place that you may fire the powder
underneath through a hole made to put a Pistol in.

To make Roche-Sulphure.
ROche-Sulphure is made, one pound of Sulphur molten on a slow fire, and one
quarter of a pound of mealed powder put thereto by little and little, and in
the cooling put three ounces of Corne-powder, mixing them well together; to
which put one pound of molten suet, so have you made good Roche-Sulphure.

A true receite of a Composition that will burn and feed upon the Water.
TAke Masticke half a pound, white Frankin sense, Gum, Sandrake, Quicklime,
Brimstone, Bitumen, Camphire, and of the best and dryest Gunpowder, of each of
these one pound and a half; Rozin one pound, Saltpeter four pounds and a
half, mix them all together, and you have your desire.

A Receite of a Composition that will burn under water.
TAke Brimstone one pound, Gunpowder ten Ounces, of the best Saltpeter you
can get, one pound and a half, Camphire beaten with Sulphur and Quicksilver;
mix them well together with oil of Peter, or for want of it, let it be
Linseed oil boiled, unill it will scald a Feather: fill a Canvas ball with
this Composition, arm it, and ballast it with Lead at the bottom; make a
little vent at the top, fire it well, and cast it into the water, and you shall
find the experience worth your labor.

A Receite of a Composition that will kindle with the water.
TAke of Oil of Tyle one pound, Linseed-oyle three pounds, oil of yelke of
Eggs one pound, new quicklime eight pounds, Brimstone two pounds, Camphire
four ounces, Bitumen two Ounces; mingle all together very well, and you shall
have your desire.

How to know the just time or hour, that any quantity of a lighted Match shall
do execution at the time desired.
TAke our ordinary Match which is used for the Musket, rub, or beat it against
a post to soften it, then either dip the same in the water of our ordinary
Saltpeter; then dry it very well either by the fire, or in the Sun, according
as your haste requires: or else beat a little Brimstone very small, and put a
little fine Gunne-powder amongst it, and rub the Match with them, being made
liquid with a little Aqua vitae, and dried as before said: then try first how
long one yard of this Match thus prepared, will burn, which imagine to be
about a quarter of an hour; and if one yard will burn so long, then four
yards will be just an hour: Take therefore as much of this Match as will burn
so long as you will have it to be ere your work should fire, bind the one end
unto your work, lay loose powder well dried, under, and about it lay the rest
of the Match in hollow or turning, so that one part of it touch not another,
and fire it.

For Fire-pikes 4 pound a piece for one dozen.
Powder 20 pound. Peter-roch 5 pound. Peter-meale 5 pound. Sulphur 3 pound.
Rozen 2 pound. Turpentine 1 pound. Linseed oil 1 pound. Sum 38 pound, 8
ounces. For arming. Sulphur 6 pound. Turpentine pound. Thread 4 pound. Sum 10
pound. For Arrows 2 dozen, each 1 pound. Powder 12 pound. Sulphur 3 quarters of
a pound Rozen 3 quarters of a pound. Roch-peter half a pound. Peter-meale 3
qua. of a pound Sum 15 pound 3 quarters. For coating. Sulphur 5 pound.
Peter-Roch 2 pound. Peter-meale 1 pound. 1 yard of Canvas and marle. Sum 9
pounds. For2dozen of balls wetworks of 4 pound a piece. Powder 48 pound.
Peter-roch 16 pound. Pitch 2 pound. Rozen 2 pound. Turpentine 8 pound. Linseed
oil 1 pound. Traine-oyle 1 pound. Su^me total 90 pound For Coating. Pitch 14
pound. Rozen 2 pound. Sulphur 8 pound. Canvas 4 yards. Small Marle 3 pound.
Sum 31 pound,. For 1 dozen of pots, each one 1 pound,. Corn-powder 1 pound.
Serp. powder 9 pound. Sulphur 3 pound. Peter-roch 1 pound and ^/^. Sum 15
pound. For Capping. Canvas 1 yard. Okam of a pound. Sulphur three fourth
pound. Packthred 1 ounce. Su^me 1 pound, 9 Ounces.
A short View of the Chiefest Heads which are contained in this Book of
GVNNERY, Viz.
FIrst of the principles of Philosophy sit to be known. page. 1. A Table of
the Square: A table of Cubes. page 2 How to extract the square root. page 2.
How to know the nearest root of a number not square. p. 3. ^oure several
questions upon the same, and all fully answered. page 4, 5, 6. How to extract
the Cubicke root, with the manner how it is to be done. page 7. How to find the
nearest Cubicke root, and not cubicall. p. 8. A question of two Cubes. page 9.
A question asked about a Gunne. page 9. A question of a Bullet. page 9. How to
turn a whole number into a fraction. page 10. A question of whole numbers and
fractions. page 10. How you may Geometrically find the Diameter of any Bullet,
that weighs twice so much as a known Bullet. p. 11. Then to prove it
Arithmetically. page 11. By one Bullet to know the weight of another, the
Diameter given. page 12. How by the weight of one Piece, to know the weight of
the other. page 13. To know how many shots of powder will be in a grand Barrel
of powder, for any pee^e. page 13. The example how to do it, and the proof.
page 13. By knowing what powder a Piece must have, to know how much a piece of
another bore will require. page 13 To find the supersicies of a Bullet. page 13
A Table showing the weight of all Iron Bullets, in Haberdepoize weight. page
14. To find out how many square inches are contained in a solid content of a
Bullet, and consequently, how many pound weight. page 14. To find the true
content of a circle. page 15. Arithmetically to find out the mean proportion
between two numbers. page 15. To know Arithmetically, how much of every sort
of metal is in (...) Piece of Ordnance. page 16. To fi^ ^he superficial
content of the hollow concavity of a Piece of Ordnance. page 17. How to find
the solid content of the Cillinder of any Piece. page 17. To measure any sort
of Timber. page 17. Directions how to weigh a great deal with a few weights.
page 18. How to measure any sort of Board, Glass, or Pavement. page 19. To
measure Land an easy way. page 19. How to measure any irregular substance
whatsoever. viz. as a Crown, Horsehead, or any Image, or concaved piece. p.
19. How by knowing the weight of one fathom of rope, to know the weight of
another. page 20. By the Compass of any small rope, to find the Diameter and
weight of one, four, five, or six times as big. page 21. How to know what
empty Caske will carry any sort of Ordnance over a River. page 21. How by
knowing what powder a few Pieces spend, being seldom discharged, to know how
much powder any of the same will spend being often discharged. page 21. To know
how much powder each Cannon spent in the former conclusion at a shot. page 21.
The proportigns between Bullets of Iron, Stone, or ^ead. page 21. By knowing
the Diameter and weight of an Iron Bullet, to find the weight of a Bullet of
Marble. page 22. How to know Arithmetically where to place the Trunnions of any
Piece of Ordnance. page 22. How much rope will serve to make breechings and
tacklings for any Piece. page 22. The names of all the principal members of a
piece of Ordnance, and how they are placed. page 25. What instruments are most
fit for a Gunner. page 25. How to load and fire a piece of Ordnance ^ke an
Artist. page 26. What Powder is allowed for proof, and what for action for
each Piece. page 27. If Weights, Scales, and Ladders be wanting, how many
Diameters of a Bullet will make a reasonable charge in powder for any piece
named. page 28. How Moulds, Forms, and Cartredges are to be made for any sort
of Ordnance. page 28. To make Ladles, Rammers, and Spunges for all sorts of
Ordnance. page 28. How you may find whether a Piece have any flawes, crackes,
or honey-combes. page 32. To dispart a piece of Ordnance. page 33. The
Geometrical finding the Diameter for the weight of any piece assigned. page
35. How to tertiate a piece of Ordnance. page 35. To cool a piece of Ordnance,
when she is grown hot, with overmuch fiering. page 36. Reasons that cause a
shot, though well directed to err in her charge. page 37. To know at how many
degrees of mounture, a Piece will convey her Bullet called her best Randon.
page 38. A Table truly proportioned for our English Ordnance. p. 39. A Table
of Randons, for the six first points of the Quadrant. page 40. A Table of
right Ranges, also the use of the Table, with a plain example. page 41. Of
shooting at randon at a mark beyond the right line of the Pieces reach, or
right range of the shot; and also of the dead range of any Piece at every
degree, with the example. page 42. To know how the range of his Piece
increases, from degree to degree. page 43. Ho^ (...) and the right line, or
right range of any Bullet for every elevation, by any one right or dead range
given for the Piece assigned. page 43. To make a good shot in a Piece not
truly bored, and to know how much any Piece will shoot amiss, the met tall
^icker of one side than another. page 44. ^o remedy a Piece not truly bored.
page 45. To choose a Piece to shoot at a single mark, the course also to be
observed therein. page 45. Having found the first shot faulty to the right or
left hand, over or under, to amend the next time, and make an effectual shot.
page 45. How to plant Ordnance in secret and double batteries, so they may not
be easily dismounted. page 46. To make a shot in the night, at a mark showed
you in the day, and how to prepare for it. page 46. To make a good shot at an
Enemies light in a dark Nighs, not having any Candle or other light by. page
47 How to order a Piece, to make a good shot at a moveable Mark, as at a ship
under sail, Boat rowing, or Horseman riding. page: 47.
(...)


