A Treatise of Witchcraft.

Wherein sundry Propositions are laid down, plainly discovering the
wickedness of that damnable Art, with diverse other special points annexed,
not impertinent to the same, such as ought diligently of every Christian to be
considered.

With a true Narration of the Witchcrafts which Mary Smith, wife of Henry Smith
Glouer, did practice: Other contract vocally made between the Devil and her,
in solemn terms, by whose means she hurt sundry persons whom she envied:
Which is confirmed by her own confession, and also from the public Records
of the Examination of diverse upon their oaths: And Lastly, of her death and
execution, for the same; which was on the twelfth day of January last past.

By ALEXANDER ROBERTS B. D. and Preacher of Gods Word at Kings-Linne in
Norffolke.

EXODUS 22. 18. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Impium est nos illis esse
Remissos, quos coelestis Pietas
Non Patitur impunitos: Alarus Rex apud Cassiodorum.
LONDON, Printed by N. O. for SAMVEL MAN, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Ball.

1616.

To the right Worshipful Master John Atkin Mayor, the Recorder and Aldermen,
and to the Common Counsel, Burgesses and Inhabitants of Kings Linne in
Norffolke, Grace and Peace.
Right Worshipful:
IN these last days, and perilous times, among the rest of those dreadful
evils, which are foretold should abound in them, a close and disguised 2.
Timoth. 3. 5.
contempt of religion may be justly accounted as chief, which causes and
brings upon men all disastrous effects, when although it be shadowed with a
beautiful Mask of holiness, fair tongued: yet false-harted, Titus 1. 16.
professing they know God, but in works deny him. And among these there be two
especial sorts; the one, who entertaining a stubborn, and curious rash
boldness, strive by the judgment of reason, to search ouer-deeply into the
knowledge of those things which are far above the reach of any humane
capacity. And so making shipwreck in this deep and vnsoundable Sea,
ouerwhelme themselves in the gulf thereof. The other kind is more sottish,
dull, and of a slow wit, and therefore ouer-credulous, believing eueri^ thing,
especially when they be carried by the violent tempest of their desires, and
other ungoverned affections; and among these the devil usually spreads his
netts, as assured of a prey, waiting closely if he can epsy any, who either
grow discontented and desperate, through want and poverty, or be exasperated
with a wrathful and unruly passion of revenge, or transported by insatiable
love to obtain some thing they desire; and these he taking advantage,
assaulteth with golden and glorious promises, to perform unto them the wishes
of their own hearts; the drift whereof is (he being as at the first incased
in a subtle Serpents skin) only to enthrall and invassall them slaves to
himself. The first of these mentioned, are sly and masked Atheists, who
ouer-shadow their secret impiety, loose and dissolute behavior with some
outward conformity and show of religion, snatching (as they think) a
sufficient warrantize thereof from those disorders they observe among men, and
therefore pass uncensured, having a civil, but dissembled carriage. The second
be Sorcerers, Wisards, Witches, and the rest of that rank and kindred: no
small multitude swarming now in the world, yet supposed of many, rather worthy
pity then punishment, as deluded by fantasies, and misled, not effecting
those harms wherewith they be charged, or themselves acknowledge. But
considering they be joined and linked together with Satan in a league (the
common and professed enemy of mankind) and by his help perform many subtle
mischievous actions, and hurtful designs, it is strange that from so great a
smoke arising, they neither descrie nor fear some fire. And therefore, in
respect of these, I have at your appointment and request (for whom I am most
willing to bestow my best labors and ever shall be) penned this small
Treatise, occasioned by the detection of a late witch among you, whose
irreligious care, and unwearied industry, is not to be defrauded of deserved
commendation, and by mature deliberation, and discreet search, found out her
irreligious and impious demeanor, and also discovered sundry her unnatural
and inhumane mischiefs done to others, whereof being convicted, she was
accordingly sentenced, and did undergo the penalty justly appointed, and due
by Law unto malefactors of that kind. After all which, you kindled with a holy
zeal of the advancement of Gods glory, and giving satisfaction to every one
howsoever affected, intermitted no means, using therein the labor of your
careful Ministers (willingly offering themselves in this holy service) whereby
she might be brought (as one converted in the last hour) to the sight and
acknowledgement of her heinous sins in general, and particularly of that of
witchcraft, confessing the same, and by true repentance, and embracing of the
tender mercies of God in Christ Jesus save her soul (who refuses no true and
unfeigned convert at any time.) And he graciously blessing these religious
endeavor, of yours, vouchsafed to second the same with a happy and wished for
event, which (as I hope) shall appear manifestly in the following Treatise
unto all those who are not fondly, and without cause, too much wedded to their
own conceits: And thus, desiring GOD most humbly to confirm and strengthen
you in his truth, which ever you have loved, and is your due praise, and shall
be at the last an honor unto you: I rest

Your Worships in all Christian duty to be commanded, A. ROBERTS.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, I have upon occasion penned this short discourse, and that
of such a subject wherewith not being well acquainted, am enforced to crave
some direction from those, whose names you shall find remembered in the same:
(that I be not unthankful unto those from whom I receive instruction) and
have in former time, and latter days, taken pains in searching out, both the
speculatiue, and practique parts of this damnable Art of Witchcraft, a
dangerous and seducing invention of Satan, who from the Arcenals, and Magisins
storehouses of his ancient and mischievous furniture, has not spared to
afford all help, and the best Engines for the subuerting of souls, pliable
to his allurements: and to this end, beside a plain narration of fact in this
case committed and confessed, (least the Treatise should be too bare and naked)
I have added thereunto a few Propositions, agreeing to such a subject matter,
manifesting some special points not altogether importinent in my opinion, nor
unworthy of due consideration: I know mine own wants, and do as willingly
acknowledge them: One more experienced, and of greater leisure, and better
health, had been fitter for the opening and discovering of so deep a mystery,
and hidden secret of Iniquity, as this is; and happily hereafter may be willing
to take that task in hand: yet herein thou shall find^ something not ^all: A
manifest contract made with the Devil, and by (...) terms of a loague, which
is the ground of all the per^tious actions proceeding from those sorts of
people, who are, have been, and shall be practitioners in that cursed and
hellish Art. And yet no more then she, that Witch of whom in this relation we
do speak, has of her own accord, and voluntarily acknowledged after
conference had withme, and sundry learned and reverend Divines, who both prayed
for her conversion, carefully instructed her in the way to salvation, and
hopefully rescued her from the Devil, (to whom she was devoted, and by him
seduced) and regained her to God from whom she was departed by Apostac^e. And
in this so Christian and holy action were the continual pains of

Master Thomas Howes. Thomas Hares. John Man. William Leedes. Robert Burward.
William Armitage.

And of these in the day of execution (which she in no wise would condescend
unto should be deferred, though offered repriuall upon hope that more might
have been acknowledged) being very distemperate, nevertheless some
accompanied her to the place, and were both eye and care-witnesses of her
behavior there, seeing and hearing how she did then particularly confess her
confederacy with the Devil, cursing, banning, and envy toward her neighbors,
and hurts done to them, expressing every one by name, so many as be in the
following discourse, nominated, and how she craved mercy of God, and pardon for
her offenses, with other more specialties afterward expressed. And thus I end,
taking my leave, and commending thee to the gracious guidance and preservation
of our good God in our blessed Savior Christ Jesus.

Thine ever in the Lord, A. Ro^.

A TREATISE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECVTION OF MARY SMITH, CONVICTED OF
WITCHCRAFT, and condemned for the same: of her contract vocally and in solemn
terms made with the Devil; by whose means she hurt sundry persons whom she
enured, with some necessary Propositions added thereunto, discovering the
wickedness of that damnable Art, and diverse other special points, not
impertinent unto the same, such as ought diligently of every Christian to be
considered.
THERE is some diversity of judgment among the learned, who should be the
first Author and Inuenter of Magical and curious Arts. The most general
occurrence of opinion is, that they fetch their pedigree from the Augustinus de
diuinatione D^monum: and de (...). lib. 7 cap 35. Pl^us (...) natural lib. 30.
cap. 1.
Persians, who searching more deeply into the secrets of Nature then others,
and not contented to bound themselves within the limits thereof, fell foul of
the Devil, and were insuared in his nets. And among these, the publisher unto
the world was Zoroaster, who so soon as he by birth Augustinus de Ci^tate Dei
lib. 21. cap. 14.
entered the world, contrary to the usual condition of other men, laughed
(whereas the beginning of our life is a sob, the end a sigh) and this was
ominous to himself, no warrantise for the enjoying of the pleasures of this
life, overcome in battle by Ninus Iust^ (...) Epito^e Trogi Pomp^y. lib 1.
King of the Assirians, and ending his days by the stroke of a thunderbolt,
and could not, though a famous Sorcerer, either foresee, or prevent his own
destiny. And because he writ many books of this damnable Art, and left them
to posterity, may well be accounted a chief master of the same But the Devil
La^antius de origin error^. lib. 2. cap. 17. And cites the testimony of
Sibilla (...) for proof hereof. Gratianus Decretorum part. 2. causa 26 quest 2
Can^ sine saluatore, and (...) esse has (...) (...) affirmat Ced^nus in
historia compendio.
must have the precedencie, whose scholars both he and the rest were, who
followed treading in his steps. For he taught them South-saying, Auguration,
Necromancie, and the rest, mere delusions, aiming therein at no other mark,
then to with draw men from the true worshipping of God. And all those
pernicious practices are fast tied together by the tails, though their faces
look sundry ways; and therefore the Professors thereof are styled by sundry
names, as Magitians, Necromancers, Inchanters, Wisards, Hagges,
Fortune Tellers, Diuiners, Witches, Cunning Men, and Women, etc. Whose Art is
such a hidden mystery of Probationes ex quibus legitim^ est Iudicia fieri, tres
necessaria plant d^ci and inda^ po^nt (...) veritas notory and per^tis ^ath. 2^
confess^ voluntari^ ei^ qui reu^ (...), atque (...) 3^ certorum te^um (...)
testimonium: his and 4^ addipotest violent^ presumptiones de (...) de (...)
lib. 4. cap. 2. 3 4.
wickedness, and so unsearchable a depth of Satan, that neither the secrets
of the one can be discovered, nor the bottom of the other further sounded,
then either the practisers thereof themselves by their own voluntary
confessions made, or procured by order of Justice (according to the manner of
that Country where they be questioned) have acknowledged, or is manifested by
the sundry mischiefs done of them unto others, proved by impartial
testimonies upon oath, and by vehement presumptions confirmed, or else
communicated unto us in the learned Treatises, and discourses of ancient and
late Writers gathered from the same grounds. And The Oracles of the Pagans, in
all places of the world, when CHRIST was borne, were silenced, and the Devil
became mute (...) so that Augustus Caesar demanding of Apollo by his messengers,
sent to Delphor, had this answer returned, (...) etc. in sense thus much, An
Hebrew Child commands me to leave this place, and return again to hell.
From hence therefore you must depart from our Altars, without resolution of any
questions propounded. Eusebius de preparatione Euangelica. lib. 5. cap 8.
Theodoretus de Gracorum affectionum curatione qui est de oraculis (...), Vide
and Suidam in Augusto, and A^um de incarnatione verbi.
although this Hellish Art be not now so frequent as heretofore, since the
Pagans have been converted unto Christianity, and the thick sogges of Popery
ouer-mantling the bright shining beams of the Gospel of Jesus Christ (who came
to dissolve the works of the Devil. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.) and were by the sincere
and powerful preaching thereof dispersed; yet considering these be the last
times, days evil and dangerous, foretold that should come, 2. Tim. 3. 1. in
which iniquity must abound, Mat. 24. 12. and as a raging deluge overrun all,
so that Faith shall scarce be found upon earth, Luke 18. 8. and the Devil
loosed from his thousand years imprisonment, De hac ligatione and solutione
Di^li ple^ August. de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 20. cap. (...).
Revel. 20. 3. enraged with great wrath walks about, and seeks whom he may
devour. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Because he knows he has but a short time, Rev. 12.
12. Before I enter into the particularity of the narration intended, it shall
be material to set down some general propositions, as a handful of
gleanings gathered in the plentiful harvest of such learned men, who have
written of this argument, whereby the erroneous may be recalled, the weak
strengthened, the ignorant informed, and such as judge aright already,
confirmed: and among many other these as chief, all which you shall see
exemplified in the following Discourse.

The first Proposition.
IT is a Quaere, though needless, whether there be any Witches: for they
Wierus de magor^ insomium poe^s lib. 6. cap. 17. 18 19 20 21 22. 23. 24. etc.
27. and de Lamijs lib. 3. cap. 7. and de la ni^rum impotentia. But this
position comes from another as dangerons, even Infidelity denying that there
be any Devils, but in opinion; which was the doctrine of Aristotle, and the
Peripatetique Philosophers. Pompenatius de inca^nationibus Binfeldius de
confessionibus malesicorum
have some Proctor^ who plead a nullitie in this case, persuade themselves, and
would induce others to be of the same mind, that there be no Witches at all:
but a sort of melancholique, aged, and ignorant Women, deluded in their
imagination; and acknowledge such things to be effected by them, which are
impossible, unlikely, and they never did; and therefore Magistrates who inflict
any punishment upon them, be unmerciful and cruel Butchers. Yet by the way,
and their good leave, who take upon them this Apology, all who are conuented
upon these unlawful action, are not stricken in years; but some even in the
flower of their youth be nuzled up in the same, and convicted to be practisers
thereof; neither be they ouerflowed with a black melancholique humor, dazeling
the fantasy, but have their understandings clear, and wits as quick as
other: Neither yet be they all women, though for the most part that sex be
inclinable thereunto: (as shall afterward be showed, and the causes thereof)
but men also on whose behalf no exception can be laid, why any should demurre
either of their offense or punishment for the same. Wherefore for this point,
and confirmation of the affirmative, we have sundry pregnant and evident
proofs.

First testimonies Divine and Humane: Divine of God himself in his word, (...)
left for our instruction in all dogmaticall truth, reproof and confutation of
falsehood in opinions, correction for the reforming of misdemeaners in
conversation, doctrine for the guidance of every estate Political,
Ecclesiastical, Occonomicall. 2. Timoth. 3. 16. Therefore expressly, Thou
shall not suffer a witch to live, Exodus 22. 18. Philo in libro de legibus
specialibus.
but to be executed in the same day wherein she is convicted, and this was a
custom observed by the ancient Fathers.

And Deuteronomy 18. 10. 11. there is a black Bill set down Vide Paulum
Phagium in annotationibus, and Chaldaicam Paraphras^ in cap. 18. and 19.
Leuitici.
, and registered of sundry kinds of these slaves of Satan, all condemned, and
God adds in the same place the reasons of this his severe and sharp
judgment against them. First, because they are an abomination unto him.
Secondly, he determines utterly to destroy all such, and gives his people the
Israelites an example thereof in the Canaanites, whom their Land spewed out.
Thirdly, for that he requires all who belong unto him, to be pure, undefiled
and holy, not stained with impieties, for they are bound unto him by covenant
in obedience. Fourthly, such were the Heathen, strangers from God, blinded in
their dark understanding, without saving knowledge, with whom the Israelites, a
chosen and peculiar nation, enjoying his laws and statutes, must have no
familiarity. Further, the woman of Endor acknowledges herself to be one of
the rank. 1. Sam. 28. 9. And Iesabel, mother of Iehoram, is in plain terms
styled a Witch. 2. King. 9. 22. who Rodinus in consulatione opinionum Wieri.
is supposed to have brought this Art, and the Professors thereof into Samaria,
which there continued for the space of six hundred years. Insomuch that it
was rise in common speech, when any would reproach another, to do the same in
this form; Thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil (a familiar spirit) which
the malicious Jews, not abiding his heavenly and gracious doctrine, objected
to Christ Jesus our blessed Savior, Ioh. 8. 48. The holy Apostle reproving the
Galatbians for their sudden Apostasy and backsliding from the Gospel so
powerfully preached unto them and with so great evidence of the spirit, as
though Christ had bin crucified before their eyes, does it in no other terms
then these, Who has bewitched you? Gal. 3. 1. And afterward, Cap. 5. 20.
marshalleth Witchcraft among the works of the flesh: In both which places the
names are taken from the seducements and illusions of Inchanters, who astonish
the minds, and deceive the senses of men, and all that by virtue of a contract
passed between them and the Devil. Other like proofs may be added to these
alleged, Leuit. 20. 6. Micalo 5. 12. Nahum 3. 4. Now then when God affirms
there be such, whose words are truth, shall man dare once to open his mouth,
and contradict the most righteous?

Concerning humane witnesses, they be almost infinite; and therefore it shall
be sufficient to produce some few, choice, and selected: Cap 61. congregata est
haec synodus sub Iustimano qui vocatus est (...), la qu^ crant Epis api, 227.
Balsamon in suis ad eum Commentarijs, and vocata est synodus in Trullo erat
autem* (...) Secretarium palat^ quia in to fuit celebrata, eam aute (...) vocat
Balsamon quasi Qui ni sexta^ dicas quia quod quinta and sexta synodis deerat
(septem enim recipient Graeci) haec expleuit, Nomenclator Graecorum dictionum
quae apud Harmenopulum^ occurrunt in s^l (...) Promptuario.
The second Council of Constantinople held and gathered together in the
Imperial palace, of two hundred seven and twenty learned and reverent Bishops,
names sundry sorts of such Sorcerers, and censureth their actions to be the
damned practices of the Pagans, and decrees all the Agents therein
excommunicated from the Church and society of Christian people, adding the
motive reason of this their determined sentence, from the Apostle, 2. Cor. 6.
14. For righteousness has no fellowship with unrighteousness, neither is
there communion of light with darkness, nor concord with Christ and Belial,
nor the believer can have part with an Infidel. And This testimony of
Chrysostom ^cited by Balsamon, in his exposition upon that Chapter of the
Council before alleged, to which may be added others of the same holy Bishop
in his 9 Homily upon the Epistle to the Colossians, and his 6 Sermon against
the Jews.
Chrysostom sharply reproves all such, and those who advise with them upon
any occasion, confuting the reasons which they take to be sufficient warrantise
of their doings. As among the rest they will pretend, She was a Christian
woman who does thus charm or inchant; and takes no other but the name of God
in her mouth, uses the words of sacred Scripture. To this that holy Father
replieth, Therefore she is the more to be hated, because ^ee has abused and
taken in vain that great and glorious name, and professing herself a
Christian, yet practices the (...).
damnable Arts of miscreant and unbelieving Heathen. For the D^els could speak
the name of God, and nevertheless were still Devils; and when they said unto
Christ, they knew who he was, the holy one of God, etc. Mar. 1 24. 2^. their
mouths were stopped, he would no such witness, that we should learn, not to
believe them when they say the truth: for this is but a bait, that we might
afterward follow their lies. There is much mention made of these, both in the
Civil and (...)
Canon Laws, and diversity of punishment allotted out for them; so that none
can doubt but that there has been, and are such. I might remember unto you
the authority of Clemens Romanus in his Recognitions, and those Constitutions
which are fathered upon the Apostles; but their credit is not so great, that
they may without exception be impannelled upon this lury, for they have long
since been challenged of (...) in (...) Apology against (...). and ^bius aloweth
but one only Epistle of his Histor. (...). 2 cap. 16. (...) d^ stinct ^5 (...)
contra (...).
insufficiency.

Among the Gentiles, when th^se so qualitied persons did swarm, and were
accounted of high esteem, there be reckoned up whole troops of this bl^cke
guard of the Devil; As (...)(...)
Circe whom Homer reports to have turned V^sses Companions into Wolves,
Lions, Swine, etc. by her Enchantments, insauaging and making them beast-l^ke
and furious. Medea (...)
famous in this kind, for the murdered by Witchcraft Glauce in the day of
her marriage, who enjoyed Jason her love. And Scholiastes Theocriti Idil 2 (...)
the Mortars of these two, wherein they stamped their Magical drugges, were
for a long time kept in a certain mountain, and showed as strange monuments
to those who desired a sight of them. For Remigius (...) lib. 1. cap 2.
the Devil furnishes such with powders, ointments, herbs, and like
receipts, whereby they procure sickness, death, health, or work other
supernatural effects. Of the same profession were Theocritus in (...), Idil. 2.
Simotha, Lucan. Pharsalibus lib. 6.
Erictho, Horatius (...) (...) lib. 5.
Canidia, and infinite others beside, whose damnable memory deserves to be
buried in everlasting oblivion.

But because the reports of these may seem to carry small credit, for that
they come from Poets, who are stained with the note of licentious Pictoribus
atque Po^is quidlibet audie^ semper suit aequa pote^.
faining, and so put off as vain fictions; yet seeing they deliver nothing
herein but that which was well known and usual in those times wherein they
lived, they are not slightly, and upon an imagined conceit, to be rejected: for
they affirm no more then is manifest in the records of most approved
Histories, whose essence is and must be (...) Polib. historiarum lib. 12.
truth, Ti^aus (...)
as straightness of a rule, or else deserve not that title. In which we read
of T^itus Annal. lib. 2.
Martiana, Id^ a^l. lib. 12. and 13. and Suetonius in Claudioc. 33.
L^custa, Plutarchus in Mario.
Martha, Apulcius.
Pamphilia, Munsterus Cosmographiae lib. 2.
Aruna, etc. And not to insist upon particulars, there be infinite numbers
ouerflowing even in these our Remigius, a judge in these cases reports of 900
executed in Lorayne for this offense of Witch craft in the time of his
government.
days, since the sincerity of Christian Profession has decreased, and been
in a sort ecclipsed in the hearts of men: for the period of the continuance
thereof (after it be once embraced) in his first integrity, either for zeal of
affection, or strictness of discipline, has been by some learned Divines
Lutherus in Genesin.
observed, to be confined within the compass of twenty years; and then
afterward by degrees, the one waxed cold, and the other dissolute: which being
so, it is not to be marvelled though the Devil now begin to show himself in
these his instruments, as heretofore, though he cannot in the same measure, in
respect of those sparks of light which yet shine amongst us. But of this so
much now, because I shall have afterward occasion further to enlarge this point.

Again, the policy of all States Binseldius de confessionibus maleficorum,
calls this reason a most strong and conuincing argument.
have provided for the rooting out of these poysonfull Weeds, and cutting of
these rotten and infected members; and therefore infallibly proving their
existence and being: for all Ex malis ^ribus bonae nascu^tur leg^s.
penal laws look to matters of fact, and are made to punish for the present,
and prevent in future, some wicked actions already committed. And therefore
Solon the Athenian making statutes for the settling of that Commonwealth, when
a defect was found, that he omitted to provide a cautelous restraint, and
appoint Diog^ ^ertius lib 1. de vit^s Philosophorum in Solone.
answerable punishment for such who had Cicero in Oratione pr^ Ros^o Amerino.
killed their parents, answered, He never suspected there were or would be any
such. Wherefore to confirm the position set down, God does notthreaten to
cast away his people for murder, incest, tyranny, etc. But Sorcery, Leuit. 20.
6. And Samuel willing to show Saul the grieuousnesse of his disobedience,
compares it to witchcraft, 1. Sam. 15. 23. The Holy Ghost also manifesting
how highly God was displeased with Manasses, makes this the reason, because
he gave himself to Witchcraft, and to Charming, and to Sorcery, and used
them who had familiar spirits, and did much evil in the sight of the Lord to
anger him, 2. Chro. 33. 6. And for this offense were the ten tribes of Israel
led into captivity, 2. King. 17. 17. Of these 12. Tables Liuie in the (...)
book of his first Decad. Dionysius Halica^us 10 Book of his History, and
Johannes Rosimus most fully in the 6 chapter of his 8 book of Roman
antiquities. Liuius. Plinius lib. 34. cap. 5. Cicero de legibus, lib. 2. and de
de ^rato primo.
The twelve Tables of the Romans (the ancientest law they have) by a solemn
Embassage (sent for that purpose) obtained from Athens, and accounted as a
Library of knowledge, do both make mention of such malefactors, and decree a
penalty to be inflicted upon them. Cod. lib. 9. titul. 18. lege multi magicis
actibus.
Constantius and Constanti^ think them worthy of some unusual death, as
enemies of mankind, strangers from nature: Sententiarum receptarum lib. 5.
cap. 25. ad lege^ Corneliam de sicarijs and maleficis. Paulus Iurisconsultus.
and Julius Paulus distinguishing the punishment according to the different
quality of the offenders, pronounces out of the then received opinions, that
the better sort found guilty, were to dye (not determining the manner) those of
meaner condition either to be crucified, or devoured of wild beasts.

Our ancient Saxon Kings before the In (...) sieve de priscis Anglorum legibus
Guiliel^ Lambertus.
Conquest, have in their municipall Laws apparently demonstrated what they
conceived of these so dangerous and devilish persons. Alucidus keeps the
express words of God: Foeminas sagas ne sinito viuere. Suffer not women
Witches to live. Gunthrunus and Canutus will have them, being once apprehended
(that the rest of the people might be pure and undefiled) sent into
banishment, or if they abide in the kingdom (continuing their lewd practices)
executed according to desert. So Athelstane, if they be convicted to have
killed any, etc. And how the present estate stands affected toward them, the
sundry strict statutes in this case provided, may give any, not wedded to his
own stubbornenesse, sufficient and full satisfaction. Wherefore not to erect a
Tabernacle, and dwell longer in persuading an undeniable truth, that there be
Sorcerers and Witches, I leave these Hellish Infidels, and proceed.

The second Proposition.
THe second Proposition: Danaeus de sortiar^. cap. 20
Who those be, and of what quality, that are thus ensnared of the Devil, and
undermined by his frauds. For resolution whereof, this may suffice. Those who
either maliciously reject the Gospel offered unto them: or receiving and
understanding the same, do but coldly respect, and carelessly taste it, without
making any due estimation, or having any reverent regard thereof. In both which
is a manifest and open contempt of God. For as he purposing to honor the first
coming of his Son into the World, clothed in the cloud of our flesh, which
he assumed then, suffered many to be really possessed of Devils, to be
lunatique, deaf, dumb, blind, etc. whom he might deliver from these
torments, and so make apparent his glory, and show by these his miracles
wrought, that he was the promised Messiah, Esaias 35. 5. 6. And therefore Christ
refers those Disciples whom John sent unto him (doubting in respect of that
base form which he took, and demanding whether it was he that should come, or
another to be looked for) unto his Doctrine and Works; and by them to be
instructed, whereof they were then both hearers and beholders, Math. 11. 3. 4.
5. So now coming in the dew of his grace, and having restored the light of the
Gospel, and bestowed that upon mankind, as an especial and invaluable
blessing, in his justice gives over the despisers thereof unto the power of
Satan, whereby both others who contemn the same, might by their dreadful
example be terrified, and the faithful stirred up to a respective
thankfulness, for so great a mercy vouchsafed unto them, and acknowledge their
happiness in being made partakers thereof, and by especial favor delivered
out of the tyranny of the Devil: For this is one of the fearful judgments
of God, and hidden from us (as all area great depth, Psalm. 36. 6.) that those
who received not the truth that they might be saved, should have strong
delusions sent unto them, and be given over to believe Satan and his lying
signs, and false wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. And thus consenting unto sin, and
his suggestions, they are deprived of the Iaquerius in flagello Hereticorum,
cap. 18.
help and assistance of God, and so disabled to resist all violent rushing
temptations: for one offense, not being truly repented of, brings another,
and at last throws headlong down into hell: and by this means man
despising God his creator and redeemer, and obeying the Devil a professed
enemy, and irreconciliable adversary, not easy to be confronted, becomes his
servant: for of whomsoever any is overcome, even of the same is he brought
into bondage, 2. Pet. 2. 19. And the Apostle gives as the reason why the
heathen were so sottish Idolaters, and defiled themselves with many detestable
and loathsome sins, Peccatum si citius poenitendo non ^gitur, iusto Iudicio
(...) De^s ^atam peccan^ meatem, etiam in culpum alteram permittit cadere, vt
qui ^do and cerrigendo noluit mundare quod fecit, peccatum incipiat peccato
cumulare, Greg. Hom. 11. in Ezech. Augustinus lib. 83. questionum questione 97.
and Aquinas 1. 2. quaest 79. artic. 3 and quaest. 87. artic. 2
because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, therefore God gave them over to a reprobate sense, and vile
affections to do those things which were not convenient, full of all
unrighteousness, Rom 1. 24. 25. and. 29 So these being enthralled, and
deuoting themselves to the Devil by a mutual league (either express or
secret) he brandeth with his mark for his Zanchius de operibus creationis,
part. 1 lib. 4. cap. 15. Danaeus de sortiar^ cap. 4. and Erastus de Lamijs.
own, as in ancient time was an use with Bondslaues and De hoc more Alexander
ab Alexandro. Dierum genialium lib. 5. cap. 18. Suetonius in Caligula, cap. 27.
Cicero de officijs lib. 2. Coelius Rhodinginus Antiquarum lectionum lib. 7.
cap. 31. and olim militiae Tyrones (...) crant and in cute signati Vegetius
lib. 1. cap. 8. and 2. cap. 5. Prudentius (...) Hymn^ 10. and huius moris
meminit, Ambrofius in funebri oratione pro Valentiniano.
Captives, and these be (...), taken alive in his snare, 2. Tim. 2. 26. and
that in some part of the body, least either suspected or perceived by us (for
he is a cunning concealer) as under the eyelids, or in the palate of the
mouth, or other secret places: Wherefore some Judges cause them, once being
called into question, and accused, to be shaven all the body Et insigne
exemplum apud Gildemannum de Lamijs lib. 3. cap. 10. sectione 38.
over. And for the manner of impression, or branding, it is after this sort.
The Devil when he has once made the contract between himself and the
Witch, and agreed upon the conditions, what they shall do, the one for the
other, gives her some scratch Remigius in Daemonolatria lib. 1. cap. 5. and
cites the confession of eight several persons, acknowledging both to have
received the mark and in what part of the body.
, which remains full of pain and anguish until his return again: at which
time he does so benumme the same, that though it be pierced with any sharp
instrument, yet is without any sense of feeling, and will not yield one drop
of blood at all: a matter known by just, often, and due trial.

And for the most part, he brings these his slaves and vassailes obliged to
him as his own, to some desperate, Tragical, Peucerus de praecipuis
diuinationum generi^us titulo de Magia.
and disastrous end; and that either by the execution of Justice for their
demerits, or by laying violent hands upon themselves, or else God powers upon
them some strange and extraordinary vengeance, or their Grand-maister whom they
have served, dispatcheth them in such manner, as they become dreadful and
terrible spectacles to the beholders, whereof Histories will furnish us with
Philippus Caemerartus in Historicit medicationibus part. 1. cap. 70. and 7^.
variety and plenty of examples: For the Devil is a murdering spirit,
desirous to do mischief, swelling in pride, malicious in hatred, spiteful in
envy, subtle in craft; and therefore it behooves every one resolutely to
withstand his assaults, Ephesians. 4. 27. and cautelously to decline his
subtilties, and cunning ambushments from whence he inuadeth (...)
us, Ephesians. 6 11. b For this adversary against whom (...)
we sight, is an old beaten enemy, six thousand years are fully complete
since the first time he began to assault mankind. But if any keep the
Commandments of God, and constantly, by a lively faith, cleave fast unto
Christ, he shall overcome: for our Lord is invincible. c The Devils (...).
indeed do willingly offer themselves to be seen of those who are not
governed by the Holy Ghost; and that either to win themselves some estimation,
or to entangle and deceive men, vailing their treacheries under a f^iling
countenance, whom they deadly hate, for if it lay in their possibility, they
would overthrow and destroy heaven it self. Now unable to do this, they
endeavor to work upon a more weak subject and matter; and therefore he that
will not be subdued of them, must avoid all occasions whereby he may take any
advantage, and covered with the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and defended
with the Shield of Faith, quench all his fiery Darts. Ephesians. 6. 14.

The third Proposition.
EXcept God do by his especial grace and ouerruling power, restrain the malice
of these Witches, and preserve his Children, they are permissiuely able, ^.
through the help of the Devil their master, to hurt Men and Beasts, and
trouble the elements, by virtue of that contract and agreement which they have
made with him. For man they endamage both in body and mind: In body, for Vbera
matris ^tes s^ssimos hum^ gene^ educatores ^ocal Pha^rinas apud A Gell^m no^t.
(...) lib. 12. cap. 1. Arctius problema^ p^ 2. ^oco 144. de Ma^a.
Daneus reports of his own knowledge, as an eyewitness thereof, that he
has seen the breasts of Nurces (only touched by their hands) those sacred
fountains of humane nourishment so dried up, that they could yield no milk;
some suddenly tormented with extreme and intolerable pain of the Cholicke,
others Godleman^ de (...) lib. 1 cap. 7. 9. 21 22. 23. 24 25. 26. etc.
oppressed with the Palsy, Leprosy, Gout, Apoplexy, etc. And thus disabled
from the performance of any action, many tortured with lingering consumptions,
Exempla omnem sidem supe rantia Florentinae mul^eris and ^ici c^usdam (...)
epist. Med^inalium lib. 2. Epist. 38. (...) ven^culo lignum teres and quatuor
(...) sunt: little and fo^m and (...) poni^. ^ycosthenes lib. de prodi^ and
ostentis quo modo huius^odi in corporibus humanis inueniantur and qua ratione
(...), aut e^antur and an tribuc^da haec male (...) and ^abolica arti
Binseldius in comme^ to ad titulum Codicis de malefi^is and Mat^is page 510.
and not a few afflicted with such diseases, which neither they themselves who
wrought that evil, could afterward help; nor be cured thereof by the Art and
diligent attendance of most skillful Physicians. I willingly let pass other
mischiefs wrought by them, of which many things are delivered in the Canon and
Civil Laws, in the Schoolmen, and Divines both ancient and modern.

In mind, stirring up men to Just, to hatred, to love, and the like Gratianus
in decretis, Caietanus in summula titulo de mal^io. Iaqueri^ (...) slage^o
sascinariorum, cap. 11. 12. Ioh. Nider in praeceptorio, praecepto 1. ca. p 11.
Bod^ in Daemania, lib. 2. cap.
passions, and that by altering the inward and outward senses, either in
forming some new object, or offering the same to the eye or ear, or stirring
the humors: for there being a near conjunction between the sensitive and
rational faculties of the soul, if the one be affected, the other (though
indirectly) must of necessity be also moved. As for example, when they would
provoke any to love or hatred, they propound an object under the show and
appearance of that which is good and beautiful, so that it may be desired and
embraced: or else by representation of that which is evil and infamous,
procure dislike and detestation. Neither is this any strange position, or
improbable, but may be warranted by sufficient authority; and therefore Cod.
lib. 9. titulo 18. Lege est ^tia, (...) legem (...). W^rus de praestig^
daemo^um lib. 3. cap. 38.
Constantius the Emperor does expressly determine, all those justly
punishable who solicit by enchantments chaste minds to uncleanness: And
Saint In 3. Caput prophet Na^, vide and Nazianzenum in (...), sieve de arcanis
vel (...) non procu^ fine, and eius parap^slen N^elam.
Jerome attributes unto them this power, that they can enforce men to hate
those things they should love, and affect that which they ought to avoid: and
the ground hereof has his strength from the holy Scriptures: for the Devil is
able to enslame wanton (...) Col^. 7. cap. 32.
lust in the heart, and therefore is named, the Spirit of Fornication, Osea 4.
12. and unclean, Math. 12. 43.

There is a very remarkable example mentioned by Jerome In vila (...).
, of a maiden in Gaza, whom a young man loving, and not obtaining, went to
Memphis in Egypt, and at the years end in his return, being there instructed
by a Priest of Aesculapius, and furnished with Magical Coniurations, graued in
a plate of brass, strange charming words, and pictures which he buried under
the threshold of the door where the virgin dwelt: by which means she fell
into a sury, pulled off the attire of her head, flung about her hair, gnashed
with her teeth, and continually called upon the name of her lover.

The like does Oratione in laud Cypria ni eandem historia^ resert Nicephorus
Calustus lib. 5 cap. 27.
Nazianzene report of Cyprian before his conversion (though some think it
Prudentius (...) de passione Cypriani, vnu^ erat iu^enum doctisartibus
s^istris, sraude puditit^ perstringere. etc
was not he whose learned and religious writings are extant, and for the
profession of his faith and doctrine was crowned with Martyrdom) but another
of that name, toward Iustina, whom he lasciuiously Ovid. lib. 2. de art.
amand. philtra nocent animis, vimque fauoris habent. Propertius lib 4 in lanam
quandam consuluitque siriges nostro de sanguine and in me, hippomenes fata
semin^ legit equ^. Vide de his Aristotelem de natura animali^ lib. 6. cap. 22.
Pliniu^ l. 8. c. 42.
courted, and unlawfully lusted after. It were easy for me to instance this in
many, and to add more testimonies, but my intended purpose was, to set down
only some few propositions, whereby the judicious reader might be stirred up
to a deeper search, and further consideration of these things: for often they
drive men to a madness, and other such desperate passions, that they become
murderers of themselves. But this always must be kept in mind, as a granted
and infallible truth, Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 22. and 23.
That whatsoever the Witch does, it receives his force from that society which
she has with the Devil, who serves her turn in effecting what she
purposes, and so they work together as Iaquerius in stagello heretic^ru^
fascinarioru^, cap. 6. Martinus de Arles, p. 43^.
associates.

Now concerning beasts they do oftentimes kill them outright, and that in
sundry manner, or pine and waste them by little and little, till they be
consumed.

For Ioh. Gerson in Trialogio Astrologia Theologisatae propos 16. Palanus in
Syntagmate, l. 5. c. 13
the Elements, it is an agreeing consent of all, that they can corrupt and
infect them, procure tempests, to stir up thunder and lightning, move violent
winds, destroy the fruits of the earth: for God has a thousand ways to
chasten disobedient man, and whole treasures full of vengeance by his Angels,
Devils, Men, Beasts. For the whole nature of things is ready to revenge the
wrong done unto the creator.

It were but fruitless labor, and ill spent, to bestow long time in
confirming this so manifest a truth, and not much better then set up a candle
to give the Sun light when it shines brightest in mid-heauen: yet to
satisfy those who doubt hereof, I will give a small touch of an example or two.

(...)
Curious Sidius the Roman General in a battle against Salebus, Captain of the
Moors, in want of water, obtained such abundance of rain from Heaven by
Magical enchantments, that it not only sufficed the thirst of his dstiressed
Soldiers, but terrified the enemies in such sort, (supposing that God had sent
help) as of their own accord, they sought for conditions of peace, and left
the field.

The narration of Olaus^ Magnus which he makes ^ ^ ^. (...) 13 14. 15. 16 17.
18. 1^ (...)
of his Northern Wisards and Witches, would seem to be mere fictious, and
altogether incredible (as of Ericus, who had the wind at command, to blow
always from that quarter to which he would set his hat. Or Hagbert, who could
show herself in any shape, higher or lower, as she pleased, at one time so
great as a Giant, at another as little as a Dwarf: by whose Diabolical
practices mighty Armies have been dicomfited, and sundry others, except the
truth hereof were without contradiction approved: by the experience of our own
Nauigators, who trade in Finland, Denmark, Lapland, Ward-house, Norway, and
other Countries of that Climate, and have obtained of the inhabitants thereof,
a certain wind for twenty days together, or the like fixed period of time,
according to the distance of place and strings tied with three knots, so that
if one were loosed, they should have a pleasant gale: if the second, a more
vehement blast: if the third, such hideous and raging tempests that the
Mariners were not able once to look out, to stand upon the hatches, to handle
their tackle, or to guide the helm with all their strength; and are sometimes
violently carried back to the place from whence they first loosed to sea; and
many (more hardy then wise) have bought their trial full dear, opening those
knots, and neglecting admonition given to the contrary. Apuleius ascribes to
Pamphile, a Witch of Thessalia, little less then divine power to effect
strange wonders in heaven, in earth, in hell: to darken the stars, stay the
course of rivers, dissolve mountains, and raise up spirits, this opinion went
for current and uncontrolled. And without all question the Devil De potestate
D^monum Aqu^ (...) Sum. (...). quest 110.
can do this and much more, when God lets him loose. For he is styled, The
Prince of the world, Ioh. 12. 31. A strong man armed, Luke 11. 21,
Principality, a ruler of darkness, spiritual wickedness in high places,
Ephesians. 6. 12.

Thus he dismayed the heart of Saul (when he had broken the Commandment of
God) with dreadful fear, and enraged his mind with bloody fury, 1. Sam. 16
14. Entered into Judas, provoked him to betray his master, despair and hang
himself, Math. 27. 3. filled the heart of Ananias and Saphira with
dissimulation, Act. 5. 3. possessed the bodies of many really, as is manifest
in the History of the Gospel. Our Savior Christ assures (...)
us, that a daughter of Abraham was bound for 18 years by Satan, with such a
spirit of infirmity, as bowed together, she could in no wise lift up her
self, Luke 13. 11. 16. He spoke out of the Pythonesse, Acts 16. 17. brought
down fire from heaven, and consumed Jobs sheep 7000. and his servants, raised
a storm, struck the house wherein (...) Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere
Lunam:
Carminibus Circe socios mutauit Vlyssis,
F^gidus in pratis cantando rumpitur Anguis, etc.
(...) de se Iactans Me^ca apud Ouidium lib. 7. Metamorphos^. Cum volui ripis
ipfis mirantibus; amnes
In fontes rediere suos, concussaque ^o,
Stantia concutio eantu f^era, nubila pello,
Nubilaque iudico.
Apud Virgilium Dido Aunms^rorem allequitur. -- Mihi Massilae gentis monstrata
sacerdos,
Haec se ca^minibus pro^ittit soluere mentes
Sistere aquam fluvijs, and flumina verter^ (...).

his sons and daughters feasted with their elder brother, smote the four
corners of it, with the ruin whereof they all were destroyed, and perished:
and ouerspread the body of that holy Saint their father with botchesy and biles
from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. (...) And he E^ Brachma^
No^nus Dionys^con, lib. 36. (...). De Marco heretico and mago stupendae
referunt (...) contra hereses. lib. cap. 9. and Epipha^ 3. (...). (...). 1.
will have his servants Wisards and Witches, coadiutors with him, and makes
them fit instruments to the performance of all wicked exploits, and this is
when God pleases (of which I shall have occasion to speak more afterward) to
give leave, for his will is the first supreme and principal cause of all things:
and nothing can be done visibly in this Commonwealth here below of the
creatures, but is decreed and determined so to be first in the high Court of
Heaven, according to his unsearchable wisdom and justice, disposing
punishments and rewards as seems good unto himself. So Pharaos Iannes,
Iambres, 2. Ti^ot. 3
Magitians could turn water into blood, their rods into serpents, produce
frogs, etc. But when it came to the base vermin, to make lice, they were
pusled, and acknowledged their imbecility, confessing, Digitus Dei est, Vide
Nicola^m Lyranum in and additionem Burgensis, and replicam corrector^ contra
Burgensem.
Gods finger is here, Exodus 18. 19. For if they could effect and bring to pass
all mischievous designements without his sufferance, it would infer a
weakness, and conclude a defect of Diabolus Deo perpetuo aduersatur voluntat^
and act^ non s^mper effectu: id est, Intentio semper est mala, ^si non semper
exanimi sui sententia m^lum per^ere possit Deo illud ve^tente in bonum. Aug. de
Ci^it. Dei, lib. cap. 35 and de trinitate lib. 3. cap. 8.
power in him, as not sufficient to oppose their strength, supplant their
force, and avoid their stratagems. And we must not imagine that the
practitioners of these damnable Arts of which sex soever, be they men or
women, do perform those mischifes which they effect, by their own skill, or
sucl^ means as they use, of which sort be the bones of dead men's skuls,
Toades, Characters, Images, etc. But thorugh the cooperation of the Devil, who
is by nature subtle, by long experience instructed, swift to produces strange
works, and to humane understanding admirable. Yet (...)cap. 15.
he will have those his vassals persuaded of some great benefit bestowed upon
them, whereby they are enabled to help and hurt, whom, how, and when they
list; and all to indeere them, and by making them partakers in his villainy,
being strongly bound in his service, and steadfastly continued in the same,
might more grievously ofsend (...) de (...) Da^.
God, and bring just condemnation upon themselves. And for the greater, and
more forceable enticing allurement hereunto, he promises (...)
to give and do many things for their sakes, and reveal to them hidden
secrets, and future events, such e as he himself purposes to do, or knows
by natural signs shall come to pass. So then to conclude, in f every
Magical action, there must be a concurrence of these three. First, the
permitting will of God. Secondly, the suggestion of the Devil, and his power
cooperating. Thirdly, the desire and consent of the Sorcerer; and if ^ any of
these be wanting, no trick of witchcraft can be performed. For if God did not
suffer it, neither the Devil, nor the Witch could prevail to do any thing, no
not so much as to hurt one (...).
bristle of a Swine. And if the Devil had not seduced the mind of the wicked
woman, no such matter would have been attempted. And again, if he had not
the Witch to be his instrument, the Devil were debarred of his purpose.

And as these evil spirits are in themselves different in power,
understanding, and subtlety: so can their servants do more or less through
their means.

I conclude with that memorable speech of a most noble and learned man, Iu^s
Scaliger de ^tate, ad Card^, ex. crcitatione 349. an (...) ^redalitas vim a
ddat male^o.
The Devil is the Author and principal of all that evil which the Witch or
Wisard commits, not thereby to make them more powerful, but to deceive them
by credulity and ouer-light belief, and to get himself a companion of his
impiety, cruelty, and hatred, which he bears both to God and man; and also of
eternal damnation: for indeed it is his work, which the foolish and doting
wisards conjecture is brought to pass by the words and enchantments which they
utter: and is very busy thus to color his proceedings, which never come
abroad in their own likeness, because he enuieth the blessed estate of man,
and his eternal salvation purchased by the perfect obedience of Christ the
Redeemer, and hates that Image of God which he beholds in him; much like
the Panther, Bafilias Homilia 21. in diuersos Scrip^ locos sermon babito in
non procula fine.
who when he cannot get hold of the man himself, is so inflamed with rage,
that he teareth his picture in pieces violently which is cast upon the ground
to hinder his pursuit of the hunter who has carried away his whelps. And Lib
2. qu^ e^ de origin err^ris cap. 15.
so as Lactantius speaks, these unclean sprits cast from heaven, wander up
and down the earth, compass land and sea, seeking to bring men to destruction
as a con fort of their own desperate and irrecouerable estate.

The fourth Proposition.
Having showed before, that the practice of Witches receives the being and
perfection from that Nauarrus in Manuals confessarior. cap. 11 in primum
decal^gi praeceptum.
agreement which is made between them and the Devil, it now follows
necessarily, that we do enquire whether it be possible that there may be any
such agreement and league between them. The cause of doubt arises from the
diversity or disparity of their natures, the one being a corporal substance,
the other spiritual, upon which ground some Ioh. W^rus, totum hoc si^litium
pulal and (...) imaginarium, and impossible p^at, idque passim in (...)
pracipu^ autem de Lam^, cap 7. 8. and 23 and de (...) Daemon^, lib. 6. c. 27,
etc. Hun^ resutant erudit^. ^nselde consessiouibus mal^sicorum, and T^ Erastus
de Lamys.
have sopposed that no such contract can pass: But we are to hold the contrary
assirmatiue, both de esse, and de posse, that that there may be, and is,
notwithstanding this difference of essence, a mutual contract of the one with
the other: for we read of undry leagues between God and his people, and some
with great solemnity of ceremonies used in the same, a De (...) ceremonus
(...), Ier. cap. 34. 18. and (...) contra Iulia^m and Procopius Gaz^us (...)
loc^m and Aug^ (...).
Genesis 15. 9. 17. and Deuteronomy. 5. 2. and in many other like places, yet is he a
simple essence, (...), l. 2. cap. 8.
free from all division, multiplication, composition, accidents, incorporeall,
spiritual, and invisible. But in Angelical creatures, though there be no
Physical composition of matter and form, or a soul and a body; yet is there
a metaphysicall, being substances consisting of an act and possibility, subject
and accidents. And further, between a spirit and a man, there is communication
of the understanding and will, the faculties and actions where of must concur
in every covenant, which is nothing else but the consent of two or more persons
about the thing.

And when the Devil durst in express terms tender a contract to our blessed
Savior, tempting him in the wilderness, showing him the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory thereof, offered them with this condition, All these will
I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Mat. 4. 9. How much more
then will he adventure upon man, weak, wicked, and easy to be seduced? An^o
Brissonius de formulis, lib. 6. Solemnia pactorum sine obligatione verba sunt:
spondes? spondeo. promittis'^ promitto dabis? dabo vt facias, faciam.
Iustinianus in institution bus, lib. 3. titulo 16.
can doubt but that these be the solemn and formal words of a bargain, D^
vt des, do vt facias, I give this for to have that given, I bestow this, to
have such, or such a thing done for me.

Now this covenant is of two sorts, secret or manifest; secret, when one
indeuoureth or intends to do any thing by such means, which neither in
nature, nor by institution hauo power to produce the purposed effects, or be
conjoined as necessary with other, which can bring the same to pass. Express,
wherein consent is given either by writing, and words, or making such signs,
whereby they renounce God, and deuote themselves slaves and vassals unto the
Devil, he promising, that upon such condition they shall do wonders, know
future events, help and hurt at their pleasure, and others like unto these.

An example whereof we may observe in His Monach^ Floriacensis C^nobij diabolo
suadente, and enormiter instigante sieius obquijs and arti magicae obligauit in
tantum quod Diabolosecit Homagium cum pacto vt ei (...) ad nutum succederent,
etc Holcot. in cap. 17. lib. sapientia lectione 190. Platina in illius vita.
Vide and Balerum de Romanorum pontificum actis in lib. 9. in Syluestro secundo,
and Robertum Barnes. de vitis pontificum Romanor^.
Siluester the second, one of the holy Fathers of Rome, who did homage to the
Devil his Lord, and made fidelity to live at his will and appointment, upon
condition to obtain what he desired, by which means he got first the
Bishopric of Rhemes, after of Rauenna, and at the last the Papacy of Rome.
Which Sea, though it will yield good plenty of such like presidents, and we may
find them in authentical records of Histories, yet I content my self with
this one.

Godelmannus de magia tacita and ^ca, lib. 1. cap. 2. (...). 8. 9. 10 etc.
The formal terms of this covenant, as they be set down by some, are most
dreadful: and the several points these.

To renounce God his Creato^ and that promise made in Baptism.

To deny Jesus Christ, and refuse the benefits of his obedience, yea to
blaspheme his glorious and holy name.

To worship the Devil, and repose all confidence and trust in him.

To execute his commandments.

To use things created of God for no end, but to the hurt and destruction of
others.

And lastly, to give himself soul and body to that deceitful and infernal
spirit, who on the other part appears to them in the shape of a man (which is
most common) or some other creature, conferreth familiarly, and binds
himself by many promises, that at all times called for, he will presently
come, give counsel, further their desires, answer any demand, deliver from
prison, and out of all dangers, bestow riches, wealth, pleasure, and what not?
and all without any labor and paines-taking, in a word to become serviceable
to their will, and accomplish all their requests. And this is that which the
Prophet Esaias speaks, chap. 28. 15. to make a covenant with death, and an
agreement with hell. The consent of the ancient Fathers, if there were any
doubt, might be added to the further clearing of this conclusion. For Sieve
illius sit, sieve alterius ist^ liber. De duplici Martyrio. Aquinas 2^. 2a.
quest. 96 Ioh. Gerson in Trilogio astrologiae Theologisatae propositione 21.
and de erroribus circa artem magicam, Dillo 2.
Cyprian directly affirms, that all those who use magical Arts, make a
covenant with the Devil, yea he himself, while he practiced the same (before
his calling to the light and true knowledge of God) was bound unto him by an
especial Camerarius meditationum historiarum, lib. 1. cap. 6. Bodinus exemplae
ponit Daemonomanias. lib. 2. c. 4 Binseldius de confessionibus maleficorum.
writing, whereunto some subscribe with their own blood, which was a use among
diverse nations, and a most sure bond of constant friendship, and Simile de
Catili^ resert Salustius. cum adius iurandum populares sceleris sui adigeret,
humani corporis sanguinem vino permixtum in pateris circumtulisse, inde cum
post execration^ omnes degustauissent, sicut in s^lemnibus sacris fieri consuc^
ap^ruisse consilite suum, atque to dictitant sccisse, quo inter se magis ^idi
^orent.
inviolable consociation. But herein these seduced wretches are deceived: for
these promises which he makes, are treacherous, and the obseruances whereunto
he enioyneth and persuades them, as powerful in producing such or such
effects, mere deceipts, and have no quality in them to that purpose, but
respects his own ends, which are one of these four.

First, to the moving of them to the breaking of Gods law.

Secondly, to adore him with divine worship and sacred rites.

Thirdly, to weaken their hope and faith in God

Fourthly, to cover his own fraud and treachery, that it may not be perceived.

And when they find this Impostor failing in the performance of his vowed
promises, then he wants not his shifts: as that these defects are not to be
imputed to him, or the weakness of the Art, but their own negligence or
ignorance, who have not exactly observed such directions, and in that manner
they were delivered: or mistook his meaning, which is commonly delivered in As
that to Pope Siluester the second, his demand; who asked how long he should
live and enjoy the Popedom? answered, until he should say mass in Jerusalem;
and not long after, celebrating the same in a Chapel of the Church dedicated
to the holy Cross in Rome, called Jerusalem, knew how he was ouer-reached, for
there he dyed. And an other parallel to this, may be that of a certain
Bishop, much addicted to these vanities, having many enemies, and fearing them,
asked the Devil whether he should fly or not: who answered, Non, sta secure,
venient in^ ^ui suau^ter, and subdentur tibi. But being surprised, and taken by
his adversaries, and his castle set on fire, expostulating with him, that he
had deceived him in his distress, returned answer, that he said true, if his
speech had been rightly understood: for he advised, Non sta secure [id est
sugias] venient inimici tui suauiter, and subdentvr, [id est ignem tibi]. Such
were the Oracles which he gave, and whereof all histories do testify. Holcot
upon the book of Wisdom, and the rest before mentioned with him.
ambiguous terms, such as will admit a double construction: and herein
appears the lamentable and woeful blindness of man, who is contented to
swallow up, and excuse many of his lies by one truth foretold, which has
casually come to pass, whereas in other matters they make light account of,
yea contemn infinite truths, if they shall find by long search and diligent
inquiry, but one falsehood. Wherefore it behooves us to be careful Sentinels
over our selves, for that our grand Leo de collectis Sermon. 40. and natiuitate
Domini, (...). (...).
adversary, proud, envious, and not standing in the truth, reposeth all his
possibility of victory in lies, and out of this poisoned sink, deuiseth all
kind of deceits, that so he might deprive man of that happy and blessed
estate which he lost by pride, and draw him into the society of his own
damnation: therefore it is a needful caveat given by one of the ancient
Fathers: Our enemy is old against whom we fight, six In proemio, lib de
exbortatione ad Martyrium. Cyprianus.
thousand years fully complete are passed since he began to oppose himself
against us; but if we observe the commandments of God, and continue steadfast
in faith, apprehending Jesus Christ, then shall we be able to withstand all his
violent assaults, and overcome him because Christ in whom we trust, is
invincible.

The fifth Proposition.
THE Devil can assume to himself Augustinus in Enchiridio, cap. 59. and 60.
and Lambertus Daneusin suis Commentarijs: ad eundem.
a body, and frame a voice to speak with, and further instruct and give
satisfaction to those who have submitted themselves unto him, and are bound to
his service. For he lost not by his transgression and fall, his natural
Binseldius de confessionibus maleficorum. Aquinas, Summa part. 1. quaest. 51.
art. 3. and 4
endowments, but they continued in him whole In Daemonibus (...), Diouisius
Areopagita, de diuinis nominibus cap 4. and si vacat liccbit consulere in
eundem Pachemerae Paraphrasin and maximischolia. Isidorus Hispalensis de summo
bono. lib. 1. cap. 12.
and perfect, as in the good Angels, who abide in that obedience and holiness
wherein they were created, from whence a reason confirmatiue may be thus
framed, Good Angels can take unto themselves bodies, as Genes. 18. 2. Judge. 13.
3. 6. therefore the evil also. Thus the Devil has appeared to some in the
form of a Sulpitius Seuerus in vita beat^ Martin^. Multa exemplae habet
Bodinus in praesatione ad Daemonomaniam.
Man, clothed in purple, and wearing a crown upon his head: to others in the
likeness of a Hieronimus in vita Hilarionis.
Child: sometime he shows himself in the form of foure-footed beasts,
fowls, creeping things, P^llus de d^monum natura.
roaring as a Lion, skipping like a Goat, barking after the manner of a dog,
and the like. But (...) de conf^bus (...).
it is observed by some, that he cannot take the shape of a Sheep, or Dove,
though of an Angel of light: 2. Cor. 11. 14. And further, Petrus Martyr in 28.
caput. lib. (...). lib.
most of the learned do hold, that those bodies wherein they do appear, are
fashioned of the (...) ^ (...) sunt corpora ^ca.
air, (though it is not to be denied, but they can enter into other, as the
Devil did into the Serpent, deceiving Eve, Genesis 3. 1.) which if it continuing
pure and in the own nature (...) Scaliger de ^tate ad Card^m exerci^ione 359.
(...) 13.
, has neither color nor figure, yet condensed receives both, as we may
behold in the clouds, which resemble sometime one, sometime another shape, and
so in them is seen the representation of Armies fighting, of beasts and Birds,
houses, Cities, and sundry other kinds of apparations.

Histories of all can witness of the Devils appearance in human Socrates
Histori^ (...). (...). 7. cap. 38. and historia Triparlib. (...). cap. 9.
shape: thus a Pseudo, Moses, or Messiah in Crete, persuaded the Jews that it
was he who brought their Fathers the Israelites out of Egypt, and led them
through the Red Sea, and would conduct them also out of that land upon the
waters into Judea. But many following his counsel, perished: the rest
admonished by that destruction, turned back, accusing their folly; and when
they made enquiry for this guide, to have rewarded him according to his desert,
was no where to be found, whereof they conceived he was a Devil in Man's
likeness. And such an one Chro^ (...).
was that merry (but malicious) spirit, who walked for a long time in Saxony,
and was very serviceable, clothed in country apparel, with a cappe on his
head, delighted to converse and talk with the people, to demand questions,
and answer what he was asked, hurting none, except injured before, and then
declared himself a right devil in revenge.

Vide nauigation^ Monsieur de Monts, ad (...) Franci^, lib. 2. cap. 5.
The late Discoueries and Nauigations made into the west Indies, can furnish us
with abundant testimonies hereof, in which the minds of the Inhabitants are
both terrified and their bodies massacred by his visible sight, and cruel
tortures; yet (which is the opinion of many learned) he cannot so perfectly
represent the fashion of a man's body, but that there is some sensible
deformity, by which he bewrays himself; as his Binseldius de confessionibus
maleficorum. Alexander ab Alexandro dierum Genialium, lib. 1. cap. 19. Remigius
de D^monolitria, lib. 1 cap 7 and apud Rbodingium antiquarum lectionum lib. 29.
cap. 5. est exemplum (...) admiratione.
feet like those of an Ox, a Horse, or some other beasts, cloven houed, his
hands crooked, armed with claws, or talants like a vulture: or some one
misshapen part, wherein (though he delight in the shape of man, as most
fitting for company and conference) is demonstrated, the great and tender love
of God toward us, who has so branded this deceiuer, that he may be discerned
even of those who are but of mean capacity, and so consequently avoided. And
as in his body assumed, so in his speech there is a defect, for it is weak,
small, whispering, imperfect.

And thus it is Remigius demo^trias lib. 1 cap. 8 and simile co^orat de Appione
(...) Pl^ius naturalis histor. lib. 30. cap 2. (...). lib. 5. sub si^m.
reported of Hermolaus Barbarus, who inquiring of a spirit, the signification
and meaning of a difficult (...).
word in Aristotle, he hard a low hissing, and murmuring voice giving answer.

And this he does of set purpose, that so his sophistical and doubtful words
might be the less perceived.

Neither can this seem strange to any, that the Devil should speak, who
brought a voice from Trees to salute Philostratus de vita Apollo^ lib. 6. cap.
13.
Apollonius, and inspired that talkatiue Oak in Dodona, famous for the Oracles
uttered there in Heroical verse, to the Grecians, and to every nation in his
own language, Chaldeans, Egyptians, Armenians, and other people who were led
by him, and depended upon his resolution.

And thus the Sophocl in Tr^ vocal (...), quia vt (...) Scholia^ interpretatur
(...). Et (...) Argo Lycophron in Alexandra sua (...) no^inat qua ex Dido^
quer^u ^lum ha^sse traditur qu^ aliquoties locuta est vt apud Apollonium Argo^
quarto ideo and (...) Orpheus appellat, vide plura apud Strabonem lib. 17. and
(...) de hoc sono iudicium perpe^de. P^ in descrip^one dec^m regionum veteris
Graeciae, libro primo in Att^. Iuue^lis S^yro 15. Ps^llus de D^onum ^ura. (...)
libro secu^ Annalium.
Image of Memnon, when the Sun did shine upon it, and his beams touched the
lips thereof, (which was at the arising in the East) speak unto them who were
present.

And considering, as has been mentioned before, that there passes between
the Witch and her Devil, a compact, as with a Master and a Servant, it must
therefore consist upon prescript terms of commanding, and obeying; and then
of necessity is required a conuersing together; and conference whereby the same
covenant may be ratified.

The sixth Proposition.
GOd gives, both the devil, and his servants the witches, power sometimes to
trouble his own children; so Iaquerius in flagello heretic^rum fascinariorum,
cap. 19. and 10.
Christ our blessed Savior, was by Satan carried from place to place, Math.
4. 5. Job Binfeldius de confessionibus maleficorum.
in strange manner afflicted, and his children slain, through his power, whom
none can conceive but were Gods servants, religiously brought up in his fear:
and their father has an honorable testimony from the mouth of God himself,
Job 1. ver. 8. David, a man according to Gods own heart, Acts 13. 22. is by
Satan stirred up to number the people, 1. Chron. 21. 1. and that incuriosity
and the pride of his heart, only to know the multitude of his subjects, 2.
Sam. 24. 2

Whereas the Law appoynteth another end, Exodus 30. 12. which he had (...)
(...) lib. 7. sectione sieve capite iuxt^ Gracam editionem 10.
now forgotten, the maintenance of the Ministry and worship of God. And a
daughter of Abraham is bound of the devil eighteen whole years, had a spirit
of Infirmity, was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself, Lu.
13. 11. 16. a grievous calamity in respect of the author, the continuance, and
the effect. But to handle this point a little more distinctly; It shall not be
amiss to open first some reasons, why God does give this power to the devil
over the righteous his children sometimes, as also upon the wicked and
disobedient to his will: And in the second place, why Witches have the like
leave granted unto them. Therefore for his children.

The first reason of his permission is his inscrutable Zanchius de op^s ^tio n^
part 1. lib. 4 cap. 13. (...)
wisdom, who out of evil brings good; so Paul had a minister of Satan to
buffet him, to keep him in humility, that he might not wax proud and
high-minded, in regard of those great mysteries which were revealed when he
was taken into the third heaven, 2. Corint. 12. 4. Thus his tentation was a
medicine preservative preventing the disease of his soul, which otherwise he
might have fallen into, B^n collectan^ ex Augu^ino ad Epistolas Pauli.
for both himself, and the rest of the Apostles, though they were chosen
vessels, yet were they also frail and brittle, wandering yet in the flesh upon
earth, not triumphing securely in heaven.

Second, It is Iaquerius in (...) here^rum (...), cap. 20.
proceeding from his mercy and goodness, for the trial of faith, obedience and
constancy in such as belong to God: whereof there is an excellent pattern, and
unparalleled in Job 1. 13. 14. etc. for by this trial is made a proof to
examine whether we do continue firm upon our square, and unshaken, or no;
and be not removed, either by the (...) (...).
seeming wonders of the devil, or of his servants and associats. And therefore
the Apostle pronounces him blessed, who endures temptation, for when he is
tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him, James 1. 12. for he is faithful, and will not suffer us to
be tempted above that we are able, but with the temptation also make away to
escape, etc. 1. Cor 10. 13.

Third, We are admonished always to stand in a readiness, and be armed for to
fight, prepared to withstand the devil, knowing that God does oftentimes give
him leave to assault us. Therefore we have need to be furnished in all points,
for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6. 11. 12. And (...). Pet. 5. 8. 9. be
sober and vigilant, because your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. He Strigelius in explicatione locoram
Theologicorum Melant^ part 3. titulo de cruce and calamitatibus.
is no weak assaylant, and therefore here by the Apostle are noted in him
four things: First, his power (a Lion): Second, his hatred, and wrath in the
word (roaring): Third, his subtilty (walking about) observing every opportunity
and occasion to hurt us: Fourth, his cruelty (devour) no contentment but in
our ruin and utter destruction.

Fourth, God would have us get the victory against Satan, and take knowledge,
that Christ on our side fights for us, through whom we triumph, and so are
made more undoubtedly assured of our salvation; and this is that which he
promised, The Augustinus de Gen^siad literam, l. 11. c. 22.
Seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. And the
Apostle confirms, God shall tread down Satan under your feet, Romans 16. 20.

God suffers the devil to prevail against the wicked, yet in the most Holy
there is no injustice 2. Chron. 19. 7. But

First, (...) in (...). lib. 2
Herein is the declaration of his justice, whereby he punishes obstinate
sinners, and those who provoke him to wrath, and will not repent: And thus it
is said of the Aegiptians, whom no plagues could soften, that he cast upon
them the fiercenes of his anger, and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil
Angels among them, (...)
Psalm 78. 49. And when Saul had neglected the commandment of God, an evil
spirit from the Lord troubled him, 1. Sam. 16. 14. Thus Ahab seduced by his
false prophets descends into the battle, and is slain (contemning the
words of Michaiah) in (...) Iaquer^m in stag^ here^orum (...) ^orum, cap. 23.
whose mouths the devil was a lying spirit, who sent of the Lord, persuaded
him and preualled, 1. Kin. 22. 22. 23. 24.

Second, By affiiction in the body or goods, God would quicken them up to
seek the salvation Idem cap. 21.
of their souls. And so Paul gave over a seandalous and incestuous person unto
the devil, that he might be induced to forsake his sin live chastely
hereafter, and be an edifying example to those whom he had offended: and this
kind of discipline was more sovereign, then any other could have been,
because man's nature abhors Satan, and trembles with fear once to conceive
that he should fall into his power and hands, and this is that which he
writes, aduising the Corinthians to deliver him unto Satan, for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus, 1. Cor. 5. 5. And in this sort he speaks of two other deceivers and
blasphemers, Hymenaeus and Alexander, I have delivered them unto Satan, that
they may learn not to blaspheme, 1. Timothy 1. 20. therefore this giving over,
was not to destruction, but for correction.

The last point propounded, was, That witches have power granted to vex Gods
own children as well as others, and prevail over them; and that we do enquire
(so far as we may, and is justifiable) of the causes thereof, which may be
these.

First, (...) This is permitted unto them for the experience k Trithemius in
libel. (...) qu^ionum quas illi dissoluendas proposuit Maximilianus Imperator,
quest 7.
of their faith and integrity, so that by this means their love toward God
which lay hidden in the heart, is now made manifest. To be quiet and patient in
prosperity, when we may enjoy benefits at our own pleasure, is a matter
easily to be performed: But to endure the fire of Tribulation, that is the
proof of a steadfast Christian, and in losses and sickness procured by such
to be silent, and submit our selves, this is the note of a faithful man, and
to choose rather obeying the law of God, to bear the infirmity of the body,
then to ouer-flow in riches, and enjoying health and strength offend the Lord.

Second, this makes a difference between the wicked and the godly: for thus
the holy Apostle speaks of the righteous, that by many afflictions they must
enter into the kingdom of heaven, Act. 14. 22. And all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus suffer tribulations, 2. Timoth. 3. 12. for whom the Lord loves,
he does chasten, Prouer. 3. 12. It is a Christians glory to undergo for Gods
cause, any vexation whatsoever, whether wrought by the devil, or brought to
pass by wicked men his (...)
instruments; for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
God has promised to those who love him, James 1. 12. But we read contrary of
the wicked, they become old, yea, are mighty in power, their seed is
established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes,
their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them, etc.
they spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down into the grave, Job
21. 7. 8. 9. etc. Yet surely they are set in slippery places, suddenly
destroyed and perished, and horribly consumed as a dream when one awaketh: O
Lord, thou shall make their Image despised, etc. Psalm. 73. 18. 19. 20.

The seventh Proposition.
MOre women in a far different proportion prove Witches then men, by a
hundred to one; therefore the Law of God notes that Sex, as more subject to
that sin, Exodus 22. 18. It is a common speech amongst the Jewish Rabbis, In
Perk^i ab^both. (...) lib. 5. cap. 10.
many women, many Witches: And it should seem that this was a generally
received opinion, for so it is noted by Pliny, Quintilian, and others, neither
does this proceed (as some have thought) from their frailty and imbecility,
for in many of them there is stronger resolution, to undergo any torment then
can be found in man, as was made apparent in that conspiracy of Piso against
Nero, Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
who commannded that Epicharis, known to be of the same faction, should first
presently be set upon the rack, imagining that being a woman, she would never
Muliebre corp^ impar dolor^
be able to overcome the pain: But all the tortures that he or his could
devise, were not able to draw from her the least confession of any thing that
was then objected against her. The first days question she so utterly
contemned, that the very Chair in which they conveyed her from the place, did
seem as a Chariot wherein she rid, triumphing over the barbarous usage of
their inhumane cruelty. The morrow following brought thither again, after many
rough incounters, remained so unshaken, that wrath it self grew mad, to see
the strokes of an obstinate and relenting fury fall so in vain upon the softer
temper of a Woman: and at the last took a scarf from about her neck, and by
it knits up within her bosom the knowledge she had of that fact, together
with that little remainder of spirit, whereof by force and violence they
labored to deprive her.

Tertul in Apolog^t. C^initus de doctrina Christiana lib. 9. cap. 8.
Former ages have likewise produced Leena an exemplary president of this sort,
to all posterity, who when Armodius and Aristogito^ having failed of the
execution of their enterprise against Hipparchus a tyrant, had been put to
death, she was brought to the torture to be enforced to declare what other
accomplices there were of the conspiracy. But rather then she should be
compelled thereunto, bit her tongue asunder, and spit it in the face of the
tyrant, that though she would, yet could not now disclose them. In remembrance
whereof the Athenians caused a Lion of Brass to be erected, showing her
invincible courage by the generosity of that beast, and her perseverance in
secrecy, in that they made it without a tongue. Therefore the learned have
searched out other causes thereof, and among the rest, observed these as the
most probable.

First, they are by nature credulous, wanting experience, and therefore more
easily deceived.

Secondly, Binfeldius de con^lionibus (...) l^ficorum. (...) de p^ipuis
diuinationum generibus in titulo de (...). Martinus de A^los.
they harbor in their breast a curious and inquisitiue desire to know such
things as be not fitting and couenient, and so are oftentimes entangled with
the bare show and visard of goodness. As the Lady of Rome, who was importune,
and vehemently instant upon her husband, to know what was debated of that day
at the Council Table. And when he could not be at rest, answered, The Priests
had seen a Lark flying in the air with a golden Helmet on his head, and
holding a spear in his foot. Scarce she had this, but presently she told it to
one of her maids: she to another of her fellows, so that report was spread
through the whole City, and went for current until it received a check: But
all are not of this mould.

Thirdly, their complexion is softer, and from hence more easily receive the
impressions offered by the Devil; as when they be instructed and governed by
good Angels, they prove exceeding religious, and extraordinarily devout: so
consenting to the suggestions of evil spirits, become notoriously wicked, so
that there is no mischief above that of a woman, Eccles. 25. 13. etc.

Fourthly, in them is a greater facility to fall, and therefore the Devil at
the first took that advantage, and set upon Eve in Adams absence, Genes. 3. 3.

Fifthly, this sex, when it conceiueth wrath or hatred against any, is
unplacable, possessed with insatiable desire of revenge, and transported with
appetite to right (as they think) the wrongs offered unto them: and when their
power herein answers not their will, and are meditating with themselves how
to effect their mischievous proiects and designs, the Devil Exemplum apud
Binfeldium reperies de consessionibus maleficorum, page 32
takes the occasion, who knows in what manner to content exulcerated minds,
windeth himself into their hearts, offers to teach them the means by which
they may bring to pass that rancor which was nourished in their breasts, and
offers his help and furtherance herein.

Sixthly, they are of a slippery tongue, and full of words: and therefore if
they know any such wicked practices, are not able to hold them, but commnnicate
the same with their husbands, children, consorts, and inward acquaintance; who
not consideratly weighing what the issue and end thereof may be, entertain the
same, and so the poison is dispersed. Thus Dalilah discovered her husbands
strength where it lay, unto the Philistines; and procured his infamous and
disastrou^ ouer-throw. Judge. 16. 18.

Hitherto in some Popositions I have set down the original of witchcraft,
and other such curious and unlawful Arts, the quality of the persons agents in
the same, the power of the Devil, and his confederates, the league of
association which enterchangeably passes between them, his assuming a body,
and framing a voice for the performance of that business; that women, and why,
are most subject to this hellish practice. Now the truth of all these shall
appear by exemplary proofs in the Narration following.

A true Narration of some of those Witch-crafts which Marie wife of Henry Smith
Glouer did practice, and of the hurts she has done unto sundry persons by the
same: confirmed by her own Confession, and from the public Records of the
examination of diverse upon their oaths: of her death, and execution for the
same, which was on the twel^th day of Ianu^ i^ last past.
MArie wife of Henry Smith, Glouer, possessed with a wrathful indignation
against some of her neighbors, in regard that they made gain of their buying
and selling Cheese, which she (using the same trade) could not do, or they
better (at the least in her opinion) then she did, often times cursed them, and
became incensed with unruly passions, armed with a settled resolution, to effect
some mischievous proiects and designs against them. The devil who is
skillful, and rejoices of such an occasion offered, and knows how to stir
up the evil affected humors of corrupt minds (she becoming now a fit
subject, through this her distemper, to work upon, having the understanding
darkened with a cloud of passionate, and reuengefull affections) appeared unto
her amiddes these discontentments, in the shape of a black Proposition 4.
man, and willed that she should continue in her malice, envy, hatred, banning
and cursing; and then he would be revenged for her upon all th^se to whom she
wished evil: and this promise was uttered in a low murmuring and hissing
voice: Proposition 5.
and at that present they entered terms of a compact, he requiring that she
should forsake God, and depend upon him: to which she condescended in express
terms, renouncing God, and betaking herself unto him. I am sparing by any
amplification to enlarge this, but do barely and nakedly rehearse the truth,
and number of her own words unto me. After this he presented himself again
at sundry times, and that to this purpose (as may probably be coniectured) to
hold her still in his possession, who was not able, either to look further
into these subtilties, then the superficial bark thereof, or not discover the
depth of his designements, and in other forms, as of a mist, and of a ball of
fire, with some dispersed spangles of black; and at the last in prison (after
the doom of judgment, and sentence of condemnation was passed against her)
two several times, in that figure as at the first: only at the last he seemed
to have a pair of horns upon his head, and these as she come down from her
chamber, being sent for to confer with some learned and reverend Diuiues, by
whose prayers and instructions she might be brought to the sight and confession
of her grievous offenses, be regained and rescued out of his hands, brought to
repentance, and the favor of God, assured hope of mercy, and eternal life,
and at these times he wished her to confess nothing to any of them, but
continue constant in her made promise, rely upon him, and he would save her.
This was too high a strain above his reach to have made it good, and a note of
his false descant, who having compassed this wretched woman, brought her to a
shameful and untimely end; yet doing nothing herein contrary to his malicious
purposes, for he was a muttherer from the beginning, John 8. 44. Now then, to
descend to particulars, and the effects of this hellish association mad^. Being
thus joined and linked together in a reciprocal league, he begins to work
for her, in procuring the mischief of those whom she maligned, whereof these
few acknowledged by her self, may yield some taste of more, though concealed.

Her wicked practice against John Orkton.
THe first who tasted of the gall of her bitterness was John Orkton a Sailer,
and a man of strong constitution of body, who about some five years sithence,
returning out of Holland in the Netherland, or low Countries beyond the Seas,
happened, for some misdemeanors committed by him to strike the son of this
Mary Smith (but in such sort as could not in reason be offensiuely taken) who
hearing his complaint, came forth into the street, cursing and banning him
therefore, as oftentimes she did, dwelling in the next adjoining house, and
wished in a most earnest and bitter manner, that his fingers might rotte off;
whereupon presently he grew weak, distempered in stomach, and could digest
no meat, nor other nourishment received, and this discrasie or feebleness
continued for the space of three quarters of a year; which time expired, the
forementioned grief fell down from the stomach into his hands and feet, so
that his fingers did corrupt, and were cut off; as also his toes putrisied and
consumed in a very strange and admirable manner. Nevertheless, notwithstanding
these calamities, so long as he was able, went still to Sea, in the goods and
ships of sundry Merchants (for it was his only means of living) but never
could make any prosperous voyage (as then other men did) either beneficial to
the Owners, or profitable to him self. Whereupon, not willing to be hindrance
to others, and procure no good for his own maintenance by his labors, left
that trade of life, and kept home, where his former grief increasing, sought
to obtain help and remedy by Surgery, and for this end went to Yarmouth,
hoping to be cured by one there, who was accounted very skillful: but no
medicines applied by the Rules of Art and Experience, wrought any expected or
hoped for effect: for both his hands and feet, which seemed in some measure
every evening to be healing, in the morning were found to have gone backward,
and grown far worse then before: So that the Chirurgian perceiving his labor
to be wholly frustrate, gave over the cure, and the diseased patient still
continues in a most distressed and miserable estate, unto the which he was
brought by the hellish practices of this malicious woman, who long before
openly in the streets, (whenas yet the neighbors knew of no such thing)
rejoicing at the calamity, said, Orkton now lies a rotting. And no marvel
though she could tell that which herself had done, and her good master would
not suffer to be concealed, but that the testimony of her own tongue should
remain as a record toward her further detection and condemnation, who sought
means of her voluntary accord to be reconciled with the woeful distressed
party, but this was nothing else but to plaster over and disguise her former
inhumane and barbarous actions, for no relief at all followed thereof: for
oftentimes, as has been proved, the Proposition 3.
devils and witches his instruments do cause such diseases, which neither the
one, nor the other can remove again. And this is not any vaporous imagination,
but a most undoubted truth. For now this poor man continues still in a
lamentable estate, grief, and pains increasing, without hope of help, except
God in the abundance of his tender mercies vouchsafe to grant comfort and
deliverance.

Her wicked practice against Elizabeth Hancocke.
THe second person distressed, by this witch, was Elizabeth Hancocke, then
widow, now wife of James Scot: the manner, occasion, and proceeding of whose
dealing against her was thus. She coming out of the town from the shop of
one Simon Brown a Silkeman, unto whom she had carried home some work, which
was by him put out unto her; Henry Smith, as she passed by his door, took
her by the hand, and smilingly said, that his ducke (meaning his wife, this
woman of whom we now speak) told him that she had stolen her hen; which
words she then passed over, as only spoken in merriment, and denying the
same: in the mean time, as they were interchanging these words, she came
herself, and directly charged her with the hen, and wished that the bones
thereof might stick in her throat, when she should eat the same: which speech
also she made no great reckoning of, supposing them to be but words of course,
and might be uttered in jest. Nevertheless, afterward better considering of
the same, conceived much grief, to be counted one of so evil quality and
disposition, and espying that hen for which she was accused, to sit upon the
hatch of her shop door, went to her, and moved with the indignity of that
slander, and unjust imputation, told her in some passion and angry manner,
that it was a dishonest part thus to blemish the good name of her neighbors
with so untrue aspersions: whereupon, breaking forth in some violence, she
wished the pox to light upon her, and named her proud ^inny, proud flurts,
and shaking the hand, bade her go in, for she should repent it; and the same
night, within three or four hours after these curses and imprecations
uttered, she was taken and pinched at the heart, and felt a sudden weakness
in all the parts of her body; yet her appetite to meat nothing diminished, and
so continued for the space of three weeks; in which time, when she was any
thing well, would come to the door, and lean upon the stall, whom this Marie
Smith seeing, did euerbanne, adding the former curse, the pox light upon you,
can you yet come to the door? and at the end of these three weeks, being but
very weak, came soorth as she used to do, to take the air, this mischievous
woman most bitterly cursed her again, whereupon she went into the house, fell
into such a torturing fit, and nipping at the heart, that she fainted, hardly
recouerable for the space of half an hour, and so grievously racked and
tormented through all parts of her body, as if the very flesh had been torn
from the bones, by the violent pain whereof she could not refrain, but tore
the hair from off her head, and became as one distraught, bereaved of sense,
and understanding: And the same night the bed whereon she lay, was so tossed,
and lifted up and down, both in her own feeling, and in the sight of others
then present beholders of her extreamities, by the space of one hour or more,
that she was therewith exceedingly terrified, and did think oftentimes in her
sleep, that she did see this Marie Smith standing before her. And this sit
continued sixteen hours, during which passion Edward Drake her father came to
the Town, touched with grief for this torture of his daughter (as parents
hearts are relenting and tender, and natural compassion is soon stirred up in
them) took her urine, went to one for his advice (whose fact herein is no way
instifiable, and argued but a small measure of religion, and the knowledge of
God in him) who first told unto him the cause of his coming, that is, to
seek help for his daughter, and then added, that she was so far spent, that
if he had stayed but one day longer, the woman who had wronged her, would have
spent her heart, and so become unrecoverable, and thereupon showed him her face
in a Glass; and further, opened the beginning cause of falling out, which was
for a hen, which before this, Drake neither knew nor heard of, and then gave
his counsel for remedy, which was the matter sought for and desired, and that
was in this order. To make a cake with flower from the Bakers, and to mix the
same instead of other liquor, with her own water, and bake it on the harth,
whereof the one half was to be applied and laid to the region of the heart, the
other half to the back directly opposite; and further, gave a box of ointment
like triacle, which must be spread upon that cake, and a powder to be cast upon
the same, and certain words written in a paper, to be laid on likewise with
the other, adding this caveat, that if his daughter did not amend within six
hours after the taking of these receipts, then there was no health or recovery
to be looked for: and further, wished silence to be kept herein, for the woman
who had done this, would know any thing.

And being thus furnishing with instructions, and returning home, as he
alighted from his horse to enter into that house where his daughter lay (being
the next unto Mary Smiths) she then stood leaning over her shop window, whom
he knew to be that person, which was showed unto him, and she cursed him
passing by, and told his daughter that her Father had been with a Wisard. And
the next day following after they had put in practice the directions given, she
affirmed to diverse of the neighbors, that Drake the afflicted woman's father,
had been to ask counsel, and made a Witch Cake, but she would learn how
they came to have that knowledge: yet for the present she found help, and was
freed from the languishing and other conflicts wherewith she was assaulted by
the space of six weeks.

After this, being married unto James Scot, a great Cat which kept with this
Witch (of whose infernal both purposes and practices we now speak)
frequented their house; and upon doing some scathe, her husband moved therewith,
thrust it twice through with his sword: which notwithstanding those wounds
received, ran away: then he stroke it with all his force upon the head with a
great pike staff, yet could not kill her; but she leapt after this upward
almost a yard from the boords of that chamber where she now was, and crept
down: which he perceiving, willed his lad (a boy of fourteen years) to
dragge her to the muck-hill, but was not able; and therefore put her into a
sack, and being in the same, still moved and stirred. Whereupon they put her
out again, and cast her under a pair of stairs, purposing in the morning, to
get more help, and carry her away; but then could not be found, though all the
doors that night were locked, and never heard what afterward became thereof.

Not long after, this Witch came-forth with a Birchin broom, and threatened to
lay it upon the head of Elizabeth Scot, and defiled her clothes therewith, as
she swept the street before her shop door, and that in the sight of her
husband, who not digesting this indignity offered unto his wife, threatened that
if she had any such fits, as she endured being a Widow before marriage, he
would hang her. At this she clapped her hands, and said he killed her Cat. And
within two or three days after this enterchange of words between them, his
wife was perplexed with the like pain and grief at her heart, as formerly she
had been; and that for two days and a night: wherefore her husband went to
this wrathful and malicious person, assuring that if his wife did not amend,
he would accuse her to the Magistrate, and cause the Witches can by no means
be so easily brought to to recall the mischief they have done, as by threats
and stripes. Remigius in Damonolatria, lib. 3. c. 3.
rigor of the law to be executed upon her, which is due to such malefactors.
These things were done some three years sithence. The party troubled yet
lives, but in no confirmed health, nor perfect soundness of body.

Her wicked practices against Cicely Balye.
A Third subject whereupon this wrathful woman's anger wrought, was C^eely
Balye, then servant to Robert C^ulton, now wife of William Vaux, who sweeping
the street before her masters door upon a Saturday in the evening, Mary Smith
began to pick a quarrel about the manner of sweeping, and said unto her she
was a great fattail'd sow, but that fatness should shortly be pulled down and
abated. And the next night being Sunday immediately following, a Cat came unto
her, sat upon her breast, with which she was grievously tormented, and so
oppressed, that she could not without great difficulty draw her breath, and at
the same instant did perfectly see the said Mary in the chamber where she lay,
who (as she conceived) set that Cat upon her, and immediatl after fell sick,
languished, and grew exceeding lean; and so continued for the space of half a
year together, during the whole continuance in her masters service; until
departing from him, she dwelt with one Mistres Garoway, and then began to be
amended in her health, and recover of her former pining sickness: for this
Witch had said, that so long as she dwelt near her, she should not be well,
but grow from evil to worse.

Thus every light trifle (for what can be less then sweeping of a little dust
awry?) can minister matter to set on fire a wrathful indignation, and inflame
it unto desired revenge, the Devil being willing to apprehend and take hold
upon such an occasion, that so he might do some pleasing office his bond-slaue,
whom she adored in submisse manner, upon her knees, with strange gestures,
uttering many murmuring, broken, and imperfect speeches, as this Cicely did
both hear and see, there being no other partition between the chamber wherein
she performed these rites, and the house of her master with whom she then
dwelt, but only a thin feeling of board, through a cranny or rift whereof she
looked, listened attentively unto her words, and beheld (diligently her
behavior, and might have seen and heard much more, but that she was with the
present spectacle so affrighted, that she hastened down in much fear and
distemper.

Her wicked practice against Edmund Newton.
THe fourth on dammaged by this Hagge, was one Edmund Newton: the
coffeehouse did arise from this ground; Because he had bought several
bargains of Holland cheese, and sold them again, by which she thought her
benef^ to be somewhat impaired, using the like kind of trading. The manner of
her dealing with him was in this sort. At every several time of buying Cheese
he was grievously afflicted, being thrice, and at the last, either she or a
spirit in her likeness did appear unto him, and whisked about his face (as he
lay in bed) a wet cloth of very loathsome savor; after which he did see one
clothed in russet with a little bush beard, who told him he was sent to look
upon his sore leg, and would heal it; but rising to show the same,
perceiving he had cloven feet, refused that offer, who then (these being no
vain conceits, or fantasies, but well advised and diligently considered
^bseruances) suddenly vanished out of sight. After this she sent her Impes, a
Toad, and Crabs crawling about the house, which was a shop planchered with
boords, where his servants (he being a Shooemaker) did work: one of which
took that toad, put it into the fire, where it made a groaning noise for one
quarter of an hour before it was consumed; during which time Mary Smith who
sent it, did endure, (as was reported) torturing pains, testifying the felt
grief by her outcries then made.

The sickness which he first sustained, was in manner of a madness or
frenzy, yet with some interposed release of extremity: so that for thirteen
or fourteen weeks together he would be of perfect memory, other times
distracted and deprived of all sense. Also the joints and parts of his body
were benumbed, besides other pains and greifes from which he is not yet freed,
but continues in great weakness, disabled to perform any labor, whereby
he may get sufficient and competent maintenance. And by the council of some,
sending for this woman by whom he was wronged, that he might scratch her (for
this has gone as current, and may plead prescription for warrant a foul sin
among Christians to think one Witchcraft can drive out another) his nails
turned like feathers, having no strength to lay his hands upon her.

And it is not improbable but that she had dealt no better with others then
these above mentioned. For Mr Thomas Yonges of London, Fishmonger, reported
unto me, that after the demand of a debt due unto Mr John Mason, Silkeman of
the same City, whose Widow he married, from Henry Smith Glouer her husband,
some execrations and curses being wished unto him, within three or four days
(being then gone to Yarmouth in Norfolk upon necessary business) there fell
sick, and was tortured with exceeding and massacring griefs, which by no
means (having used the advice of sundry learned and experienced Physicians in
Norwich) could in any part be mitigated, and so extraordinarily vexed thirteen
months, was constrained to go on Crutches, not being able to feed himself,
and amended not before this mischievous woman was committed to prison (accused
for other wickednesses of the like kind) at which time (so near as he could
conjecture) he then received some release of his former pains, though at the
present when he made this relation, which was at Candlemas last past, had not
perfectly recovered his wonted strength: for his left hand remained lame, and
without use.

But thus much by the way only, omitting how before this accident a great
Water-dogge ran over his bed, the door of the chamber where he lay being
shut, no such one known (for careful enquiry was made) either to have been in
that house where he lodged, or in the whole Town at any time.

I do not insist upon this, because she did not nominate him or any other
unto us, but only those four already expressed: and for the wrongs done to
them, she craved mercy at Gods hands, as for all other her sins, and in
particular for that of Witchcraft, renounced the Devil, embraced the mercies
of God purchased by the obedience of Jesus Christ, and professed that her hope
was only by his suffering and passion to be saved. And all these, that is to
say, her former grievous offenses committed against God, and his people, her
d^fiance of the Devil, and reposing all confidence of salvation in Christ
Jesus alone, and his merits, she in particular manner confessed openly at the
place of execution, in the audience of multitudes of people gathered together
(as is usual at such times) to be beholders of her death. And made there also
profession of her faith, and hope of a better life hereafter; and the means
whereby she trusted to obtain the same, as before, has been specified. And
being asked, if she would be contented to have a Psalm sung, answered
willingly that she desired the same, and appointed it herself, The Lamentation
of a Sinner, whose beginning is, Lord turn not away thy face, etc. And after
the ending thereof thus finished her life: So that in the judgment of charity
we are to conceive the best, and think she rests in peace, notwithstanding
her heinous transgressions formerly committed: for there is no maladay
incurable to the Almighty Physician, Esaias 1. 18. Ezech. 33. 11. Therefore Caine
did injury to God, when convicted of the barbarous and unnatural murder of
his righteous brother, cried out that his sin was greater then could be
forgiven, Genesis 4. 13 for Gods mercy is greater then man's misery can be. And
even for the like unto this very fact, we have a book case, already adjudged,
and ouer-ruled in those Ephesians, who brought their coniuring books,
sacrificed them in the sire, aestimated at the Bud^us de ass^ lib. 5.
value of nine hundred pounds of our money, repented of their The Ephesians
were infamous for their Magical practices, Appollonius professing the same in
the Ci^ie, so that it grew into a proves, (...), the Ephesian letters, which
were certain Characters and words, by virtue whereof they obtained good
success in all business, victory against others, cuasion and escape from
danger^; and as we read in Suidas, a Milesian armed with these letters,
ouer-came thi^ty Champions in the games of Olimpus, but being removed by the
Magistrate, having intelligence thereof, himself was subdued. Of these see
Athenaeus Deipn^sophiston lib. 12. Hes^cbius in his Lexicon. Plutarchus
quastionum conuiualium, lib. 7. cap. 5.
sins, and obtained mercy, Acts 19. verse. 19.

The eight Proposition, and first consequent.
NOw then from this premised narration, these two corrollaries or consequents
do necessarily follow.

It is not lawful for any Christian to consult with a witch or wisard, or go
to them for help. God himself, whose commandment is and must be the rule of
our life and direction has forbidden it, Leuit. 19. 31. and 20. 6. Deuter. 18.
10. 11. And the Imperial laws, have been in this case very respective. Cod
lib. 9. titulo 18. 1. (...) and L. (...)
Therefore, Leo the Emperor straightly enioyneth, that none should resort unto
them, and styles their advice nothing but mere impostures and deceit; and in
the Gratianus decretorum part 2. cause. 26. qu. 7.
Decrees collected by Gratran, the teachers of the people are seriously
exhorted to admonish them, that magical arts and enchantments cannot heal any
infirmity: and that they be the dangerous snares, and subtilties of that
ancient enemy of mankind, by which he indeuoureth to entangle them Dan^ in
dia^o de (...) cap. 6.
: and these so straight and severe prohibitions are not without just and
weighty cause. For,

First, we must have no commerce or dealing with the devil, either directly
and immediately, or mediately and indirectly; for we ought to have our recourse
to God alone in all distresses, and this is that which Eliah spoke with great
indignation unto the messengers of Ahaziah, who went to enquire of Baal-zebub,
for the recovery of their Lords health, 2. King. 1. 3. Martinus de Arles in
trallatu de superstitionibus. Johannes Gers^ de (...) circa ar^em m^cam ^ticulo
5.
So that we must not seek to Satan, or any of his ministers. For none can
serve two masters, Matt. 6. 24. But as religious Ichosaphat, when we know not
what to do, then lift up our eyes to heaven, 2. ^hron. 20. 12.

Secondly, that help which any receive from them brings destruction of our
souls, for such as secke for relief this way, make a In cu^ing diseases the
d^uell ^especteth t^ ends: the one, that he might seem to keep the promise he
has made with those his slaves, and retain them in their malicious practices
and in^delity: the other, that he might draw their faith and trust from God,
who are thus healed by witches and wisards his instruments, and cast them down
headlong into des^uction of their souls: or if they miss of hoped reliese
which often times so comes to pass, God withstanding their attempts, then to
wound their conscien^, and d^iue them to despair.
separation and departing from God, which is the death of the soul. And though
it may be objected, that some have received benefit hereby, yet these are not
one of ten. And further, we are not to judge herein of the lawfulness of
these actions by the success, but rest upon the commandment, for itfalleth
out sometime, that a thy ese and common robber by the high way, may live i^
more abundance, then those who with a lawful and honest trade painefully
maintain then selves, yet therefore he is not justified. And when we have
recourse unto others beside God, we bewray herein our Nauarrus in
Enchiridiosi^e manuals con^ssariorum cap 11
distrust, infidelity, contempt and rebellion against him, which grievous
sins bring his wrath and eternal destruction. But let it be taken for
granted, that we may receive good by them, yet this maxim is sure, and a
truth vnrepealeable, which no distinction can elude; we must not do evil that
good may come thereof, Romans 3. 8. Chrys^st. cont. Iud^os ^m. 6.
yea, it were better to end our days in any extremity whatsoever, then to use
these for our helpers.

Thirdly, they Tatianus oratione tertia contra Gr^cos.
cure not diseases but in show, except such as themselves have inflicted,
otherwise those do return, as is reported of Adrianus the X philinu^ ex D^
Adrian^ (...).
Emperor, who troubled with a dropsy, by magical charms did oftentimes
empty the water thereof, but in a short space increased again; and perceiving
the same to grow worse and worse, sought to dispatch and rid himself of life,
by poison, or the sword, or some other desperate atte^pts. O^ a worse malady
(the first being abated) follows: as I have known one, who using the help of
a wisard for the cure of a sore in his breast, ptescribed in this sort: crossed
the place affected with his thumb, and mumbled to himself some words in
secret, after gave the patient a powder like the ashes of wood, which was to be
boiled in running water, and with it to wash the ulcer, after certain clouts
were to be applied, with special care to lay that side of the clout unto the
sore, which was by him cr^ssed, and marked; and all these clothes must at once
be bound upon it, and every day the lowest removed or taken away: thus in short
time that anguish and grief ceased; but not long after the party fell into a
more grievous infirmity, and still continues therein. Or if the evil be taken
from the Bodine proves this by many examples in his Daemonomania. lib. 3. cap.
2.
person presently afflicted, then is it laid upon his friends children or
cattle, and sometime it falls to the lot of the witch herself, so that
always the devil is a devil, doing evil, and working mischief.

Fourth, a Binfeldius de confessionibus ^sicorum. Cardinalis Ca^etanus in
summul^ titulo de male ficio. Tolet^s in summa cas^ conscienti^, sieve
instruction^ sacerdotum li. 4. c. 16.
wisard, witch, or sorcerer can not relieve any but by his or her invocation,
and help of the devil, but this fact is absolutely, and without exception,
wicked, and can by no limitation or circumstance be made tolerable: Therefore
they who require this at their hands, which they cannot perform without
committing of sin, be liable to the same vengeance and wrath of God to which
they are; for not only the principal offenders, but the Grati^ in Decret^
part 2. caus^ 26 q^st. 2. se^. Q^ sine saluatore, etc.
accessaries, and consenters to their evil, are worthy of death, Romans 1. 32.

Now before I conclude this point, because by these kind of creatures, many
toys be used, to shadow and mask the devils suggestion and works, it
shall not be amiss to mention some of them, and among the rest be Of these
characters and Images, John Gerson de err ovibus circa art^ magicam dic^ 3.
litera O. Marti^us de Arles de superstitionibus. Binfeldius in co^mentar. ad
titulu^ Codicis de (...) et mathematicis; and examples Hector Boethius l. 2.
histori^ Scoic^, de rege Duffo, and Thuanus lately in the reign of Charles the
ninth king of France in the 57. Book of the history of his times.
characters written or graven in plates of metal: and for these it is most
certain that Quantities have no active quality; and therefore, if any
expected success according to desire do follow in the use thereof, it
proceeds from the illusion of Satan, and is his work, that hereby he might
win credit to his crafty sleights and conueyances, and procure to himself
authority, establishing the kingdom of darkness, withdraw men from resting
upon God, and reposing their trust in his almighty power, and boundless mercy,
and solicit them to expect help from him. There are besides these, other
idle trifles (for they des^rue no better name which are appointed to be hung
about the neck) for Amulets, as Binfeldius in titulum codicis de mal^cis and
mathemati^is. Martin^s de Arles in (...) de (...) gionibus
powerful and effectual remedies against certain diseases, and pictures made
of gold, brass, lead, wax, etc. which neither have nor can have any other
virtue, then that which they do receive from the matter whereof they be framed,
for the sigure works not as a cause of alteration; but if it bring to pass
any other effect that is from the power of the devil an old enemy, and crafty
deluder of mankind, and therefore, presupposes a contract made with him:
wherefore Spartianus in v^ta Anto^ni Caracall^.
Antoninus Caracall^ condemned those who used the same, for the help of
Tertian and Quartan agues, and Constantius Amm^us (...) lib. 19. non pro^ fine,
and lib. 29.
decrees such to be worthy capital punishment, and put to death. And that
natural cover wherewith some children are borne, and is called by our women,
the silly how, Midwiues were wont to sell to credulou^ Advocates and Lawyers,
as a^ especial meane^ to furnish them with eloquence ^mpridius in (...)
Di^dumco.
and perswasiue speech, and to stop the mouths of all, who should make any
opposition against them: for which cause one Balsamon in commen^ ad con^.
Constantinopolitanum in T^llo cap. 61.
Prot^s was accused by the Clergy of Constantinople to have offended in this
matter. And Chrysostom often accuses Midwiues for reserving the same to
Magical uses. And Clemens Stromatcon libr. 1. gest^it (...).
Alexandrinus gives us to understand of one Er^stus, who had two inchaunted
rings, so framed, that by the sound thereof he had direction for the fit time
and opoortunity in mannaging all the businesses he intended, and yet
notwithstanding was privily murdered, though he had warning given by that
sound which was his usual instructor. Thus, none can escape the revenging hand
of God, which pursues those who have infeoffed themselves to such vanities,
and are besotted with these unlawful curiosities. But among all other, charms
and inchaunting spells, have gotten the start of the rest, which some think
absolutely lawful, and may upon warrantise be used, and plead prescription
for their i^stifiication; for we read in Homer Odiff^ 19. vu^s V^ (...) Cato
de re ru^ica. Pl^. li. 28. c^. 2. (...) l. 2. c. 2
that Ulysses being wounded by words, stayed the flux of blood; and De sub^
libr. 18.
Cardanus tells us, that himself cutting his lip, could by no means restrain
the flowing blood, until he charmed it, and then presently stanched: but dare
not affirm whether his own confidence, or the words did make this restraint. I
might add to these, that infallible means (as is supposed) by finding out a
thief with a Sieve and a pair of Sheares, with that conjunction Georgius
Pictorius in epitome de Magia. cap. 21.
Dies, mies, Iescet, etc. and the rest of such senseless and monstrous
terms, a Riddle that Oedipus himself could not unfold. But because this
conceit of charming has ouer-spread it self in this Sunneset of the world,
and challenges a lawful approbation from the authority and practice of
ancient Vide Ritherbusium in no^is ad Malchum de vita Pythagor^. Alexander
Trallian. libr. 10. de colico ^ffectu, in fine. Serenus Sammo^cus de pr^ceptis
medici^ cap. de Hemitrit^ depellend^. Job. (...) medici^lium lib. 1 epist. 33.
and 34.
Physicians, yea and found some Aquinas (...) summa secund^ secund^ quest. 96.
^ticulo 4.
Divines to be their Patrons respectively, and with clauses of mitigation, I
think it very necessary to show the unlawfulness thereof. Wherefore,

First, they had their original and beginning from the devil, who abode not
in the truth, John 8. 44. was cast down with the apostata angels to hell, and
delivered into chains of darkness, 2. Pet. 2. 4. who envying man^ felicity
received into grace after the De differentia inter (...) and homine^ pecc^res
Augustinus in Encbiridio cap. 28. and in suis ad illum co^mentarijs Lam* bertus
Dan^us.
fall, himself eternally rejected, omitted no occasion to weaken and overthrow
the same, that the benefit thereof might come but to a few, and the greatest
number perish with him for ever. Whereupon he endeavored to inwrappe the weaker
sort of that frail corporation in superstitions, beguile them with doubtful
and false oracles, and bring to a form of worship contrary to that which God
had commanded, Peucerus de generibus Diui^ationum and titul^ de
incantationibus.
whereby the world began to abound with Idolatry, disobedience, contempt,
murders, uncleanness, lusts, thefts, lying, and such like outrages: and that
he might with his infections impoyson them more dangerously, and sovereign in
their hearts, he undertook to work wonders, imitating such miracles as God
had done, and devised cunningly many subtle sleights and legerdemaines, and
for this end most blasphemously abused the glorious and holy name of God, and
the word uttered by his mouth, and represented a false show of those effects,
which he had wrought in nature: and herein leuelled at two intentions, one to
reproach God, and counterchecke his works; the other to ouer-mask and cover his
own secret traps and frauds, persuading men, that by the power of words these
things were brought to pass, which must needs therefore be of great
^fficacie: seeing that the world and all things therein were so made of
nothing; for the spoke, and they were created, and thus practiced to disgrace,
and extenuate, that admirable and great work of Creation, and cause men to
make lighter account of the Creator, seeing that they also (instructed by him)
were enabled through the pronunciation of certain words contiued into a
special form, either to infuse new strength into things, or deprive them of
that which formerly they had, or alter the course of Nature, in raising
tempests, stirring up thunder and lightning; in Frigidas in pratis cantand^
r^pitur anguis Virg. ecloga 8.
taming serpents, and depriving them of their natural fierceness and venime,
and cause wild beasts to become meek and tractable, yea in seeming to make
sensible bodies; as clouds, wind, rain and the like. And thus the devil is
that father who begot Charms, and brought them forth, not powerful in
themselves, but by that inter league which he has with those who are
invassaled unto him.

Secondly, God does as straightly prohibit them, and severely punish the
practisers thereof, as others offending in any exercise of unlawful arts,
Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11. There shall not be found among you (instructing the
Israelites his people) a charmer, etc. for these are abomination unto the
Lord, etc. And this is recorded in the Catalogue of those sins of Manasses,
by which he sought to provoke God unto anger, 2. Kin. 21. 8. 2. Chronicles 33.
6.

Thirdly, words have no virtue, (...) and (...) Etym^logicis dicitur quasi
(...) De hac materia ^ru ^itissine disput it Franciscus Valesius de sa^ra
Philosophia, cap. 3.
but either to signify and express the conceits of the mind, or to affect
the ears of the Auditors, so that they can work nothing but in these two
respects: first of the matter which is uttered by them, which understood of the
heaters, affect the mind diversely, and that especially when there is joined
with it a comeliness of action and pronunciation, as we we see oftentimes in
the speeches of the Ministers of the Word, and in the pleadings of Orators. As
when Paul reasoned before Foelix and Drusilla his wife, of Temperance,
Righteousness, and Judgment to come he trembled, Acts 24. 25. Presectus
Iude^ imp^itus (...) sibi i^pune ratus est, etc. Tacitus ^lium lib. 12 and ^
per omnem (...) ac (...) regium s^ruile ingen^ execuit
being guilty to himself of fraudulent and cruel dealing, of lasciviousness
and a filthy life, and therefore might justly fear vengeance for the same.

A like example to this is that in King Agrippa, though working upon a better
subject, Act. 26. 28. And if I may conioyne Divine eloquence with Humane, it is
memorable, that while (...) (...) C^crone.
Tully pleaded before Caesar for Ligarius, accused by Tubero, to have been
confederate with Pompey, purposing to put him to death, as an enemy, when the
Orator altered, and in Rhetorical manner enforced his speech, the other
changed accordingly his countenance, and bewrayed the piercing words to be so
affecting, that the supplications, when he came once to urge and mention the
battle of Pharsalia, (trembling and dismayed) did fall from his hands, having
the passions of his mind extraordinarily moved, and absolved the offender. Or
else when by their pleasantness, with delight they slide into the hearts of
men, and ravish their affections: and thus it was with Aug. confessinum lib 9.
cap. 6 Quantum si^ in by (...) and ^tibus (...) s^ue (...) Ecclesia tua vo^bus
comm^us ^ter? Voces ille instuebant auribus m^, and lquebatur veritas tua in
cor meam, and (...) a^bat affeectus pretatis, and currebant (...) and (...)
mihi ^rat cum (...).
Augustine, as he acknowledges of himself, that being at Milaine where he was
baptized by S. Ambrose, when he heard the harmony which was in singing of the
Psalms, the words pierced his ears, the truth melted his heart, his passions
were moved, and showers of tears with delight fell from his eyes. Vide
Aquinatem egreg^ de hac mat^ ^isputante (...) contra Gentes, lib. 43. cap. 105.
and tuis Commentatorem Franciscum de Sylucstris.
But these effects are wrought only in such who understand that which is
spoken, but neither of both these properties are to be found in the Charms of
Wisards: besides, that they are conceived and expressed in monstrous and
unknown terms, not intelligible, and without signification: and therefore
the effects they produce being Caietanus in summula in titulo: Incantatio.
Toletus in ^mms causuum cons^ntia, sieve instructione sacerdotum lib. 4. cap. 17.
supernatural must proceed from that secret compact, at the least made with
the Devil.

Fourthly, these charms are mere mockeries, and gross abuses, both of God,
and Men his creatures, I will give you a taste of one or two, whereby you may
judge of the rest, for they came all out of one shop, and are fashioned in
one forge, and have the same workman or Artificer. Godelmannus in tractatu de
magis, Veneficis etc. lib. 1. cap. 8 (...) 26 and 27. vide S^em Matolum
colloquiorum sieve dicrum caniculorum part 2, colloquio 3.
An old woman craving help for bleare eyes, had delivered a Billet of Paper to
wear about her neck, in which was written, The Devil pull out thine eyes,
and recovered. Another tied a scroule to a sick man, full of strange
Characters, with which were intermingled a few names of Devils, as Lucifer,
Satan, Beelzebub, Oriens, Behal, Mammon, Beuflar, Narthin, Oleasar, etc. and
other of this sort; but what manner of blessing this was, and how likely to be
medicinable, a Christian truly instructed in Gods word knows; and the Lord
who is the father of mercies, and God of all comfort, preserve us from such
blasphemies, which are the Devils Sacrifices.

Fifthly, the discreeter sort among the Heathen, by that small glimpse of
natural reason which they had, misliked of these things: Cato de re rustica,
cap 5.
And therefore Cato among the rest of admonitions to the Bailiffe of his
husbandry, gives this charge, to ask no advice of any Southsaier, Diuiner,
Wisard, or Nativity Calculator. Columella lib. 1. cap 8.
And Columella utterly forbids all acquaintance with Witches, whereby
ignorant people are enforced to expense detestable Arts, and mischievous deeds.
Libro de morbo sacro (sieve illius sit, sieve alterius, nam de authore apud
cruditos dubitatio est^ ^atem ab initio. and quaed^ huc pertinentia babet
Theophrastus de plantis lib. 9. cap. 21.
Hippocrates does almost like a Christian discourse of this point, and condemn
the whole practice of this Art, as injurious unto God, who only purges
sins, and is our preserver; and for these fellows who make profession of
such wonder-working, brandeth them for Impostors and deceivers. I conclude with
that remarkable saying of an ancient Divine; (...).
These vanities do separate and with draw us from God, though they may seem
to have something in them to allure and delight us; yet let no Christian
entertain them, whose hope ought to be settled in God alone. And if thou be in
distress, or afflicted with sickness of body, and feel no present release or
comfort, what then? here is the trial of thy patience, have not recourse to
superstitious and unlawful helpers, although they promise thee present remedy;
and when they foretell thee of things which do truly according to the
prediction so fall out, believe them not, follow the example of Christ, who
rebuked the Devil, though he called him (as he was indeed) the Son of God. For
under the veil of truth he shadoweth falsehood; even as if one should sweeten
with honey or sugar the brimme of the Cup wherein he brings poison: But some
will say, they call upon the name of the Lord of Sabbath. Well, but this title
they give not to God, but to the Devil: therefore betake thou thy self to God
alone, crave health at his hand, and follow the Apostles direction; If any be
sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let him pray,
James 5. 14.

The ninth Proposition, and second Corrolary.
THere has always been some wanton, or perverse wits, who only to make
trial of their skill, would take in hand to defend absurd positions, and
commend both such things and persons, which were infamous, and contemptible as
Phauorinus apud Agellium. lib. 17. cap. 12.
Phauorinus writ the praise of the Quartane Ague, one of the gout, blindness,
and deafness: Luciani encomion (...).
Lucian of a fly, Erasmus.
Erasmus of folly, Synesius.
Synesius of baldness, Lib. 1. de Republica.
Glaucus in Plato of injustice. And among the exercises of the Ex^at eius
laudatio inter exempla exercitationum Rhetorum ab Henrico Stephan^ editarum cum
Polemonis and Himer^ declamationibus.
ancient Orators, we find those who strained all their understanding to blaze
the honor of that witless and deformed Coward Thersites. And this they have
performed with great Art and eloquence, only to show their faculty, but never
in good earnest took such a matter in hand. And therefore more deeply is he to
b^ censured, who has made himself an advocate to plead the cause of Wi^rus.
Witches, and defend the^ as innocent. And because this is a dangerous example,
and does draw those who are evil affected to offend, hoping for patronage of
their impiety, I add for conclusion this last proposition: Wisards, Witches,
and the whole rabble of Sorcerers (no kind excepted) are justly liable
Simlerus i^ 22 Exodi.
to extreme punishment. The arguments alleged for proof hereof, are many: I
will make choice of a few (with reference to such authors in whose writings
more may be found) and those which are most Of these all the following
reasons. (...) de confession, maleficorum, and (...) ad titulum legis de mal^
and mathematicis copio^. Remigius de D^onologia, lib. 3. cap. (...). Pe^ de
pr^cipuis Diuinationum generi^ Erastus de L^s. Bodinus Daeomanias lib. 4. cap.
5.
demonstratiue.

First, God himself has enacted that poenall statute, Thou shall not suffer a
Witch to live. Exodus 22 18. and names here a Hironimus O^ster in locum, and
Iunius and Tremelius in e^dem.
woman practicing this damnable. Art for two reasons: First, they are more
inclinable hereunto then man. Secondly, that though their fault may seem, as
being the weaker, excuseable, and is in this respect extenuated by some, yet is
not therefore to be spared, whether of that sort which they call Per^s of
Witchcraft.
good, or bad (for so are they distinguished) and there be some who never
brought Binfeldius in Commentarium ad titulum Codi^s de Mathematicis and Man.
harm upon any in body, goods, or mind. The cause of this so sharp a doom,
is their compacting with the Devil, openly or secretly, whereby they covenant
to use his help, in fulfilling their desires, and by this means make
themselves guilty of horrible impiety: for in this they renounce the Lord, who
has created them; make no account of his favor and protection, cut themselves
off from the covenant made with him in baptism, from the communion of Saints,
the true fellowship and service of God; and on the contrary yield themselves by
this confederacy, to Satan, as their God (and therefore nothing more frequent
and usual in their mouths, then my God will do this and that for me) him they
continually fear and honor. And thus do at the last become professed enemies
both to God and Man. You may add to this forther law, that which is Leuit. 19.
26 and cap. 6. You shall use no enchantment: the soul that turns after such
as have familiar spirits, and are Wisards, to go a whooring after them, I will
set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people,
etc. Again, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found among you any that uses
Divination, nor an obseruer of times, or an inchanter, or a Witch, or a
Charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, a Wisard, or Necromancer. And
that God might show how God^ de, Magis and ve^, l b. 3. cap. 11. (...). 14 15.
16. and seq.
much Manasses had provoked him to wrath, through his transcendent and
outrageous sins in the Catalogue thereof, his conspiring with Devils is
Anonymus de Mosaicarum and Romanarum legum collatione titulo. 15.
mentioned 1. King. 21. 8. And therefore is deprived of his kingdom, bound in
fetters, and carried captive unto Babel, 2. Chron. 33. 6. 11. and though he
repented of these outrageous and enormious Constitutiones criminales Caroli 5^.
a Georgio Ramo edita cap. 44. 109. and 177 Such are exempted from all benefit
of those pardons which Princes use to give to other mal^f (...) ctor^. For^rius
ad legem 236. in Titulo de verborum signi^atione, vide illu^ (...) mu^a erudite
scribit, ad propositum nostrum (...).
transgressions, yet God would not be appeased for them fifty years after he
was dead, Ierem. 15. 4.

Secondly, the civil laws in this case are most strict, decreeing them to be
burned, and their goods confiscate, though they were persons of quality, and
honorable, seated in dignity, and place of authority: and there is a severe
constitution made by Charles the fifth in late days against them, that though
they shall not have done, or be convinced to have hurt any, yet because they
attempted a thing unlawful, and abominable unto God, are extraordinarily to
be punished. And concerning this particular, S. Augustine discourses
excellently, worthy to be read, de cin. dei. l. 8. c. 19.

Thirdly, God wills those should be put to death, who by Diabolical and
unlawful Arts, do endeavor to help or harm others, whether in act they
perform the same, or purpose with intention, conceiving and thinking they can
do it, with rank Witches must needs be marshalled; and therefore justly
subject to deserved punishment.

Fourthly, all Idolaters are to dye by divine appointment, Deu. 17. 5. But I
think no man's forehead is so brazen, that will stand Proctor, and plead
guiltless for these sort of people, who deuote themselves wholly to the
Devil, though never so closely, and with great and cautelous secrecy: and no
doubt God therefore was revenged of the Templars, and their detestable
wickedness practiced in darkness and obscurity, who all A^o Domini 1312.
whose order began 1123. Thomas Walsi^gham in the life of K. Edward the 2^, in
his English (...), and in his (...) N^.
perished, as it were, in a moment for the same; of which at the full we may be
informed in our own ancient histories.

Fifthly, they do solicit others to be of their profession (which is one
clause of that contract made between them and the Devil) and consecrate their
children unto him: and against this, there is an especial caution put in
Deteronomy 13. 6. 9. 10.

Sixthly, they deserve death as inhumane and barbarous tyrants, for lingringly,
vt sentiant se more, that they may feel how they do decay by degrees, seek
the utter overthrow of those whom they do malign: and as a further appendix
to this, oftentimes by the help of their grand teacher, sow discord between
husband and wife, solicit maidens, yea enforce both them, and married women
to unclean, and unlawful lusts, and herein implore the help of the devil,
to accomplish their malicious designs, which transgression is capital.

Seventhly, the exercise of this act or vanity is punishable by death, although
it be practiced but only in sport and jest, which may appear thus, because
God has seriously forbidden (and under no less forfeiture then of life it
self) to ask counsel of a Soothsayer or Coniurer; if this then be a crime of
such nature, in those, who it may be herein thought not to do evil, there
is no reason to induce any to think that he will spare the wilful, and
purposed authors thereof, and Magitians, who work only iuggling tricks, and
illusions, and foretell some future things, as yet unknown until they do so
fall out, are not freed from the sentence condemnatorie; much more then those
who willingly, and upon premeditated malice, murder or impair the life and
good estate of other, deserve to stand parallel with them. And there can no
reason be yielded of this so sharp a c^ ^re, but only because they have
learned, and accordingly exercise unlawful arts, for whosoever endeavors to
bring that thing to pass, by pretending natural means, which exceeds the
power of Nature, and is not thereunto enabled either by God, or the ministry
of good Angels at his appointment, he must of necessity have this faculty
communicated by some combination and inter league with the devil.

Eighthly, the Judge or civil Magistrate is bound by virtue of that office, and
superiority he sustaineth in the commonwealth, to purge and free that place,
in, and over which he has command, of all malefactors, which if he do
neglect, then is a double offender, against the Law both of Justice and
Charity; for he is obliged by duty to foresee (so much as in him lies) that
the public state should be secured, which it concerns to have offenders
punished, otherwise he makes himself partner with them in their outrages and
offenses, and stands answerable for those damages sustained by the whole
body of the people in general, or undergone by any particular of the same,
for sparing of the wicked Pythagor^ apud Stobaum.
is hurting the good, and he that does not repress and forbid evil (when it
is in his power) does countenance and maintain it.

Much more might be added, and many examples produced, to manifest, how in all
Nations these odious company of witches, and the like have ever been accounted
detestable; and for their impious deeds requited with never dying shame, and
utter confusion, and justly by law executed; for among the Romans,
Mathematitians, Tacitus annal^um (...) 2 (...) consul^ L^um (...) ad^um
co^ntarys.
and Magitians by the Decree of the Senate were expelled out of all Italy: and
amongst these Pituanus was thrown down from the rock Tarpeius, and crushed
apeeces. Martius by the Consuls put to death with the sound of a Trumpet
without the gate Exquilina: Publicia and Licinia Valerius Maximus li. 6 ca 3.
Remigius Damonol^g. l 3. c. (...)
women, and seauenty more witches hanged. The Demosthenes oral. 1. contra
Aristogitone^.
speedy judgment of the Athenians, witness of their hatred against these
kind of malefactors, is much commended, who without any other solemnity of
proceeding at the only accusation of a Maid, without delay put one Lemnia a
witch to death: and it is memorable which Ammianus Libr. 26. not far from the
beginning.
Marcelli^s has left in record, that one Hilarious, because he committed his
son young, and not of mature years, to be taught and instructed unto a
Coniurer, was adjudged to die, and escaping from the hands of the executioner,
who had negligently bound him, drawn by force out of the next church of the
Christians, to which he fled as unto a Sanctuary, and executed.

The end of Bonfinius rerum Hungaricaram decad^ 2. libr. 2.
Varasolo, a famous Inchantresse in Hungary is dreadful, who for her sundry
witcheries was cast into prison, and there constrained through extremity of
hunger, to tear off and eat the flesh of her own legs and arms, and at
the last, impatient of further delay, there murdered herself, and shortened
the span of her life.

But here I stay my hand, take it from the table, and the rather, because much
has already been spoken to this purpose. Wherefore, for conclusion, I shut up
this whole Treatise with a remarkable speech of a noble Allaricus apud
Cassiodorum li. 9 epist 18. in qua edictum illius: and Corne^ius Agripp^,
sometime more then well acquat^ed with this Art, does retract his own books
written of secret philosophy, and in plain terms and expressly gives his
judgment, that all these loud women (for this title may include the whole
rabble of this black Guard) with Iannes and Iambres, and Simon Magus, are to
be tormented with endless pains in eter^all fire. Cornelius Agrippa De
vanitate Scientiarum ca. 4^.
King; Let the straight rigor of law be inflicted upon all, both practisers
and partakers with wisards, by putting any confidence in them; for it is
ungodly for man to be remiss and favorable unto those whom divine piety, and
our duty to God will not suffer unpunished. For what folly were it to forsake
the Creator and Giver of life, and to follow the author of death? this
dishonest fact, unbeseeming, and utterly repugnant to the credit and
reputation of a Judge, be far from him. Let none countenance that which the
Laws do condemn, for all are by the Regal Edicts to be punished with
death, who intermeddle with such forbidden and unlawful Arts.

FINIS.

