THE DAY OF HEARING: Or, SIX LECTVRES UPON THE latter part of the third
Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews: of the time and means that God has
appointed for men to come to the knowledge of his truth, that they may be saved
from his wrath.

The summary points of every one of which Lectures are set down immediately
after the Epistle dedicatory.

Hereunto is adjoined a Sermon against fleshly lusts, and against certain
mischievous May-games which are the fruit thereof.

By H. R. Master of Arts, and now Minister of the word.

Ioh. 3 19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.



Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's churchyard,
at the sign of the Bible. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, SIR THOMAS EGERTON, Knig^^, Lord Keeper of the great
seal of England, and one of her Ma^esties most Honorable pr^v^^ counsel, my
especial benefactor, the increase and continuance of all spiritual blessings,
with that true honor which is from God, and lasts for evermore.
DVTY binding me (Right ^onourable) to show some testimony of a thankful mind
toward you, I have presumed so far as to offer to your good Lordship this
small exercise of mine, such as it is, which I have taught and written
according to the ability that God has give^ me, and as the charge committed to
me required.

The Apostle Paul instructs his scholar Timotheus, and in him all ministers
that have the charge of teaching, to show themselves approved unto God, (...).
Tim. (...). (...)
as workmen that need not to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright.
For in so dividing of the word consists the life and force of the ministry,
that all me^, what age or condition soever they be of, which will be fed to live
everlastingly, may have their portion of meat give^ the^ out of that word, and
that in season, or conveniently, that it may be savoury and pleasant as the
venifon of Jacob was unto his father Isaac, and not unsavory as the sons of
Elie made the offering of the Lord to be abhorred.

But such is the untowardness of this age, which, in respect of the time, should
have abounded with all knowledge necessary to salvation, that not only country
people (specially where the word has seldom been divided aright) but also
the inhabitants of towns and cities, in too many places of this land, have
need to be taught the first principles of the word of God. For now in the
latter days, on the one side, the pride of life, Atheism, and the custom of
sin has so bewitched the world, that the hearts of most men are become fat,
and their ears are dull of hearing, that the word which they hear does not
profit the^: neither do the manifold tokens of Gods anger revealed against the
impiety and unrighteousness of this age, (as the pestilence, the late dearth,
sundry new and strange sicknesses) nor the present troubles of wars, beside
other innumurable examples of Gods displeasure daily seen among us, any thing
move secure worldlings, and such as are hardened in ungodliness, to turn from
their own ways, and to obey the gospel of God while it is yet called To day.
And on the other side, the poison of the whorish church of Rome has so spread
it self over the world, that as certain wild beasts, of which Cicero
writes, Den^l. deor. lib. 2.
when they be hu^ted, are wont with an intolerable filthy sent to drive from
the^ the hu^ters; so the leave^ of Antichrist, though he be now hunted to his
place, has infected all that way where he has gone, that the unwholesome savor
there of cannot yet be purged with the bright fire of Gods word: no not in
those places where the word has of a long season been divided aright, not
withstanding the continual diligence of faithful Pastors in their ministry,
the vnreproueablenes of their conversation, and the godly writings of many
learned and zealous men.

For mine own part (being one of the least and last among my brethren in this
so weighty a calling) as afflictions are the assigned portion of a Christian, I
have been weakened with Gods visitation of sickness, and chastened with the
adversities of this life, that little was the good that could be done by such
as I am. I rejoice of mine infirmities, knowing (as Mar^i^ (...)her.
one, that was sufficiently tried with afflictions, has written for the
comfort of others) that experience and practice in bearing the cross is that
which makes a right divine, and a true Christio^ indeed. Howbeit, having, now
above a year since, at several times, according to that measure of grace that
I received, exercised upon the latter part of the 3. Chap. of the ^ipist to the
Hebrews, and supposing that setipture to be most fit to be handled in these
days, and among those people who^ I was to instruct, I thought it my duty, and
the rather being requested, to publish the same to the benefit of others,
specially of such as hunger after good things, and accept of that portion of
meat which curious and full stomachs have no lust to. I have added thereto a
sermon, the matter whereof and the cause of annexing it to these Lectures is
briefly specified in the preface to the reader. if profane writings, as
histories of profane men's lives, books of lustful love, invented fables, and
tricks of vain men's wits, which help to build the Babel of pride, and to
fortify the Egypt of sin, be so favorably received and studied on in the
world, much more is Christian doctrine to be regarded of Christian men. And
whereas great clerks and grave divines do out of the treasure of their many
years studies bring their gold and blew silk to the building of the Lords
sanctuary, let goats hair be accepted at the hands of younger and Poorer
men, so it be fit for the building, and be offered of a willing heart, as the
Lord requires. It (...) ^55
skilleth not what proud and envious men judge of our enterprise, so long as
we have the testimony of a pure conscience. The world is always like it self,
full of scorpion like scoffers. And it is no new thing to see the common evil of
envy so to reign in most men, that they have other men's doings in obloquje,
and ^^eke to depratie them. And this they do, as the Poet says: (ducunt; Vel
quia nil rectum, nisi quod placuit sibi, (...) (...). (...). (...).
Vel quia turpe putant parere minoribus. either because they count nothing well
done, but that which pleases their humo^: or else because they think it a
foul disgrace that their inferiors should; go before them.

But that I be not tedious unto your honor; as I have found undeserved
favor at your hands, so, being not otherwise able to testify my love to
you, I am bold to present unto your Lordship this little fruit of my labor,
hoping that of your wonted clemency and favor, you will accept of it, as a
mite of a willing mind, and unfeigned good will. And in that I have therein
alleged other authors beside the holyscriptures, I did it of care to have
every truth confirmed in the mouth of approved witnesses.

I need not here speak of your Lordships good deserts. I know that a
virtuous man loves not to hear his own praise: for it is better to be a good
man indeed, then in men's opinion to be so accounted. Wherefore as GOD has
exalted you to honor and dignity, and (as a learned young man has lately
written to you) has made you a keeper of many vines, and, as we see, has
wrought in you a notable care under her Majesty to provide for the welfare
of his Church; so I beseech him that is Lord of Lords long to preserve your
honor in all safety, and to increase in you his gifts of grace, to the setting
forth of his glory, to the continual good of his church, and finally to your
own eternal comfort, through the merits of his son Christ Jesus. And whereas
the world is in danger of eternal perdition, as great part through
irreligiousnes and atheism without either knowledge or true fear of God, and
a great part through affected ignorance and obstinate frowardness in Popish
customs; we are to pray daily that it may please God to wake men out of the
sleep of sin and voluptuous living, and by the power of his holy word still
to weaken the kingdom of sin and of Antichrist, and to call those that are
to be called to the knowledge of his truth while it is yet called To day.

Your Honors most bounden Orator, HVGH ROBERTS.

THE CONTENTS, OR BRIEF sum of the Lecture: upon the latter part of the
third Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, set down in order, as follows.
1 The first Lecture, upon the 7. 8. 9. 10. and 11. verses; of the authority
of the word of God; and of the special causes why this scripture, being part
of one of the Psalms of David, is alleadge^ by the Apostl^ writing to the
Hebrews.

2 The second Lecture, upon the 12. and 13. verses; of the fru^t of an evil
heart; of mutual ex^^^tation; and of the dectit fulness of sin.

3 The third Lecture, upon the 14. verse; of faith; and of the assurance of
salvation, and ever lasting felicity to the true believers.

4 The fourth Lecture, upon the 15. verses of the necessity of hearing the
word of God; how the bardening of the heart is to be understood; and of the
error of praying in the church; specially in the time of public (...), or of
c^mmon pr^^ers.

5 The fifth Lecture, upon the 16. and 17 verses; of the wickedness of m^ns
nature; all ^en are naturally bent to idolatry; we must imitate the faithful
(though they be but few in number, or in one age) whom God raises up in all
ages to confess his name; of Gods long sufferance and bountifulnes toward
(inners; of sin, and the fruit thereof.

6 The sixth and last Lecture, upon the 18. and 19. versest of the punishment
of the^ that obey ^^t the Gospel, though for a time they be borne with, and
live in a flo^rishing states what the tokens of Gods iudg^ents, which befall in
the world, and wherewith some men are visited, should profit us; the word of
God is the judge of men, which word is to be obeyed while the day of grace
lasts.

THE FIRST LECTVRE, UPON the words of the Prophet David, alleged by the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, cha. 3. ve. 7. 8. 9. 10. and 11. of the
authority of the word of God: and of the special causes why this scripture of
the Prophet is here alleged: with the application thereof.
7 Wherefore, as the holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his voice.

8 Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, according to the day of
temptation in the wilder^esse.

9 Where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works for ^i^ years
long.

10 When fore I was grieved with that generation, and said they err ever in
their heart, neithe^ have they known my waie^.

11 Wherefore I swear in my wrat, if they shall enter into my rest.


IN the beginning of this chapter (men and brethren beloved in Christ) the
Apostle, that was the author of this epistle, exhorts the Hebrews, or Jews,
to whom he writes, to consider Christ Jesus, the Apostle, and high Priest, as
he faith, of our profession of Chrstianisme; and he compares him with that
great and renowned Prophet of God, Moses; because the jews did magnisie the
remembrance of Moses, by whom God had planted and established both the religion
and civil government of the people of Israel: and therefore it is written of
him, there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, who, the Lord
knew Deuteronomy. 34 10
face to face. And for this cause in the ninth of John, the Jews stand so
precisely upon the authority of Moses, and say, we be Moses diseiples. To 9.
28. 29.
we know that God spoke with Moses. Now to prove that Christ far excels
Moses in honor and authority, the Apostle uses two notable and familiar
arguments. The one he draws from a comparison between the builder and the
house which he h^th builded: Christ is the builder of his spiritual house,
which is the church; Moses was but one part of the building: therefore Christ
is above Moses. The other from a comparison between the heir, or the natural
son, and the servant of his house: Christ is the son; Moses was but a
servant: therefore Christ is more honorable then Moses. Here upon the Apostle
infers that all the faithful which profess Christian religion are the
house of Christ, if they persevere and continue in his grace unto the end.

But because without faith it is impossible Heb. 11. 6. Row. 10. 17
to ple^se God, and without the hearing of the word of God faith is not
attained, and without a good heart there comes no prosite Heb. 42.
by hearing.

Therefore, that they which hear the word of God may be effectually joined to
this building of the house of God, and that they may be so prepared to hear
this word, that it may be so prepared to hear this word, that it may not be
unto them a favor of death unto death, but of life unto life, the Apostle
^^leadgeth this scripture out of the Psalms of David: the authority whereof
Psalm 95.
he attributes to the holy Ghost, who spoke by the Prophets. And here we
learn that the holy scriptures which we hear or read, thought they be named
after that Prophet, that Apostle, or that Evangelist by whom they were
ministered or written, are not with standing the lively oracles of God, and the
very words of the holy Ghost, who inspired the Prophets and holy Ghost, who
inspired the Prophets and holy men, and moved the^ to speak as they were
taught and directed from above: according as the Apostle Peter 2. P^^. 1. 10.
21.
witnesleth, know this, that no prophecy in the scripture is of any private
(...): for the prophec, came not in old time by the will of (...): but h^l^^
(...) of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. And likewise when of
sin, is by the faithful pastor collected and preached out of the sacred
scriptures, we are to teceyue the same, and to esteem of it, as if God
himself did speak unto us, who then shows his face unto us so far as we are
able to abide it, but his glorious voice, our frail nature cladde with sin
and transgression cannot endure to hear, without the ministry of men, as it
appears in the Israelits, who say to Moses, talk Exodus 20. 19.
thou with us, and we will heart: but i^t not God talk with us least we die.

And yet, when we are taught by Gods ministers, it is the holy Ghost that
teaches us, Of whose wisdom the Apostle says, we have this treasure in
earthen vessels: 2. Cor. 4. 7.
even heavenly treasure, pure and undefiled. for, as we see the water of a
fountain when it is put into the earthen vessels, does not chaung his
nature and quality that it had before: And the light of the sun, though it
shine through a window into a dark place, does nevertheless retain that
virtue and operation which it has from the body of the sun; so the ministry
of men, which are the organes or instruments of the holy Ghost, alters not
the nature and property, neither diminishes the authority of those things
which they, minister. We must bevvare therefore that we give not the less
credue to the wisdom of the holy Ghost because we hear it at the mouth
of men. For, it is written, God 2. Cor. 4. ^
that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he which has
shined in the hearts of his Ministers to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of GOD in the face of JESUS CHRIST. And therefore whosoever
believes not men, teaching as they are taught of GOD, the same believes not
the spirit of GOD who has made them able Ministers of his holy will
revealed in his word. For CHRIST has given that commission to his true
Ministers, that he says of them, he that hears you, hears Luke 10. 1^
me, and he that despises you despises me

Now seeing that the Canonical scriptures are the sayings of the holy Ghost,
who yet speaks to us, (...) often as we hear them ministered and taught, shall
we not give great heed to so great a Doctor, that his words may persuade
and take place in our hearts to the winninge of the soul? for this cause this
scripture with the rest of that Psalm of David was usually song among the
jews, upon the sabbath days, when the church came together, that it might
stir them up to a more attentive hearing of the law and the Prophets. And so
likewise this psalm is wont to be read, or song in our chruches in these days,
before the common praires and divine exercise of the other scriptures, as a
preparatiue to the estectuall hearing of Good voice; And not to give place to
evil thoughts, and worldly cogitations which are wont to harden men's hearts,
and to cause many to depart out of the church, as wise, and with as little
knowledge, as they came to it.

To omit now the particulare handling of these words of the Prophet: for they
are afterward repeated and applied by the Apostle, as we shall see in the
handling thereof: let us here consider three especial causes why this scripture
is here alleged: whereof the first is, that the Hebrews might have no I
cause to glory of their farhers and progenitors after the ^lesh. For those
their fathers which, as they boast of, had eaten Manna^^^ Ioh. 6. 31.
the wilderness, tempted God, faith the Prophet; and therefore he exhorts
their posterity, and all that hear the same word of salvation, which was
preached unto those fathers by Moses, not to harden their heart ^s as they did.

There is nothing so common in the mouth of vanie and superstitious men, as
the praise of their fo^efathers, and of the days that are past; as if it were
enough for us, if we could but follow the example of our fathers; never
examining how they believed, ^r how they heard the word of God, or whether they
have heard it at all. And we think that our sins sh^l not come into judgment
if we have learned them of our fathers. But do we not hear that God faith in
the second commandment, that he is is a ie^ouse God, visiting the sins of
Exodus 20. 5.
the fathers, upon the children, upon the third generation, and upon the
fourth of them that hate him? that is, as a worthy teacher expounds
Bullinger upon the second co^ma^deme^t.
it, if the children walk in the crooked stepps of their fathers, and think
that their iniqu^tie shall not be punished, because they have learned it of^
their fathers, yet God will ^harplye revenge it in the children, although he
touched not their fathers when they committed the same iniquity. The people
that were left from the captivity of Babylon object against the Prophet
Jeremiah that when they, and their fathers did burn incense unto the Queen
of Ier. 44. 17. 18.
heaven, and power out drink offeringes unto her, they had plenty of
victuals, and all was well with them. But when they left of that service, we
have had, say they, scarceness of all things, and have been consumed by the
svvorde and by the famine. The Prophet replyeth, that because they and their
fathers with their Kings and Princes h^dde done such things, therefore the
LORD could no longer forbear Ier. 44. 20. 21. 22.
it, but brought those plagues upon them.

And thus do the frovvarde people of our days, which vvincke at the light,
deceive themselves, obiecting that our fathers, (which as they say, were of
the old religion) had plenty of all things, and felt no want. And because
they are touched with the evilles of these days, (which notwithstanding are
nothing so great as the obstinacy and vvillfull ignorance of this age has
deserved) they run into that note of folly, why is it that the Eccle. (...).
12.
former days were better then these?

This has been the old complainte of all ages. The heathen Ovid fastlib. I.
laudamus veteres, sed nostri^ vtimut annis.
Poet says laudamus veteres, we are wont to praise the years of our
forefathers. This comes from the darkness of our nature, that we judge
foolishlie of those things whereof we be ignoraunte, according to this
saying of a learned teacher: because we Bishop lewell.
feel not our fathers evilles, therefore we imagine they had no evil at al.
But though it were true that our fathers have had the peace, and posperitie of
this world, yet if we will look into that age, wherein they lived, we shall
find nothing whereof we may glory. For indeed it was the Egypt of
superstition and spiritual darkness, and therefore as Deering upon the
epistle to the Hebr. lect. 24.
one has left in writing upon this Epistle to the Hebrews, if we go after
Baalims which our fathers have taught us, we shall be fed with the
wormwoode which our fathers have leaten. Yea let us assure our selves we
shall be beaten with more stripes then our fathers, if we will wittinglie
tread in their steppe^. For as Bulliuger says, if thy forefathers Bulliuget
upon the Apoc. set. 35.
bad had the like opportunity which then neglectest, what a space would
they have run before thee.

And therefore, as it shall be easier for Tyr^^ Luke. 10. 14.
and S^lon at the day of judgment then for them that heard Christ, and saw
his miracles, and were not the better therefore: so, I may say, it shall be
easier for our forefathers at that day, then for them, which bring forth no
good fruit, nor make profession of the truth (being preached and made known
unto them) which has not been so revealed to our fathers, as it is now to
the people of our days.

The second cause why the Apostle recites 2
this scripture of David, is, that with the example, and punishmente of them
that tempted and hardened their hearts in the dese^te, he might terrify the
Hebrews, and make them more careful to receive the words of exhortation,
and to obey the voice of Christ the mediator of the new testament, whose
voice; as he is greater then Moses, so shall they draw upon them great
erpunishment which neglect to hear it.

The children of Israel, of whom mention is here made, after they were
delivered out of Egypt by Moses, for all that they had seen the works of God,
and his miracles which he wrought for them in Egypt, and at the red sea, yet
they tempted him in the wilderness, and doubted of his ^goodnesse and
providence toward them, and said, is the Lord among us or no? because they
had not Exodus 17. 7.
water at their pleasure. This was the provocation which is here mentioned,
wherewith the Lord God was tempted, in the wilderness, of his own people,
after that he had delivered the^ out of the hands of their enemies.

And again when they should have gone out of the wilderness into the land of
Canaan to possess it, and to dwell therein, where they should have had rest,
peace, and prosperity, yet they believed not the word of God, The chil-dren of
Israel are commanded to go up and possess the land which God had said before
them: but they say they will send men to search out the land, Deur. I. 21. 22.
and therefore the Lord, s^^ll, bearing with them, bids them len, Number. 1^.
^3. how be it the event and issue of their sending, declares that it came from
the people^ disobedience to the word of God: for the years, in which they did
b^^r^ their iniquity in the wilderness, are measured with the number or the
days, in the which they had searched out the land of C^naan, Number. 13. 14. 33.
34.
but sent twelve men, a man out of every tribe of the children of Israel to
search the land to know what manner of land it was, and whether they might
obtain it or no; as if the living God, and Lord of the whole earth, which had
done so many things for them, should not now be able to subdue their
enemies, and to give them the land according to his promise. And when the
twelve men returned, after forty days, from searching of the land, and
brought with them of the fruit thereof to show to all the congregation of the
children of Israel, ten of the twelve brought up an evil report and slander
upon the land, and to these ten men, the whole assembly gave credit, and their
words to them seemed to be true. And therefore they murmured against Moses and
Aaron, and would have made a Number. 14.
new captain to bring them again unto Egypt; but Joshua and Caleb (two of the
twelve that had searched the land) all the multitude would have stoned with
stones, for the truth sake which these two men reported of the land, and
because they persuaded the people not to rebel against the Lord.

Thus the Israelites that came out of Egypt tempted the Lord in the wilderness
and provoked him to anger by following the counsels of their own hearts, and
therefore the Lord says of the^, as it is in this text, they err ^ver in
their hearts, and what was then their punishments? as I live, says the Lord, I
will surely do unto you, even as ye have spoken in mine ears; Number. 14. 28. 2^.
your carkases shall sal in this wilderness etc. And so it came to pass: for
of the six hundredth thousand, which came out of Egypt^, and were able to
discern between good and evil, none but two men, Caleb the son of
Iephiumeth, and Joshua the son of Nun, which constantly, as the scripture
says, followed Number. 32. 12
the Lord, did enter into the land of Canaan to inhabit it; all the rest were
consumed in the terrible wilderness according to the word of the Lord, for
Moses says, and the Lord was Number. 32. 13
very angry with Israel, and made them wander in the wilderness forty
years, until all the generation that had done evil in the sight of the
Lord were consumed. And here the text says, therefore I swear in my wrath if
they should enter into my rest.

Where it is said, in my wrath, we are to understand that God, who is a spirit
immortal, infinite, and incomprehensible, with whom is 1am. 1. 17.
no variableness, neither shadow by turning, is not subject to any of these
passions which the scriptures seem to attribute unto him, as wrath, jealousy,
grief, repentance, and the like. But these things are figuratively applied to
God after the manner of men for our understanding sake, which are not able to
conceive of heavenly things, without metaphors, allegories, ^arables and
similit^^es, borrowed from earthly and natural things, which are therefore so
much used in holy scriptures for ou^^ learning. And here by the name of wrath,
or anger, is set forth the determinate sentence of Gods eternal justice
against sin and disobedience.

And when it is said, that he swear, it teaches us fear, and consirmeth to us
that Gods threatenings fall not to the ground without Augustine in Psalm 95.
full effect. For as Aurelius Augustine says upon this place, iurantem hominem
debes timere, thou ought to fear when a man swears, least for his oths
sake he should do that which is As Herod did Mar. 6. 26. when he caused John
Bapsist to be beheaded.
against his will; how much more, says he, ought thou to fear when God
swears, who can swear nothing rashly? his oath is a sure confirmation.
Whereas in deed, as another father says, every word of God ought to be taken
for anoth. And this phrase, of they shall outer, does aggravate the
threatening. For here is an (...), that is, a concealing of that that would be
uttered, after the manner of men, when one through indignation, or anger, or
otherwise moved with some passion of the mind, utters not out his meaning to
a full and perfect serce. And the meaning of this is, if they shall enter into
my rest, my word is of no force, or I am not to be believed when I speak. Our
saviou^ Christ, mourning for the Pharisees because of the hardness of their
hearts, uses the same phrase of speech in the gospel by Mark, saying^,
verily I sa^^ unto you, if a sign Mar. 8. 12
shall be given to this nation; as if he should say, if a figne be given them
there is no truth in me, or let me be a deceiver.

Thus as M. Beza^ wri^eth, when God swears by himself, he suffers his
truth, In Mar. ca. 8. ver. 12.
and his glory to be judged of according! to the words which he assirmeth.

And what do these things teach us? forsooth they confirm Gods just
judgments to overtake them which harden their hearts and obey not his voice,
that we thereby might be taught to fear, and brought to obedience. For to us is
now preached the same Christian verity, and religion, that the Apostle preached
to the Hebrews in this Epistle. Seeing therefore how fearfully the children
of Israel were punished for their provoking, and disobeying the word which was
brought unto them by the servant of God, Moses, how great then shall their
punishment be which harden their hearts, and set light by that word of grace
which was brought into the world by the son of God himself? surely as one
faith, we, if we harden our hearts, shall be Eralmu^.
so much the more grievously punished, by how much the greater he is that has
vouch safed to speak unto us in his own person.

Seeing therefore that Christ the mediator of the new testament, who by his
own testimony is greater then lonas greater then Solomon, and greater then all
the Prophets that went before him, has uttered his voice; unto us with his
own mouth, and yet the same voice is heard in our ears; how then shall we
escape if we neglect so great salutation?

Lastly the rest mentioned in this scripture The third cause why this
scrip-ture is a^leadged of the Apostle in this text to the He-brewes.
does notably express the rest and promise of God set forth in the new
testament, as a figure most agreeable to the thing figured. For the external
rest wheronto the children of Israel were to be brought, was the land of
Canaan. The rest of the gospel is the celestial Jerusalem, the city of the
huinge GOD described in the twentieth and one of the Revelation, into the which
none unclean thing shall enter. And now as the murmuring Israelites were
deprived of entering into the land of Canaan: because they believed those tenn
men, which brought avile slander upon the land, and would give no credit to
the other two, Caleb and Joshua, which stood for the truth; so we, if we go
after Baals Prophets, false teachers, and deceivers which are mo in number then
Elyab, or Caleb and Joshua, and so follow the multitude and decline from the
truth, shall be excluded from the rest everlasting; and shall have our portion
with the multitude of Hyppocrites and unbelievers.

The Papists that are against us, do bragg of the multitude of people: and
nations, which have followed the church of Rome, and received their traditions:
but this proves not the truth to be of their side, but rather the contrary.
For Christ calls his church a little flock. And he says, that wide Luke 12.
32. Mat. 7. 13.
is the gate, and broad is the way that leadesh to destruction. So the whole
world in the days of Noah consented togeither in ungodliness confirmed by the
custom of many ages: but Noah and his family is all the Genesis 7. 1.
slocke that was CHRIST'S, and that had not consented to the ungodliness and
custom of those evil days. And L^^ alone is found righteous in a whole
city of wicked people. Caleb and Joshua, even Genesis 19.
two men are found faithful and constant in all that great multitude of Gods
own people which came out of Egypt. And in the revelation, the Lord calls
his servants, my two witnesses; as if they were the fewest in Revel. 11. 3.
number of all other.

Now here are two ways set before thee. If thou will go to hell; Follow the
multitude and thou art never out of the way. But if thou will enter into life;
follow the example of good men though they be but one or Luke 13. 24.
two amoug many thousand: for Christ faith to thee strive; because the gate is
so straight that it is hard and most difficult to enter in there at. Yet harden
not thine heart, neither regard what thy forefathers have done before thee; but
regard and obey the Lords voice, and walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit: and thou art in the way to that gloriouse rest which remains to the
people of God, purchased with the blood of the mediator of the new testament,
to whom be praise in the church throughout all generations for ever.

The second Lecture, upon the 12. and 13. verses; of the fruit of an evil
heart; of mutual exhortation; and of the deceitfulness of sin.
12 Take heed brethren, least at any time their be in any of you an evil
heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God.

13 But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.


THese words, my brethren, have a relation to that scripture which continues
from the seventh v^^se of this chapter to this twelfth verse of the same, taken
out of the Psalm of David, as an excellent sermon of the holy Ghost, and so
applied by the Apostle to declare, as you have heard, that the authority of
men, and examples of fathers can be no ground, nor stay of faith, or religion
to any man; because the best of the^ have erred; as al those fathers of the
Hebrews, who after they had seen the glory of God, and were delivered out of
Egypt with signs and wonders, even the whole company of them (two or three men
excepted) provoked God in he wilderness, and would not believe the word which
was preached unto them. Where we have also learned that if Moses the servant
of the house, and the law given by him could not be despised without
punishment: for they which obeyed not were deprived of the promised rest, and
overthrowen in the wilderness; much more shall they be punished which will not
hear the son, of whom Moses did bear witness, and whose voice inviteth to
a more glorious rest then the earthly rest of the land of Canaan

These things being so alleged, by the Author of this Epistle, to warn the
Hebrews, and in them all other people, to whom the same gospel is revealed, to
the end that they might hereby receive instruction to be the more careful to
hear the voice of Christ the prince of all the Prophets, and the end of the
law to every one that believes.

Now he proceeds to apply the exhortation of the Prophet more particularly,
according as the time of Gods calling requires. And by this word, brethren,
he declares his tender affection toward them, and the earnest desire that he
has to win them to Christ. Where we are to know in what sense they are
called, brethran. Not according to nature, as Jacob and Esau were 4 So^tes of
brethren.
brethren; nor ^or consanguinitie sake, as all the jews were brethren;
neither are they called brethren by imitation, or for their agreement in evil,
as Simon and Leui are Genesis 49. 5.
called brethren in evil, because they had consented to slaie a man; and in
this sense malefactors and wicked men imitating one another, and consenting
to do evil, are brethren.

But according to truth the Hebrews are ^heere called, brethren: for all the
faithful are brethren by grace. It appears in many places of this Epistle,
that much people of the Jews were converted to the Christian faith, and had
received the doctrine of the Gospel, and acknowledged CHRIST JESUS for their
Messiah.

And also it is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles that many thousand
jews Act. 21. 20.
did believe. Yet the chiefest of them, and for the more part the whole nation
were obstinate and persisted in the blindness of their own hearts; and also
those that believed were all zealous of the law of Moses, retaining with the
gospel, the Circumcision, the sabbath day, the purification; and other
ceremonies of the law. And therefore as the doctrine of the holy Ghost, in
this scripture, is most forcible to persuade the unbelieving to receive the
grace of God in Christ; so is it most necessary to keep and strengthen the
weak members in the sincerity of the Gospel, and to teach them to forsake
the ceremonies and earthly rudiments now abrogated and taken away by the death
of the Messiah. Thus we understand that, as brethren by grace, and endued with
Christian faith, he exherteth them to be ware of an evil heart of unbelief.

There is no defection or falling; away from the liui^g God where there is not
an evil heart. And therefore where the Prophet speaks of the provoking and
apostasy of their fathers in the wilderness, it is added with all, they err
ever in their heart. There Psalm 95. 10. Hebr. 3. 10
is the root of evil and insidelitie, even the heart. The holy Prophet says,
the heart is deceitful and wicked above all things; who can Ier. 17. 9.
know it? Here we see that naturally in the heart of man there is nothing but
wickedness and obduration: and this is the cause that the children of men are
accustomed to do evil and to delight in sin. For such as the tree is, so is
the fruit thereof. And so long as this obduration possesses man's heart, his
voluntary religion is nothing but Hypocrisy, his outvvarde show of
obedience is but dissimulation, when he offers his prayers and
intercessions, it is but lip labor, like the people which drew near unto
Christ with their mouth, and honored him with their but their heart, faith
he, is far from (...): and therefore they worshipped him it vain.

Simon the Sorcerer, as it is in the Acts Act. 8. 11.
of the Apostles, believed and was baptized: but he was not therefore the
better: for, Peter said to him thine heart is not right in the sight of the
Lord. Wherefore if you will love the Lord your God, you must love him with
love out of a pure heart. For that is the end 1. Tim. 15.
of his commandment. For the Lord judges not as men do after the outward
appearance, but as it is written, the Lord be holds 1. Sam. 16. 7.
the heart. If the heart be not purged by grace, all outward holiness is but
as painted sepulchers fair without and foul within, or as green grass, and
fair flowers under the which lies a venomous snake that will sting you to
death. Christ tells you that out of the heart come those things that defile
the whole man, as, evil thoughts, murders, Mat. 15. 19. 20.
adulteries, fornications, theftes, false testimonies, slanders, and the like.
And for this cause his Apostle faith, purge your hearts ye lam 48.
wavering minded. For while the heart is not purged, there is nothing in man
but a vvavering mind; and as the same Apostle faith, avvavering minded man is
unstable in all his ways. He is carried from one vanity to another, he
sells himself to sin, from miquitie to iniquity. He is content with Judas
to sell Christ and Christian religion for the gain of this world, and for the
pleasures of sin, this is the fruit of an evil heart and unfaithful, which
hates to be reformed, and will not obey the voice of the almighty.

The Prophet Zachariah cries out against the people, that would not, hear the
law of their God, and says, they made their hearts, as Z^c. 7. 12.
an ada^an^^ stone least they should hear the l^we, etc. Their hearts were so
far from believing the word of the Lord, that for the hardness thereof, he
compares them to the adamant stone. Plin. not. ^ist. lib. 37. cap. 4.


The adamant as the historiographers do observe, is the hardest of all other
stones. It is so hard that no tool can break it, no fire can heat it; yea
nothing can overcome the hardness of this stone, or soften it and break it,
but only the warm blood of the he Goat: And surely the hearts of the children
of this world are rightly compared with the hard adamant, which naturally are
so hardened in sin, that without the dew of grace, and the virtue of the
blood of Christ make them soft, and renew them, all our preaching, all our
exhorting, and dehorting, though we had the tongues of men and angels cannot
soften, nor turn the heart. For as it is written, that which is crooked can
^o Eccle. 1. 15.
man make straight. We see that the gracious, and most powerful words of
Christ himself did nothing prevail to win tho hard hearted Jews, but
ratheri hardened them in their contumacie, and made them more perverse the^
they were before, because the veil of unbelief was laid over their hearts.

Behold how great a root of wickedness is the obduration and frowardness of
the heart, whence comes the forsaking of life and health, uttered in that
desperate sentence against the counsel of the almighty, depart from us* for
we desire not the Job. 2^. ^4.
knowledge of thy ways. Nevertheless, although most men have not the hearts
of brethren, yet this doctrine must be preached to al, take heed brethren,
least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful, to
depart away from the living God.

He is called the living God in two respects: the one is for difference sake
put between him and the Idols of the Gentiles, which were the work of men's
hands, and had no life, and yet were they called Gods. But he is more
properly and truly called the living God for excellency sake, because he ever
lives, and is the well spring of life, which gives to all things life and
being. To fall away therefore through the evil of thine own heart, from him,
which is to thee all in all things, is a desperate evil case.

Here we learn that it profits us nothing to have believed the word of life,
and to have begun in the spirit if afterward we fall by the way, and seek
to be made per^ect by the flesh. For, as the Prophet says, whenever the
righteous man turns away from his Ezech. 18. (...).
righteousness, and commits iniquity, he shall even die for the same. Many
have begun well, and have afterward fainted in the midst of their race, and
departed from the living God. Ioash king of Judah began to do well, and did
that which was acceptable in the sight 2 Chro. 24.
of the Lord, so lo^ as Ieho^ada the priest lived; but afterward he fell to
idolarry, and departed away from the living God. So Amaziab his 2. Chio. 25.
son, at the beginning of his taigne, did uprightly in the eie^ of the Lord,
but not with a perfect heart. For he was weary of well doing. And therefore he
was slame and ^reason was wrought against him, when he turned away from the
Lord. The Galathians Gal. 3. 3. Gal. 5. 7.
began in the spirit, and did run well for a time; but afterward they
turned away from the truth to the weak rudiments of the world, and would be
made perfect by the flesh. Gal. 3. 3.


And among other examples of this Apostasy, or falling away from grace, not
able is that of Julian the Emperor, who for his revolting is called, Apostata.
In his youth he was brought up in the college of clergy men, and profited so
well in Christian learning Greg. Naz. in Iusiansi or at. 1.
that he became a public reader of the holy scriptures; but afterward he
sufrered himself to be deceived of heathen Philosophers, and then renouncing
Christianity, he gave himself to Paganism, in the reign of the Emperor
Constantius. He was taken for a sound Christian; and for his sucsesse in
war, for his learning, his gentleness and many other laudable gifts that he
had, he was highly renouned. But when he was promoted to the empire, and had
full authority, then he showed himself an Apostaia. He was wont
contunieliouslye to call Christ our savior, Galileus, the man of Gablee, and
by all crafty means to seek the dishonor of the Christians, advancing the
Paganes, and such as would forsake Christ and his religion, to honor and
offices, and so, in despite of Christianisme, he licensed and aided the lews to
build the temple at Jerusalem. Greg. Naz. in lusiana^ oral. 2.
But when they laid the foundations thereof, the earth claue asunder with a
great earth quake and a mighty storm of wind arose, that their whole work
was overthrown, and many of the lews slain, many of the^ burnt and maimed in
their principal members, with lightnings and fire from heaven. Other tokens of
Gods wrath were seen among them, as also in the host of lulia^. And so the
jews were made to desist from their wicked enterprise. And lulian, when he had
reigned a year and seven months, or there abouts, having received his deaths
wound in battle against the Persians, took his hand full of blood and threw it
into the air, saying, vicists tandem Galiae, thou man of Galilee, meaning
Christ Jesus, when all is done thou have the victory. With this blasphemy
uttered in despair, and in a feeling of woe, he perished. Here is a notable
pattern of an evil heart and unfaithful.

Many in all ages have after this manner fallen away from the living God, and
have gone from Christ to Antichrist, though not so famous as Indian.

It can not be unknown to them, which by reading and exercise seek the ground
of true religion, how many in this land, which seemed to be professors of the
word of God in the reign of the last king Edward, have fallen away again in
the days of Queen Mary, and like the wethercocke have turned from the Gospel
to the Mass, and from the servants of Christ became the servants of the Pope,
rather then they would forsake either wife, children, lands, houses, or other
earthly commodities for Christ and the Gospels sake.

Again, which is more to be lamented, not few within these forty years,
being brought up in this their native country in schools and universities of
learning, when they should have done good in the church of God, have
contrariewyse run beyond the seas to commite fornication with that painted
harlot the false church of Rome: and then have become rebels against God and
his eternal word, against their lawful prince and their natural country. They
have imitated lulian in apostasy. And it is come unto them according to the
saying of the holy Ghost, the doggees returned to his vomit, and the 2. Pet. 2.
22.
sow that was washed to the wallowing in the ^^re and to leave these men to
him to whom they fall; there are now abiding in this land too many, that are
infected with the leaven of them, which have drunk of the poisoned cup of
Rome, and do wilfully withdraw themselves from the true church, and refuse ^o
hear the doctrine of the Gospel, least they should be converted thereby, and
least the savior of the world should heal them. An evil heart therefore has
deceived these people. And this is the just judgment of God, to send them
strong delusion, as the scripture 2 Thessalonians. (...). 11. 12.
faith, that they should beleeuel^^s, that all they might be damned which
believed not the truth, but bad pleasure in unrighteousness. Now the remedy
which the Apostle prescribes against the custom of sin, against apostasy,
and falling away from GOD, is, exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, least any of you be hardened through the deceitnesse of sin.

Although this duty of exhorting does chiefly belong to the Ministers and
teachere of the word of GOD, as Paul teaches 2. Tim. 4. 2 preach the
vvordo:, be instant, in season and out of season (...)prove, rebuke, exhort
with all long suffering and doctrine, yet here the holy GHOST, speaking by
the Author of this Epistle, will have all men, which profess true religion, to
exhort one another, and that daily or every day; for as much as there is no
day, nor hour of our life without temptations of infidelity, and without the
snares of death laid in our ways. And therefore we are taught in diverse
places of holy scriptures to have a care of our brethren, and to instruct them;
so Paul says to the Thessalonians, exhort one another, and edify one 1
Thesse. 5. 11.
another even as ye do. And because he deserves not the name of a Christian,
whosoever is ignorant of the ground of faith, and religion contained in the
sacred scriptures, and is not able to edify another, nor to speak as the word
of God. Therefore the same Apostle writes to the Romans, I am persuaded of
you my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness and filled with Romans 15. 14
all knowledge, and are able to admonish one another. The doctrine of the
holy GHOST delivered by the Apostles, as it appears in their writings, is
full of such exhortations, as, edi^ie one another, exhort one another, be
fulfilled with the spirit.

But Satan the enemy of all truth has always too many of his side, which are
against this doctrine; yea and in these dai^^ some that have the name to be
preachers, (I pray God they be not for Baal) whose vo^ce sounds, let not
artificers, husbandmen, and men without learning, busy themselves with holy
scriptures, and with matters of faith and religion, let them not go about to
tell other men what they should do, and to admonish other men of their
errors, tracte^^ fabri^^a fabri, let them meddle with those things they have to
do; and take no care of other men though they be in an error. This is the
wisdom of the flesh, and here we see how contrary it is to the wisdom which
is from above, and teaches us to exhort, to edify, and to admonish one
another, what calling, what trade of life, or what condition soever we be of.
For God has always required this duty of mutual exhortation of them that
profess his name, as it is written, thou shall not hate thy brother in Levit,
19. 17
thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not
to sin: For this cause Augustine says, that every Christian has the August.
do verb. domini sermon. 16.
keys in his hand to bind and to loose his brother upon earth: for when he
gives him warning and admonition, if he hear him, he has won him, but if he
despise him, he has bound^ him: because the words of exhortation, taken out*
of the doctrine of Christ and his holy scriptures are a favor either to life
or to death, by whomsoever they be spoken or delivered. For we have learned,
that not only the minister of the word, but also all Christians without
exception are commanded to instruct, and exhort their brethren, and the
greater that every one is in respect of his place, or calling, the greateri^
his charge herein, and the more cause he has to covet with that faithful
servaunt of the LORD, Moses, that all the Number. 11. 29.
Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon
them, that so they might be able to teach one another, that none might perish
for lack of knowledge. For the Lord complains that his people is go^e into
captivity, because they had Isa. 5. 13.
no knowledge. If there be no knowledge, there ca^ be no exhortation, and then
no setting free from the captivity of s^nne.

The time to exhort, and likewise to learn, is, while it is called, to day. It
must not be deferred, or put over till to morrow: for the scripture says, ye
cannot tell what shall be to morrow. Iam. 4. 14.
By the date in this place is not meant the whole course of our life, as some
have taught upon this text. But the day is taken for the acceptable time of
grace, in which the wisdom of God utters her voice among us, and inviteth
us to the marriage of the kings son. For not withstanding that no time, while
we live upon the earth, is to late to amendment of life, yet the Gospel of
Christ, which is the light of the world that teachceth us faith and
repentance, may be taken from us, and then it is night, and no day, even as
it is this day with the Turks, ^he Papists, and all other nations of the
earth, to whom the Lord has not given the light of his holy word, thought
they have the natural day, yet have they not the day of grace, but they
walk in the night of ignorance and superstition, in which they go out of the
way and perish. We have had this day almost this fortye years; and yet so
far are we from being able to exhort one another that the most part of our
elder men and women have not yet learned the meaning of their baptism, oh, how
lamentably have these people been hardened through the deceitfulness of sin
And will you still walk in this fearful darkness, and not come into the light
of ^he day? now let the sun of right cousnesse shine in your hearts For even
this day it is called to day, and we know not how long this day will last; but
when it is past it will not be redeemed though we would seek it with tears,
Heb. 12 17.
as Esau sought the blessing; and yet was rejected, because the day was past.

Now that which hardens us, is, the deceitfulness of sin. If sin were
not deceitful, it could not overcome, nor prevail against so many men, and
all sorts of people, and all ages, as it does. It prevails against old men,
which in respect of time ought to be teachers, and deceives them, that
notwithstanding they be come to that age, that their strength is but labor and
sorrow, yet will they not give over the love of this world: for it is with them
as Cicero says, there is none Cicero lib. de s^nectu^e.
so old, which does not think himself able to live one year. And so
deferring from year to year, and from day to day, the hoare head is
childishly deceived, and al his experience cannot draw him out of the snares of
sin. It deceyueth youth and middle age, and tells them, it is time enough
to serve God, and to be religiouse when old age shall approach; and being
deceived they will not hear verity, which says, remember now thy creator in
the days of thy youth. For when age Eccle. 1. 12.
comes then are the evil days, and the years wherein thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in them.

Sin is so cra^tie and deceitful that it deceyueth even the wise and the
prudent of this world; it is observed in the little beast Chameleon, that it
can change it self into all colors that it si^teth upon, except white. But
there is no color or show of virtue which sin cannot change itself into.
For thereby it deceyueth and hardens all sinners. It comes to the coneteouse
man, having the color and name of good husbandry, and not of coueteousnes,
and so hardens him. It comes to the drunkard, not under the ^ame of
drunkenes, but of good fellowship, and hardens him so, that he is nothing
ashamed of his sin.

The sin of whoredom comes to the leacherous, and to the wanton naminge it
self, sweet love, or, a trick of youth, and then it is received as a
delectable guest, and not as sin which stays ^he soul.

Pride in apparel deceives the proud, and vain glorious soul, under the
title of cleanlines, and decencte: because, if it come under the name of pride,
it is more odiouse, and is known to be sin. Neither is there any sin so
soul or detestable, which is not smoothed with some fair name, and title to
cloak it with all. For herein is the deceitfollnesse of sin and here with
are men deceived and hardened that they sin as with cart ropes, and drink up
iniquity like water. But woe unto them, says the Prophet, thas speak good of
evil, and evil of good, which put Isa. 5. 10.
darkness for light, and light for darkensse, that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for s^wre. Now, if you have not an evil heart of unbelief, call upon
the name of the Lord, seek the Lord while he may be found, seek the
knowledge of his ways, while it is called to day, that so you may be able to
exhort and instruct one another, and to avoid the deceitfulness of sin,
before you be hardened and blinded through the craftiness thereof, let us
now ^o^e together and pray.

The third Lecture, upon the 14. verse; of faith; and of the assurance of
salvation, and ^verlasting felicity to the true believers.
14 For we are made partakers of Christ ^f we keep sure unto the end, the
beginning wherevvith we are vpholden.


THE Apostle having already proved by plain and strong arguments that Christ
is the son of God, and the Messiah that should redeem Israel, and having
exhorted the Hebrews to beware of infidelity, and disobedience, which wa^ the
cause that their forefathers perished in the wilderness, whose example he
lays before them in the scripture of the Psalmist before alleged: now he
declares how and by what means we are made true members of Christ, and
fellow heirs with him of the celestial inheritance.

We are made partakers of Christ, says he, if vvs keep sure unto the and the
beginning, wherewith we are vpholden. These words lead us to speak of faith,
and justification by faith.

In the 6. of John it is recorded that when the people which had seen the
miracles of Christ, asked what they should do, that they Io. 6. 28.
might work the works of God: Christ tells the^, this is the work of God,
that ye^ cleeue in him who^ ver. 29.
he has sent. And in the 2. of the Acts, those Jews, which had heard the
sermon of Peter, being p^icked in their hearts, said to the Apostles, men and
brethren what shall we do? To who^ Act 2. 37.
the Apostle Peter answers, amend your lives, ver. 38.
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of sins. And in the 16. of the Acts, to the lay^er, or keeper of the prison,
Act. 16. 30.
demanding what he must do to be saved, Paul ver. 31.
and Sylas say, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

These and the like place^ of scriptures, my brethren, do teach us principally
two things, the one is, that there is a fear of death eternal, and of Gods
judgments, naturally remaining in the hearts of all men, according as it is
written, that for fear of death, men are Heb. 2. 15.
all their life time subject to bondage.

And that is, because of sin and the testimony of a guilty conscience: which,
as we see upon any occasion of fear, bewraveth that sin lies at the door.
The other thing which we do here learn, is, where the remedy against the
strength of sin, and the sting of death is to be found, namely in the Lord
Jesus Christ by beleeuinge in him: for among in in there as given no^e other
name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, but by the Act. (...). 11.
name of Christ Jesus, who was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen
again for our instification. Romans 4. 25.


As in the time of Moses there was no remedy, not cure that could help them,
that were stung with the fiery and venomous serpents in the wilderness but
only the be holding of the braslen serpent, which Moses had set up, made the
poison harmelesle, Number 21. 9.
and saved from death them that were bitten; so is there no mediator, nor
advocate in heaven, nor in earth, nor any oblation, or offering of man, that
can deliver from the death of the soul, and break the force of the poison of
sin, but only true faith, which is the eye of the soul, whereby we behold
him that was figured in the brassen serpent, and is lifted upon the tree of the
cross for the health and salvation of all that believe. This is the wedding
garmente, which whosoever has not put on, is in danger to be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and guashing of teeth. This is the faith
whereby Mat. 22. 12. 13
the just do live. This is the beginning where with we are uphold, which we
must keep sure unto the end. In the text it is called, (...) the beginning of
the substance. And some translate it, the foundation of the assurance: which
foundation is the sound doctrine of the Gospel of CHRIST apprehended by
faith: or according to Chrisostomes exposition, faith it self. For that is the
organe or instrumente whereby we are made partakers of Christ. We find in an
other place of this Epistle that the Apostle uses the same word, (...), in the
Heb. 11. 1.
definition of faith. By this phrase therefore, the beginning of the substance
unto the end, is meant nothing else but continuance, or perseverance in the
faith of Christ, according to that to the Coloss. 1. 23. If ye continue
grounded Col. 1. 23.
and established in the faith. These, and the like places in the scriptures,
which speak with this condition, if, ought not to be; so understood, as if any
of the faithful, that are elected to life eternal, could perish or fall away
from grace; but they do effectually exhort us to be the more strengthened in
the spirit, against the weakness of the flesh, and the continual al te^ptatio^s
of this life that would gue^ch our faith. For there are many imperfectio^s in
the faith of the godly so long as they live upon the earth. And the narrownes
of our hearts is such, that we cannot comprehend, as we ought to do, what God
will do for us, but yet the gates of hell, and the storms of this life, that
never put out the candel of Gods elect, which is their faith. This faith
therefore is here called, the substance, or vnholding, or sure standing, by a
the use of building: for as no building can stand without a sure substance,
or foundation to stand upon, so no man can stand or walk in the way of life
without; faith, which is the thing that quickens evene true Christian, and
is unto him a rising again from death unto life through Christ the savior.
For even as the body is dead without the soul, so the soul is dead without
faith; and therefore Augustine writes, Super 10. tract. 49.
auima ^u^ anima si^es est, faith is the life of thy soul. And again where
the A postle faith, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Ephesians. 3. 17
faith. How should Christ dwell in my heart? he answers, thy faith in Christ
is Christ dwelling in thine heart.

And now speaking of this faith that justifies the elect of God, we must note
that it differs from other gifts of the spirit, which in the scriptures
have the name of ^aith, that so we may the better understand what that faith is
whereby we are said to be justified, and made the sonns of God.

There is therefore an illumination, or inlightning 4 Kinds of faith.
of some men's minds, to consent to the doctrine of the Gospel, and to receive
it for the infallible truth of God: for in the gospel they that are on the
stones, which Mat. 13. 20. 21. Mat. 4. 16. 17. Luke 8. 13.
receive the word with joy, but have no root, are said to believe for a tune,
but in the time of temptation they fall away. This belief, or faith for a time
is commonly called, temporary faith, because it is not permanent, nor
effectual to justification, but it is a faith that reprobates have that are
yet in the state of condemnation. There is also a gift of doing Miracles,
which an ungodly or reprobate man may have: and this is called, the faith of
miracles: of the which 1. Cor. 13. 2.
the A postle speaks, if I bade all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and had not love I were nothing. This faith, or gift, makes no man partaker
of Christ. Thirdly there is a general kind of acknowledging the word of God
and the history of the Gospel to be true, and that Christ is such a savior
of men as the scriptures do report of him, and yet he that so believes cannot
apply the grace of Christ, nor the comfort of GODS promises, confirmed in
CHRIST, to himself. He cannot believe the remission of sins to belong to
himself for CHRIST'S sake. This is called, faith historical, and is common
both to the devilles and to reprobate men. And of this kind of faith, the
Apostle James faith, thou beleevest that there is one God: thou do well: the
devilles also believe it, and tremble. Iam. 2. 19.
Lastly, the faith which the Apostle speaks of in this text, and which is
proper to Gods children only, is called a pastifying faith, because it
apprehends, and lays hold on the justification which is in CHRISTIE-SVS.

Some learned devines make of these 4. sorts of faith, but two, whereof the one
(as they call it) is a faith of Christ, and this is such as the de vils and
false Christians have the other a faith in Christ, such as true Christians
have. Yet for difference between the faith of repiobate men, and the says
that devils are said to have, the former kind of faith, to wit, a faith of
Christ, is divided of others, as we have hard, into a temporary faith, a (...)h
of miracles, and a faith historical.

Now the faith in CHRIST, which none but the godly areindued with, is defined
in the 11. chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. 1.
to be the substance of things which are hoped for, and the demonstration
of things which are not seen. It is called the substance, or ground, or the
state of the soul: for that we live by it. I live, faith the Apostle, yes not!
I Gal. 2. 20.
now, but Christ lives in me: and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by
the faith in the son of God.

When the scripture faith that we are justified by faith, it signifies as
much, as that we are set free from the penalty of the law, and acquitted from
the sentence of condemnation. For this word, justification, is the contrary to
condemnation: and without Christ it is manifest that all men are in the state
of condemnation, as it is written, like wise then as by the offense of one,
the fault came Romans 5. 18.
on all men to condemnation, so by the justifying if ^ne, the benefit abounded
toward all men to the justification of life. This is the free gift of GOD, to
be justified by faith, and counted righteous in the sight of GOD through the
imputation of CHRIST'S righteousness. We conclude, faith the Apostle, Romans
3. 28.
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. And again,
being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through Romans 5. 1.
our Lord Jesus Christ. And to the same effect again, being now justified by
his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Thus we see Romans 5. 9.
how the faith that justifies differs from other faithes, which reprobate
men, and devils are said to have. We see also the virtue and property of this
faith, and what it is to be justified by it.

But, in that we are said to be made partakers of Christ by a right faith, we
are further to note two things in the virtue and quality of this faith that
justifies. I he one is the assurance of our salvation, because our sins are
for given us. The other is the assurance of our glorification with Christ in
life eternal: for where remission of sins is, there is also life everlasting.

Touching the assurance of our salvation, we are sure to be saved, because we
believe, and are surely Persuaded that the price of our redemption is Christ
has in his own person sustere whatsoever was due to our sins, and has thereby
fully ^reed us from the ire of God, and the curse of the law. Of his sufferings
I have else where spoken more at large, which, iflets were not, should have
been published.
fully and sufficiently paid. For the holy Ghost witnesses, God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. 10. 3. 16. and again he
bears witness, saying, the son of man came. Wherefore? to give his life for
the ra^some of many; or as the word, (...), is interpreted of the best
translatours, for the price of the redemption Mar. 10. 45.
of many. This assures us of full satisfaction made for our sins. For to
ransom, or to redeem, is properly used to signify the desiverance of
captives, when man for man, or life for life is redeemed.

So Christ, being the good shepherd, did give his own life for the life of his
sheep. And 10. 10. 11. Gal. 3. 13.
thereby has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse
for us.

For the plainer understanding of this so great a mystery, mark a familiar
similitude. There is a king, whose laws are just and good, and by the law al
his enemies which have rebelled, and are found guilty of high treason ought to
suffer death: and the sentence of condemnation is already denou^ced against
them, and there is no hope of life remaining. Yet the king has no pleasure in
the death of these rebels, but the law, which declares that he is a most
just king, must be fulfilled: and therefore the kings own son does offer
himself to die, to satisfy the law, to the end that these men may be
acquitted from the judgment that has passed against them; and now these
condemned persons are ransomed, and set at liberty, but the price of their
redemption was paid by the kings own son, and it cost him his life. Thus
was the cause with all the children of Adam. We had al rebelled against the king
of heaven, and earth, and there was found none that kept his law, none that
was righteous, (...) not one. And therefore death was gone over Romans 3. 10
ail men: for as much as all men had sinned; and Romans 5. 12.
now the son of God Christ Jesus takes our nature upon him, and being made
like unto one of us (sin only excepted) he suffers the cursed death of the
cross for our rede^^tion. Here appears the love of God to us ward, and
herein stands the assurance of our salvation, that Gods son, the king of
kings, was wounded for our tra^sgressions, and broken for our iniquities: that
the chastisme^t Is^. 53. 5.
of our peace was upon him, and that with his stripes we are healed. And that
we might be sure that he has paid our debts to the uttermost farthing by
susteining the infinite wrath that was due to us, the same Prophet says, that
he was plagued and smitten of GOD, and that he povvred out his souls unto
death, and all this for our transgrestion. Isa 53. 4. 8 12.

And therefore thou that art a Christian, and beleevest without vvaveringe
that CHRIST has suffered these things for thee, and for thy deliveraunce out
of the hands of thine enemies, havinge that feeling of thy sins that thou
feel thy self to stand in need of every drop of that precious blood
which was shed upon the tree of the cross for the redemption of mankind:
thou that have this faith, if thou hold if fast unto the end, art made
partaker of CHRIST. And now it is impossible that thou should be damned.
For there is no condemnation to them, Romans 8. 1.
that are in CHRIST JESUS. Yea (as a Godly Doctor faith Christ the redeemer
Martin Luther.
must be damned before the elect man can be damned, for whom he delivered him
self to death. And another faithful teacher Bradford the Martyr in his ser.
of repentance.
says, if the sufferings of Christihad not bin enough, he would yet once more
come again, yea God the father, if the death of his son incarnate would not
serve, would himself and the holy Ghost also become incarnate and die for us.
Hereof then is that assurance which the elect have of their health and
salvation through the grace of GOD in CHRIST JESUS; according to that notable
testimony of the Apostle, I am persuaded that neither death, nor life; nor
Angels, nor Romans 8. 38. 39.
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, not things to come, nor
beight, nor depth, nor any other crea^ure shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus.

If this be not true, why do thou say in thy creed, I believe the
forgiveness of sins? For to believe and to doubt, or to be uncertain, can
never go together.

The other property of faith that justifies, is, to be assured, not only of
forgiveness of sins, and deliverance from death, but also of eternal life,
and that we shall be co^municants with our redeemer Christ in the glory that
shall be revealed. For, if we be justified by faith, and ingraffed into his
mystical body, according to the meaning of our baptism, we are not only
acquitted from the judgment of condemnation, and saved from wrath, but we are
also made partakers of all the merits of Christ, and they are as surely sealed
to be ours, as if we our selves had wrought them. For now the kingdom of
heaven, and the inheritance of the blessed life is due unto us, as to heirs
annexed with Romans 8. 17.
Christ. And whereas of our selves we are without understanding, full of
iniquity, unholy and lost sheep. The holy Ghost says, that Christ is made
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
and sanctification, and redemption. For, (as the same Apostle speaks in an
otherplace) if God spared not his own son but gave him for Romans 8. 32.
us all to death, how shall be not with him give us all things also? This is
most true, as it may be illustrated by example, the spouse, after she be once
married to her husband, is not only called after his name, but is also made
partaker of all things that her husband has right to; his honor is her
honor, his wealth is her wealth, what estimation, what dignity, and what
deserts soever the husband has, the spouse his wife, is made partaker of the
same; because they two are made one flesh, as Mat. 19. 5.
says the scripture: even so the faithful soul, which is justified by faith,
and married to the bridegroom Christ Jesus, is fully beautified withal the
graces of Christ, with his righteousness, with his innocence, with his
holiness, with his honor, and with his glory: yea the faithful are so
honored that they shall sit Luke 22. 30.
on seats, and judge not only men but also the Angels themselves. Know ye not
that we shall 1. Cor. 6. 3.
judge the Angels? how much more things pertaining to this life? such is the
honor that they have in whose hearts Christ dwells by true justifying faith.
And thus are they made partakers of Christ.

But let none of the^ that are hardened in sin, and which delight and take
pleasure in the works of the flesh, think that they a^ made partakers of this
grace. For without that sure faith, whereof you have heard, there is no
salvation, and where no works of the spirit, nor any token of regeneration
appears, there can be no sound faith: and therefore where the Apostle says,
that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Rom 8. 1.
he adds, and shows, who they are, which waelke not after the flesh, but
a^^er the spirit.

These three things are proper to a saving faith: that thou stedfasthe believe
in th^^^ heart; that thou make consession of thy faith to the world be
confessing Christ before Mat. 10. 32. Col. 1. 10.
m(...), and that thou be fruitful in all good works, adorning thy faith,
with works worthy amendments of life. Walk according Mat. 3. 8.
to this rule and persenere in it to the end, and thou art ^^d^ partaker of
Christ. And it his appearing thou shall receive an incorruptible crown of
glory. Let us humble onr selves in prayer.

The fourth Lecture, upon the 15. verse; of the necessity of hearing the word
of God; how the hardening of the heart is to be understood; and of the error
of praying in the church; specially in the time of publ^ke teaching, or of
common prayers.
15 Sol^^g as it is said, to day, of ye hear his voice, barden not your hearts
as in the p^ovocation.


OF the word, to day, I have a^^eady showed that it is applied unto the time of
grace, that is, so long as the word of GOD which is the light of the world is
made manifest unto us. And here again we may observe, that when the Apostle
says, to day, he gives us to understand that the spirit of God did speak by
the mouth of the holy Prophets, not only for the learning and instruction of
the people that lived in the days of the Prophets, but also for the learning
of all men in all times and ages to the end of the world.

For the Prophet David to instruct the people of his time says, to day, Psalm.
95. 7. and the Apostle, almost eleven hundredth years after David, teaching the
Hebrews, says, to day if ye hear his voice harden not your ^eartes, Whereby
he would have them to understand that the same scripture did then call them to
the obedience of the Gospel, which to the same effect was preached to their
father* so long ago by the Prophet^ David. and so at this present time, you are
called of God to the spiritual marriage of his son, that you may receive
forgiveness of your sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by
faith in him, here is no more required of you but obedience and attentiveness
to hear, so long as it is called to day. For now we have the word near unto
us even in our mouth, and in our hearts, as the scripture Romans 10. 8.
says: And no man is commanded to go beyond the sea to hear it. For it is not
to be heard at the mouth of the Priests of Egypt; nor of the Philosophers of
Greece; nor of the Rabbis of the Jews: to whom men in times past were wont to
travail for to hear wisdom, as the Queen of Sheba came from the furthest
parts of the earth to Jerusalem. 1. King 10. 1 Mat. 12. 42.
To what end? to hear the wisdom of Selomon. We may easily gather that such
a journey could not be performed without great charges and many danger(...)
and therefore, as Christ witnesses, she shall rise in Judgment, and shall
condemn those that are carlesse to hear the wisdom of Christ, the true
Sal^mon, which he has now, (blessed be his name for it) sent out of Jerusalem,
And out of the land of Judea, even into this land; and has dispersed it over
the same, so that we need not travail far for to hear it.

For now it is called, to day, with us, and now we may hear it if we will, and
by hearing it we may live. the hour shall come, says Christ, and now is, when
the dead shall hear Io. 5. 2^.
the voice of the son of God, and they that hear it shall live. Lo hear it
appears that we are spiritually dead, and are estranged from God through
sin, and therefore oppressed with eternal destruction without hope of life,
except we be quickened by hearing of Christ's voice. The Prophet David had
experience of this in himself, which made him say, I will never forget thy
precepts: Psalm. 119. 93
for by them thou have quickened me. As if he should say, before the time that
I heard and obeyed thy voice, I was dead, but now the Gospel of thy saving
health has restored me to life.

Consider therefore the necessity of hearing and let that move you to put away
hardness of heart. It is manifest that without Io. 3. 36.
faith none can be saved from the second death, nor from the day of Gods wrath:
and faith, as witnesses the holy Ghost, comes by hearing. Neither has God
appointed any other Romans 1^. 17.
means, then the hearing of his vo^ce for the attaining of faith, and by faith
salvation: as it is most evident by that one and notable example of the rich
man, who because he had not regarded the day of grace, was after his bodily
death tormented in hell; Luke. 16.
and desiring to have Lazarus sent to preach unto his brethren, least they also
should come into that place of ^orment, receives this answer from Abraha^^,
they have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear the^. But ^er. 29.
when he was yet more instant to have one sent unto them from the dead,
Abraham, replyeth again, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they b^e persuaded ver. 31.
though one rise from the dead again. This may su^^ice any man, that will
understand, that God will have no other way, nor means for man to come to the
knowledge of his will, and to be saved from the wrath to come, but by hearing
his voice revealed in the scriptures. Wherefore, so long as the time of grace
lasts, let no man harden his heart from hearing, let no man look the gate
of heaven against his own soul, not become the minister of his own death,
let no man, (as the manner of most men is) be like the vain Athenians, more
desi^^us, either to tell Act. 17. 21.
or to hear some news of other men, or that concerns some worldly
commodities, then to hear the wisdom of God, which yet cries openly, and
utters her voice in the stre^^^. Pro. 1. 20.
For the voice of this wisdom, if thee be heard and received with
meekness, says the Iam 1. 21.
scripture, is able to save men's souls: and is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believes. Romans 1. 16.
Herein the wisdom of God excels the wisdom of this world. For all the
counsel of the wise men, and lawyers of the world, all the learning of the
Philosophers and s^^oolemen, and all the cloquence of the readiest orators and
advocats, though a man hear the^ never so attentively, cannot make him wise
unto salvation; neither is it in them to bring the glad tidings of peace to a
troubled soul disquieted with the fear of death and the terror of hell: for
only the voice of Christ has that p^e^ogatiue; and therefore al me^ are
commanded not to harden their hearts, if they will hear it. But is it in the
power of man not to harden his heart, since the scripture says, I will harden
Pharachs heart; and in an other Exodus (...). 3. Revel. (...): (...).
place, he shuts and no man opens? Here we must understand that there is
two manner of hardening of the heart, to wit, a divine hardening, and a humane
hardening, or the hardening of God, and the the hardening of man, and yet the
one of these does not harden without the other: for God hardens not Pharaohs
heart, but that Pharaohs own will is the cause of it, and his hardening
proceeds not from any other, but from himself. And therefore the scripture
says, that Pharaoh harde^ed his heart. Neither for all that E^od 9. 34.
does Pharaoh harden his own heart, but God does it iudicially, or according
to his secret judgments: for the kings heart is in the hand of the lord. Pro.
21. 1. But when it is said that God hardens the heart; we must not so
understand it, as if God should make that hard, which before was soft and
tender, or of it self was not hard. For the truth is, that all men are borne
with a hard heart and dark understanding, even with a heart of stone like the
Adamant, of the which we have heard already. And for this cause the Lord says
by his Prophet, I will take away the sto^^^ (...). 36. 26.
heart o^^ of your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh. God therefore
is said to harden the heart, when as he denies his grace, and the fire of his
holy spirit to mol^^fie and soften that which is naturally hard, even as when
the heat of the fire is denied to the softening of the hard and untempered
wax. This is called of some, a pr^vatiue hardening; because God detaineth his
grace from men for just causes which are not known to us.

Beside this God hardens after an other manner, when he does not only suffer
the heart to remain in that hardnesle and obduration which it has by nature,
but does also externally harden it more and more by his ministers. For, as we
may see in (...), Pharaoh was made more obstinate and hardhearted by the
ministry of Moses and Aaron, then he was before he had heard ^hese men. And
in these days we have too much expetience hereof by seeing ungodly men to
become the more froward and malicious, the more that they hear Gods word and
are taught by his ministers. This is Gods judicial hardening of the heart,
whereby in his just judgments he punishes the former sins of men: and for
this purpose he commands his ministers as it is written, Make the heart of
this people ^at, make their ears heavy, Isa. 10.
and shut their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert that I might heal the^.
Here we see how, and wherefore, God hardens the heart.

Now the humane hardening, or the hardening attributed to man himself, is
that, which the text that we handle warns us to beware of, if ye hear his
voice harden not your hearts. This hardening of the heart is nothing else but a
voluntary purpose and intent of man to continue in sin, and not to follow nor
obey the doctrine of Gods everlasting truth howsoever it be preached unto him;
as hereof we have examples in king Saul, in Judas, in Iuhan the Aposta^^, and
others'; but specially in Pharach, whom the scriptures do set before us as a
notable pattern of a disobedient and hard-hearted man. After this manner
thhrefore the Israelies in the wildernesle hardened their hearts, by grudging
and bitter strining against Moses when they wanted water, notwithstanding they
had the word of the Lord among them. This is it Exodus 17.
which the Apostle puts us in mind of, when he says, harden not your
hearts as in the p^ov^^ation. And this is the hardening wherewith man hardens
his heart; even his own perverse will, and purpose of sinning wherein he
persisteth, and so becomes the minister of death and perdition to his own
soul. Now the cause of all hardening of the heart is sin and the custom of
sinning. For Moses says, Phiraoh sinned again and hardened his heart. Exodus
9. 34.
There Pharaohs sin goes before the hardening of his heart. Wherefore
consider how fearful and dangerous the custom of sin is: it brings
hardness of heart which denies obedience to the word of God, and despises
his holy ministry, and so grows to fullness of sin, the wages whereof is
death eternal. Let the consideration Romans 6. 23.
of these things cause you with fear and reverence to hear the Gospel of your
salvation; and before you come to hear it, be careful, as the Apostle
exhorts, to cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that
Heb. 12. 1.
hangs so fast on, that when the Lord speaks by the mouth of his mess^gers,
you may have cares to hear, and hearts to understand, and be in a readmes to
hear his voice, and to say with Samuel, speak Lord for thy serva^t hears.
Here 1. Sam. 3. 10
we see that as there was a voice hard, so there was a readiness to hear it.
Here ^od did speak and here man was prepared to hear him.

But this example of obedience and preparation to hear the Gospel, which is
more glorious, and speaks better things then the law, is too rare in our
age. For most men and women, though they resort to church, and to Christian
congregations, are yet in the time of divine exercise of the word of God more
ready to speak then to hear. They are more ready to pray by themselves, and
to offer up a sacrifice of their own superstition, then either to hear
reading or preaching of the holy scriptures; or to consent with one mind to the
common praters of the whole church, if the time so require: yea and some are
not content to be thus far superstitious, but will also give themselves to
read on some prayer book, when God speaks to them out of his book of life.
Such blind devotion of men, and private repeating of words, out of due time
and place, must needs be a sacrifice, not accepted, but rejected of God For it
cannot be the fruit of faith, because you have not so learned Christ: and
whatsoever, says the Apostle, is not of faith is sin. Romans 14. 13


Mark a special doctrine of that famous preacher Solomon touching this point,
take heed to thy foot when thou enterest into the house Eccl. 4. 7.
of God, and be wore near to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for
they know not that they d^^ evil. If they know not that they do evil, then
they do it of ignorance. But it is evil says he; and we are taught that
Christians must abstain, not only from evil it self, but, from al
appe^^^nce of evil. Yet because nothing is so 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
evil, but if it be commonly used, seems to be good, and men will needs
defend it so to be, as in this case some are wont to say, that when they give
themselves to pray privately in the church, they do it that they may be the
better prepared to serve God. But, as the Apostle says to the Corinthians,
which came disorderedly to the receiving of the Lords supper, have ye not
houses to eat and to drink 1. Cor. 11. 22.
in? So I may say to such me^, if you will pray alone, and pray privately, have
ye not houses and private places to pray in? ought ye not at home, and before
ye come from home to prepare your selves, and to remember that, going to
church, you go to appear before the Lord to hear his voice for the attaining
of faith, and to praise him with the congregation. And for this cause, as a
learned and painful teacher in these days has written, ought M. Perki^s upon
the fourth commandment.
we on the Sabbath day to arise early in the morning, that we may prepare our
selves to the better sanctifying of that day. And this preparation, as he
says, consists in private prayers and taking account of our several sins.
but no man can be ignorant that private prayers must be referred to private
places, and time convenient. For, as Solomon says, to all things there is an
appointed t(...). Eccle. 3. 1.


But if you think that the temple or material house, where we assemble our
selves for divine exercise, can make your prayers more holy, then your hearts
from whence they proceed can make them, ye are then indeed super(...). For
the Lord of heaven and earth dwells not in temples built Act. 17. 24.
with h^^ds. Neither is one place of the earth (in respect of the place it
self) more acceptable to him then an other. For now, the temple at Jerusalem,
which was called, the house of prayer, has an end. And, as the scriptures
affirm, you your selves (if ye be true Christians) are the temple of the
living god. 2. Cor. 6. 16 1. Cor. 6. 19
No place therefore, as one father says, does sanctify or make holy the man
that is in it, but rather the man the place.

yet for the defense of this evil custom of praying in preposterous manner,
some say, it is a decent order for me^ when they come into the church to kneel
down and pray. The contrary is rather true: for it is an affected disorder,
and betokens what of reverence to the word of God and his ordinance, for some
me^ to be at their own prayers, when the whole assembly does either hear the
word, or pray otherwise with one accord. This is not according to the rule o^
the Apostle, with one mind, and with one ^onth to praise God, except they Romans
15. 6.
that will pray by themselves, when time and place serve not thereunto, have
another God beside the father of our Lord jesus Christ.

Where Luke writes how the Apostles recemed the holy Ghost upon the day of
Pentecost, he says that then they were all with one Act. 2 1.
accord in one place. And for this cause has Christ promised to be in the
midst of them that Mat. 18. 20.
are gathered together in his name, assuring us of his spiritual presence to
be with us, if there be unity of faith, and Christian concord in our
assemblies. And this unity is, when, as the Apostle exhorts, all speak one
thing, and are knit together in one mind and in one judgment without
distentions. But for all this, some me^, 1. Cor. 1. 10
because they will not seem to do otherwise then they have been accustomed,
can cavil and say, that, because prayer is good, it is good to pray always:
and therefore they will repeat their prayers when they may be seen of me^, and
when other men pray not. These are like the Heretics which were called
Euchites, Euchits or Psalliapist^s.
for that they were wo^t to spend much time in praying, and to repeat their
prayers as it is recorded of them) so hastily, and with swi^tnes of tongue, as
if God had been to be served with lip labor. This is contrary to the rule
of the Apostle James, which says, let ever^e man be swifte to hear, slow to
Iam. 1. 19.
speak. And the son of Sirach says to the same effect, ^e swift to hear
good things. For Eccl. 5. 1^.
shall the natural men of this world be swift and ready to hear the counsel of
a lawyer or advocate in some earthly matter, and shall not Christians be more
careful and ready to he are the counsel of God, which is able to make them
wise unto salvation?

Yet some will say that when they pray, they are careful to serve GOD, and
they mean well, and therefore they will do it at church, and regard no time.
But as one has truly said, a good meaning does not excuse an evil act, and
this we may see to be most true, if we remember the punishment of V^zah, who,
without doubt, meant well in that he put his hand to the ark of God, and held
2 Samuel 6. 6.
it, because the oxen which drew it did shake it. But because he had no warrant
from God so to do, the Lord smote him that he died in that ^.
place. And it is probable that Saul meant well, in his own opinion, when he
spared the fat beasts, and the best of the sheep, and of (...). 15. (...)
the oxen of the Amalekites, because he would sacrifice them unto the Lord. But
what says the oracle of God to him? has the Lord as ver. 22.
great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the voice of the
Lord is obeyed? behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken is
better then the fat of Rams.

Behold here how acceptable a sacrifice it is to harken to the voice of the
Lord. And contrariwise learn of Solomon, how abominable the prayer of them
is, which will pray, and will not hear the law of the Lord, he that Pro. 28. 9.
turns away his ^are from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abominable.
Let no man therefore harden his heart, and prefer superstition before truth,
that his prayer be not abominable but acceptable, being offered in due season,
and proceeding from faith and knowledge, which is by hearing, and hearing by
the Romans 10 17.
word of God. As the ministry of the new testament is principally divided
into the ministration Act. 6. 4.
of the word, and prayer, so in the time of teaching the minister is the mouth
of God unto the people: and in the time of public prayers, he is the mouth of
the people to offer their sacrifice to God^ and he that despises, or regards
not these things, despises not man, but God. For these very words of the text,
if ye hear his voice harden not your hearts, declare unto us that when we
hear that doctrine wih^h teaches us faith in the son of God, and repentance
from dead works, it is God that speaks unto us by the mo^th of men: and he
requires at our hands that s^l^ng as it is sa^a to day, that is so long as we
may hear the voice of the new covenant of grace, we be more near to hear it,
then to give the sacrifice of fools. For ought not Christians so to profit by
hearing and learning that they may be able (as it is required in these places
of scriptures. Col. 3. 16. Romans 15. 14. Heb. 3. 13. 1 Thessalonians 4. 18. and 5. 11.)
to teach, to edify, to admonish and to comfort one another with the word of
God? but if the knowledge of these things had any place in the heart^ of vain
me^, they would abhor to be at their prayers, or to speak their own words,
when they should be intentine to hear the word of faith. Let us beware
therefore, as Origin says, least there be a veil laid over our hearts, not
only when Moses is read Super Exodus ho^il. 12.
but also when Paul is read. And without doubt, if we be negligent in hearing,
and set not our mind to learn, and to understand, not only the scriptures of
the law and the Prophets, but also the scriptures of the Apostles and
Evangelists are covered with a veil that we shall not understand the^. Thus
says O^^gen. And surely, as the lews rejected the Gospel of the new
testament, and boasted that they were the sea(...) Abraham, and (...) (...) 2.
C^^. (...). 14. 15.
the disciples of M^ses, when is in the reading of Moses, their ^^nds were
h^^d(...), and the veil of vnbe^ie^e was la^d over th(...) (...)es that they
did not understand the old testament: so do ^ost ^en in these d^^es, being
content with the b^te name of (...), and with the blind customs received from
their fathers harden their hearts in sin, and stop their ea^es against the same
Gospel of grace. But woe be to the security of these men.

Now seeing that to pray, or to be otherwise exercised in the congregation then
the time and place requires, when me^ come into the church, is not the least
(...), which argues (if men will pe^sist in it being admonished) that they
harden their hearts in ignorance and will not be ready to come to Christ
when he calls: take heed that you give not the less credit to this, or
any other doctrine confirmed with the truth, because you hear it from young
men, or from your inferiors in the estimati^ of the world. For he that
despises the precepts of life ministered by men, despises not man but God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8
says the Apostle. Satan is a most subtle adversary, and goes about by all
means to keep you under the veil of darkness, and natural ignorance. if
other means fail him he can work by persuading you to measure your faith to
the word of God, with the fame and estimation of the minister, and so either to
receive or reject his doctrine according as the world judges of the man.
Hereof we have a manifest example in the ninth of John; where, when the man
that was borne Io. 9. 30. 31. 32. 33.
blind began to preach unto the Jews of Christ, known by his divine power in
opening his eyes, the Jews show their pride, and disdain to learn of such a
one, and say unto him, thou art altogether borne in sins, and ver. 34.
do thou teach us? says an ancient Christian doctor upon these words, it
is seen that Cy^ill.
greater men do commonly disdain to learn of their inferiors* this
proceeds from the dangerous disease of pride, whereby man persuades himself
in his own conceit, that he has sufficient knowledge, when he is ignorant;
and he is ashamed* to learn of them that are of less reputation, in the
judgment of men, then himself, least he should seem to be ignorant, or to
have less learning then that man has of whom he is taught. But, if our mind
were endued with true humility. we should not be ashamed to learn, a quovis
puerulo, of any child, says he, that could teach us the thing which we know
not. For the truth is to be embraced, and heard of whomsoever it may be
learned. These at the words of a worthy teacher.

And of this humility which ought to be in all Christians to learn, we have a
notable example in Apollos, a man eloquent, and mighty Act. 18. ^4. 25. 26.
in the scriptures, and yet humble to be further instructed of Aquila and
Priscill^, a poor tent-maker and his wife. here every one, that will be the
servant of Christ, may learn humility, and be prepared, like the men of
Berea, with all readiness to receive the word, Act. 17. 11.
which is able to save his soul, and of the servant of sin to make him the
servant of righteousenesse. It is yet called to day. And yet we may hear the
voice of the bridegroom Christ Jesus. And is there is one day of seven
appointed for men to rest, And to hear his voice: and as there is a time of
that day for men to hear, and not to be otherwise occupied then in hearing;
let no man abuse that time; let no man the^ speak his own words. Art thou
dull of hearing, and can hardly setle thy mind to learne^ yet be careful to
hear from the beginning to the end, and thou can not go away without some
good leslon laid up in thine heart. Have thou a good memory, and a^t thou apt
to learn? the^ spend all the time of hearing in hearing, and thy knowledge
shall be the more increased. Wi^^ thou be justified by ^aith, and be made
partaker of Christ? thou have heard that says comes by hearing; and Romans 10
17.
now thou m^ist hear; now is the day of hearing, so long (...) the Lord
calls. Hereafter will be the day of rejecting, for them that would not hear
when they were called. In that day men cannot learn though they would: for
wisdom warns the^ which sleep out the time of grace, when learning is
offered unto them, when affliction and anguish shall come upon P^o. 1. 27. 28.
you: then shall they call upon me but I will not answer: they shall see^e me
early, but they shall not find me. the reason is added, why wisdom will not be
found of m^ at their pleasure: because they h^ted knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord.

If therefore thou will not in this day of his g(...) hea^^ his voice to thy
salvation, thou shall hereafter in the day of his wrath hear it to thy
condemnation: and if now in the day of his calling, his voice cannot awake thee
out of the sleep of sin and security, it shall hereafter in the day of his
judgment awake thee to thine eternal confusion, though thou sleep in the
earth, and though thou be returned into dust, doubt not of this: for the lord
speaks it, the hour sh^l^ come in the which all that 10. 5 28. 29.
are in the graves shall hear his voice. And they shall come forth, that have
done good unto theresurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto
there surrection of condemnation. In that day shall every scripture, every
sermon, and every word of exhortation, which thou have heard, or read, be a
witness against thee how thou have hardened thine heart, and would not obey
his voice when he offered thee his grace. Consider therefore that this is the
day where, in he calls thee, and speaks to thee, saying, behold now the
accepted time, behold now the 2. Cor. 6. 2.
day of salvation.

This time, and this day, wherein he proclaims peace, is but short, and
v(...)e: redeem it therefore with all readiness of mind, that thou may be at
peace with God for all eternity.

You that are diligent husband-me^ are careful to redeem the time of fair
weather in harvest, because you know not how soo^e it will rain, And man, whose
life is compared to a vapor that appears for a little time, and after ward
vanishes avva^^, if he live to Iam. 4. 14.
day, knows not whether he shall live to morrow. And if it be permitted him
to live, yet knows he not how soon the Lord will send a famine of hearing
his holy word; and send a dark night of ignorance, in the which no man can
work, no man can hear the glad tidings of the Gospel, nor believe it, though
he would. Let us pray that our hearts may be mollified, and prepared as good
ground to receive the seed of the word, while it is yet called, to day.

The fifth Lecture, upon the 16. and 17. verses* of the wickedness of man's
nature; all men are naturally bent to idolatry; we must imitate the
faithful (though they be but few in number, or ^n one age) whom God raises
up in all ages to confess his name; of Gods long sufferance, and bountifulnes
toward sinners: of sin, and the fruit thereof.
16 For some when they heard, provoked him to anger: howbeit, not all that came
out of Egypt by Moses.

17 But with who^ was he displeased forty years? was he not displeased with
them that sinned, whose carkeses fell in the wilderness?


THe Apostle, which was the Author of this Epistles, applying the exhortation
of the Prophet before alleged, seems here to allude to that desperate
provoking, and disobedience of the children of Israel mentioned in the 14 of
Number. When they believed those ten men that brought up a vile slander upon the
land of promise, and murmured against Moses and A^r^^, and would have stoned
Joshua and Caleb, because they stood for the truth, as it appears more (...)
large in the 14. of Number. this is therefore as if (...) Apostle should say, the
whole assembly of them that came out of Egypt, to the number of six handieth
thousand men of understanding, even all of them without ex^^^tion heard the
word of the LORD, and his promise concerning the land of Canaan, but some of
them, yea the greatest some, the ^^h^le assembly says the scripture, and
again, all the mul^^tua^ (notwithstanding (...) 4. 2. (...)
some are excepted) when they heard, did not believe, but provoked the ^o^d^
to anger with their meredulous (...)ing and (...) bellion.

And it is worthy to be noted that he says, when they ^^^rd they provoked him,
or hearing they provoked him^. For as he that is of God, 10. 8 47.
hears GODS words; so they that are c(...)lly minded, and have their
understanding darkened, do never provoke the LORD so much as when his word,
and his counsel (...) p^e^ched unto them; which because it is contrary to the
wisdom of the (...)h, ^^st^^eth up the natural man ^o^e^ll, and to oppose
himself against the wisdom of the holy GHOST, according as it is written,
the wisdom of Romans 8 7.
the flesh is enimitie against GOD. And again, the natural manne perceives
not the 1. Cor. 2 14.
things of the spirit of GOD: for they are foolishness unto him: neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. For Satan, who
works in the children of disobedience, will rather su^^er them to consent to
any thing, then to that doctrine which ostereth unto them the peace and favor
of God.

And for this cause our Savior CHRIST says, that he came not to send peace
into Mat. 10 34.
the earth: but the svvorde. A sword, as we know, cutteth asunder and makes
a separation. And CHRIST, although he be the very author of our peace, yet
when his peace is preached unto the world, the wicked and disobedient, which
before seemed to be quiet and calm, do now show forth their bitterness
and corruption of nature, by contending against this peace, and against the
messengers and professors of the same.

And so CHRIST by their malice is made the occassion of t^multe and discord.

They provoke him not before they hear him, for the wickedness of man's nature
is like fire that lies hid in quick lime, which never boyleth, nor shows
his heat until you put water to it; which, being of a contrary nature and
quality, causes it to burn and cost out heat. It is also like to the vapors
of the earth, which appear not so long as the virtue and heat of the sun is
not on the earth, but when the sun arises then they arise and ascend, not
from the sun, but from the earth.

Thus is the case with the unregenerate and earthly minded man. If there be no
word of faith preached, there is no provoking: but if the word be ministered
to exhort, to improve, and to rebuke, then the wisdom of the flesh which is
enimitie against God, begins to be unquiet and to provoke. The high Priest
of Jerusalem, and the Scribes never provoked so furiously, as when they heard
the words of Christ, saying, hereafter shall ye see Mat. 26. 64.
the son of man sitting on the right hand of the heaven. Then the high
Priest rent his clothes. ver 65. Act. 7. 54.
And again, The stiff-necked among the Jews provoked never so madly, as when
they were sharply rebuked of the holy Ghost by the mouth of Stephen: for then,
as Luke says, their hearts did clean for anger, and they guashed at him with
their teeth. So king Ahab provoked most of all, when he heard the Prophet
Michaiah, 1 King. 2^. 17. 18.
at what time he told him the truth from the Lord, and signified the event of
the war, which Ahab waged against the king of Syria, to go against him. And
the remnant of the Jews which were left from the captivity of Babylon,
although they had protested Ier. 42. 5. 6.
unto Jeremiah that they would obey the voice of the Lord whatsoever would
come of it; yet when the same Prophet told them from the Lord, that if they did
set their Ier. 17.
faces to enter into Egypt to dwell there, they should die by the sword, by the
famine, and by the pestilence, and none of them should remain nor escape from
the plague, which the Lord would bring upon them. At the hearing of these
things they disobey, and say that Ieremtah speaks Ier. 43. 2.
falsely, and they will go into Egypt whether he will or no. So the multitude
in the wilderness, of whom the Apostle speaks here, provoked then most
desperately, when Caleb and Joshua rebuked them that they should not rebel
against the Lord, neither fear the people Number. 14. 6. 7. 8. 9.
of the land of Canaan who should be but bread for them, knowing that the
Lord, whose word is a sure rock, would give them the land according to his
promise. These thing* when they heard they so proucked that they would have
stoned Caleb and ver. 10.
I^s(...)

By these examples we may learn how contrary, and repugnant the wisdom of
flesh and blood is to the wisdom of the holy Ghost: for it is not subject,
as says the Apostle, Romans 8. 7.
to the law of God, neither indeed can be. And for this cause the Lord says,
as the heavens are Isa. 55 9.
higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts
above your thoughts. This is it therefore why the nations of the world, and
the most part of men in all ages have affected, and sought after false, and
counterfeit religions, as most agreeable with the corruption of man's nature, at
the hearing whereof no man might be displeased, nor made to provoke. Such were
the inventions of the Heathen, they were content to receive and subscribe to
any religion, or rather idolatry, except the religion of the true and
everliving God.

The Egiptians, as it is recorded of them, worshipped so many feigned Gods,
that their several sacrifices and ceremonies are said to have been more then
six hundredth and sixty in number. The Grecians imitated them. The old Romans
in process of time exceeded them in the number of superstitious religions. But
for all that, the Romans would never consent to worship the GOD of Israel,
nor to receive the religion of that people: because they knew that he must be
worshipped according to his commandment, and not as they would.

The religion of Mahomet, which now the Turks do mainetaine, was patched
together of the inventions of Mahomet, and of the devises of certain profane
and wicked men, in such wise that the ignorant multitude might have no cause
to dislike of the same, that so they might draw the more people to ^ome with
them in their sect: But the doctrine of CHRIST, and his Apostles they sought by
all means to slander, and tread under foot; and they do still provoke as
often as they hear it, because it is the doctrine of truth.

We cannot deny that our forefathers, withal the adherentes of the false church
of Rome have most fearfully provoked the Lord, for the space of five hundredth
years at the least, by consentinge to suppress the holy scriptures, that
they should not be published to the understanding of the common people, and
by persecuting and killing the little flock of Christ, which professed to be
saved by faith alone in Christ Jesus, and not by the law, nor by works. It is
too well known that such has been the fruit of Antichrist; making ignorance
the mother of deuotio, and devising so many new Gods, or dead me^ to be called
upon, and prayed unto for help, that in number the Gods of the heathen have not
exceeded the^. With these and the like impreties, that son of perdition the
bishop of Rome has of long time provoked the God of truth, and mightily
bewitched the unthankful world. For (as it is written in the Popes own
Gratian as distinct. 44. si papa.
law) he has not only bee^e remiss and negligent of his own, and his
brethrens salvation, but perversitas Papa(...)m^. rabiles populos catervatim
secum duxit ad gehe^nam, the Popes maliciousnes has drawn with him to hell
innumerable people by heaps.

And what shall we say of the provoking of these days? in which (the people of
this land being brought out of the Popes Egypt of dark ignorance, and
superstition, and having heard the doctrine of Moses, of the Prophets, of
Christ, and his Apostles, now forty years long, even so many years as the
children of Israel heard the same doctrine of faith in the wilderness (yet
Atheism, superstition, and contempt of the truth are so rife every where, that
Caleb and Joshua, the messengers of the truth, cannot persuade men to forget
Egypt, and to set their mind upon the land of promise. Surely this must be the
greater condemnation of the world, that Io. 3. 19.
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light.

Here we see that all men are naturally inclined to superstition and idolatry.
And therefore no man that continues in sin, and neglects the calling of
God, shall be excused because so many ages and so many people, our fathers, and
our forefathers have so lived; yea and have so provoked the Lord, and walked in
the broad way that leads to destruction: all such examples of disobedience,
if we will sin after them, shall, as has been already said, aggravate our
punishment: because the Lord has caused them to come to our knowledge for our
admonition. For whosoever shall follow the wicked fact of Caine to shed
innocent blood, shall be punished seven fold more then Caine was, because
Genesis 4. 15.
he is warned by Caines example to abstain from murder. And all those plagues
which happened unto the Israelits in the wilderness for their infidelity and
mur^u^ing, came for examples sake, and ar^ written, says Paul, to a^monish us,
upon whom the ends of the 1. Cor. 10. ^1.
world are come. And f^r this ^^use the Lord would h^^e his dreadful
judgments, which have been executed against the sins of former times to be in all ages told and preached unto the world, that men might be warned thereby to
amend their lives, as we may see by those messengers which came to Job, one
after another, to tell him of Gods judgments showed upon his ca^^ell, his
servantes and his children. Every one of these messengers says, I only a^
escaped alone. To Job 1. 15 16 17. 19.
what end? or wherefore are they escaped? it follows, to tell thee. And to
the same effect the Lord says by Eze^^el, I will leave a little Eze. 12. 16.
number of them from the sword, and from the famine, and from the pestilence.
To what end? that they may declare, says he, all these abominations among the
heathen where they come.

We are then sufficiently admonished, by the examples of former ages, what will
be the punishment of evil* and are taught what examples we must follow, to
wit, the examples of good men, whereof we have some in all ages of the world.
The Apostle says here that not all which came out of ^gypt by Moses provoked.
We must look on them that provoked not, but obeyed the word of the Lord,
though they be but few among many thousands of disobedient and unfaithful
people. It seems that the younger forte which were under twenty years old,
among Number. 14. ^9
the children of Israel, provoked not the Lord, or if they did, yet, by the
testimony of the Apostle here, there was a remnant left among those murmuring
people which obeyed the word of the LORD, as Moses and Aaron, Caleb and
Joshua: unto those few we must have an e^e, and not unto the multitude of
sinners. For the LORD says, thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil,
Exodus 23. 2.
neither agree in a controversy to decline after many and overth^ovve the
truth. And therefore wicked is that common saying which has been alleged
of the Papists, communis error facit (...)s, a common error, or consent in
evil stands for a law.

Notwithstanding that at all times, and in all places, the more part of men,
which are evil, give evil examples to draw others unto sin, which is the
cause that Christ says, woe be unto the world because of offenses: for it
must needs be that offenses shall Mat. 18. 7.
come etc. Yet, as the Apostle speaks, we are Heb. 12. 1.
compassed about with a great cloud of witnesses, or good examples which we
must imitate so long as we live in the wilderness of this world.

We have the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the Saints of the old testament.
We have Christ himself the author and finisher of nor says. we have the
Apostles, Confessors, and martyrs in the time of the new testament, for an
example to suffer persecution for righteousness sake, and in all things to
obey the will of God.

And within the period of these last five hundredth years, even in the
flourishing time of Antichrist, we have those faithful co^ses^ours (though they
were but few in number that we have heard of) which have resisted Antichristian
iniquity even unto blood: we have them, I say, for an example of love and long
patience, witnessing, unto us, that in those days of desolation, and popish
tyranny, all did not provoke the Lord, nor fall away from the right says.

For as in the days of El^ah, when that 1. King. 19. 10.
wicked woman Iezebel hade persecuted the Lords Prophets, and when the true
worship of God seemed to be utterly abolished o^t of the land, seven thousand
were reserved (though none of them was known ver. 18.
to El^ah) which had not consented to idolatry, so in the days of our
forefathers, many thousands did obey the Gospel of salvation, and did not
defile their garments with Popish idolatry; and of them the Lord has made
some to be known to the world, and their memorial to rema^ne as monumentes
of his grace for our comfort and example.

And to come to examples nearer to our time, and to our selves. I have heard it
credibli reported, that, when here in England, within these When this was
preached, i^ was the year 1598.
five and forty years, many of the Saints and true believers did constantly
suffer martyrdom for the testimony of the word of God, there were here in
Sussex whole parishes of men and women, which for all the heat of that grievous
persecution in the The constancy of su^^ex people in the prosession of the
Gospel.
days of Queen Mary, came not at the false church, not bowed the knee to the
idol of the Mass; beside those that were martyi^, which with their blood have
sealed the confession of their faith.

And (as it is best known to them that profess religion, and have long known
this country) there were also diverse which testified their love and obedience
to the Gospel by assembling together at co^uement times in woods and
^^li^a^ie places, where they had the word of says pu^elie taught, and the
sacraments administered; The Lord protecting the^ from the cruelty of those
days.

These are as clouds of witnesses for our example, that we should follow their
faith and obedience to the word of God.

And now in our days, notwithstanding that the love and zeal of many does
wax cold, and that the d^rnell and wild oats do^ over-growe the good corn.
that, for the most part, we can see nothing but the multitude of
luke-vvarme and irreligions people, yet are there many faithful witnesses, and
sincere professoures of the Gospel of God among us. But alas, as the world is
always like it self, we are so far from following the says and example of
the Saints, that while they live among us, we cease not to speak evil of
them, and to persecute them.

^hus we see that the Lord leaves no time (no not when it seems that the
professors of his name are rooted out of the earth) without worthy vvitnesses
of his truth, whose steps we must tread in, unless we will run in the
broad way that leads to destruction.

It follows: but with whom was he displeased forty years? was he not
displeased with them that sinned, whose carke^ses fell in the, wilderness?
Here comes the long suffering, and bountifulness of God to be considered,
who never destroys any people, nor any child of man for their wickedness,
before they be sufficiently warned, and have time to repent, and to turn from
their evil ways if they will. Before he brought a stood of waters to drown
the old world, he gave them, that then had sinned, the space, not of forty,
but of three times forty years ^or ^epentance. He Ge^. 6. 3.
burned not the cities of S^dom and Gomorah with fire and brimstone from
heaven, Ge^. 19. 24. 25. (...). Pet. 2. 8.
before he had given them time to amend, and warning from day to day by
righteous Lot.

And of that ungodly woman Iezabell, the Lord says, I have given her space.
To what end? to repent of her fo^nication, and she repented not. so Rev. 2.
20. 21.
here, the holy Ghost says, that forty years he was displeased with the
Israelites after they came out of Egypt. So long endured he their manners and
intolerable rebelling against his word in the wilderness.

Here we may learn, as the Apostle warns us, to walk circumspectly, and to
^edeeme Ephesians. 5. 15. 16.
the time, remembering also what he says of them that abuse the time of
repentance, despises^ thou the riches of Gods bountifulness, and Romans 2. 4.
patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God
le^^eth thee to repentance.

^et a Christian therefore be careful to use well the time wherein he liuet^,
considering that, while he is in this world, he is in a wilderness of
innumerable dangers and temptations, where it be hooveth him to watch and to be
circumspect, or else he is in a desperate case, and heapeth unto himself wrath
against the day of wrath, whosoever he be that despises Gods long patience.

Forty years. This number forty is oftentimes used in the holy scriptures,
and is commonly applied to the time of repentance^, of abolishing of sin, and
stablishing of righteousness. And it teaches us that the works of God are
perfect, and that, when he begins, he makes an end. As here, forty years
he was displeased with the Israelites in the wilderness, according to the
number of the Number. 14. 33. 34.
days in the which they had searched out the land of promise. In which forty
years he overthrew them, and made an end of them with their sins. Forty
days and forty nights was the rain upon the earth when all the inhabitants
Genesis 7. 12.
of the old world (except Noah and his family) were drowned. In those forty
days, and forty nights the Lord wiped away all wickedness and cruelty
wherewith the earth was corrupted.

Forty days are limited to the people of Ni^eveh for repentance. And in that
space they repented: for they believed God, as it is in Jonah, and proclaimed a
fast, and put on sackecloath Ion. 3. 4. 5.
from the greatest of them even to the least of them.

And to speak according to natural observation, it is noted in mankind
generally that an Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. in pro^m.
infant does seldom or never laugh before he be forty days old. Here we may
see that man ^ath just cause to be always sorry, and to mourn for his sins
which are the cause of all the miseries of this life.

When God establishes perfect righteousness upon earth, forty of days and
nights are spoken of: as when Moses was called from the sight of the people,
he was with the Lord in mount Sinai forty days and forty nights Exodus 24 18
and 34. 28.
in which he fasted miraculously, that so the law of God, which he was to
deliver unto the Isra^lites, might receive the more honor and authority. And
again, forty days and 1. King. ^9. (...)
forty (...) E(...)h, at the calling of the Lord continued ^^s^ing, because
he was the minister that should restore the law to the former perfection
thereof.

And our savior Christ is said to have fasted Man. 4. 2. ^uke 4 2.
(...), and forty mightes, before he began his public life, and
preaching. The end of which fast, o^ (...)le, as Upon the harmony of the
^^a^gell. Mat. 4. (...).
M. C^lv^ does well obsetue, was that it should be a seal to the doctrine of
the Gospel; which as it is more glorious then the law of Moses, so was it to
be adorned with miracles, and rate signs. And after he had suffered his
passion, and was ^^sen again, he was seen of his Apostles by the spice of
forty days. Act. 1. 3.
In which forty days he confirmed unto them the verity of his ^u^^ection.

Thus we see where unto this number forty is usually applied in holy
scriptures. For as te^^e is a perfect and absolute number, and all supe(...)
numbers do arise either by adding unto te^^e, o^ else by multiplying of ten, so
the multiplying of ten in this number forty, declares unto us the loving
kindness, and mercy of God, who gives unto men such space of days, or of
years, either to see the confirmation of his truth, and his works, or to
amend and turn unto him before they be destroyed for their sins and
transgressions.

And here we may learn that our departing from iniquity, our faith, and
obedience to the word of GOD must be effectual, earnest and vnsamed, and we
must persevere in the same, not for one day, but forty days, or forty
years, that is, so long as the LORD will have us to remain in the
wilderness of this world.

Now the cause why the LORD was displeased with his people forty years, was
sin. For the Apostle says, was he not displeased with them that sinned,
whose car^^^ses fell in the wilderness? The root and beginning of all sin
is the natural corruption, or original sin wherein all men are vvrapped
from their mothers womb, and vvherevvith mankind has been infected ever
since the fall of Adam.

This corruption brings forth fruit unto death, by transgressing the law of
God We sin three manner of waie^.
three manner of ways, that is, in thought, word, and deed, according to the
words of our savior Christ affirming that those things, which desile a man,
come from the heart. For out of the heart, says he, come Mat. 15. 19.
evi^^ thoughts. These are sins, and defile the whole man. Murders,
adulteries, fornications, theftes. These are sins in deed. False testimonies,
slanders. These are sins committed in word.

And now all these transgressions, and every one of them, as they are committed
of men, are called actual sins. And they are Three sorts of actual sins.
of three sorts. One is counted a sin of infirmity, into the which the
godly, and regenerate men of God, do commonly fall through the weakness of
the flesh. Of this kind of sin speaks Paul, when he says, the evil
which I would not, that do I. And Rom 7. 19. 1. (...). 1. 8.
of this Saint John says, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us.

The second is a sin of ignorance, committed through lack of knowledge, when
he that sins knows not that he does evil. Such was the sin of Paul
before his conversion, when he lived a Pharis^^, and persecuted the
Christians, notwithstanding he had zeal, and in his life was unrebukable,
Phil. 3. 6.
touching the righteousness of the law. And of this sin, after he was
converted, he says, I did it ignorantly through unbelief. 1. Tim. 1. 13.


The third kind of sin, is, a sin of malice, or a sin of disobedience to
the truth of God, when they that have experience of Gods favor, and goodness
toward them, and know his word to be the rule of righteousness, will not for
all that forsake their own ways to follow it, and to obey it. Such was the
sin of Saul when he did not 1. Sam. 15 9
obey the words of Samuel, being commanded to destroy the Amalekites, and all
that appertained unto them.

This sin of disobedience was the sin of the children of Israel, for the
which the Lord was displeased with them forty years; who knowing the
goodness of God to be more extended toward them, then any other nation of
the earth, did notwithstanding disobey his voice, and tempte him ^enne times,
as the scripture witnesses. Number. 14. ^2
And therefore they were rejected of the Lord that they should not enter into
his rest, and were punished in the wilderness with horrible plagues, where
their carkeises fell for an example, and a terror to all that should have
thereof.

This sin of maliciouse frowardnes, and disobedience to the word of God, is
of all other most fearful, and is therefore called rebellion, 1. Sam. 15. 23.
wickedness, and idolatry, and compared with the sin of witchcraft. And of
this kind of sin John says, he that commiteth sin^s of 1. 10. 3. 8. 9.
the devil. And whosoever is borne of God sins not.

This is therefore the sin that we must beware of. We see how fearfully it
was punished in Gods chosen people. And their punishments, as Paul witnesses,
being written to admonish us, might, if they were 1. Cor. 10. (...).
well weyed, terrify the stubborn, and froward generation of this age, and
might move those that prefer the darkness of their own hearts before the
light of the truth, to examine them selves what ground they stand upon. For
there shines in many now-adayes a goodly show of holiness and equity in
their dealinges, and yet are they enemies to the Gospel, and glad if they can
find occation to do hurt, and to slander the professors thereof. But if this
sin of wicked frowardnes, and disobedience to the word that we hear, were
far from us, then all other sins would soon be corrected, and reformed.
Wherefore being compassed, as we have with a cloud of many witnesses, whose
example, if we consider them, leads us to obedience to the will of God, we
pray that every one of you show the like diligence to the resisting of sin
and evil examples of the world, and to grow to perfect knowledge in the word
of God while it is yet called to day.

The sixth and last Lecture, upon the 18. and 19. v^rses: of the punishment of
them that obey not the Gospel, though for a time they be borne with, and live
in a flowrishing state; What the tokens of Gods judgments, which befall ^n the
world, (...)and wherewith so^e men are visited, should pro^ite us; the word of
God is the iu^ge of men: which word is to be obeyed, while the day of grace
lasts.
18 And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but unto
them that obeyed not?

19 So we see that they could not enter in, because of unbelief.


WE have already heard of the^, which, when they heard the word of God from the
mouth of his ministers, provoked him to anger with their rebelling and
murmuring against him, where it was noted how great the corruption and
wickedness of man's nature is, which provokes against the wisdom of the holy
Ghost, and sets more by superstitious vanities, then by the word of
eternal life. We have also heard of sin, and the effect thereof. The sins
of the Israelites, whom God delivered from the bondage of Egypt, were the cause
that within forty years, in which they abused Gods long suffering, they were
with diverse plagues destroyed and consumed in the wilderness.

And now to declare a further punishment of sin, and rebellion, then is the
bodily punishment, and the evils of this life, the scripture says here, that
God swear to them that obeyed not, that they should not enter into his rest,
By which words, repeated out of the scripture of the Prophet before alleged,
the Apostle puts the Hebrews in mind, not of the rest of the land of
Canaan, which their fathers through disobedience and unbelief had lost, but of
the rest of the heavenly (...)salem, the everlasting inheritance of the
Saints, whereof the earthly rest and peace in the land of Canaan, as also the
rest of the seventh day, was but a type or a shadow: and therefore he says, If
Jesus (or Joshua) Heb. 4. 8.
had given them rest, then would he not after this day have spoken of an other.
For the Prophet David in his exhortation made long after the possessing of the
land of Canaan, speaks of the true and perfect rest, which the faithful do
enter into, and which God has promised Heb. 4. 3.
from the beginning of the world to them that obey his voice.

To be excluded from this rest through unbelief and hardness of heart, is a
wo^full case. It is to have thy portion with dogs and Rev. 22. 15.
enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever
loves or makes lies.

The children of Israel, to whom the Lord made his power so manifestly known
in Egypt, at the red sea, and in the wilderness, were afterward, when they
sinned, most fearfully punished, and destroyed. And moreover, as this scripture
witnesses, the Lord swa^e that they should not enter into his rest. Here is
the just reward of sin, and disobedience, that is, to be deb^rred, and shut out
for evermore from en(...)ng into the ^ords rest. And this is here declared in
that he denies unto those perverse people the sign or sacrament of his grace,
signifiyng thereby that the grace it self is denied unto the^: for the not
admitting of those obstinate and unfaithful Jews into the land of Canaan,
shows that for then unbelief they are not As no sacrament (...) instituted
of God without signification of an invisible grace, so the taking away of the
sacraments imports a taking away of the grace that was signified thereby:
howbeit not so but that God may, and does extraordinarily save some where the
ordinary means of salvation and the sacraments cannot be had.
admitted into the perfect and eternal rest figured in the earthly rest of
that promised land: Which also in an other place, the Author of this Epistle
(whom we understand to dispute here, not of the shadow, but of the substance,
not of the transitory, but of the perpetual rest) infers with these words,
they to whom it was first preached, entered not therein for vnbeliefes sak^
Heb. 4. 6. This passes all the temporary plagues, and punishments which befall
men for their sins in this present life. And yet this happened to them which
in this world were reputed for Gods people, and for a time were partakers of
all the signs and tokens of Gods favor.

Wherefore, that no man be deceived in himself, and think that he stands
fast because he is in the church of God, when he is not of the church, here we
see, that, as Paul says, to be under the cloud, to pass through 1. Cor. 10.
(...). (...). 3. 4.
the se^, to be baptized unto Moses (that is, to be partakers of Gods
sacraments under their captain Moses) to eat man^a, and to drink of the
spiritual rock. which, as he interprets it, was Christ, did nothing profit
the children of Israel: for when they sinned, and would not obey, nor give
credit either to the comfortable promises, or to the fearful threatenings of
God, they were ouerthrown^ in the wilderness, and deprived of all hope of the
rest promised to the faithful seed of Abraham.

These things are written that we might learn and understand that our baptism
ministered to us in the name of the holy trinity, our coming to church, our
common prayers and our outward hearing of the word of God, our receiving of the
communion of the Lords supper, our names of Christians, and whatsoever outward
signs and marks of Christian religion we have, shall profit us nothing to
attain eternal rest, so long as our hearts be not clean from the hypocrisy,
and superstion of the flesh, and so long as we do not crucify the old Adam
which is wont to rebel against the word of God, because it reaches us things
contrary to our own will.

Whosoever therefore does not suffer the words of exhortation, and does not
in. sincerity and truth obey the voice of Christ, has no part in the
inheritance which is prepared for the sons of ^od, notwithstanding that for a
time he he partaker of the earthly sacraments and signs of the same.

Moreover let no man flatter himself, and think that he is safe from Gods
iudgment^ if he has no^ so tempted God as the Israelits did in the wilder^es,
or if he has not so murmured against his ministers as they did; but let him
rather consider whether his faith, and obedience has been so tried as the^^s
was, and whether without murmuring and distrust, he has gone through the fire
and water of temptation which they were brought unto for their trial,
according as the scripture witnesses, thou shall remember all the way Deuteronomy. 8.
2.
which the Lord thy God led thee this forty year in the wilderness; for to
humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart whether thou
would keep his commandments or no. Here we see that the Lord exercised the
Israelits with great dangers and many difficulties of the terrible wilderness,
for to humble them, and to know whether with sound and faithful hearts they
would cleave to him, and abide his trial.

If thou have not then been exercised with diverse temptations as they were, or
if thou a^t not yet come into the day of trial, perswad not thy self that all
is well with thee, because thou stand when none does sight against thee. Say
not like the church of the Revel. 3. 17
^aodiceans, that thou art rich because thou know not thy wretchedness and
poverty, and that thou have need of nothing because thou see not thy
nakedness. It is an easy thing to overcome where their is no battle, and to
promise to thy self the victory before thou a^t tried. That lesson of the
King of Israel is worthy to be remembered, let not him* 1. King. 10. 11.
that g^rd^th his har^es, boast himself, as he that puts it of. And that,
of the Apostle is a notable warming, let him that thinks h^^ 1. Co^. 10. 1^.
stands, take heed least he fall.

Thirdly and specially let us here learn, that if such sins and iniquities,
as are equal to the sins of the Israelits in the wilderness, be not visited
with the like plagues as theirs were, they shall not therefore escape
unpunished. For there is a judgment to come, and the Lord has sworn that the
unfaithful and unrighteous, which disobey his word, shall not enter into his
rest. This is a sure testimon^e that puts away all doubt: for if anoath for
Heb 6. 16.
confirmation among men be an end of all strif^, as are the words of the
Apostle, how much more does it take away al occasion of doubting when the Lord
almighty binds himself with an oath?

The interrogation which the Apost^e uses in these words, to whom swear he
that they should not enter into his rest? does more significantly express the
punishment of not obeying. And here is also used a figurative kind of speech,
whereby less is said, the^ (...) understood, and whereby we gather that there
are dreadful punishments ordained for all obstinate and unbelieving sinners.
For what ensues from not e^tering into the rest of immortality but to have thy
part and portion with them which are shut out of the city of ^od? and what
part have they? the holy Ghost declares in these words, the fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable and Revel. ^1. 8.
murderers, and wheremongers and sorcerers, and idolaters and all ^^ers shall
have their portion (...) the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the secon^ death.

This is the wages of sin and disobedience; and although the time of payment be
deferred until the harvest of this world, yet this cup of vengeance is
prepared for all the workers of iniquity, which shall not enter into rest. And
therefore, as one father says, he that does evil ought to fear the more if
he be not punished in this world: for then he is to drink the deeper of Gods
wrath in the judgment to come.

These things being most true, let it not grieve thee that art a true
Christian, though sinners do flourish for a time, and though thou see the
unclean conversation of wicked and profane people to abound in the earth, and
yet in the mean while thou thyselfe do suffer affliction, and art tried
with diverse adue^sities. Remember for all this that God is good to Israel, and
the damnation of his enemies sleeps not.

It cannot be denied but that many of those sins, which God in former ages
did so (...)ly punish for an example unto the world, do now reign in the
world, and yet are (...) visited with the like severity and puni^hment,
because as we read, God has (...) a day, in the which he will judge the Acts
1^ ^1.
world (...) rightousnes. And therefore, as it is well obse^^ed of Chrysostom,
many of those sins, for the which the world was drowned in the days of Noah,
are day he committed in the world, and yet ^od brings not Ge^ 7. ^1. 2^. 23.
a ^lo^d to drown the world, as he did then; because there is a ^^ood of wrath
ordained for them in the world to come. Many of those sins for the which Sodom
and Gomorrah were consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven, are still
practiced in the world, Genesis 19. 24. 25.
and yet the Lo^d raineth not fire out of heaven to destroy them that do such
things* because he has appointed for them the ^i^e that shall never be
quenched. Many are they which speak against Gods word, and persecute his
church as Pharaoh did, and yet Exodus 14. 27. 28.
are not choked with the sea water, as Pharaoh and his ^eruantes were; because
the bottomless sea of perdition is reserved for them. Many do murmur against
heaven, and dislike of Gods ordinance as the Israelits did in the wilderness,
and yet are not destroyed with fiery serpents, and with other plagues, as Number.
21. 5. 6.
they were: because the worm that never dies shall hereafter torment them.
Many there be which take bribes and gifts unlawfully as Gehaz^ did; and yet
they are not st^ike^ with the foul disease of leprosy, as he was; 2 King. 5.
27.
because they shall be plagued after this life where there shall be weeping
and gnashinge of teeth.

And again many do lie and dissemble in matters of religion, as Ananias and
Sapphira Act. 5. 5. 10.
did, and yet are not punished with suden death, as they were: because death
immortal, and everlasting waits for the^.

These things are thus applied of * Chrissostom. 1 Chrysostom. in Act. Apo. c.
5. him. 12.
and for this cause, when the Apostle Peter says, that God spared not the
angels, that had sinned, but east them down into hell; and that 2 Pet. 2. 4. 5
6.
he spared not the old world: and that he turned the cit^es of Sodom and
Gomorah into ashes; he does not say that God did then with the like
punishments cut of the false teachers, of whom he speaks, and such as walk^
like the Sodomits after the flesh, in the l^st of uncleanness; but he
gathers thereby, that the Lord knows 2. P^t. 2. 9.
how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.

The heathen man, as Iustine Martyr alleges, Just. Mart. in h^de mo^^^chia.
was not ignorant of this ^udgment, and of the reckoning to come: for he
speaks pl^^ly thereof: S^^ustus et ^mp^us eadem condition futu(...), rape,
^urare, frauda, misce, if after this life there be no difference between the
just man and the wicked, then go to, catch what thou can, steal, deceive,
make confusion of all things: s^derrarenol^, but be not deceived: for, says
he, there is a^iudgment in hell beneath, which God that is Lord of al things
will do, whose name is so dreadful that I d^re not name him. Th^^ and much
more he alleges out of Phil^mo^ and other heathen writers, which by the light
of nature did set forth, not only the ommpotency of God and the immortality
of man's soul, but also the reward of virtue, and the punishment of sin after
this life; and how that God (which, as one of them says, is the eye of equity
that sees all things) does bear with the evil deeds of men in this life
for that they shall come into judgment hereafter.

The doctrine of the holy Psalmist is of singular force to this purpose, who
for the instruction of others, confesses that his f^^t^ were almost gone, and
that his steps had wel-nigh slypt, Psalm. 73. ^3. (...). 5.
when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, how they thrive in the world, and
are not in trowble ver. 17. 18. 19. 20.
as other men: but when the Lord opened his understanding, he saw the end of
these men, namely that they are se^^ in slippery places, and are suddenly
destroyed, and horriblelio consumed, as a dream when one awaketh. Job Job. 21.
17. 18.
testifies the like both of their momentary prosperity, and of their sudden
destruction.

The servants of God have here a singular comfort, that they may not be
discouraged with tribulation, and adversity, and that they may not at any
time stumble at Gods long patience and benignity toward reprobate and unjust
men, seeing that he rewards every man according as his deeds shall be,
though Romans 2. 6. Rev. 22. 12.
he be not hasty in punishing, and though he does not in this life punish all
men's sins alike.

Here also secure worldlings, and such as are slow to believe the word of
truth, may be moved to fear Gods judgments, and by amendment of life to
withdraw themselves out of the s^are of the devil, which, as the Apostle
says, are taken of him at his 2. Tim. (...). 26.
will.

And now, if neither the promises of entering into eternal rest, nor the
testimonies of Gods fearful judgments revealed against sin and disobedience,
can move us to repentance, let us yet make use of Gods visitatio^s wherewith we
hear, and see the iniquities of these our days to be visited; as in all ages
God shows diverse tokens of his displeasure and indignation against the
unrighteousness and unbelief of men. For every plague, ev(...) calamity,
sudden death, burning with fire (...)there, strange sicknesses, famine, every
stood of waters, ruin of buildings, unseasonable weather: every one of these,
and of the like adversities, as often as they happen in the world, are a sermon
of repentance to all that see them, or hear thereof For whenever God
punishes some kind of sins, or punishes some men more severely then others
that have sinned, even that his punishment is a warning and a memento to every
one of us to look to our selves, and to call to rereme^brance our own sins,
knowing that it is the same God that will take vengeance of eue^^e sin, and
transgression of men, and that he will strike with a more heavy hand, if his
warning, and example of his justice be not regarded.

Wherefore, to come to our selves. We see that beside the pestilence, and many
other ^ignes of Gods anger where with this land of late years has been
visited, the Lord has now for the space of three years together sent
scarsitie of bread, famine, and penury among us* And shall we think that the
poor, and the helpless, who (for the most-part) suffer these things, are
sinners above the rest that have not yet tasted of this cup? if we think so we
utterly deceive our selves For we are otherwise taught of the Lords Prophet in
these words, when the land sins against me by committing a trespass, then
will I Eze^. 14 13
stretch out my hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof,
and will send famine upon it. We see that the Lords hand is after this manner
stretched out, and that the staff of bread is broken. We see, and must needs
know that the sins of the land are great, and that the inhabitants thereof
from the greatest to the least have not ob(...) the voice of the Lord to walk
in all his ways; and yet we see but some punished with the scourge of hunger
and aduesitie. The rest, that are not yet touched, are so far from
repentance, and newness of life that, as the Prophet says, they drink wine
in bowls and anoint themselves Amos. 6. 6.
with the che^^^e ointments, but no man is sorry for the afflections of Joseph.
Few do weep, or have that Christian-like affection to weep with them that
suffer affliction. And will you still continue in sin and hardness of heart?
shall not the afflictions of our brethren cause us to fear, and to turn into
the way of truth before that greater plagues be powered out upon the land, even
upon every soul that does evil and continues in sin and disobedience?

Every man may gather that the calamities of other men do testify, that the
punishment of his own sins lies at the door; As to this effect, the heathen
Poet speaks. Et tua res agitur paries cum proximus ordet. Horatius.



When thou see thy neighbors house set on fire thou have warning to look to
thine own And for this cause the Lord, sometimes, cutteth down the green
tree, showing thereby what he will do to the unfruitful fig tree that keeps
bar^e^ the ground of the vinyard, though he let it stand for awhile.

That no man therefore might sleep in his sins, or think himself to be the
better man because he sees other men punished, and himself not touched,
Christ teaches us most plainly by the cruel slaughter of the Galileans made
by Pilat, and by the fall of the Luke 13. 2. 3. 4. 5.
tower upon the men ^n Siloa^^, that the worst men are not first punished, but
that if God show such tokens of his judgments upon some few, all other me^
(except they amend) shall nothing the rather escape his heavy hand for that
they be borne with for a time.

When we see therefore that God ha^dleth some men severely, and in his justice,
we ought to fear and examine our selves what we have deserved, and so to
consider that the longer that God bears with us, the more terrible will be
his reuengment if we abuse his benignity and wink at the testimonies of his
wrath showed upon others for our example.

Now, having such evident testimonies of Gods severe judgments in all ages
revealed against the vnrighteousenes and unbelief of men: as the Apostle says
here of the unbelieving Israelits, we see that they could not enter in because
of unbelief; so we see, and declare unto you by the same word of truth, which
we minister^, that all obstinate and unbelieving sinners which will not obey
the truth, shall not enter in to the rest of life everlasting, or have any
part in the feliciti^ of the faithful. Do we therefore judge men? no in no
wise. The word which we minister is the judge, and by it we denounce the
judgments of God against them which obey not this word, instructing them with
meeknes, and proving i^ God at any time will give the^ repe^t^nce that they may
come to the knowledge of his truth: for this is the judgment of the spirit of
God, he that obeys not the son, shall not see life but the wrath of God
abides ^o. 3 36.
on him. and he that is in this unbelief, though he fasi from mea^^, though he
say many pra^ers, though he give much to the poor, and though he build
churches, and do many gloriouse works, does yet nothing acceptable to God,
while he believes not in the son, and while hi^ heart cleaves not to the
word of the Lord. For as it is written, without faith it is impossible to
please God. and again, Heb^ 11. 6 Romans 14 23
what soever is not of faith is sin. So far is the carnal man, which is
possessed with unbelief, from pleasing of God, that all his works, even the
best deeds that he does are nothing else but sin.

Many there be, which do many things that have in deed, as the Apostle says,
a show Col. 2. 23.
of wisdom, in voluntary religion: but if you ask these people, from what
faith their works do proceed, and upon what promises of God contained in his
word their faith is settled; they will commonly say, that though they know not
these things, yet hope they to be saved as well as your self. But be not
deceived: for this hope is no hope. It is not the auker of the soul both sure
and steadfast. And your faith is no Heb. 6. 19.
faith, so long as it be not built upon the rock of Gods word, which is the
jewel that you should desire more then gold: and find to be sweeter then
honey, and the honey comb. But while Psalm. 19 19.
you build upon the devises of your own heart, your adversary, when the day
of trial comes, will overthrow your whole building which is not grounded*
upon the rock but upon the unsure sand.

Wherefore if you will enter into Gods rest, and dwell safely from the fear of
evil, your heart must be purified by faith, and, as you hear daily, faith is
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10. 17


If hitherto you have been dull of hearing, or slow of heart to believe this
word, give now the more diligence to hear, and to exercise your selves therein:
least it be taken away from you for your former negligence and unthankfulness.
For so the Lord threatens by his Propher, bebould the days come, says the
Lord God, that I will send a famine in the la^d, Amo^. 8. 11 12.
not a famine of bread, nor a thrist for water, but of the hearing of the word
of the Lord. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even
unto the East shall they run is and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and
shall not find it. This is a famine more to be feared then any famine of
material bread. For this falmine of hearing the word of God, is a toke^ of
reprobation, and a sign that God does utterly forsake, and cast away that
people or nation where it is sent. For, when God takes away the light of his
word, what shall we find but hell^^h darkness, and the shadow of death? and
this is the ^ust judgment of God for the unbelief of them that shall nos enter
into his rest.

Behold now, therefore the accepted time, behold 2. Cor. 6. 1.
now the day of salvation. For yet it is called to day, and yet wisdom
utters her voice in the Heb. 3. 13. Pro. 1. 20.
streets, and open assemblies of our people, and promises that whosoever
obeys her, shall ver. 33.
dwell safely and be quiet from the fear of evil. Be hold now the Lord stadeth
at the d^^re, and knockee^^, saying, if any man hear my voice and open the
Rev. 3 20.
door, I will come in unto him, and will supp^ with him, and he with me.

To this Lord, that has made his voice to be heard among us now above forty
years long, and yet continues unto us the glorious day of his grace, be
praise in the church throughout all generations for ever. Let us humble our
selves before the thro^e of grace and pray.

FINIS.
A GODLY AND NECESSARY SERMON against fleshly lusts; and against certain
mischievous May-games, which are the fruit thereof. Preached upon the first
Sabbath day in May, in the year. 1598.

By H. R. Master of Arts, and now Minister of the word.

Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary one to the other.



Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's church yard,
at the sign of the Bible. 1600.

To the Reader.
THis sermon (Christian Reader) should have been published together with
another of the sufferings and agon^es of our savior Christ, and of his
victory over death, but that some, which would be counted the soundest
clerks, and yet br^ach not the soundest doctrine to the world, want not their
favorers and means to stop the way of all such things as do not concord and
say amen to whatsoever they have said and fastened upon the world for truth.
Omitting therefore things that must be deferred, I have here adioined to these
six lectures ^ntitled, the day of hearing, a sermon upon a text of the Apostle
Peter exhorting to abstain from fleshly lusts. For as the son of S^rach
forbids us to keep back our counsel when Eccl. 4. 23.
it may do good, so the before named Apostle of Christ commanudeth us, every
man as he has received the gift, to minister the same one to 1. Pet. 4. 10.
another.

Wherefore (as time and place required, and as God ^nabled me to be an
instrument of his mercy) I have br^fly entreated of the perilous bondage and
thraldo^e into the which we are brought through the lusts of our own flesh,
that, seeing our selves to be in a dangerous case, we may be the more s^irred
up to watch, and by Gods gar^^ to have victori^ against such invincible
adversaries.

And when I taught these things (n^w more the^ a year and a half agone)
occasion was given that I could do no less then in their own color, as near
as I w^^ able, set forth the manifold evils and inco^venience^^ of certain
offensive and unlawful games, special^y of (...) may poles. Which though it be
a*doctrine not acceptable nor welcome to the world, specially to such a^ be
lovers of vain pleasures more th^^ lovers of God, yet must we not for fear of
me^ keep back those things which may do good. These poles s^t up, and
maintained to stand in ^co many places of this l^^d, are evident marks of
contempt of the word of God, and true godliness. and therefore, ^s we have
already by the late dearth and scarcity of food that has b^ne, and by
sundr^e plagnes, and strange sicknesses tasted of Gods anger against such
contempt of his Gospel^^ so (except, as the Prophet exhorts ^s^. 55. 6. (...)
seek the Lord while he may be sound, and call upon him while he is near) it
is to be s^ar^a that his wrath will in greater measure be ^owred out upon the
inahbitants of this land to the perpetuall^^^ of them that have neglected and
despise^ the grat^ous time of Gods ^al^ng. For what can the end of the world
which is so set on wickedness lo^ke for, but bl^odie wars, sudden sorrows,
and deadly calam^^ies? (...) that we would judge our selves that we ^ight not
be judged of the Lord. The magistrate and the minister, if they do the work of
the Lord either negligently or deceitfully must think that other men's blood
shallbe required at their hands.

Pray therefore that all which are in authority, and all that have the charge of
men's souls committed unto them, may always be found faithful and vigilant to
resist sin and offenses, not fearing nor favoring the person of any mortal
man whose breath is in his nostrelles. And pray that we all, what calling or
condition soever we be of, may be always mindful of our vow made in our
baptism to sight against sin, the world, and the flesh, till we become
conquerors through Christ Jesus; to who^ be all praise and dominion for
evermore.

Against fleshly lusts.
1. Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and Pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul.
IN this parcel of scripture (which you have heard this morning, as it is
usually read in the church this day) the Apostle Peter, as an excellent
instrument of the holy Ghost, warns the Christians of the Jews of the
imminent peril, not of thieves, nor of violent robbers, nor of wild beasts,
nor of foreign enemies, but of the lusts of their own flesh, which are the
more dangerous, and the more hard to be avoided, because they are inseparable
companions of the flesh and nature of man.

In the former chapter of this epistle, exhorting them to holiness and purity of
living, he puts them in Mind that they were not redeemed from their vain
conversation, as he 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19.
says, with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ as of a lamb undefiled and without spot* in the consideration
whereof, they might more clearly see what they were before their calling, and
what they are now being called and sanctified in Christ Jesus. They must walk
therefore in their Christian race to withstand the continual^assaults of their
spiritual enemies: among which the lusles of the flesh are not the least nor
the casiest to be subdued, for that they fight against the soul, so long as
this life lasts, and bring forth fruit unto eternal death.

Peter directs this doctrine to the^ which believed of his own nation the
Jews: notwithstanding it appertains to all Christians which have obtained
the like says to become the true seed of Abraham. For as the believing ^ewes,
to whom he writes this Epistle, were at that time strangers scattered among
the gentiles, and had lost the land of Judea, so, as they were Christians,
they were also strangers upon earth, and so are all the faithful what nation
of people soever they be of, albeit that they live and dwell in their native
country where they were borne and brought up.

It behooves them therefore, being strangers, to be more circumspect and
careful to resist their enemies; these enemies are the lusts of the flesh,
which fight against, the more excellent part of man, even against the soul.

Here we may learn that man, as he has a body of flesh wherein his soul
dwellet^, is an enemy unto himself. This may seem to be a strange Paradox,
or a thing that most men (because of the ignorance that is in them) will not
believe. But the true Christian, that walks not after the flesh, but after
the spirit, finds and feels it to be true, according as it is written, I
see another law in my members Romans 7. 23. 24.
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law
of sin, which is in my members. O vvretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?

And the heathen man by the light of Socrates.
nature could find out the true cause of man's wretchedness; whereof he
thus speaks, the chief cause of all evilles that happen to man, is man
himself: for he through his greedy lusts and desires troubles both himself
and all other, creatures.

Chrysostom in a certain treatise of his, N^^^ l^d^tur nisi aseipso.
does notablye prove that no man is hurt but of himself: for as he says,
he that hurts not himself can of none be hurt: as Kaine, sudas Iscartot,
king Pharaoh, and such others, could not have perished if the cause of their
confusion, that is, the lusts of their own flesh, which prevailed against them,
had not been within them. And contrary wise, Job, Joseph, Daniell, the Apostle
Paul, and al good men could not be hurt, though for a time they did suffer,
and took in good worth the spoiling of their goods, slander, imprisonment,
persecution, and al ^^^ury at the hands of them which did hurt, and yet did to
them no hurt: because with patience they resisted, not giving place to the
motions of fleshly lusts. These lusts are those mighty enemies which
overthrow the stoutest and the wisest among the sons of men. King David, and
Solomon his son, with other godly men have been grievously wounded herewith.
But the proud man is overcome of them, as Nebuchadn(...)r was of his proud
lusts. The voluptuous man, the drunkard and the vain glorious in Apparel is
overthrown of his own lusts, as Dives was. The covetous man, as ^uda^ was and
the wanton fornicatour, As (if that story be true) the unjust Judges were that
condemned chaste Susanna.

Seeing therefore that our flesh is as a strong castl: that defends so many
lusts, which fight against the soul, as there be diversities of sins, we
are well admonished of the Apostle, as strangers and pilgrims to look to our
selves and to abstain from such enemies.

Strangers and pilgrims do commonly stand in more fear of enemies the^ they
that dwell in their known country and among their acquaintance, as it
appears by Jacob how Genesis 34. 3(...)
he feared the Cananites when his sons had slain Hamor and Sechem. He feared
because he was a stranger in the land and few in ^^mber in comparison of his
enemies.

So Lot is despised of the Sodomites, because Genesis 19. (...).
he was a stranger, and one that had not been borne in that country; therefore
they regard not his prayers, nor his entreaty he made unto them, but bid him
be pa^king as a stranger. This pride of insulting against strangers lies as
poison within us all, what nation soever we be of, and upon any light occasion
shows it self. It pleased God therefore, Acta. 10. 34.
(who is no accepter of persons) to bridle such insolency by his holy word, as
it is written, love the stranger. and again, thou shall love the Deuteronomy. 10. 19
stranger as thy self. With a memento that we have just cause so to do. For
ye were strangers Levi. 19. 34.
^n the land of Egypt.

Io(...)hes brethren do behave themselves in the land of Egypt with great
humility, and a(...)nde at the rough words of Joseph* which they would not
have done but for that they were st^^gers in the land and few in number. And
that is it that should cause al strangers and pilgri^s to look to their own
wa^es, and to live warily, because they are co^p^^led about with strange people
of strange conditions, which are many in number, and they few.

Now the state of all true Christians here upon earth is by the condition and
nature of strangers most ^i^ly expressed. For in the sacred scriptures ^hey are
called strangers. The Prophet speaking in the person of the faithful
confes^eth that they are so, saying, I am a Psalm. 119. 19 Psalm. 39. 12.
stranger upon earth. And again, I am a stranger with thee, and a soiournor as
all my fathers were, and in another place, where he confesses his own, and his
peoples unworthiness, he says, we are strangers before thee, and so^ourners
^ike all our fathers: our dates are like the shadow upon the earth, 1 (...).
29. 15.
and there is none abiding.

We see that this is true: for man so long as he dwells in the tabetnacle of
his flesh, dwells as a stranger among his spiritual enemies which are the
lusts of his flesh, daily fighting against him, and wounding his soul more
deadly the^ the multitude of any strange and barbarous people can wound or hurt
his body when they are moved to fight against him. Man can kill but the
body, but fleshly lusts kill both the soul and body too. This the Apostle
Paul shows, where he says, if ye live after the Romans 8. 13.
flesh, ye shall die.

We read in an heathen writer that D(...) C(...). de b^th Tree. lib. 4.
the arrows of Hercules had been d^pt in the blood of the venomous monster
Hidr^; And therefore whosoever was shot of wounded with any of them perished
and dyeil without recovery. The lusts of the flesh may be compared to such
Arrows: for the flesh of al men has ever since the fall of Adam been infected
with the vemme of ^lie old serpent the Devil; And therefore the lusts thereof
^lay the soul with endless death, of they be not refisted with great
vigila^ty. For as James says, when lust has conceived, Iam. 1. 15.
it brings forth sin: and sin when it is finished, brings forth death.
Here is the wound that lust gives to the soul, to w^t, death which shall
never have an end. and again the s^n^e Apostle says, from whence are vvarres
Iam. 4. 1.
and contentions among you^ are they not hence even of your lusts that sight
in your members? here note that he says, your lusts, and in your members. For
if they were not in our members and within our bodies, we might be safe from
the danger of them, if they were in our garments, we might have them washed
out, or change and put on such as should be clean. or if they were in some
one kind of meat, we might abstain from that and live by other meat; But
the Prophet says of them that had fasted from meat, your lust remains
still. Isa. 58. 4.
Or if they were as a plague in some town or city, or in some men's houses,
the inhabitants there of might change their dwelling and so avoid them. Or if
they were in some one country more then in another, men would be content to
leave that as a wilderness rather then to die in it, even as Abraham forsook
Genesis 12. 10
Canaan, and went into Egypt in time of a famine. Nay if these lusts were but
in some one outward member of the body, as in the hand, or the foot, some men
would be content to cut of that member to save the rest of the body from
infection or death. But the scripture says, the heart is deceitful and wicked
Ier. 17. 9.
above all things, who can know it? here we see that the principal part of
the fleshis infected, even the heart; and no man can make him a new heart, no
man can go out of his own flesh, nor change the dwelling place of his soul so
long as this life lasts.

Luther writes of one that was grieved Martin Luther of one that intended to
be an Heremite.
with himself for sin, and weary with seeing and hearing the iniquities of
the world; which made him forsake the society of me^, and go into a desert
place thinking there to be safe from evil, and from all occasion of sin. but
herein he was greatly deceived: for, being in the desert, he had with him an
earthe^ vessel, to hold water in: this vessel with often falling down from
the place where he would have had it to stand, did move him to such anger^,
that at the last it caused him to break it in pieces. Then he began to
consider what his nature was: and saw that he could have no peace with himself
though no man disquieted him. If this be true (as most true it is that in ma^s
flesh dwells no good thing) Romans 7. 18.
what excellent thing do the Heremits, and such people as forsake the
felowshipe of men under a pretense of religion, if they abstain from offending
when they want occasion to offend? you know that the these cannot steal so
long as nothing is les^e in his way. If there be no battle, there ca^ be no
victory; but we see that the Christians victory is not gotten by alte^^ng the
dwelling place of his body, o^ by going out of the wo^ld, that is, out of the
^o^ie^^e of men, but it must be in the world by ^e^i^^ing his dayl^e
adversaries to keep himself, as ^^mes s^^th vnspo^ted of the Iam 1, 27.
world. For Christ will not have his disciples to be exemp^ed from the
combats, and temptations of the world, least they should wax de^^tie and
slothful, or ^^^e unprofitable to other men: and therefore he does not pray to
have them taken out of the world, but he Io^. 17. 15.
prays to have them kept from evil, that in the midst of dangers they may
not be wounded to death, and that his power may be made perfect in weakness. For
it is manifest that in the holiest men of this world, the flesh is weak and
lusts after evil things. I know, says the Apostle, that in me, that is
(...) Romans 7. 18.
my flesh dwells no good thing.

If the flesh were not corrupt and full of evil lusts, man should be free
from all kind of dangers: for the^ Sa^han could have no power over him, the
world could not deceive him, and the vanities of this life could not enti^e
him. But the flesh, which every man hears about with him, so long as he is a
pilgrim upon earth, is as a huge heap of all v(...) is like t^ a puddle of
water full of (...) and ^^t in the bottom, which, as sone a^ it is s^^red,
infecteth and fowleth all the water that it becomes unwholesome both (...) man
and beast.

So ^^than, finding store of corruption and sinful lusts within man's body
and flesh, st(...)th up the same and kindles them, evermore ministering
occasion to commit on^ sinn^ or other that the soul may be de^iled, and be
made lo^thsome i^ the sight of God. (...) is the root of evil, and here is
the puddle of deadly poison, even the flesh which ever l^st^th against the
(...)is. And for this cause the holy Ghost has not concealed from us what
will be the end if we suffer the flesh to have the upper hand. For he tells us
plainly, if ye (...) after the flesh ye (...). but if we will Romans 8. 13.
escape th^^ death, he warns us to play the Soldiers and to kill that we
our selves be not killed hereafter, (...), says he, Col. 3. 5.
M^^tifie, or kill your members which are on the earth. What members?
fornication, vncl(...)sse (...)te affection, evil conc^^^scence and c(...)sse.
But we have no members that are named with these names. We think so
indeedes but the spirit of GOD see^^ more then we do, and therefore
signifies unto us that sin has taken so deep root in us that, for the
most part, it ouer^uleth us in so much that it calls the affections of our
flesh by the name of members. And therefore you cannot here an exhortation more
necessary for Christians then is, to mortify, or to abstain from the deeds
of the flesh: and whosoever is adoer of this on lesson, is a profitable
scholar i^^ the school of Christ. but when should we abstain from these
lusts, and mortify them? there is no time, nor day of our life, not any hour
in the day but some of them do fight against our soul: for they are so many in
number (as you heard before) as there be diversi^^es of sins* ^f you will know
the^ by name, the lust of pride is one, the lust of uncleanness is another, the
lust of anger and wrath is another, the lust of covetousness is another, the
lust of back biting and slandering is another, the lust of envy or evil will to
your neighbor is another, the lust of glu^^ony and drunke^ne^ is another, the
lust of sweating, of slouthfulnes, and of filthy talking, with a number more are
the lusts that lie still in our flesh whithersoeuer we go, and every one of
them when opportunity serves will show it self an enemy to our souls.
These are the children of ^abilon which lead the children* of Israel captive;
happy is he that takes them and (...)th them against the stones. Beat them
down therefore while they be young: and put ye on the spiritual ^r^^ou^, and
take to you the shield of faith that ye may be able to withstand the^. You that
will be active and seek to excel one another at games and pla^es, you that
think it a disgrace to put up I^^uri^ and to be abused at the hands of me^,
wh^e are ye faint hearted herein? and wh^e will ye not see it when these
enemies of your souls do abuse you and make you their slaves while ye serve
them and a^e led by them to commit sin? many of them need not fight against
you: for you ge^e place to them without resistance and do utterly forget the
vow made in your baptism, which is, to forsake them and not to be led by them.

It is seen that they which are the soldiers of earthly princes, when they
come to the wa^res, can prepare themselves every man in his place to sight, and
none must be idle, when his captain puts his life in hazard; Because they
are then to deal with their bodily enemies, at whose hands, if they be
vanquished, nothing but death or bondage is to be looked for. And shall the
soldiers of Christ sleep when they should watch? shall they play when they
should fight? and shall they be careless when they are beset with so many
enemies which intend to bring the soul to destruction and bondage to the
Devil and his Angels? Christian men are always in this danger; and there is
no hope of victory against these adversaries unless we will with manly
courage sight against them under the banner of our captain Christ, according
as we have promised at the time of our baptisine: and his banner and example
that he The means or the weapons whereby we must fight against fleshly lust^.
left unto us, is sob^ie^^e, watching, earnest prayers, tears, abstinence, and
abstaininge even from all appearance of euill^. These things he, being free
from sin and all fleshly lusts, exercised in his life, that he might leave us
an example with what weapons we must overcome our enemies, and save our selves
from their lying in wait for our blood.

How then will they be counted Christians, or Christ his soldiers that never
imitate him, nor exercise any of these mea^es. This is the cause that so few
obtain the victory to be crowned kings, and so many daily perish in their
sins by imitating the world and obeyinge their own lusts. For as one father
says, wh^t LORD or master would take it in good pait at the hands of his
servant that when (...) himself did lack and suffer hunger and did labor and
watch, his servant should then give himself to eat and drink, to sleep and
live at ease? the servants of Christ have no such privilege for the says that
the s(...) is not greater then his Lord, I^. 15. 20. Wherefore whosoever
immitateth him not cannot be his servant, but is a servant of his own lusts
whereunto he yields and obeys: for so the Apostle witnesses, k(...) not
that you are his servants to whom Romans 6. 1
ye obey, whether it be of sin unto ^eath or of obedience unto righteousness?

Consider therefore, brethren, whether ye be the soldiers and servants of
Christ, or whether ye serve your own lusts, seeinge you are so far from
perfourming the vow and promise made in your baptism that you sell your
selves to be the authors of vanities and vain pleasures, seruinge your own
lusts by ungodly pastimes and profane exercises.

Your want^n dauneing of men and women together in a most ^a^ciulous manner you
will not yet l^aue.

That pestilent play at football upon the Lords day has of late been very
fearfully punished among you; even in a neighbor of your next parish, a
spectacle sufficient to te^^^fie all, whose hearts are not hardened in sin,
in whom neither the words not works of God can have any impression to draw
them to the consideration of their own ways.

This your neighbor being (as you know) at play this day fortnight, with
running against another man, brake his leg so l^mentably that (as it is
reported for truth) the sight A notable example showed upon the abuse of the
sabbeth day.
thereof made some of the beholders ready to faint. This wound could by no
means be cured, but his body pu(...)ng thereupon, it brought him to his end,
and to his grave this day senight, to the great discomfort and undoing of his
poor wife and six Children.

Beho^ld here the f^uit of good fellowship (as they call it) where their
meetings are often times mingled with their own blood, and one man murdered
by another. Here is a lamentable act^. At whose hands shall this man's blood be
required? for when the Lord makes inquisition for blood he cannot but
remember it. No doubt the magistrate cannot be clear therefrom, who ought
carefully to have foreseen the suppression of such meetings, to the preye^ting
of this and the like noisome inconveniences which may and do commonly fall out
at such unlawful assemblies.

Yet all this cannot warn us to live sobe^ly, and to leave these abuses, but
rather to ^^^e other unto them as great, yea and more monst^ous.

Here I must change my voice and set before you some of your, desperate sins
i^ th^^ own collo^^ and property: I meant your mischieuou^ pole, your
may pole, or (...) your madding-Pole. A manifest make of your irreligious
folly, and of all other ill sports most oftensiue to the church of God.

1 They that will have such banners set up are not much unlike to the children
of Israel which made a molten calfe in the wilderness, Exodus 3. 5. 6.
and had their holy day for the dedicating of its whereupon they gave
themselves (...) and (...), and to play(...) But you will answer that you do
not say of your pole as the: (...)lit^ did of their calfe, these be thy Gods.
But ^er. 4.
go further and compare your fact with theirs: Touching their holy day, the
scripture does not say that when they committed that Idolatry they proclaimed
an holy day of the calfe, but an holy day of the ver. 5.
Lord.

And the dauncers about May-pol^^ say, that they com^ to church, and for all
their spo^^e they serve the Lord as well as others. But GOD cannot be served
by your coming to church, and by taking his name and cove(...) in your month
when your heart and mind is not with him, but with your past^^e and pleasure,
which you take most delight in. And therefore, if you ^all on the ^^me of
Christ, you must depart from (...)tie* 1. Tim. 2. 19
or else you provoke the Lord to greater anger and indignation against you by
drawing near unto him with your lips, whereas you Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
hate to be reformed in your lives.

Moreover who^ Paul rehearses to the C(...)ans, what the Idolatry of the
Israelit^ was, he speaks not of their (...)ten c(...) but says, they were
Idolaters. If we ask why* or, wherein? the people (...) dow^^, says h^^, ^o
1. Cor. 10 7
eat and drink, and r^s^ up ^o (...). There is their Idolatry. And now
whe^ein does your ^a^uivious pastime differ from this? the(...)ing. Idolatry,
so in yours: for in this sense the scripture calls (...)tous^^s, Idolatry.
Coll. 3. 5. no^ that any man, were he never so covetous, v^ se^h to worship his
silver and gold, or to prey and m^ke petition unto his worldly wealth* but
that the love and liking thereof draws away his heart, that God cannot be
worshipped (...) spir^^^ and truth. In this sense therefore what pastime or
pleasure soever carries away men's hearts from the sincere worship of God, is
Idolatry.

2 Some will ask, do you find in the scripture that a May Pole is
forbidd(...) ask also of these men, where they find that the scripture
forbids men to be Papist^^: But Exodus 20. 4, 1. Io. 5. 21. Gal. 1. 7. 8.
the scriptures forbid Idolatry, and cond^n^ false doctrine*

And you see and hear that the Pope and all Pap^stes do prac^^se the one of
these* a^^ teach the other: And therefore to be a ^^^ist* i^ to be contrary to
the word of God, (...) wis^ the scripture do utterly forbid christia^^ 1. Cor.
14. 20. Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 5. 11. Romans 13. 13
to be child^ (...) understanding, to (...) themselves like unto thi^ world, to
have fellowship with the un(...) of (...); And they plai^ly forbid (...) and
this scrip(...) a^ you hear, exhorts to abstain from fleshly lusts. But
your May Pole, and May-games are the fruit of ignorance, are after the fashion
of the world, and are the works of d^^knesse, proceeding from fleshly lusts.
They are done in wa^tonnes, and are the cause of drunke^^es. Yea commonly they
are the cause of strife and tumult; and sometime of murder also. Are they not
therefore forbidden in the holy scripture(...)

3 There be others that are patrons and favorers of this goodly pageant, which
allege antiquity, and custom for the defense of the same, and shy that it is
a thing that has been used in the time of our forefathers, and before we were
both, and at this day, such a town, and such a parish has it, and will have
it in despite of the^ that speak against it(...) Let these men remember in
like manner that Idolatry, rebellion, murder, and all other wickedness has
bend practiced in the world of old time and before we were borne; and so Gods
just punishment has been declared against them that were doers of such
things. They that will therefore imitate men in their old sins, shall also be
partakers with them of their old punishments. Ye^, and their punishment shall be
so much the sharper, by how much their warn^g has been the more. And as for
the example and custom of other places which now uphold and maintain^ these
banners, that cannot make the^ to be the less hurtful, but rather it shows
that the whole world (...)th (...) (...) 1. Ioh. 5. 19. Exodus 23. 2.
and we are commanded not to follow a multitude to do evil.

When Demetrius and the men of Ephesus saw that Paul's preaching wrought so
effectually that their gods D(...) was in hazard to be set at naught and
rejected, they have no better weapons to defend her then the shield of custom,
and example of the multitude. A^ A. Act. 19. 27.
^i^, say they, and the world worshippeth her.

We can be content when we come to church to here this and the like scriptures;
but we^ think that the preacher is out of his text if he apply them to us, or
to the abuses (...)ous time: for we have gotten the name of Christians and
therefore we think that whatsoever we do is f^r enough from idolatry. Thus ar^
most men through the blindness of the (...) hearts hardened in their sins.

There is no commonwealth so well reformed but (for the mos(...)) in all place^
t^^ greatest number of me^ ^^e lovers of the wo^ld more the^ lovers of God; and
every tr^e (...) stian has just cause to be grieved to see that after forty
years preaching of the Gospel in this land, men should still carry these and
the like idolles in their hearts. For whereyee see these may-poles stand*
there shall you find that either the word of God is co^t^ned, or else it has
not as yet been powerfully taught among the people of that place.

It has been seen in some places of this land that men have been so
desperately dispose to maintain their maytriumphes that they have set up with
the^ the Queene^ arms, intending by this color to entrap such men as would
speak against them, or go about to have the^ down, as if the Queens majesty
had allowed her arme^ to be set on may-pols. Lo here the children of this world
are in their generation wiser the^ the children of light. Oh that magistrates
would look better to these abuses.

4 Some me^, that have ^^^s to see, do yet wink at this matter, and say that
the setting up of a pole is no sin, and that it cannot hurt if other abuses
did not follow it. But they might see that the thing it self is an abuse, and
that there is nothing in it which is not sin. For it is not of the nature of
those things which God allows for the mainetaininge of man's life, as sleep,
meat, drink, and appatrell. These things are necessary, and without the use
of them we cannot live; and yet when we abuse them, or exceed in any of them,
it is sin: but the setting up of a pole, after the manner that we speak of,
adds one sin to another, contrary to the counsel of the son of S^rach,
which forbids to bind Eccl. 7. 8.
two s(...) together.

First it is an abuse of Gods creatures: for God created not the trees of the
wood to be cut down and set up again for gazing stocks, to no other use
but to satisfy men's fleshly lusts. God crowns the year with his
blessings, and satisfies every tree with moisture, making it to be green and
pleasant, and to be fruitful after his kind. But vain and graceless men
destroy the most flourishing trees, and set them up to be dry and
unfruitful like themselves.

Secondly the deed done is an idle deed, and not only so, but also a deed of
offense, and a stumbling block to draw away many that are weak, and to cause
them to speak^ good of evil, and to take pleasure therein. But every idle deed
is more then an idle word. And every idle word is sin (or else Christ would
not have said tha^ men shall give Mar. 12. 36.
account thereof at the day of judgment) Therefore every idle deed is a
greater sin. And every offense, which hinders the faith of others, is such a
sin that he says, it were better for the author thereof that a millstone were
ha^god Mat. 18. 6.
about his neck; and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

Thirdly the May-polers are caterpillars to the common wealth: for they make
destruction of the fairest young ^ree^, which, if they were suffered to grow,
would in time be good timber for necessary vse^. Thus in the act it self, not
speaking of the mischievous sequels thereof, we may see many sins bound
together, as the abuse of Gods creature, a deed unprofitable, hurtful, and
offensive to others, and finally an hindrance to the common wealth, which is a
breach of charity.

5 Who can tell whether the setting up of these poles proceeds not from the
leaven of our adversaries the Pope and his seminari^^^ for it is not unknown to
them that wheresoever such banners do stand there are many wavering and
ignorant people, not yet instructed nor settled in religion, which, if they
might have their defite would quickly b^^ perverted to go after Ba^l, and to
like better of the Mass then of the Gospel.

6 To them that ask what recreation may be lawful for them, and what exercise
young men shall have, we cannot appoint any, which the word of God does not
allow. Christians are commanded to abstain from al appearance 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
of evil. Howbeit, according to man's wisdom (which says, of evils the less
is to be chosen) of bodily exercises, such may be used as are profitable to the
common wealth, and not offensive to religion: notwithstanding the chiefest
exercise of Christian-men, whether they be young or old, should at all times
be in the law of the Lord. For therein the godly man, as David says, does
exercise himself day and night. Psalm. 1. 2.
And that is the exercise wherewith the wisdom of God would have a young (...)
to redress his way; like the young men of whom S. Psalm. 119. 9.
John writes, that they were strong, and that they had the word of God abiding
in them, and 1. ^o. 2. 14.
had overcome the wicked. But alas the contrary may be said of most young men
in these days. Let them therefore consider what master they serve; and let
them shake of the voke of sin, and abstain from fleshly lusts, redressing
their ways according to the word of God, that so they may become the servants
of Christ to whom they have made avowe in their baptism. Let us pray for the
assistance of Gods holy spirit that we may subdue all fleshly lusts.

And pray we that magistrat^ and such as ^re in authority may have a greater
care to reform manners, and to see what ought to be reformed.

FINIS.

