Englands Farevvell to Christian the fourth, famous King of Denmark: With a
relation of such shows and several pastimes presented to his Majesty, as
well at Court the fifth day of August last past, as in other places since his
Honorable passage through the City of London.

The most Honorable Entertainment of his Highness, aboard his Majesty's Ships
in the road of Gyllingame, near the City of Rochester in Kent.

With the Kings Entertainment aboard the Denmark Ships, at Grauesend: As also
their Honorable leaue-taking and farewell, Setting Sail from Grauesend on
Monday night, the eleventh of August. 1606.

By H. Roberts.

Printed at London for William Welby. 1606.

To the right Worshipful Sir John Iolles, Knight, Alderman and Sheriff of
the City of London, HENRY ROBERTS, your Worships true devoted, wishes all
increase of worship in this world, and after this life, the Joys Eternal.
RIght Worshipful, long since in those employments I had for the Irish
affairs, in the time of our most dread and gracious Sovereign, deceased, and
ever sithence, I sought opportunity, to make some show of my zeal unto you,
but time never favoring the expectation of my desired thought, I was enforced
to keep silent my loves intention. Yet now having some occasion, through these
great and most honorable favors showed unto the gracious and renowned King of
Denmark, at his being here, by our famous King, Nobility, and States of our
Land, whereof many have been eyewitnesses near this honorable City: Yet
considering, that many thousands which desired to see the same, have been
debarred of their contentments therein, and having bestowed my time and charge,
in noting from time to time, what has been done in all honor to welcome this
renowned King in several places, and sundry honorable pastimes (no doubt) to
the eternal honor of his Majesty and this Land, I have emboldned my self to
publish the same under your Worships protection, and beseech you of your
accustomed clemency so to accept it, as it is faithfully intended: so shall I
bind my self ever to your service, and in all duty rest your Worships,

Ever to be commanded, H. ROBERTS.

Englands Farewell: Showing the most royal Entertainment of the King of
Denmark, aboard his Majesty's Ships in the road of Gyllingame, near the
City of Rochester in Kent.
With the King of Englands entertainment aboard the Denmark Ships at
Graues-end.
As also, their Honorable leaue-taking one from the other.
THat there is no greater comfort to man, then perfect Love to be maintained one
with the other, there is few or none, but having Christian charity, can
testify: for besides the prescript rule of God which commands we love one
another, it brings such contentment to the mind, that there can be no Jewel
of so rare and high esteem, as the perfect love of friends. How many great
Potentates have, in their inward thoughts, preferred the love of some
especial one in their pleasures to solace with, and in their counsels to
participate with in all passions both of body and mind, to be as a second
self!

Such is the effect of Love, that many have hazzarded life, and what ever the
earth did afford them in their love, to make it known. Some for their
Countries love have dyed, some for their friend, and many by aduentring honor
of their houses, by the force of their love.

If such be the touchstone of that virtue, and so highly ought to be regarded,
how may all Christians joy therein, that have or do participate of the same!
And how may we admire in this iron age, wherein so many vices abound, to behold
the amity of Neighbor with Neighbor, Nation with Nation, and Friend with
Friend! Where, by the contrary, no torment on earth may be comparable to the
inward griefs that heart endures, where envy has domination. And truly is it
said and written of that horrible sin, by whom, and through whom many great
outrages have been attempted and done. And daily we have seen the Subject
attempting the death of their Sovereign, the Son the Father, the Husband the
Wife, and many times the Wives their Husbands. This helhound envy, begotten by
the Devil, where it once fostereth, never gives over his host, until he
has brought him to confusion: of which we have too many examples. God grant,
we that profess Christ Jesus in one simpathy of heart and mind, may abolish
that Hag, and truly embrace that heavenly commandment, to love one another,
and that we all, subjects of this peaceable and most gracious Sovereign King
James, may be so united in love to our maker, and duty to his Majesty, that
the Devil never have power, to cause us forget the one or the other:

But, that seeing his Excellency is the true touch of love, not only to us his
home-borne people, but unto all Christian Nations what ever they be that seek
his favor or comfort, a Father to the Stranger, and a careful maintainer of
peace for his people, a true Jonathan to his David, a holy anointed of the
Lord, in this most royal King, oh let us all true subjects note, and noting,
imprint in our hearts the rare, and most honorable love of his Majesty showed
to the person of his royal Brother, King of Denmark, between whose loves
there may be no comparison. The one, Love caused to commit his Kingly person to
the adventure of fears and enemies, to see his Joy, the comfort of his royal
estate our gracious Sovereign the Queens Majesty, and their royal issue:
whose love, with brotherly love has been so joyfully accepted of their
Highness, as never has been seen in this land the like. Yea, such a
surpassing Joy may it ever be amongst us, that we can never think, speak,
or write too much thereof.

Oh rare love, oh kingly and royal president for all people to note, what has
happened since the sixteenth of July now last past, the day of this famous King
of Denmarks first arrival in Tilbery Hope, where he was entertained, and
brought from his Ship with his chief delight our dread Sovereign, and the
Prince, lovingly welcomed by the Queen and States, and joyfully received by
all their Subjects, who with duty and zeal, made it known in all the best
manner so short time would give leave; yet such it was, as his Princely mind
was much delighted in the same, and no doubt does applaude this honorable
City, both for beawtie, wealth, and pleasure: a most excellent note and
honorable appearance of his gracious acceptance of their loves showed, may be
gathered, by his sudden and silent coming again in person to view the state
of this City, and rare monuments thereof, who having seen it the last of July
in all royalty, the Citizens in their rich attire, the houses garnished, and
such multitudes of people of all estates, in this manner ensuing came to view
it.

The next day being Friday, and the first of August, this royal King, knowing
the zeal and love of our Nation, whose loyalty he need not distrust,
accompanied with the Earls of Nottingham, Sussex, and others, in their Coaches
came to S. Paul's Church, where he walked, and viewed the same, and from
thence, to the top of the Steeple, where he took much delight to behold the
beauteous situation of London, the pleasant Gardens and Fields adjoining, the
richnes of the Thames, so surnished with Ships of great countenance and worth,
as he graciously applauded the excellency thereof. But amongst all other
things, he admired most, when the noble men accompanying him, did report the
being of a Horse upon that place, coming up such a way of great danger and so
^ye, that he took very good notice thereof, and wonderfully did admire the
same.

From thence he took his Coach with his company, and passed on to the
Exchange, viewing the beauty of Cheape-side, and the riches of the inhabitants,
the Goldsmiths, Mercers, and other wealthy trades, all the way setting their
commodities to sale: A sight which may delight any Prince in the world to
behold.

To grace this Royal Exchange, so named by our late Royal Queen, his Grace
walked round about the Pawneaboue, and viewed with great pleasure the same.
Then came he to the Merchants walks beneath, where it was told his Highness
the manner of our Merchants, and the hours of their meetings, where from all
Countries there was daily news to be heard by one means or other: Here they
make great exchanges of their Merchandise, make their traffike to foreign
Countries, ship their men for service; so that their greatest affairs were
every day twice there effected.

There-hence proceed they by Cornchill, Gracious street, and Fanchurch, to
the Tower of London, where our gracious Sovereign, his dear esteemed Brother
King James, met his Highness, and with Kingly welcomes entertained him, and in
his own person conducted him to the offices of the Jewel house, Wardrope, of
the Ordinance, Mint, and other places, where, to their Kingly presence, in the
Jewel house were presented the most rare and richest Jewels, and beawtifull
Plate, so that he might well wonder thereat, but cannot truly praise, or
estimate the value thereof by many thousands of pounds.

The like in the Wardrope, where, for rich Robes, beset with stones of great
price, fair and precious Pearl and Gold, were such, as no King in the world
might compare: Besides the rich furniture of hangings, clothes of estates,
Cushions, Chaires, and Kingly furniture for his Palaces, as may cause much
admiration, and bring great content to the beholders

But passing then on to the office of the Ordinance, he well viewed the warlike
provision of the great Ordinance, which at an hour is ready for any service to
be commanded. Over every piece the Ladles and Spunges hang to lade them
withal: and the Traces and Collors for the Horses to draw them away, when they
shall need to serve.

The armory and store of small shot so well maintained and kept, the numbers
ready fitted of all sorts of Muskets, Caliuers, Petronels, Dags, and other
serviceable weapons, as Pikes, Halbards, Targets, Sheelds of sundry fashions,
for variety, antiquity of the things, and the relating of their uses, did
make him with great and honorable admiration to behold them all very well, and
commend them.

These rare, rich, and most admirable pleasant sights ouer-gone, their
Majesty's ascend to the Mint, which they viewed, and from thence to the Lions,
and other wild beasts there kept and maintained for his Highness pleasures
and pastimes, all kingly delights, and such variety, as I think the world
cannot bring in one Country more store, as it has bin noted by many great
Travelers, who have seen the greatest Courts of the world.

From this place, as they went to take their Barges, the King of Denmark
walked a turn or two upon the Tower Wharfe, viewing the rich and forcible
Ordinance there placed, whereof there was no small store, as his Majesty might
well remember, by the honorable peale was made him the day before, at their
setting forwards from the Tower, to go through the City.

When their pleasures were well delighted with these shows, the Tide serving
to shoot the Bridge, they took their Barges, and were rowed to his Majesty's
House, White Hall. At their going from the Wharfe, an honorable peale of great
Ordinance was discharged, the Officers using great diligence and foresight, and
the Gunners applying themselves very paynefully for the performance thereof,
the time being so short, as truly they did all deserve great commendations.

This day brought with honor to end, they repose themselves this night, and in
the morning very early, being Saturday, they hunted in the Park of Saint
James, and killed a Bucke.

Then passed they on to Hyde Park, where they hunted with great delight,
spending the rest of the forenoone in following their pastime, and about the
time of dinner returned, and there dyned; and about four a clock, their
Barges being by commandment ready at the Privy stayres, they went by water to
Greenewitch.

The next day, being Sunday, her Majesty was churched, to the great joy of all
the beholders, the two Kings being present at that time, where they heard a
learned Sermon.

This day they solace in their private delites, the Kingly Brothers, the
Queen, Prince, and Nobles of both Realms, showing by all the means they can,
their loves, by variety of delight to beguise time, and bid them welcome.

On Monday, the fourth day of August, the Queen, who had not been partaker of
any their Kingly ports, accompanied their Royal persons, and the Prince, who
were attended on by the Nobility, and gallant Courtyers, at which time, their
sport was to run at the ring; in following which, they spend that afternoon,
where sundry of the young Noblemen proved their skill at that exercise, but
none excelled his Majesty, and the Denmark King, at whose good success the
Queen was very much delighted, and took great pleasure therein.

The next day, being the solemn observation of his Majesty's thanksgiving for
freeing his Highness from the treacherous practices of the Gowryes, the
forenoone of that day they spent in thankefulnes to God, whereof his Majesty
has a most religious and zealous care. The afternoon, for their delight, were
the Bears and Bulls brought, in which sport some time was spent, but made the
shorter, by reason of the honorable exercise of Tilting: the Lords and
Courtiers being ready armed, upon notice given them, repaired to the
Tilt-yard, every one with his several device, most gallantly mounted, and
richly armed.

To honor this royal presence the more, the King of Denmark armed very rich,
and mounted on a most stately Courser, came to the Tilt, and ran eight courses,
the first four with the Lord of Effingam, whobrake their staves most
gallantly, three a piece, and foiled the other. Then the noble and most toward
Earl of Arundell ran with his Majesty of Denmark, and brake three staves a
piece, to the great joy of all the beholders. Then followed the rest of the
Tilters as they were appointed, so gallantly behauing themselves, as was both
honorable and delightful to that most gracious and royal company. Night
growing upon them, they were enforced to give over their sport, where, taking
their humble leaves of the two Kings, the Queen, and Prince, they left the
Tilt yard, and being unarmed, returned to the Court, where, besides former
graces, and favors showed them by all their royal persons, they received many
thanks, and so spent the rest of the evening in other delightful sport, till
time of night called them to rest.

At this honorable exercise, the toward and most hopeful Prince showed
himself in his Armor, being gallantly mounted, and a heart as powerful as
any, though that his youth denied strength. For this days exercise, all the
Masters of Defense and professors thereof, were summond with their weapons to
show their skill, that the King of Denmark might see the manner of our fight,
and the variety of weapons practiced for men's defense, as well in private
quarrels, as their Countries service: but the time ouerslipt, the Challenger
Fencers, when they had marched with their Drums and Ancients about the Tilt
yard, departed.

The next morning, the King of Denmark being desirous to see some of their
practice, they which were ready in the Town, having warning to give their
attendance, in the morning early repaired to the Tilt yard, and there, in
presence of the two Kings, many of the Nobility and Courtiers, showed both
manhood and skill, wherein the Kings took great pleasures, and gave them
Kingly thanks and favors.

This sport was made more short, by reason of the Kings going from Court, to
see our Kings Houses nearest London, and to hunt in their Parkes: After they
had broken their fastes, they set forward with their Traynes to Richmonde;
there that night they hunted, and lay: and the next day dyned at Hampton court,
and there hunted, and killed Deate, with great pleasures: And surely the King
of Denmark was very much delighted, with the gallantnesse of these royal
Palaces of his Majesty's; as did appear by his earnest noting of them, and
often recounting of their pastimes and pleasures.

From thence, they proceeded to Windsore; where he was entertained by the King,
most royally: here was presented unto him, the Knights of Windsore; being all
goodly Gentlemen, and such as had served Queen Elizabeth in her Wars; and
for service done, preferred in their latter years, to this place of rest: and
are called by name of, King James Knights of Windsore.

These goodly ancient Gentlemen, being in their Roabes of Purple and Scarler,
with the Garter, and Saint Georges Cross upon them.

Which goodly, and charitable manner, when the King of Denmark was possessed
withal, and the order of their first foundation, and continuance, the King
highly commended the Founder, and in cha^itie wished, the successors to the
worlds end, might continue so honorable an action as that: whereof, by Gods
grace, there is no doubt, his Majesty from his first coming, having so
graciously and most bountlfully showed his zeal to that honorable action, by
augmenting their portions, which were possessed of those places.

Long did they not make stay in Windsor, by reason that the time began to
shorten, for the King of Denmarkes departure, wherefore after some time spent
in hunting, they ma^e their return to the Court at Greenwich, where her
Majesty lay: and on Friday, the eight of August there arrived, and so rested
till Mondav following.

The next morning then, being Saturday the ix. of August, the tide serving fit
for their purpose, this gracious and royal King of Denmark, being now to take
his farewell of those he held in esteem; with great courtesy, and many
thanks, to those of the Counsel, and Nobility, which stayed from following
the Kings he gave them a Princely and most loving farewell: and so of many
others of Honor and Worship, with many rich and bountiful Rewards to the
Officers of the Kings Household, and Guarde.

Which done, the Barges giving their attendance, these two Royal Kings, the
Queen and Prince Henry, came aborde them; and were rowed by all industerous
means down the River of Thames, so low as North-fleete, or there aboutes;
where they had their Train attending, and their Coaches: so passed they on the
way to Rochester, leaving the way to Grauesend: all the way followed with such
numbers of people, as well from London, as other places, that it was to be
wondered at.

Time has brought them near the City of Rochester; where they are met with
the Mayor and Brethren of the City, who with reverence, delivered his Mace
unto his Majesty; which graciously did accept the same, and redeliuered it to
the Mayor, willing him to keep it, and to vie it with Justice, as before:
Which done, the Mayor taking his Footecloth-Horse, which was ready, and rode on
before his Majesty, bearing the Mace before him throughout the City, to the
house of the Right worshipful Sir Peter Bucke Knight, one of his Highness
Officers of the Navy: which house was the lodging of the king of Denmark:
whom our King there left to his repose, and returned himself to the House of
the reverend Bishop of Rochester, Doctor Barlow: and the Queen and Prince to
their Lodgings, which were all several*

The next day, being Sunday, which Holy appointed day of the Lord, their
Majesty's came to the Cathedrali Church the College, where they heard a most
learned Sermon, by a reverend grave and learned Doctor.

The Sermon ended, their Dinners prepared aborde the Ships, and their Boats
and Barges attending them. They set forwards to the Waters side, where every
Officer in his place, served: the Right Honorable Earl of Nottingham Lord
High Admyrall being present, Sir Robert Mansell, Sir John Treuor, and others.

The King had a Note delivered him, containing the names of every Ship, what
burden they wear, and what Munition and Men they had: which Note, his Highness
observed, and viewed every Ship as they rowed along, keeping their way,
until they came to the Ship, prepared for them to dine: which Ship was
perfumed with sweet and pleasant Perfume, and hanged with Cloth of Gold all
the sides within: wherein three Chaires of Estates was placed, for the two
Kings, and Queen.

The dinner was furnished with all kind of Dainty provision, in such
aboundaot manner, that the King of Denmark marueyled where such store of meat
should be dressed: And to see the manner of it, his Majesty took occasion,
after dinner, to go upon a spacious Gallarie made upon Lighters, between the
two royal Ships the Elizabeth Jonas, and the White Bear; near which two
Ships, rid a great Hulke, which was furnished with Ouens for Baked meats;
and had in it three fair Ranges to roast with: all which, his Majesty in
person saw; and thorowout that Ship, went from place to place, noting every
room.

The time passing away, the Kings took their Barges, accompanied with the
Queen, Prince, and Noblemen; and rowed on toward Chartham, where they had
sight of all the Ships* which were rich in Ancientes, Pendants, Hagges, and
Streamers: and withal, so furnished with goodly Men, as might joy their
Majesty's to behold: All which, made so glorious a show, that might well amaze
the miode of a man to think on, being a Friend; but torrifie the heart of the
proudst Enemy, to see it.

When their Majesty's had viewed the whole Fleet, they were rowed to the
shore; where on a Hill, very convenient, they might ouer-looke the whole Navy,
there was ordained places for them: When being seated, and the word given,
every Ship, in their due course, discharged orderly their whole Ordinance,
in such order and form, the one Ship after the other, as was greatly
pleasing to their Majesty's; and gained great credit to the Gunners,
performets of that service. The great Shot then discharged, was two thousand
three hundred, besides the Health at dinner; which was begun with Shot, and
answered.

This welcome most Honorably performed, the Kings gave the Lord high Admyrall,
and the Officers thanks, for their pains, and care taken herein, and returned
to Rochester, to their Lodgings. That evening, the Gunners of the Navy, showed
very excelent and rare Fier-workes.

The next morning, being Monday, and the xi. of August, the Kings, the Queen,
and Prince, with their traynes, set forward toward Grauesend, by the way so
followed with people, as was wonderful, and did make the train of Courtiers
admire: yea, such was the multitude of people, Londoners, and others, which
came to Rochester, that thousands could get no lodginges, or meat for their
money.

The time has brought these Royal persons, near to the Town of Grauesend,
where the Port Re^ne of the Town, with his Brethren, in very decent manner,
presented them selves to his Majesty, and offered his Office unto his
Highness: which graciously accepted the same, and delivered it again unto him,

So passed their Majesty's forwards to the waters side; at whose coming, they
were saluted with a mighty peale of Ordinance from the King of Denmarkes
Admyrall, and so from all the rest of his Fleet: who having finished, the two
Block-houses of Tylberie and Grauesend began; and thundered such a Volye of
Shot, as was highly to be commended.

Aborde the Royal Ship of the Denmark Kings, are these Princes gone; where
a most hearty welcome they receive, and great cheer. The Ordinance often
times discharging, upon Healthes to all Friends: which Ordinance was answered
by our two Block-houses in such order, as desarues commendations.

After dinner, the Gunners of the King of Denmarks Ships, showed their rare
devises of Fire-workes: the beauty of which was not to be seen, by reason of
the brightness of the Sun, which dimmed the same.

Dinner ended, and the tide (which stays not) serving to go for London, our
gracious King and Queen having brought his kingly Brother to his own Shipp,
from whence he brought him, after many kind Adues given on every side, as well
by the Princes, as their Noble train, they commend his Majesty to Gods
protection, and heartily wish his safety in his own Country: which solemn
farewells accomplished, the King, Queen, and Prince, took their Barges to
come for the Court, leaving the King of Denmark to Gods pleasure, and favor
of the Winds; who sent after them, a token of Princely love, in the thundering
noise of all the Ordinance from all his Ships.

These Royal Companies parred, as you have heard, the King of Denmark took
order for Rewards to be given to all Offices of his Majesty's Householde:
which, as it is said, was most bountiful. And for other places, aborde the
Ships to the Masters, like Rewards.

Thus have I recounted in two several Pamphlets, the whole Discourse, and
royal Entertainment of this most Royal King: whose pleasures, and great
welcomes in all places, no Prince but may admire.

And most worthily was the love of all men bestowed on his Highness, for all
courtesy and loving favors might be exspected from a King of his
magnificence, was not wanting in him; as his gracious countenance showed in
all places. Besides which, it has very seldom, or never been seen, so many
Strangers togeathers in this Land, so well governed, and so kindly used: Such
was his Princely care of them, and our Nation, for breeding of quarrels by any
of his people, that of all other Vices, their charge was to keep them from
being druncke: and withal, inflicted upon them a heavy punishment, for any
that should offend, contrary to his commandment: for the execution of this
his Majesty's pleasure herein, he appointed a Marshall, who had diverse men, as
Officers under him, to have a vigilent care over them; which with all diligence
performed the same: and such as they found druncke, were brought to a House
appointed for their Prison; wheare their Thumbes were chayned together, and
nailed by it to a post: where they remained till some suite was made for their
delivery, and hearty repentance for their faults; the due execution whereof,
kept them in such awe, that you should seldom after the first week, see any
of them out of order.

A comfortable hearing it is to all Christians, to see so vile a sin
reformed. God grant us all to follow like examples of well doings: preserve
our dread Sovereign Lord King JAMES, the Queen, the Prince, and all the rest
of their Royal issue: And send this famous kingly Brother, a fair wind, and
a safe and pleasant passage to his desired Port. Amen.

FINIS.

