To the Courteus Readers.
LIke as the Lodestone points at the immovable poles of Heaven, and will
not lie still otherwise: so true generous and noble minds ever aim at virtue,
and esteem their noble houses by them half stained, unless in valorous
prowess, wise policies, and kind courtesies, they equal themselves to, (if
not surpass) the most famous of their Progenitors, yea of all whereof
memorial is extant: by which their worthy endeavors they live in most great
honorable reputation in this world, and after do live by fame everlastingly.
Among which famous worthies, this Edward of Lancaster here mentioned, deserves
not the least praise or prise. And if any will allege, that in this Poetical
praising of him, there be many fictions (as, Poetis et pictoribus permagna
conceditur licentia) let such learn to read these manner of books, as
Socrates wished women to use their looking glasses; namely, fairewomen, to look
on their glasses, to beware that their good manners may shine as well as their
beauty; and ill-fauoured women, to endeavor that their inward virtues might
make gracious their outward deformities. So let Gentlemen by reading these
books observe therein only those things, the practice whereof may innoble
them more and more, and the baser and cowardly sort, here learn only what may
promote them: And thus wishing the end of all thy reading to be to attain
true virtue, I wish thee an eternal reward of glory. Farewell.

H. R.

THE MOST DElectable and pleasant History, of the Illusturous and most
puissant Prince, Edward, Knight of the holy Cross of Jerusalem.
The first Chapter.
IT has been said (courteous Gentlemen) in the first part of this History,
that this most famous Prince, our home born Countriman, having finished with
great solemnity, his marriage, to the good content of himself, and more
increase of joy to his Lady Valia, making small stay, as desirous to see the
holy place where our Savior was alive and dead, giving the Thracian King most
honorable thanks for their great intertainment, and honor done him and his
Princes at their marriage, embarked first his Lady in a small Sattia, which
came from Marceelas, which of purpose he fraighted for Ceneto Vecha, committing
the care of her, and her servant Alinda, to the good regard of the Friar who
married them. Which done, having well entreated the master, mariners, and
merchants, for their more favor in their voyage, the wind blowing a fres^
leuant, they weighed their Anchors, set sail, and betook themselves to the
mercies of the raging Billows.

What sorrowful parting was between them, I omit, leaving that to their
judgment, which on the like suddenn^sse, depart with their sweet loves. To
recount unto you the travail of our beloved Knight to the holy land, of which
he had great care, having embarked his Lady with her followers, taking a
most reverend farewell of the King, the Queen, and the Princess Argentino,
with all the Peers of their Country, who both honored and loved him, he
betook himself to travail, not unlamented of all the Court, whose love was
so united unto him, that it seemed their spirits to part with their bodi^s at
his bidding farewell. But as all things must have end, so had the Knight made
an end of giving the kind Adieu to that Country: and only accompanied with
his Page, well mounted, he took his journey first for Peloponensee, an
ancient City of Greece, which after many a weary journey, passing the
dangerous mountains, and uncouth places uninhabited but of ravening and most
ouglie beasts, he recovered that City of fame, where he had of the Viceroy
most honorable entertainment, with all shows of love and kindness that he
could require: where resting himself after his weary travails, we leave him
for a time, to recount unto you the success of the Princess Vallia, in her
journey by sea.

CHAP. II.
How Argentino consorting with a Knight of her Country to make the Lady
Vallia away, who assailed her at Sea, and what chanced her.
THe prince, whose love Argentino, daughter to the Thracian King by all means
sought to obtain, burned in such jealousy and hate, wanting her desire, that
all her mind and study was, by some death or other, to quite her of her
ryuall, the lovely Lady Vallia, thinking thereby to gain the love of her
knight, which we more desired then the worlds goods, and sifting her woman's
wit, which was apt enough to many devilish devises, and finding none so
perfect, which she du^st to practice, flaming with revenge to finish her
intended evil, bethought her of a knight in her fathers Court, whose
countenance and shows of kindness persuaded her, he intended some singular
affection unto her. Of this knight, her thoughts assured her: wherefore,
casting from her all regard of honor, required in such of so highesteeme: she
sent for the knight, commanding her messenger to have him unto her presence. In
which, no time was delaied of either part. For the Messenger no sooner had
delivered the princes pleasure, but the knight whose affections was somewhat
bent to her love, as one new rise^ from a dream, ^mazed to behold such
visions, as often in sleep appears, r^wsing himself, without any questions
demanding, hasteneth with such speed as he could best use, to her presence,
whom with great favor, and unwonted courtesies, she kindly entertained, using
many pleasing speeches, to inchaunt him to effect her devilish will. Of all
which, when he had with such kind thanks requited her, and that she felt the
tool had taken some conceit of her lyking, cunningly to see how this potion
would work, she says:

Siegniur Gualintie, for that I have noted the weak conditions of men, and see
by experience the small account they have of their words, and faithful
promise, I dare not say what I would, wherefore, I am enforced to conceal in
secret, that which to the death consumes me. And therefore withal, feigning
a womanish kind of heaviness, pouring forth a few dissembling tears, like
the Crocadill, to effect her intended evil, she cease her speech. Gualintie
which saw these unexpected motions, amazed thereat, could not suddenly
conceive what these motions might intend, yet aiming at her passion, which he
imagined was some discontent, he says.

Honored Princess, what occasions your grace has to carry so hard opinions
of men's constancy, it were too de^^e a matter for me to question, yet would
your good thoughts might be such of your humble servant, as I desire it should,
and as my will is at your excellent hands to deserve, I doubt not then but my
loyalty should recover those loose opinions you have of men's constancy: for
performance whereof, in all faithful duty, I humbly offer the faith of a
knight.

The Princess Argentino, glad to find the Gentleman in so good a humor, was
easily drawn to believe what he promised. And therefore without standing on
terms of light belief, she said. Gentle knight, whose word I hold so
firm, as the surest bands, I accept your kind proffer of courtesy, for
which, by that true faith which honor ought to maintain, your performance
shall be so requited, as thou shall ever be honored for the same, and thy
posterity. Therefore what I intend, I will nor can no longer conceal from
thee.

Know (gentle knight) and with that a sigh drawing tears, restrained her
dissembling speech, so that she could not utter what she had to say, yet
putting off she proceeds: Let it be known to thee, most honored knight,
those abuses offered me in our own Court, by that disloyal and unjust knight
of the holy Cross, who making shows of love unto me, many times courted me
with his false intended suites, as well as by his flattering tears of no other
intent, as I find now by just proof, but to dishonor me and my father: else
after so many protestations, vows, and solemn oaths taken, his loyal
affection to me was such, as no torment nor sorrow, nor no turmoyle whatsoever,
could remove from his false and dissembling heart: he would not before my face
in presence of my gracious father, and his most noble Peers, have conjoined
himself in marriage with a runnagate Damsel, a beggar, a common traveler,
and therefore no better then a common courtezan, by his disgrace, so disgracing
me, as the remembrance thereof can never be rooted from my faithful heart,
nor never (...) my body take his natural sustenance, until I be by some
means or other, revenged on him and her, that thus most perjured has showed
himself, the most vniustest knight of the world. And that minion, the which
doubtless by some enchanted spelles has woonne his love from me, to her
liking, which otherwise she could never have done.

This (good knight quoth she,) my long protestations might weary thee: but
pardon my fault, and imagine how dear I hold thee, that amongst all the
Knights of my fathers Court, have made choice of you, to participate with me
of my great heaviness: for which, if thou can but set down a revenge
sufficient for them, but chiefly for that enchaunting sorceresse, and execute
it by thine own hand, I promise my self thine everlastingly, or what other
reward so ever thou shall require. Gu^lintie, which felt by her speeches, that
grief she endured, was only a longing to revenge her of her loves rival, a
torment which stingeth all women to the heart, hoping she would prove as firm
as she proffered she would, and that in pleasing her fancy, and revenging her
on the Lady, he should gain her love, for so much by her insinuating speech
he gathered, standing on no more points of having, but effecting her word.

He vowed by that honor, which at her princely fathers hands he had received,
never to take one quiet sleep, until he was for her on the Lady thoroughly
revenged, and that with such rygour, as she her self could not devise so ill
a torment. And so taking his leave, humbly kissing her hands, he left her to
her accustomed thoughts, speeding to the Lantano of the city, or as we say the
Admiral, who had charge of all the kings Galleys, Foysts, Brigandines, and
Frigots, unto whom, faigning a matter of service, he had for the employment of
one chief Gallie, he compounded with him for her, and presently had her
furnished, with vittailes, and all other needful things: which done, as one
careful of what he intended, he put to the Seas, and by his own skill,
knowing what course the Lady kept for her port of Cenito Vecha, shaped the
like to his master, rowing that night with all the force his poor slaves was
able to make. In the morning the Sun showing his most glorious and splendent
beams, and finding himself by his masters reckoning to be well shot from
his own coast. After some kind shows ofloue, and requital to the master for
his service and forwardesse in finishing his pretense, omitting the principal
cause of following the ship he sought, he (...) offered him, by a Merchant
in that company of whom he so earnestly craved revenge. The Master which
could well demean himself, knowing the knight to be of great account, and
believing what he had said, promised his best furtherance for the same. And
shifting his course for their more speed, well waiting how the wind had
scanted upon them, halled over for an Island, where commonly all men bound that
way, accustomed to water. In which place by chance unhappily they met them.
The Lady and her wom^n being on the shore recreating themselves, and the men
busied in getting water, wood, and such wants, aboard, saw the Gallie which
rowed mainely in for the place, who showing their colors, by which they were
known to be of Thrace, there was no further doubt, they having the Kings
pass, and the league such between the nations.

But the knight whose heart was bound to revenge him on a guiltless Lady, no
sooner came to anchor in the road, but halling the ship, enquired for the Lady,
who was then a shore, which hearing, he speedeth unto them, furnished with
twenty of his best men well appointed, which he thought to be suffient to
supprise such naked people as he supposed they were. No sooner was he on land,
but with hollow heart, saluting the Frenchemen he met, unto whomhe was well
known, requiring speeches with the Lady, he was by those that honored her
for her fathers love, as also for her noble husband, simply conducted to the
place, where the Friar, with all the Merchants were devoutly on their knees at
prayer, unto whose Orisons this bloody minded knight, as bad clearke, said
Amen, long before it was time, without regard of honor or oath made for
defense of Ladies, rushing upon them, laid violent hands upon her, and
others on the rest of the Gentlewomen, intending to have carried her away
perforce, which the Frenchmen seeing, loath to loose the Ladies good company,
required the knight to acquaint them with his intent, in offering them that
wrong, whose kindness refusing, without returning any answer, with his sword
slew him that first spoke, which caused the others, with such weapons as they
had, to reueng^ their companions death, so that between them began a most
cruel and grievous fight: the Frenchmen fighting in the right of our English
Caueliers Ladies, so valiantly behaved themselves, that they slew the most part
of those which came a shore: from whom recovering their weapons, it is not to
be thought what exployts was done between them. But in the end all sorting
out to the knights overthrow, who was in the fight slain, with all his
company that stood with him in the action. Such as fled was by those yt were
busily employed, seeing their friends so ill entreated, slain, so that none
recovered to carri^ tidings how they sped. The Friar in this broile being a man
of peace, taking care of the Lady and her company, withdrew the^ from their
presence: and searching in fear some place o^ safety, from pursuit of the
enemies, by chance lighted on the Cell of an Hermet, wherein they shrouded
themselves.

The master in the Gallie, noting their ill success a shore, laid the ship
aboard, rifled her o^ what she had, and like a most cruel wretch, sunk her in
the road: which done, hoysing his sails, having a wind fair for his port,
he made no longer stay, leaving the Lady with her company in a barraine
unfrequented Isle, having no relief at all of any thing, but such roots and
herbs provided for them by the aged Hermet, whose guestes they were. Now
against their wills, with this. Hrmet we leave them a season, to attend their
devotions, and a time of deliverance, the Master with the Gallie bound for his
home, to show you what other fortunes befell the Knight of the Cross.

CAHP. III.
How the Knight of the holy Cross, after some small stay in Peloponenses,
betook him to his travail, with his fortunes.
EDward having reposed himself in this City, thinking the time long until he
saw the end of his desired journey, taking leave of the Viceroy, betook
himself to his good fortunes. Two days travailed he throughout those deserts
of Greece, only accompanied with his Page, and a Currier which was his guide.
The third day he had sight of a mighty conuoy of Cammils, being at least
six thousand, with their Merchants, which came from India, bound into Egypt.
To those governors and Merchants he sent, requiring them of vittailes to
relieve his store: his wine and oil, by a casual hap being lost, and no
place of refuge near to relicue it by a far way: which the Merchants very
kindly granted, furnishing his wants of what he required, and they could
spare. With this company he continued three days, very pleasantly passing the
time amongst them, of whose company they were all right glad. The third day
drawing toward the evening, as they began to unfurnish their Cammils, and to
set up their Tents, determining to lodge there all night, their espials
descried a company of armed people, well mounted, which sped them toward
their company, so hardly pursuing the scowts, that they had much a do to
escape. Of these people the Merchants had great doubt, and seemed to be very
much troubled in mind at these tidings: which the knight perceiving, cheered
them with such comfortable speeches, as he could h^st utter, and they
understand: arming himself to withstand their forces, and placing his
companies with such weapons as they had to receive them, which was scarcely
finished, before six galland Caunleres, with their staves charged come near
unto them, and required the merchants to deliver those goods they had, for the
uses of their king.

The Merchants, reposing themselves of this noble champion, were driven to a
non plus, what to answer, but as men amazed, stood gazing one the other in
the face, whose timerousnesse the knight perceiving, dreading no colors,
mounting himself with his staff charged in the rest, singled himself, and
putting forward, required those gallants to say what their business was. The
Tartares perceiving him to be a knight at Arms, and they soldiers, answered.

Sir, what thou art we know not, but by thy seeming, if we be not deceived,
thou art a man of Arms, whom we come not in any sort to molest. But for these
base fugitives, which have wronged our King of his customs, due to be paid of
all men passing his Country, we come to be satisfied, which we will have, or
leese our dearest lives in gaining thereof: therefore gentle sir, as we have
declared the truth of our coming, take no part with them, if thou love thine
own welfare. The knight which heard their reasonable answers, could not take
any thing spoken in ill part, until he had examined the truth of the
merchants, and whether there was any such custom due to their king as they
required, which on there great oaths they denied, vowing unto them by all
solemn protestations they could use, that there were none belonging to the
King, but outlawes, and such as lived on the spoils of trauailers, neither was
there ever any custom required of any prince in their time, some of them
having used that passage many years before.

The good knight which was loath to wrong either part, could not tell what to
answer, considering the guise of men, which is to make the best of their own
matters, called the cheifest merchants, for in them he had most trust, and
examining strictly each particular, of their abode, their cause of travail,
and their place whither they were bound, swore them to the truth of all what
they had spoken, which donehe returned again unto the armed outlawes, which
attended his answer, saying.

False villains, and deceitful wretches, how dare you, being robbers and
disturbers of peaceable trauailers, so much to abuse the reverent name of your
king, who is altogether unacquainted with your trecheries, as to make his
authority a shelter for your bloody minds, and spoiling the goods of honest
men, that you have abused both him and us, you shall all well know. Therefore
if your business be no other then I have notize it is, depart, or you shall
know, to your great sorrow, and hearts grief, that you have met with him which
will not be dared with your high looks.

The Tartares hearing him speak so like himself, and with such resolution,
could well have forborne to deal with him, or his company, yet setting their
rest upon the courage of their company, which were all well appointed, and
better mounted, defied the knight, who taking all advantages, seeing their
resolution such, encouraging the Merchants, who were all fearful of loosing
what they had, began most honorably to assail them whose power was as bravely
resisted a long time: in this conflict was most honorable deeds of Arms by
the noble knight done, who ever cheared his companies, which were all likely to
run away. So hot and fiercely continued this good knight this assault, that
encountering hand to hand the principal leaders, he gave them such payment, as
they could not with all their skill find fault with their paymaister: such
order he took with them, dealing dole to all their costs, that many of them
for fear fled the field, betaking them to places where they might behold the
wonderful deeds of honor done by this most renowned knight, which on all
sides they so assailed, as he had no way to get out, but such passage as he
made with his well tempered Curtelar, of whose metal he made at that instant
sufficient proof, which those outlawes well felt. And p^rc^yuing their power
too weak, to conquer where such a guider was, resolved no longer to abide in
hope, but every one to make such means as he best could for his own safety,
which the noble knight perceiving, so hotlye pursued, that many Tartares souls
he sent to death: Others without arms, legs, and other limbs, lay
weltering in their own blood, that it was lamentable to see, such a Massacre
amongst men, if they had been such, as in men living in Princes obedience
they should be.

These Pessants thus flying, and the noble Edward wearied with pursuit of
them, night being at hand, so as it was not to be discerned a friend from a
foe, returning again unto his companyes Tents, in a Valley distaunt from them
a good Mile, he was there at unawares set upon by one of their leaders, which
had escaped him in the battle, who gathering together an hundredth of his
straggling Consorts, knowing him to be gone that way, encountered him, who
being weary of the toil taking so lately, had like to have put him to the
foil, being so at the advantage assailed. Yet he whose heart never was
seen to faint, arming himself to defend, casting his Sheelde on his arm,
putting himself amongst the rowte of them, still crying Lancaster, God and
Saint George for England, laying so about him, that some heads, some hands,
and others in most pitiful wise crying out, he made way through the thickest,
so behauing himself, that every one that could make shift for one, was
willing to give him rowme, and to be gone. Of whom being cleared, breathing
himself, and receiving some air, he might epsy before him running up the
Hill, a Gallant mounted on a Milk white Courser, which the knight imagined
should be the commander of those companies which last assailed him, with
whom desirous to acquaint himself: he gave spnrres to his horse, and so
earnestly followed this Companion, who little thought of his coming, that
ouer-taking him before he was looked for, he arested him so soundly with his
blade of authority, as he made him forsake his Horse, to taste the sweetness
of the earth, which done he dismounted himself, saying: Abide you gallant, and
accept a strangers courtesy. I promise thee false fellon as thou art thou
dishonourest thy Master, which made thee a receiver of custom, to run away
when payment is tendered: wherefore seeing there is no more trust in thee,
here in your kings name, I discharge thee of this office. And so at one blow
taking his head with his Curtelax from his body, left his soul to him that
had most right.

This latter task accomplished, breathing himself a while, he mounted his
Horse, and pacing easily toward the Tents, which by the fires light he had
sight of, he was met with diverse of his company of the Merchants, who
being men of more valewe then many of the rest, had put themselves in search
of this worthy Knight, passing all the way, through so many heaps of dead
men, and grievous wounded bodies, that they admired his worthiness, aplawding
his valor, and still praising him, giving him the honor, above all men at
Arms, whatsoever they had either heard of or seen.

Thus passing on in search of their honorable friend, whose company they were
not willing to forgo, sometimes careful of his welfare, otherwhile commending
his hawtie deeds of chivalry, they espied passing down the hill, a man armed,
which they could not perfectly discern, and therefore made a stand,
intending to see if there came any more, before they put themselves into
danger. But being perceyed of the Knight, who stood still on his guarde,
doubtful of any more such unexpected customers, making ready for the fight.
And giving his Horse such way, as in his swiftest galloppe he accustomed to
make, he cried fiercely out saint George. At which words the Merchants having
knowledge of him, dismounted themselves, and kissing his hands, his knees and
feet, honored him for more then a mortal man, which kindness, asbeit he
expected no such reverent honor, he took thankefully, requiting them with
all courtesy, for the care they had of his well doing, so with pleasant
discourses they pass the way until they came to three tents, where they
alighting, took him carefully from his horse, and bringing him with all duty
to his lodging puruaide for him, they unarmed him, washing his bruised body, and
such small scarres as he reserved in fight, with most precious Balmes, which
done, making him all the frolike cheer and honor they could, they commend him
for that night to his rest, causing a sure guard, and heedfull watch to attend
him in his tent, and placing faithful sentinels, dreading the enemies, they
took themselves to their quiet repose.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Knight of the Cross, taking leave of the Merchants and their
company, left them to their journey.
THe day ne sooner gave light, but the Negroes and slaves provided to load
their Camels, which done, the Tents taken down, and all things ordered to
depart, the way lying now for the knight to leave their company, when they had
well broken their fast, and carowsed to their welfare, providing of al such
provision as they had, they presented him with a most curious casket of the
rarest Jewels that ever his eyes beheld, beseeching him to accept them at their
hands, as interest of their loves, vowing themselves ever his in all humble
services. The Knight which was as courteous as valiant, seeing their
thankfulness such, making choice of some special Jewels, required them to
value those which he did fancy, for without paying their prize, he would
accept none. The Merchants which had received the benefit of his valor, and
freed from those men of mischief which had despoyled them of all if he had
been absent, generally besought him to take in worth those they had presented,
for that not only their goods but their lives was his, alleging that by him
they enjoyed what they had, and therefore would not be entreated to receive any
of them again, but besought him with all humbleness, if he would not receive
them, to bestow them on whom he would.

The knight when he saw their importunate suit, commended their thankfulness,
willing them to attribute that good he had done for the^ to God, by whose
sufferance he had wrought their safety, and in all places to speak of
Englands honor, and their knight adventurers: which done, taking those Jewels
of most esteem with him, he commended them to their journey, who with many
loath depart, bade him often times farewell with heavy hearts. This adue
taken, we leave the knight to his adventures, the Merchants to finish their
journey, until fit time serve to recount such other adventures as he
enterprised, to show you further of the Lady Valia, Alynde and their honest
company, left in the unfrequented Isle.

CHAP. V.
Of the great discomfort of the Lady Vallia, who of a conceited fear, fell
sick of a grievous malladie.
YOu have heard gentiles, how the Lady Vallia with those Merchants, was in the
vnfrequent Island, left without any manner of sustenaunce or relief, other then
such wild roots, herbs, and fruits, as naturally had their being in that
barraine soil, through which unusual diet, and a conceited fear of more
ensuing dangers, the Lady fell sick of an extreme malladie, for whose
recovery no help could avail: yet did those religious Hermits and Friars the
best they could. The Merchants and others of the company, to amend their
diet, employed their labors to fish, and to making of ginnes, to take foul
and such beasts as was there to be had, only for her content, but in vain do
they seek to mittigate her sorrows, or recover her health, such was her
grief for her Lords absence, and fear of more harsh pursuit of the enemies.

In this perplexed estate continued this good Lady, past all hope of recovery,
given quite over to death by all the company, who ceased not their prayers for
her good health. But as in all extremes the favor of our God is most shown,
so behold in this, Vallia lying on her hard cabine, slumbring as in a dream,
there appeared unto her thoughts a beautiful Personage, so glorious in his
attire, as she beholding thereof seemed to lack her senses. This Angel as
she supposing, after some pause and standing to behold her, thus said.

VAllia, surseace thy further dread: thy Lord eioyeth his life, whom once
again thou shall meet, but have no knowledge of him for a time: thine nearest
allied death has taken: yet dismay not, for in the seed of thy womb shall
thou be made glorious. My message is done: thine intercessions are hard, and
thy delivery from this place asit hand.

This said, clapping his wings, as to her seemed, he left the cave, and
departed, wherewith Vallia, as one awaked from a trance, seeming as one of her
wits to be bereft, cried mainely out for help, whose sudden motions caused
them all to fear her death was at hand: yet comforted they her all they might
with such speech and words of heavenly pleasures as in such times is convenient
to be used, so long continuing their talk, that in the end grasping her hand
about the neck of her trusty Alinda: she raised her self in her bed, and
fetching a deep sigh, said. Reverent father Hermit, you patron of learning, and
others my good friends, this night have I seen my savior face to face, who
by his divine providence has vouchsafed to show him, self unto me his sinful
handmaide, by whom I am assured of my Lords prosperity, and all our freedoms
from this place.

The Hermit and the rest hearing these speeches proceed from her imagined the
lightness of her head had moved these fancies, and had the more doubt of her
good health, and standing as men amazed, gazing one the other in the face, were
as men senseless, whose hard belief of her words uttered, caused her thus
reply. Fathers and my good friends, let it not seem incredulous what I have
said, but attend the event, which ensuing to our comforts as we expect, give
the honor to him, by whose providence we are comforted. This said, bidding
them good night, she fell into a most sweet sleep, in which she continued
till the morning was far spent. Before which time the company which usually
went about their undertaken labors for getting their victuals, from the tops
of the mountains descried a small sail at sea, which they viewed, earnestly
waiting by a compass they had, which way she bare: but so long gazed they,
that the gale blowing hie, and fitting their cause, which were bound thither
for water, having spent their store at sea, through such continual foul
wether which they endured, in such manner, that they durst cease no land for
fear of danger. They descried their hull, which seen, well was he that
might make most haste with the first tidings, thinking the time long until
they came to the cave, where being near speechless with the have they made,
a sudden fear possessed all the company, specially Alinda, whose heart was
at her heel until she heard them deliver the cause of their speedy coming,
which known, God was glorified in general. And Villia as one over ioyed at
this sudden news, might not by any entreaty be held longer in her bed, but
calling for her apparel, attired her self with such courage, as if she had
felt no grief, which done, resting her weak body on the arm of her Alinda,
she left the desolate cave, to take the comfort of the sweet air abroad,
and to see the event of those blessed tydidgs she hoped of.

By this time was the ship ancored, and the Mariners making haste for water,
whereof they had great need, hoysed their boat, and with their vessels came a
shore, where they were heartily welcomed of those poor distressed people, who
enquired diligently from whence they were, and what occasion drove them to that
coast. Sir quoth the boatswaine, being a man of some good demeanor, we are of
Sicilia, an Island belonging to the Spanish king, bound by our charty party,
for the coast of Egypt, and meeting as poor sea men often do, with foul
weather, the winds raiging in such manner, our store of wine being spent, and
water scarce, our coming is hither for that relief. Thus sir, quoth he, as I
have acquainted you with our fortunes, refuse not to let us know what you are,
which have your abode in a place so vnfreque^ted as this, where I have before
this time bin often, but never saw or heard any yt lived here.

Friend quoth the Merchant, we are here a great many poor distressed souls,
which by violence of an enemy that unawares assailed us on the shore, were
driven for safeguard of this Lady to stand on our defense, where by fortune and
the assistance of God, we vanquished the proud daring enemies, which were on
land with us: which when his companions perceived that kept aboard his gally,
they first rifling our ship, taking what they best liked, and afterward
leaving us without any relief, saving that apparel on our backs, sunk our
ship, and left us to our fortunes, since which time we never had sight of any
man or ship, whereof we had any hope of comfort, before this time. Therefore
if God have ordained you for our good, and that as Christians you pity our
distresses, help this Lady with us her friends, to any place inhabited by
Christians, your payment shall be large, and your charitable deed rewarded
both of God and men.

The Boatswayne being a man as full of pit as courage, hearing this
lamentable discourse, and seeing the weak estate of the Lady, was moved with
remorse of their good, promising his best furtherance for their comforts: so
shipping one hogshead of water for the company, hastneth aboard, taking with
him the Friar and two Merchants, whose words wrought such effect with the
master and the rest, that a conclusion was paste for their passage, and the
master coming a shore, brought with him for the Ladies relief, such bread,
succor, and other provision as he had, which came in good time, and not before
it was long looked for, which was as thankfully received. The master and his
company having a care to be at sea, applied all their people to labor, so
that within two days they were well provided with water, ready to set sail.

CHAP. VI.
How Vallia and the rest taking leave of their good host the Hermit, was
shipped from thence, with their fortunes.
SVch was the industry of the Master, that long time was not spent before all
needful things were provided, when having a pleesing gale for their course,
warning was given to the passengers to be ready, for whom they made no long
stay, but their leave taken of the old Hermit, they commend him in their
prayers to God, and themselves to such success as they expected.

Al things fitted and the passengers aboard, the ancors weyed, an nimble boy
yare with his knife, gave way to the sails, which tryned to good pass, a
maine they cut the waves, and joyful of this happiness, as to be endowed with
great treasure, two days and more they enjoyed of quiet and calm content,
without any annoyance either of wether or enemies: the third morning being
ouercast and gloomie, a Boy looking out for dangers, espied under the edge of
an Island, two stout Galleys, who having sight of the Ship, made toward them
with all speed they could, of which being advertised, a general fear
possessed all their hearts, especially the Lady, who having so lately felt the
force and extremity of the merciless foe, was doubtful of the like. But how
timorous soever women in their kind be, it rests for men in extremities to
show themselves. The master being a man of courage, called all the company, as
well strangers as others, and unto them he says. Friends all and companions,
we have now small time to stand on discourses, seeing our enemies are at
hand: if enemies they be, as it is most likely, howif they getts the best, and
we by our cowardice subject our selves unto them, I doubt not but you all have
heard what mis^rie we shall endure, for Turks they are, that is without all
doubt: therefore like men show your selves and arm you with courage and hope
of victory, for howsoever death cannot be so bitter as the torments they will
inflict on you, if they prevail. Therefore as many as will take part with
me, hold up your heads, and provide for your safety.

These words were no sooner delivered from the Master, but you might see with
what united hearts every man gave his consent to fight it out, and standing on
no terms, every man provided him such weapons as he could best use, lacing
close their mettinges, and making ready their fire works to annoy them: whilst
every man was thus busied, Vallia whom fear had near overwhelmed, was
comforted by her friendly trust Alinda, who chearing her weak spirits, said.
Auant your fear Madam, cast heaviness aside, and let not these sullen
thoughts cumber you, we know the worst, death is to be preferred before a
miserable life. Therefore take courage, sh^we your self to be your self, and
remember your noble Lord, who were he present, would dare all those curs to
behold his face. Though we be women lets do our best, or at least, if your
heart quail, give me leave, for before you die some of them shall abie your
life, or both my heart, power, and weapon shall fail me.

Vallia, which saw her woman in this humor, could not forbear to smile, how
heavy soever her heart was, yet setting a good face on the matter, said, well
Alinda well, your great shows will prove I fear but a bold cowards brag,
as much may they do that say little, as they that fill the air with threatening
clamours, whatsoever thy thoughts are of my fear, if my help need, whereunto
I trust it will never come, Alinda shall see Vallia has Raynolds heart, though
not his apparel.

Whilst they were thus pleasantly jesting, to the good encouraging of all the
company, whose care was most for them, the Galleys coming up, hailed them,
commanding them to strike, and the master with the Merchants to come aboard,
or without resistance to suffer them enter. The Merchants of France, passengers
hearing their peremtory speeches, answered. Proud and unhallowed curs, what
think ye of us, to be men or babes, that you dare us so with these speeches,
know that before thou have in possession the least hair of any of our heads,
thou shall dearly abye them, therefore amain, amain, and therewith all
having his piece read, fired the same, aiming at the poope, wherewith shooting
at randen, by great fortune killed the Admiral of the Galleys, which done, a
most sharp and bloody fight began, and with great courage on the Christians
part maintained, who with their ordinance sl^w their slaves and companies like
Bees: which disadvantage the Turks seeing and feeling, fighting so far off,
borded them one on the one side, the other on the other: at this onset began
the Spaniards to quail, which were cheered to the fight by their passengers,
who seeing their valor, was encouraged to stick to that which else they had
given over, especially seeing and noting how manly and without fear, the Lady
Vallia and her Alinda deuoired themselves, who spying their times to work on
the advantage, seeing their chains full with Turks, ready to enter their ship,
from a port with their short pikes, spoiled many, thrusting them over board,
and killing diverse, and speeding them from that labor, two naked Turks having
fastened an anchor at their Ships rother, thinking to enter in their stearne
parts, by Vallia and Alinda were so plied with Pottes of Powder fired, Pikes
of wild fire, and such other, as their whole company giving over the fight,
there was very few or none, either Turks or Christian slaves which could
stand so pitifully were they spoiled, burned, and massacred, whereby they
enforced them to yield themselves unto the Christians mercies, of whom they
tooks small pity: but drenching them all in the sea they found alive, sunk
one of the Gallyes, and taking all the Christians into the other that were able
to serve, freed them from their chains, and caused the wounded to be dressed,
left the Gally in possession that night of a Merchant of Marceelas: which done,
and all things quietly ended, the Friar which saw how valiantly the Lady and
Alinda employed their forces, highly commended them for their forwardness in
this action, which made Alinda in ieasting manner thus to say. That your
Ladyship is become so valiant on the sudden, I do not greatly marvel,
considering the fellowship you have so lately with so honorable a knight,
whose courage has animated you to this hardiness: if the husband be famous
for his worth and honor gained in all places, no doubt but France and Spain,
and Italy, shall sound the Lady Vallia her high deserved commendations, whom,
if God bless with increase of children, are likely to prove men of high
account in the world, if they have the fathers courages, or the mothers
stomach which is passed by with an English heart. Vallia hearing her Maiden to
jest thus broad, cut off her speech thus.

Alinda, what motions are these, that on such sudden causes your strings to
jar so far beyond your custom, such manner of ieasts I brook not, though
loving thee, I strain my self at this time to digest them. In delivering of
which speech, Alinda perceiving by her unwonted scowling of her brows, that
she was somewhat discontent at her speech, forbear her further answers for
that time. To put her from her melancholy, the master of the ship, told her
such viands as they had was ready, if she pleases to sup: whereunto she was
easily entreated, having gotten her a stomach with her long fasting, and hard
toil in the fight Their discourses at table of each several accident
happening, I omit, to let you know their ensuing actions with their success.

CHAP. VII.
How the Spaniards delivered the Gally unto the French Merchants, and Mariners,
with such vittailes as they needed, who taking with them the Lady Vallia, left
them.
THe Lady with her friends discourst at supper of the dangers past, leaving
nothing of worth by any one particular unremembered, done in that action, a
motion was made, that the Gally with the flaues able to labor, and vittails
necessary should be given unto her to bring her to her desired port, unto which
the Spaniards to requite the good done them by her whole company, granted very
willingly, for performance of which, order was presently taken, and each thing
needfully puruaide to the ladies good content. In the morning early by break of
the day, the master having the wind fair, was loath to make longer stay then
need, haled the gally, willing them to com near the ship, and unto the
merchant revealed their intent, and what the whole company had agreed upon,
which was very well accepted of the French men, who rendered him many thanks
for his favor, for dispatch of them both: such have was made as possible they
might, which was suddenly done to the general, reioicing of these poor captives
who by this overthrow of the Turks, were made free. The lady aboard, taking
their solemn farewell each of other, they shaped each one there several course
best fitting their turn. Vallia frolike with her company, and holy father,
unto whom with a very thankful mind unto her maker for all the success she
had received from him, and accomplishing her hearts desire, omitted nothing
worthy the recounting, to the great admiration of all the hearers, especially
the Friar, whose charge she was, who calling to mind the favor of God, in
revealing to her by vision their time of sudden departure, thought her some
holy and chosen woman, and ever after in all his Masses and other ceremonial
rites according to the order of their church and blind devotion, extolled the
lady far beyond her expectation. Thus falling from one discourse to another,
to drive the time away: after they had spent one whole week at sea, they might
discover ye mountains near the old city Ceueta vecha, or old Rome, so called,
and had al things so favorable to their desire, that long before night they
recovered the road, where coming to anchor, was presently boorded by the
officers of the city, who had great fear they had bin Turks at their first
coming in: but having some conference with the Friar, was certified of all
their proceedings, leaving nothing unspoken which might gain them fame, and
the lady honor, wherefore the officers having knowledge, holding that truth
which the friar had spoken, whilst they frolic with the lady, and her
company, sent his guidelow a shore with one of his confederates, charging him
to deliver to the abbot and his friars what he heard, taking like order for
puruaying her of lodging in the old palace of the Emperor, which he caused to
be furnished with all needful furniture, as the shortness of time would
permit them, with all provision that was there to be had.

The officer who was a joyful man of these tidings to be the messenger,
hasteneth all he might, being with child with those news, and longing to be
delivered, wherefore as soon as he recovered the shore, staieth not until he
came unto the lord abbot, unto whom he forgot nothing of his charge, which the
old man hearing, blessing and crossing himself, wo^derously perplexed with the
strangenes of ye tale delivered, he first called his covent together in their
church, where they praised God for them, and their safety, and so putting on
all their best masking attire, went in procession to the sea side, to receive
her a shore, where they carried with them the speciallest relics they had.

The captain of the town with his band, in solemn order marching in like
manner, and all the bells ringing for joy, to welcome the holy Lady. After all
these the governors and council of the town in their order, making such a
beautiful show as had not been on such a sudden ever seen before.

All things ordered at point device, boats were sent out so richly furnished
with Tapistrie, Carpets, and curious Cushions, as was a wonder to see, the
shore standing full with all the people in the Town.

The men appointed to bring her a shore, being noble men, the one a governor
in the town, the other a Cardinal, who boording the Gally, on their knees
solemnly kissed her hands and feet, doing her as much honor as if our Lady
had bin present, which she took small pleasure to have, which done, and a
general welcome to the whole company, the governor entreated her to take the
comfort of the shore, to which small persuasions served, at her going to the
boat, well was he that might set hand to help, and he thought himself most
happiest, yt could come nearest her, such fopperie wos not used aboard, but
much more on the shore, where was ducking on all sides, crouching and kneeling,
with such singing, drumming and gunning, that ye Echo thereof was enough to
make a man sick. The welcome given, this noble Lady might not be suffered to
touch the earth with her feet. But at her landing place, was spread a most
sumptuous cloth of estate, and a Chair thereon to rest her, where when she
had a while reposed her self, and every one of account kissed her feet and
hands, four commanders, two Priests, and two Captains, carried her in the
chair, over whom was borne by the Abbot, the Cardinal, and two noble men,
amost rich Canapie. So marched she until they came unto the Abbey, where
preparation was made for her lodging, where the Procession ending, the
Cardinal and Abbot took leave of the governors of the town, bidding them
good night.

But they which had provided the Emperors palace, and been at great charge
for her viands, took in ill part, that any such unkindness should be offered
them, and in quiet manner besought them to grant them leave to have the guard of
her, which they so scornefully answered, that the Cardinal in speaking as his
choleric nature accustomed, with his hand had like to have given the
Governor a blow on the face, which unkindness the soldiers disdaining, by
violence sought to carry the Lady, in such manner, and with such harsh
behavior on both sides, that the Cardinal, Abbot, the Cross, Banners, and
all were laid low on the earth, and such a hurley burley begun, as was never
seen the like, striving for the Ladies entertainment, which grieved the good
Lady, which was then to be ruled by those of greatest power, the soldiers and
commanders of the Town, with whom she was best pleased, for that her love and
honorable Lord, was a man of Arms and honor.

This discurtesie the Cardinal and his company took in such ill part, that
they cursed all the Town, and Town inhabiters, suspending them from the holy
Church for ever. But they whose care was small at that time, for any their
doings cared but little. The Lady they cheared, who wanted nothing that was fit
for her honor and welfare, where let her repose her self a time with
iollitie, the Friars sweating in their own grease, and the Cardinal and Abbot
chafing like men frantike, to show you what after happened.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Governor advertised the Emperor, of the arrival of the Lady
Vallia, and what after chanced her.
THe broyle ended, a great stir was in all the Religious houses, amongst
themselves, debating of the wrong offered by the people of the Town, the
Church doors were all sealed up, and no man upon pain of their curse to enter
them.

This was considered of the Governors, who took advise in the matter, knowing
the authority they have in all places where their religion takes place.
Besought the Lady for her Letters of favor to the Emperor, to the end this
begun enmity, might be app^^^ed, unto which she was easily persuaded, though
(...) against the mind of her Protector the Fry^r.

The Ladies Letters signed, which imported her message from the Knight of the
holy Cross, and the messenger appointed, there was no detracting of time, but
with all speed that Horse could make, he applied his business, until he came
unto Rome, where coming before the Emperor, he delivered his Letters, which
were very welcome, taking great pleasure in the coming of the Lady into those
confines, being Lady and wife unto the Knight which of all men living he hold
in most regard.

Whilst the Emperor was discoursing with the Messenger, a Cardinal came to
summon him before the prefence of the Pope, presently to appear, to answer
those wrongs done by his Governors to the Church and Patrons thereof, of all
which, the Cardinal had signified his holiness, which was held a matter most
heinous.

The Cardinal gone, the Emperor called again for the Messenger, and with him
questioned of all those troubles begun, whereof he did advertise him in each
particular, and withal, delivered the Governors Letters, which he had written
to that end, doubting such a chance would happen, and that the Cardinal
would seek revenge, with all extremity he could. When the Emperor was
advertised hereof, making no stay, he came before the Pope, unto whom as the
manner was, doing reverence, he requires the cause of his speedy sending for
him.

The Pope whose fury was not yet ouerpast, incensed to more choler by
persuasions of the rest, who hung al in a string, doubting least giving heed to
these, it might incur a farther damage unto them all, in their several
government, began in loud and most harsh terms to revile the Emperor,
calling him heretic, and subborner of heretics, uttering against him speech
of most dishonor and disgrace. All which the Emperor like himself, as he was
a most grave and well governed Magistrate, knowing by his own perfections,
other men's humors, forbear to answer what he in choler offered, but mildly
leaving his presence returned to his Palace, very highly discontent, yet
governing his passions, betaking himself to his study, he began with great
wisdom to consider of each accident, and finding his Governors offense to
touch his reputation, albeit he had done all for his honor and credit, yet the
Church carrying a hand over all of what estate so ever, knowing by experience
their insolency, thought it best to reconcile himself without farther moving
of trouble, and thereon resolving sent presently for the Cardinal his
Confessor, unto whom he faineth, what heaviness and grief he conceiueth at
those unkind dealings of his Governors against his holiness, the Church, and
state thereof, beseeching him, of those loves he always proffered unto him, to
find some mean to accord his holiness and him, so that a league and peace
being obtained, all wrongs might be forgotten, and his Towns men restored to
the Church again. All which his Confessor promised most faithfully to follow.
And so taking leave of the Emperor, speedeth him to his holiness Presence,
where forgetting nothing that he had promised, omitting nothing for his better
success, declares at large the heaviness of the Emperor, for his abuse
offered against his will and knowledge, so earnestly applies his suit unto the
Pope and his honorable friends, that though with much adoo, yet at last an
atonement was granted, but the Emperor and the Town fined at ten thousand
Florence for the offense: whereon concluded, a peace was made, and unity
between them, and they all restored to the Church.

This brawle ended, the Emperor not forgetting his friends Lady, bent his
studies for her royal entertainment, for which taking order with all his
Officers, he appointed a day to set forward to her place of abode. Till which
time, we leave them to recount unto you the Knights troubles, and what
chances him in his travails.

CHAP. IX.
How the Knight of the holy Cross, by the treachery of his guide, was robbed of
his Horse and Armor, and what happened.
AFter the departure of the Knight with she Merchants, on the Mountains of ye
Tartars, coming to a place called Sylo, where he was to imbarque himself, he
discharged his guide, and sailed with other company to Misath, where being
landed, presented himself with the rest of the passengers to the Bashaw, who
came in person to see the passengers bound for Jerusalem. This Bashaw being of
a proud and insolent condition, expected great reverence, which of the common
company was given him. But our Cauylier scorning such base fashions, could not
stoop in such manner, wherefore the Bashawe began in vile speech to taunt him,
which he better understanding then the rest, though he had not his language so
perfect, in Italian answered his speeches, whereat great excepttions were taken,
yet by reason of his safeconduit, he durst no quarrel or make stay of him, but
amongst the rest, without favor, had vittailes and a guide: and so mounting
his horse departed, leaving the company to the common guard of the soldiers,
as is the custom.

The Bashawe whom spite had moved to choler against the Knight, understanding
he left the ordinary passage, intended to cry quittance with him, by treachery,
or as he best might, to fulfill his devilish mind: And that night armed a
hundredth of his best Iannisaries, whom he hired to slay him, appoynting them
the way to follow the Knight, whom they very hardly pursued, in such manner
has^ning, that they had sight of him, following by easy pace a long time, till
night growing upon them, they caused a naked Moore to overtake him, and to
keep him company, appoynting him to take such order with his guide, that where
he should rest, to rob him both of horse and armor: And that done, to give
them notise, whom he should be sure to find by their several Fyers, which
they would of purpose make. With this lesson the naked rogue left them. And
ouertaking the Knight, fell in jesting with his guide, with whom he used such
pleasant behavior, that it greatly delighted the Knight, who made much of
him, and willed him to stay by the Fountain where he pitched his Tent,
imparting with him such vittailes as he had: when the Knight had well refreshed
himself, and had seen his Horse well meated with barley which he brought for
him, giving straight charge to the Moore his guide, to maintain the Fire which
usually they kept, for defense of the Lions and wild beasts keeping the
deserts, he took him to rest.

The Moore having now opportunity to work his companion, taking him from the
Tent, began so to work with him, that with shows of kindness being his
countryman, love of the soldiers where he lived, and hope of great reward,
he won him to effect whatsoever he desired: which done, taking the
opportunity offered, he adventured first to enter the Tent, and by several
pieces took the Armor, his shield being under his head he durst not touch,
and his sword with an arming lace fastened to his arm, being well as he
thought with this, they took each of them a Horse, and leaving both ye knight
and his Page to walk on foot, left them thus in their sound sleep.

The traiterous villains having sped of their business, cease not poasting
from Fire to Fire, until they had given notise to all the soldiers what they
had done, who gathering themselves together, set on to find the Tent whither
they were conducted by the guide and the other slave, his companion in this
practice. But he that in many perilles had delivered our brave and endaunted
Knight, preserves him still for his Countries honor, as you shall note.

For the villains gone, and heavy slumber oppressing him, he fell into a sound
fleep, in which he dreamed, and in his dream seemed perfitly to see an host of
men, enuiron a few peaceable trauailers, which he of mere devotion sought to
rescue: in whih dream awaking, and bustling himself, as to help those
distressed, sought for his armor, being neither fast a sleep nor thoroughly
awaked: which ensuing, he calls his Page, and both went to seek their horses
which were likewise gone, leaving them none but the Ass and Mule which
carries their vittailes.

This chance happening, he could not imagine what to do, nor where to seek
those miscreants which so had robbed him, ye^ searches he here and there,
crying and calling for them, which were too far off to hear him: So long
they followed seeking those villains, that they might hear the noise of many
horses, which trouping made great speed toward the place where they kept.

Attentively listened the Knight, to note if he could here any voice, and bnsily
bethought him what was best to do in this extreme, believing verily that he
was betrayed yet making no semblant thereof, caused the Page to bring from out
his tent a case of Pistolles with his powder and shot, which commonly the
Page carried, with those he charged the boy, if occasion served, to do his
best service, and to give him that help he could, which faithfully he promised
to accomplish.

Scarsly had they determined what to do, but they might discry the two Moors
gallopping on their horses, which by their white Algosines they perfitly did
know, leading the others which closely followed them, making all the haste
they could.

This fight made him verily believe that those villains had betrayed him, and
that those Horsemen were they which intended to work him mischief, for whom
he purposes to provide, seeking his best advantage to continue the fight,
sheltering himself close to a shrubbed Olive Tree, which grew thereby,
distaunt from his Tent a furlong or thereabout, by which they must needs pass
that came to seek him.

The Moors approaching, making ready to take them first, which were the
Authors of this stratageme, the Page with a Pistolle killed the one, and the
other which was his guide, with his Curtilex he unhorsed, doing him no other
harm. But perceiving who he was, thought to save him alive, to be a guide
for him, if he escaped out of those Mountains, so binding him hand and
foot, he put a gagge in his mouth, and cast him from him: which done, making
ready to entertain the rest, he speedeth to his chosen Tree: where long he
had not stayed, but the others gallopping came as swiftly as they could, where
finding the two Horses without men, made them stand, but to their cost, for
his Pistolles being provided, by them the foremost two lost their lives. Which
done, he armed himself to defense, ever annoying them as he saw his most
advantage, whilst the Page with his Pistolles did his part, paying surely all
those that he made offer to hitte. A hardy broyle and dangerous fight
endured this Noble English Knight, which for all their great multitudes was not
dismayed at all, but in the midst of his distress, to the encouragement of
his poor Page, cried still Lancaster, Saint George for England, never making
any show of discouragement, albeit his wounds were many, which bled most
grievously, yet stood he, to the great euerthrowe of them all, bravely and
joyfully encouraging himself with hope of their shameful downe-falles. In
which aided by him whom he zealously served, he brought to confusion,
sometimes assayling, sometimes defending, as he best could find opportunity,
and greatest advantage, ever speeding one or other, so that he never struck
invaine.

Continuing his dole with such a kind of devotion, that the better part of
their Army being slain, and the most of the rest lying grouelling for life,
amongst them, he espied one of the very principallest having on his A^mour,
who being none of the best men, seeing the others have such ill success, was
flying as fast as he could, but the Knight perceiving him, got him to horse,
and so earnestly followed him, that to his great cost he ouertooke him, in ill
time, as he might well witness: for with such authority he arrested this
runaway, that he had no leisure to ask at whose suit, but being an execution,
pawned his life for satisfaction.

This companion having his pasport to the great devil, signed and sealed by
the hand of a noble English Knight, he armed him, and poasting back amongst
the rest, paid them more then he owed, by many a Turks life.

By this time the day gave him fair light, so that he might well see his
work, wherefore such as could make shift for themselves, seeing the ill
success their fellows had, stood not on any more points of manhood then was
fit they should, but without taking leave, made what haste they could for their
safety.

The noble Edward seeing his companions gone, and none left able to make any
resistance, went to suruay them, which were all goodly fellows, and well
appointed after their fashion, amongst which, he found one Spanyard, who was
newly taken in Turkey, and turnde Turk: this fellow had some knowledge of ye
Knight, and was abiding in Gebraltare, when by the Turks he was betrayed to
the Governor. And in his company two Easterlings which had been men of value
and good worth, who hearing the Spanyard crave for pity at his hands, having
some hope to escape with life, cried out unto him, beseeching him to hear them
speak, who being of kind and noble condition, commanded them to say what they
would he would hear them.

This comfort obtained, the Easterling bewayling their ill fortunes, which
through the cruelty of the Turks, were compeld to forsake their Savior,
allured thereunto often by threatening, and menased with grievous torments, and
often with promise of large possessions, so that in the end to their great
sorrow and more shame of themselves, they repented their fol^y and great sin
committed against God, beseeching the knight to have mercy upon them, who
being now in his hand, might either deliver them by death from that sting of
conscience, which continually gn^wed as the hungry Tiger on his prey, or
granting them life, accept them as his slaves, so that they might through a
repentant mind, obtain the favor of God, whom so highly they had offended.

With this pitiful suit, the Knight whose heart was always inclined to mercy
(moved with remorse of saving their souls, whom none but he that gave them
life could pardon) forgave them their death, and the Spaniard also, and with
the h^lpe of the Page, carried them unto his lodging, where he played the
Surgeon, binding and dressing their wounds: which done, with such Balmes and
eyntmens of rare worth, he trimmed his own greefes, giving God thanks for
his safety in those extremes, and freeing him from those dangers, for the
ease and recure of al which, he made his stay there, some three or four
days, releasing the Moore which lay bound, who served to dress their horses,
on whose examination, and the Easterlings, he had knowledge, that his intended
evil proceeded from the Bashaw, who hired the Ienesaries of purpose to slay
him, for whom God continually fought.

CHAP. X.
How the Knight of the Crosse-arriuing at Ioppa, through the treason of those
that fled, was there imprisoned.
WHen this most famous Knight, and myrrour of honor, had reposed himself with
those wounded people, some four days, and had gotten strength to travail,
he puruayed him for his journey, and set forward as his way lay to Ioppa. To
this place, some of the Ienesaries which escaped from the fight, was come
before, laying watch there, as alse at R^ma, and other places, for stay of the
Knight in his passage. At this town, the General no sooner arrived, but by
those tokens was given, he was well known, and had entertainment by the
Bashawe, which sat in the gate daily, of purpose to entertain such
trauailers as came.

When the Knight had declared what he was, and his occasion of travail, doing
all customs that to the place appertained, delivering his weapons, with which,
no man being a stranger, is suffered to enter, having him naked, and at
advantage with nothing to defend himself, or offend them, the Bashaw suffered
him to enter the Town, appointing his lodging as the custom is to do. But
before he recovered the place, an ugly monster of men, with a face as griestie
as a Bear, came unto him, accompanied with a train of rakeshames, which
attended him, all weaponed: and laying violent hands upon him, calling and
reuiling him at his pleasure, commanding him to go with him.

The knight and his company that saw this extremity and wrong offered him,
being now in such a place, where it was bootelesse to resist them, hoping the
best, yielded himself unto their mercies, who carried him to a most vilde and
stinking prison where the room was scarsty able to lodge two dogs, having
nothing but the bare earth to lodge on, neither could he be suffered to have
any, his trunkes, bedding, and such money and goods as he had, they confiscated
to the Bashawes uses, who would not depart with one ospeere of his duty.

The knight in safety, they laid hands on the page, who being a proper young
man, they sought to have him a Turk: But he who scorned his life, in regard of
Gods favor and love, on which he builded, resisted all their devises,
sometimes speaking fair, and other times, daring them to do what they durst,
respecting nothing what they could d^uise to do him harm, such was his
constancy and firm hope in God.

The Spaniards and the two Easterlings, were feign to stick still to their
old consortes for favor, whom they won with such gentle speeches, to favor
the knight, that they obtained leave to bring him his vyands, which was so good
as any they could get for their moneys, ever cheering him in his extremities,
vowing themselves his, so assured, that their lives should be offered for their
safety, which comfort he took so kindly, as if they had done him all the
good he could himself desire, promising a good requital, if God ever
released him of those troubles.

Thus leave we the noble Edward in his imprisonment, for a time: the Page to
the favor of the Bashaw, and the Easterlings employing all their best power
for his deliverance, to let you hear of the lady Vallia, and her company,
what happened the^.

CHAP. XI.
How the Emperor with all his train, set forwards from Rome, to conduct the
Lady Vallia unto Rome.
THe Emperor having made the atonement with the Pope for his people, omitted no
time for purueying all things, which might any ways tend to his honor, or
please his most noble friends lady, whom in his absence he took a princely
care of, which ordained as he could best devise, he dispatched two noble men of
his Court, with great presents unto her, to signify his coming, which took
the easier journey, his age requiring it, commanding those nobles to see each
thing with such honor to be furnished, as if himself were present. With this
charge the Nobles departed, desirous to see the Lady, of who^ for her rare
vertures, and most excellent graces was so much spoken of, as also for her
Lords sake, whose followers in the Emperors wars they sometimes were, delaieth
no time for performance of what they intended: so as in very short time they
arrived at Cenita Vecha, and were suddenly brought to the ladies presence, unto
who^ doing all the reverence they could, or as their countries use is, they
declared the great care of the Emperor for her, the joy he conceived of her
safety and good arrival in his confines, and how much his desired the
presence of her Lord and husband, whose welfare he wished as his own, and whose
company he more desired, then all the Princes of the world. This said, and the
Lady returning hearty thanks for those Princely favors, as also for her
honorable presence, the nobles desirous to be certified of ye knights safety,
began to question with her of many sundry matters, who were with such
wisdom and honorable courtesy answered, that they admired her, giving her
the praise of all the Ladies that ever they had seen.

The nobles delighting in her company, never were satisfied with her speech,
but as times convenient served, with much pleasant parley and speech of
importance, as occasion was ministered, they passed the time two or three days.
After which tune, the Lady, who had often felt such fits as to young women are
incident, though unaccustomed with those passions, and being acquainted with
none but her Alinda, which had as small skill in such causes as her self, she
put that off often with good countenance, which began now to increase so on
her, that she could no longer hide: all which she attributed to her travail,
and such other cares as she endured, that to be assured of her disease, and to
seek relief for her, being in very weak case, they acquainted the
Physician of the cardinal with her water, who by all his skill, found the
cause no other, but breeding child, for which having a careful regard
(commanded stricktly unto it by his Lord) he prescribed order of diet and
government for her, which he gave with great charge unto Alynda, to execute. In
this careful heaviness of the Ladies sickness, a messenger arrived at the
palace, which brought tidings of the Emperors coming, who was within half a
days journey, and meant God willing to sim with them that night. At hearing of
which, a great stir began in the city, making all the preparation for his most
honorable entertainment. The Cardinal with all his crew mounting themselves,
with all the nobles and burgesses of the City, in good and most commendable
order, issued the City to meet him, at whose coming, such a general joy was
seen in every place, as of long time had not been the like.

What kind and loving embracing was between the Cardinal and him, the
Bishops, A^ots, and all the rest, with shows of love and duty, and how
honorably the same was requited, I omit, bringing him to the palace gate; his
long desired place to be: where the Lady Vallia with her Alynda, and all the
Ladies of the nobility and honor met him, unto whom Vallia prostrating her
self on her knees, besought his excellent highness, to accept the humble
service of her lord and husband, who rested his in all duty, beseeching his
imperial majesty to pardon hi^ negligence, and lusse ofher Lords letters, by
which she was commended unto his favorable custody, not omitting each
particular action, which chanced her and her company, with the cause of their
loss, of all which she entreated his majesty to enquire of those merchants,
and that reverent father the Friar, to whose charge she was committed by her
Lord.

The Emperor full of majesty and honor, making great shows of hearty
welcome to her and her people, most honorably entertained them, giving those
Ladies and nobles of his country gracious thanks, in honoring him so much as
they had done, in entertaining this welcome Lady to his country. These
welcomes of each side given, the time until supper was ready, they pleasantly
spent in discoursing of sever all matters, the most part tending to the honor
and high commendations of the knight of the Holy Cross, of whose valor,
courtesy, and resolution, they all affirmed none could sufficiently speak. At
hearing of which, suppose you Ladies and women of what esteem soever, that
have men of person, valor, and honor, endowed with many good parts, as this
noble Edward, if Valia were proud yea or no, you are made judges of her
thoughts, which by your own thoughts can best censure of hers, if she be
proud, it is not her fault, for by him his countries honor through the world
is increased.

CHAP. XII.
How the Emperor taking care for the Lady his charge, after great honor done
unto her, set forwards to Rome.
THe Emperor whose honorable thoughts was most in giving due honor unto the
Lady, was joyful in her presence, but more joyful in that she was with
child, which he hoped should have his beginning in the world in his dominions,
for whom as for the Lady he was not a little careful, taking an especial
charge on himself, for her easy convey to Rome, whither after some stay made,
as well for the ease of his aged body, as for dispatch of such business the
lady had then in hand, when by his excellent bounty at her entercession, the
Merchants for their goods lost, were satisfied, and those Christian prisoners
with good rewards set free, and all things sorted to such happy event as she
desired, every one content, and the Emperor best pleased in his charge,
hearing by general report, her most godly behavior, and her resolute courage,
in their and her own defense, lovingly embracing her, he says: welcome the
flower of womanhood, to thine own Empire, where thou shall not live to be
commanded, but to command: whatsoever I possess, in all places where I have
any command: therefore honorable Lady, set fear and care apart, and frolic
it with those whose care is now for you and your welfare.

For whose gracious offers, Vallia rendered her most hearty thanks, beseeching
God to endue her Lord with life, and safe return to Rome, that he might
acknowledge the like.

This finished, the Emperor commanded to prepare for their journey, which was
in all readiness against the next morning, when with all the honor might be
shown, she was accompanied, with all the estates of the country, both Ladies
and others: at whose departing the city, great gifts were presented unto her,
which she most thankfully accepted, and the Emperor for her sake most
honorably and bountifully required.

Thus leaving the city of old Rome, by very easy iourneyes they proceed,
passing the way with all devises might be procured, to beguile the weariness
of the journey, as hauking, hunting, and other pastimes and pleasing
discourses, in which, the Emperor desirous to know of what country she was,
for that she spoke his own language so perfectly, required it at her hand as
an especial favor, which Vallia with great reverence and courtesy answered,
discoursing breefely unto him the long and hearty affection she bore him,
being but a stranger, and how she left her fathers court, with her woman then
attending on her, disguised both in man's attire, not omitting his deliverance
from the Spanish imprisonment, with all their proceedings, until their
marriage. Which wonderful discourse the Emperor was never wearied to hear:
when she had all finished, with such hearty love and more zealous affection,
if more might be, kissing her tender cheeks, which he bedewed with his tears,
proceeding from the entire joy of his most honorable heart, he says. Thou lamp
of honor, and wonder of ye earth, how may thy most deserved praises be
eternized as they merit? my noble friend in so honorable a child, and thy
country thrice happy is renowned wherein thou had thy being: blessed by ye
loins from whence thou proceedest, and a world of happiness betide those,
whose tender paps gave thee nourishment. Honorable friend duke Philip, happy
father, eternally shall thy name live, in this gracious and noble child: oh
Philip, joy of thy loving friends and kin, did thou know thy daughter, whom
long sithence it may be, thou reckonest among the dead, where living and so
near thee, what joy would it bring thy drooping aged heart: Me thinks I see
thy sprites how they would skip, to hear thy Vallia lives, which thou shall
know, with such speed as I best may, or can give thee notise thereof, if you
gracious Lady say* Amen, to what I intend. Vallia seeing the joy of the
Emperor, for her fathers good, could not forbear shedding tears at his kind
offers: which passing over as she best could, prostrating her self, she in all
humblenes, besought his Majesty, to think how much she had incurred her
fathers high displeasure so to leave him, without giving any notice of her
departure to any one, which she doubted would never be recovered without his
special suit, which if by his most honorable means she did obtain, how she
should hold her self blessed of God, and honored of his highness, modesty
caused her conceal: vewing by the honor of her husbands name, that all the
favor he could do her, was not, neither could it be so acceptable unto her as
this.

The Emperor noting her heaviness for her fathers displeasure, comforted her
all he might, assuring her on his honor, to recover what she required. And
calling for pen, ynke, and paper, wrote as follows.

To the most gracious and noble Prince Philip, Duke of Genoway, and Naples,
health, and continual happiness.
Thrice honored Duke, a longing desire has moved us oftentimes, since our
last being together, to see your excellency: but the consideration of your age
and imbecilitie, vomeete for tr^uaile, has made us forbear to trouble you,
until this instant a cause of importance to our joy, and your great comfort
happily chauncing, (at least) if thy fatherly love be such, to see thy supposed
lost child, the Princess Vallia, of whom we have certain tidings, she is in
health and safety, for whose pardon we have undertaken to become a soliciter,
and hope of success in our suite: the offense being the more pardonable, in
that it was affection, and entire love of that noble Gentleman, the knight of
the holy Cross your soldier, and our long-friend, whose wife, to thy comfort,
and honor of your house she is, Therefore, if thou rejoice in her happiness,
as thy age, and ability will give leave, come unto us, who in person, will
accompany you to her presence, who as we here, groneth with the pains of
another, as our physicians inform us. And so expecting what we desire from
you, we bid you heartily farewell. At our imperial court, signed with our
royal signet.

Augustus Magnus.


These letters written, he read the contents unto the Lady Valya, who praying
for his long life, she heartily thanked him for his gracious favor and care of
her, which done, and she there with well pleased, he signed and subscribed the
same. Then calling one of his Nobles, which was grave, and of honorable
account, he delivered the same, with especial charge, for the speedy convey
thereof, and secret conscealing of the Lady. Which done (commending him to his
journey, and good performance of his charge) he bid him farewell, whom we
leave to his travail, and the Emperor and the Lady, unto their pleasure,
until her time of deliverance, of which you shall here, as soon as the
midwife has done her office.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Knight of the Cross, by the industry of the two easterlings and the
page was freed from prison, and what chanced to them.
THe Noble Edward cloyed with his mishaps, and harsh usage in his imprisonment,
thought every month a year, and every minute a month, until he was at
liberty. Oftentimes persuading himself to great hazard in freeing him from
that captivity: And then by entreaty of those, one whose trust he relied his
determinations ceased, attending his pleasure, which never left him without
comfort, his poor followers doing for him what they could. But as long looked
for, comes at last, so the time of his delivery drawing nie, and every thing
effected securely, his guides by whom he was to be ruled, pretending a
journey to Sylo, obtained his horse and armor of the bashaw, for a present to
their Bashaw, from whence they came, which closely they conuaied away out of
the city, to a place of seacreci^, which they in their idle walk had found,
leaving the Page in his lodging, which was in a Jews house very secret. For
the Page they ordained Turkish attire, and him furnished very orderly, with a
counterfeit mustacho, the better to disguise him for being known, having
another for the knight, unto whom before their going they had imparted their
devise, which was so slay his keeper that evening, when he came to bring him
water, and in his apparel to escape, appoynting him a place without the
City, where they with the Page would tarry his coming. This done, first
conuaying the page in his attire, which escaped the watch without suspect: they
sought the gaylour, of whom pretending to take a solemn farewell, they
carried him to a Baniard, a place where the Christian Captives were kept,
plying him so with Aqua vitae, or as they call it Rakcaye, that he forgot
himself, that with kindness and shows of love, they procured him to the
prison, to take their leave of ye knight, wherein the keeper was no sooner
entered, but the Easterlings thinking that the fittest time, gave him ye word to
make him away, whilst they kept sure guarde for his safety. By whose d^uise
being ruled, the Gaylor ended his life, with a weapon which they gave him:
which done, long stood not our knight attyring himself in Cerberus apparel,
who being furnished, and disguised with a counterfeit beard, he adventured
through the gate all alone, faining a manner of stumbling and reeling in the
gate, and passed the ward, who seeing him in that mann^r dressed, cried out
Buracho, which is to say drunken. This d^one, his companions seeing all well
effected, made no long stay, but presently follows, and brought him unto the
taue, where the Page with the Spaniard and Moore stayed: they presently mounted
themselves, and away they go, praising God for his deliverance. The haste was
made, is not to be forgotten, who never ceased gallowping until they came
far without danger of the Town, where night ouertaking them, they found
place fit for their purpose, where they alighting, gave God praise, and
refreshed themselves awhile. Here the knight armed himself with his armor,
girding his sword of great worth close to his side, which done, they again
mounted themselves, and taking a course as they thought, far from sight of
any their old acquaintance, or keeping any ready way for fear of
entercepting, they travailed by aim. Two days, and some, what more well near
was spent, since their coming from Ioppa, when they met with a Moore, borne
near Algeere, in Barbary, who coming from Myca (the place where their Prophet
Mahomet was buried) was that day spoiled by a rout of Arabian thieves, which
kept those mou^tains. Of those spoiling people, the Moore warn^d the knight and
his company who were all dismaide at his tidings: yet by the most noble knight
comforted, relying on his valor, more then their own manhood, they
proceeded, travailing all that day, yet never heard any news of them. The next
morning, the knight having taken some extraordinary sleep, it was long before
they put forward, when they had not ridden by their account one league, but
they espied a crewe of horsemen which were so far from them, on the side of a
huge mountain, as they could well desearne. This sight caused the company to
doubt of some ensuing evil, which the knight perceiving, again encouraged
them, so comforting those his companions with his speeches, that they cast al
fear apart, to take part with him that was not to be dared with every naked
bug. In this mind continuing, these faint hearts looking about them often in
their travail (for fear they should be backed) they espied another rout, which
had them in chase, acquainting the knight withal, of who^ he took little care,
but commanded them to hold on their way easily, that if they followed them,
they might overtake them, before the foremost could come to help them.

Long had they not ridden, following the knights directions, but one of the
gallants that pursued them, was come forward with them, who viewing their
strength, which he supposed was far to weak to encounter them, began in
scoffing terms to flout them, especially the knight which he saw armed.

Edward, which brooked all offenses unwittingly committed, and courteously
reconciled, seeing the peremtorie doings of this base groom, drawing near
unto him, said. Base fugitive, who was thy schoolmaister that learned thee no
more good: here after when thou chancest to meet strangers, salute them with
more courtesy. And therewith all lifting up his Battelaxe, gave him so sound a
blow on the head, as the brains started about his horse neck. And he having no
power to sit, forsook his horse, falling dead under his feet. His company
which saw him fall, and had noted the blow he received, began all at once to
assail the knight, bending their lances upon his breast, which like a man of
power, and policy, he cunningly awarded, and drawing his curtelar, which
before he had bathed in the luke warm gore of many those helhounds, he so
behaved himself, that in few hours he left not many of them to stand: but
leaving their horses maisterlesse, exchanged such as they bent fancied, and
left the rest to their own liberty. The other company, which from the top of
the mountain had feene the feats of Arms done by the knight, thinking to
rescue those that lived, and to revenge those that were slain, came amain
upon them, sparing not their horse sides from the spurs, to learn them a
swifter pace, (but in ill time) to soon came they to the after reckoning: for
they were feign to pay the host, who gave them such entertainment, as they had
never power to depart from him, so honestly did this honor of knighthood deal
with them, whom he found so cruel without cause offered them. In this company
there were four Portugal merchants, whose Camils these villains had spoiled,
taking their goods, and kept them captine, intending to sell them as slaves, to
the first caua^liers of that country. These Merchants being under the charge
of their horse-keepers, left far off, seeing the ill success of the robbers,
made way for themselves, recovering such weapons as the slaves had, from who^
being clear, they mainly followed the knight, crying unto him for succor, and
earnestly beseeching his favor, which the knight perceiving, caused the rest to
stay, spurring his horse to meet them, to give them rescue from the slaves
that pursued them, from whom they fled with all the have they could make, but
with too slow speed, for some of them were feign to stay behind their legs
being too weak to carry their bodies. The knight returning from spoil of
those slaves, enquired of the merchants of whence they were, they answered of
Portugal, and were bound for traffic, with an hundred Camils laden with
spice and silk for Constantinople, of all which they had been spoiled by
these villains, of which fraternity, there was as many more as he had slain.
The knight which saw the heavy countenance of the poor Merchants, could not
forbear to pity them, and commanded them to horse themselves, upon the best
of theirs which he had slain, which done, taking care for their relief of
vittailes, for their horses, and for themselves, they were conducted to the
place, where the store of those thieves lay, where they furnished themselves
with such viands as they lived with. And after taking choice of all manner of
furniture, money, spice, and i^wels, so much as they pleased, they fired the
rest, and departed, holding their journey by the Portugals directions, who were
very well acquainted in those mountains, applying still to recover the holy
City of Jerusalem, never daring to enter any town or place of force, as you
shall hereafter understand.

CHAP. XIIII.
How the Bashaw of Ioppa missing his prisoner, pursued him, and how he escaped.
NOw the covetous Bashaw, which had the custody of this honorable knight, was
persuaded by the Easterlings his friends, that the Bashaw of Silo, would give
for his prisoner, ten hundred thousand Ducats. In hope of which, at their
earnest suites he kept him alive, sending his horse, armor, and furniture by
them, unto their Bashaw for a present (as besore you have heard) but when he
missed the Knight, the Page, and those Runagates, he was like in choler to have
slain himself, by desperation to send his soul to the Devil before his
time, from which extremity, no persuasion of his best and dearest friends,
might any way prevail, but that in a fury he would mischief himself, seeing
that by his too much trust, he was so deceived of a prisoner, and a be^fellow
of so much worth, as the Knight and his Page, whom he intended to yield to his
pleasure.

The Bashaw which fared in such frantike manner, bethinking him of all the
Devilish practices could be intended, called to mind an ancient Nigromancer,
which kept in the Mountains, between Ioppa and Rama, in the way to Jerusalem.
By this good fellow he thought to be revenged, what soever it cost him, and so
comforting himself in that hope, he cease his raging fury, dispatching two
of his best approved friends in search of this devilish practiser, who used
such diligence in their business, that in short time they found him, in whom
this Bashaw reposed his whole confidence for revenge.

This devil incarnate, they entreated with all courtesy, and best pleasing
speeches they could frame, to go with them to Ioppa, to the Bashaw, promising
great sums of gold for his pain. But all th^^r entreaties or persuasions
prevailed nething with him: if the Bashaw have ought with him to do, he must be
messenger himself, or surcease his business: which peremptory cours^ of this
Archdiuell, unto the Bashaw made known by his friends, though he were in mind
grieved at his denial, yet he wisely considered, how vainly he should spend his
time in seeking revenge on him. Wherefore, without any further trouble
(accompanied with a garrison of Ienesaries, and his two friends for his guides)
he set forward froin Ioppa, and in time convenient, came before the Cave, where
the Nigromancer kept, who knowing of his coming, thought to be somewhat
pleasant with him, to try his manhood. When the Bashaw had a while attended,
and saw none stirring unto who^ to speak, he commanded a soldier to knock:
which done the Cuniurer transformed into the likeness of a monstrous devil,
breathing ^lames of fire from his nostrils, came out unto the^, whose ugly
shape caused them all to such fear, that they wished themselves again in
Ioppa, and were ready to take their heels to be gone. But seeing their
timerousnesse, he took another way from them, and inuisibly returned into his
cave.

Once again making trial what was in them, took on him the form of a little
goat, thinking they would be doing therewith, if any occasion should be
offered them. To prevent therefore what danger in this disguise might ensue, he
anointed his head and body with an ointment, which so hardened his skin, that
no weapon wou^d pearce it.

This done, he issued again amongst them, which durst not knock any more.
And approaching near the Bashaw himself, began furiously to fling fire upon
him: which his company seeing, armed them to his defense, whom the supposed
goat ever assailed with fire, sometime flinging on him so furiously, as he
would tear him in pieces, many times clawing him, that he enforced him to
run away, leaving his message to do for which he came.

This coniurer when he had plaids his part with him, and saw that he would be
gone, thought to speak with him, to see how he liked his entertainment, and
shifting him to his wearing apparel, met him on the way, as if he had no
knowledge of his being there.

The Bashaw his kinsmen which did know him well, when first they had sight of
him, showed the Bashaw, who coming toward him, after the country fashion
saluted him, and alighting from his horse, breefely told him the cause of his
coming, beseeching his favor and help for recovery of the lost knight, for
which he promised to reward him to his content.

The sorcerer which saw the envy of the Bashaw in hope of gain, promised him
to do what art could, for accomplishing his will, craving respit of time four
or five days, that he might find what way he took, which said, and they
both thereupon agreeing, they take leave each of other, whom to their devilish
practice we leave, returning to the Lady Vallia.

CHAP. XV.
How the Emperors message being done to the duke of Genoway, for very joy of
his daughters life he dies, and what else chances.
HEre Gentles the story shows us of the Emperors safe arriu^ll in Rome,
where the many courtesies offered to the Lady was such (as well for her own
sake, being daughter and hair to the noble Duke of Genoway, as for the love
and entire affection of the renowned knight of the Cross, her honorable and
beloved husband) that the Emperor thought himself greatly bound unto all his
nobles and communaltie, and highly contented the lady his charge, for whose
pleasure and content so much cost was employed. The recounting of each
particular I omit, leaving the Lady to the solitary thoughts of her best
beloved Lord, and her gracious father the Duke, from whom the Emperor expected
hourly the return of the noble man, his am^assadour, who being as careful of
the charge to him committed, spares not his hard and diligent trauail, night
nor day, until he recovered the end of his long wished for journey: which
finished and come to the Emperors presence, prostrating him self on his knee,
was most graciously welcomed of the Emperor, whom he questioneth of the Dukes
health, and welfare of his state. The noble man which imagined how heavy the
news he had to report, would be to his highness, and all the hearers, humbly
besought the Emperor to hear in secret what he had to deliver, which the
Emperor granted, withdrawing himself of purpose, which done, he says.

Tell me (noble friend) what chance has befallen thee in this travel of
thine, and how fares our honorable friend the duke. Gracious liege, and my
dear Lord, answered this noble gentleman, to keep from your highness, what
you must know in time, though with a heart full fraught with grief, it
cumbreth me greatly, to become the heavy messenger of such tragic news.
Know (most excellent Prince) the duke has left this life, to seek the joys
of the heavenly Hierarchy. The Emperor whose thoughts were surprised with
heaviness, hearing his long deferred answer to his questions, breathing out
many sighs at the delivery of the same, with sighs and bitter tears (after
he had a while lamented, with many mournful cries, and pitiful shreekes, the
Dukes death) he straitghly charge the noble man, to deliver unto him the time
of his departure from this world, and the cause: whether of any old grief, or
sudden action: commanding him (all dread set a part) to tell the truth.

The noble man (whose heavy heart by his outward sorrows might well appear,
thought he could well have sorborne the revealing thereof, yet not daring
through silence, to incur his highness displeasure he faith. Most gracious
sovereign: thus, and in this manner, fared it with the duke at my first
arrival at his princely Court, who frollicke with the best, ioy^ull and
pleasant to hear of your Majesty's health, as his love might well appear, by
those welcomes I received from him, and his Nobles, by his command, of whom I
was ^^ entertained, as well might beseem a state of great account and
majesty, reucrencing your highness, in those honors done me. But too soon
(dread and excellent Emperor) was the gleaming joys of this courtly Nobility
ouershad^wed, with mysts of direful sorrow, chauncing by the dukes sudden
death, who as it is supposed by his people, most in account with him, over
ioyed at your excellent kind tidings of his supposed lost child, surprised with
a simphanie of exceeding gladness, left his honorable life, to the great
heaviness of his subjects, as well his Nobles as Commons, who with most bitter
and grievous complaints, spend their time in such continual lamentation, as
might move the heart most hardest, with tears, to accompany them.

The Nobles for the comfort of their Duke, with whom they were every where
(only there reverend duty reserved) companions in all exercises. The Commons
he oppressed not: the wronged, he by law justly restored to right: the widow
and fatherless, he carefully provided for: the maimed soldier, most
bountifully maintained. In brief, (most excellent, and my gracious sovereign)
there is no state, no subject, or any under his government, which has not
great cause to implore the loss of this good Duke.

This doleful discourse he finished with so deep a sigh, as pressed tears
from his ouer-grieued heart, which restraining his tongue, caused him to be
silent, and moved the Emperor at his sorrow to shed many tears, which
being suddenly ouerpast, the grieuing and most gracious Emperor, raising the
Noble man from the ground, lovingly ^mbrasing him, said.

A tale of sorrow, and much grief have thou delivered, which moved my heart
^^ lament, the death of such a most honored Prince, and to g^ieue for those
subjects, whose l^s^e is so great. But tell me, who governs the Dukedom?
and how affect they the return of the Princess? Most gracious Low (answered
this sorrowful Noble man) the state by a general consent, is in the rule of
Don Sebastian Andrea, a Noble Gentleman, of grave countenance, very
politic, wise, and most nobly inclined, who forced unto it by the
importunate suite of the subjects of all estates, in most honorable sort
carries himself: so that by his rule, their Prince late dead, is in justice
and all other good parts before remembered, little missing, to be equal
only, the nobility of his house acknowledged: so that the happiness of the
Country is the more, in so provident a governor. The like of whom, I heartily
wish your highness, and all other Princes: for where such live, which prysed
honor, and the public common weal, before their own covetous and private
commodity, where laws are not sold for Lords pleasures, nor bribes corrupt
Justices, where through the poor are oppressed, the C^^mons undone, and the
state impouerished, there is G^^ honored, and the Prince truly served. And
where such blessings b^, there is love of Subjects, and faithful hearts to
their princes. Well have thou said (quoth the Emperor) and in thy speech have
comforted my spirits, to hear thee discourse the honors ^^ this noble
Governor, whom I will honor ever for thy honorable report: on which
meditating, he committed the secrecy of his answer to the Noble man his
great wisdom, loath that the sudden news should any way discomfort the
Lady, whose welfare he prised before his own good. And so betaking the
Emperor to his careful study for the Ladies quiet, and the noble Messenger
to his repose amongst his friends, we return again to our noble Edward, who
is now in the way to the holy City.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Knight of the holy Cross, accompanied with the Portugals, and his
other companions iournied to the city of Jerusalem, and what happened them.
WHen the noble Edward had by his prowess, and honorable feats of Arms, by
death of those miscreants, released the Portugal Merchants from their
captivity, storing themselves with such needful provision, as they could
conveniently carry. They spedde themselves with all the haste they could, to
end their desired business, and fulfill their vows in the holy City,
keeping the way continually by the Mountanes, without any adventure happening,
until one of the Easterlings, fell into such danger of death, that there was
no way to recover him, which the pitiful Knight perceiving, and hoping the
best for his recovery, making his stay to see the end, what would become of
him, he applied himself by all means to seek his recovery, which was past
all remedy. In which extremity, our brave English Caualere, playing the part
of a heavenly Physician, comforted his weak patient, in the promises of Christ
Jesus, and his passion, earnestly persuading him, to remember his time evil
spent in this world, and how many and grievous sins he had committed for
any danger, or hope of worldly promotions, to forsake his Savior, whose
mercies was more to be regarded, then a legion of lives, or all the Kingdoms
of the world.

In which comfortable words the distressed Easterling taking great pleasure,
when the hour came of his latest farewell to the world, embracing the Knight
between his arms, when his faltring tongue had lost the use of speech he
showed by signs, the hopes he had to be a copartner of the heavenly kingdom,
and therwithall refined his breath, whom after the Christian manner in those
mountains, they entered as they best could, which done (forrowing for the
loss of him whom from death they coule not recall) they proceed on their
journey, in which they had not long travailed, but resting themselves in the
deserts by a pleasant rivers side. The Moore which before he had taken to
attend their horses, discryed coming with great speed toward them, a very
fair and beautiful woman, attired in a petticoate of crimson damask, which
was pursued by two Negroes slaves, which would violently have abused her body.
This strange sight in a place so uncouth, when the Moore had showed the knight,
like himself moved with pity of distressed people, especially of her sex,
presently mounted himself, and met her, whom he questioned of whence she was,
and what moved her to fly so swiftly from those villians. The Lady whom fear
had almost doomed to death, being in a grievous ecstasy, could not forbear to
show the sine of joy by her iesture, albeit her heart restrained her tongue
speech, which the knight perceiving, taking her in his arms, and brand ashing
his sword, thereby showing to revenge her wrong, he comforted her in such wise,
as taking assured hope on him, which seemed by his habit to be a christian,
she said. Honorable knight, whom God has raised for the comfort of a poor
distressed captive, know that I am wife unto a noble Grecian knight, called
Mathatias, governor of Roades, who travailing with a small train to perform
our religious vows in the holy City, now two nights past, taking our lodging
in these deserts, our tents pitched, and our guard having fire, as well for our
use, to dress and make ready our viands, as to defend themselves from the
wild beasts that haunt these mountains, a crew of cruel and most brutish
heathen, that keep these places to disturb the quiet of such passengers as
they met, guided by the fire (as I said) came unto our tents, whilst we
sleeping, dreaded neither them, nor any other evil. By those catiues was my
most noble husband slain, and such of our company, as resisted their
devilish intents: which done, making me their Captive, they horsed me, and
to their h^llish man^ion lodde me, with some of our followers, where perforce
they would have bereaft me of that most pr^cious ornament which all good
Women hold in more regard then then their life: yet preserved by Gods favor,
my tears and pittious cries did so penetrate the hearts of those homicides,
that they have pardoned me that ill, until their return from a spoil which
they have undertaken, meaning to visit their home within three or four days,
leaving me to the custody of their Villains, who with more villainy have
menaced me to obtain their pleasures, from whom having escaped by flight, I
entreat you, that shows to be of gentle image, if thou be no worse then
thou seem, either to preserve my chastity from their rape by flaying me,
or like thy self, defend my innocence, by auenging me on those accursed
villains that pursue me.

The Knight which during her long talk, had noted her gesture and modest
demeanor, uttering her sad lament, pitying her distress said. Gentle
Lady, thy distress my heart pittyeth, seeing thee in this unfrequented place,
so hardly besette with companions of base conditions, of whom fear not, for
my self by the power of him that sent me for thy comfort, will so revenge thy
just cause, as well on these, as on their masters, as they shall never take
pleasure in wronging a Lady any more: and thereon assure you, as I am a
Knight and a Christian. And without taking longer pawse, willing the Lady to
stay her there, without dread of any man, he mounted his horse, and with his
Sword pursued the villains, who fearing him, fl^dde as fast as they could,
but in an unhappy time, for his legs be^ing of more swiftness, he easily
ouertooke them, paying them their due recompense for a fact so odious, with
death. Which finished, cutting off their heads, he brought them with him to
the Lady, who thanking God for her deliverance, rendered the like to the
noble knight, unto whom prostrating her self, she submitted the care of her
safety, beseeching him as he was a knight at arms, not to dishonor her, nor
to leave her until he came where Christians inhabited. Unto which, gaging his
honor, by many solemn oaths, he took her from the ground, comforting her
with all kindness, protesting withal, that he would not leave those deserts
unsought, until he found the dead body of her Lord, to interre him with
Christian rites, and revenge his death on the robbers.

The Lady which ^ounde such unexpected comfort in her distress, after she
had with many kind requitalles of friendship, and shows of love,
gratified the knight, breaking her from her protestations, he caused her to
mount his horse, conducting her to his Tents, where their dinner, by those
that held him in more regard then their own lives, was prepared, unto whom
the Lady was welcome, wanting nothing of their store which was needful, nor
such honors as to her estate required. In this better content we leave them a
while, with sundry discourses to beguile the time, to let you know of their
further adventures.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Knight of the Holy Cross in search of the dead body of Mathatias,
governor of Roades, found him alive, with other adventures.
THe remain of that day and the night following they spent in reposing
themselves, the knight after he had taken such directions for his course in
search of the Governor, her husband, as she could give, puruaying them of
victuals for two days provision, accompanied with two of the Porttugall
merchants, taking leave of the Lady, and commending the trust of her safety
unto the rest of his followers, he left them: posting from mountain to
mountain, prying and vewing where he could discern any Tent, or show of any.
So long rid he in this manner, that in the evening, about the going down of
the Sun, he might discrie a troop of Camilles laden, guarded with three or
four naked mountenaries, to these the knight spedde him in all the haste,
making such way, that he soon ouertooke them, whom encountering, he said.
Tell me villains of whence ye are, yea, and where had ye these Camilles with
those merchandise in your keeping. The villain mounteners hearing the knight
use these speeches, uttered with a hoarse voice and a look threatening death,
trembling as though they were ready to receive their judgment and present
execution of life, kissing first the ground, and after his feet, besought him
to take compassion of them, relating in what sort they had the Camilles,
which they had taken from others which had them in charge, belonging to
those Thieves which had spoiled the Lady of her husband.

The knight understanding by their talk that they could give him notice of the
spoiled bodies, questioned them further, commanding them on pain of their
lives, to tell him where the Christians were, that were lately masters of
those Camilles, in doing which their lives should goo untouched, or otherwise
they should there finish their days.

The villains which would more willingly have been further off, when they
saw their lives was to be saved for a matter of such small importance with
them, said. The sun has not yet two times declined his power, since
certain Christians travailing these mountains, were encountered by robbers,
that have their continual being not far off, who slaying the people, left
these Camilles and goods in possession of their slaves to conduct them to their
cave, which we have slain, and humbly beseech thee of pardon.

Recreants (quoth the knight) you shall not so escape me, but you shall
likewise die, if you bring me not presently to the place where those
slaughtered bodies lie, wherefore I advise you do this and live, or denying it
receive your deaths.

The villains which saw how bootelesse it was to persuade, yielded their
consentes, and hastened with so good speed, that they shortly arrived at the
place, where they found the mangled carcases of the flaine Christians,
weltering in their gore.

This pitiful sight moved the knight of the Cross to much ruth and sorrow
for their deaths, yet knowing how bootelesse tears are to call again the
dead, dismounting himself, he suruayed the bodies, turning, and so often
tossing, to search the body of the dead governor, that with often removing he
found it, and viewing his personage, noting each linament, with his
countenance, showing a man of prowess, bedewing his bloody face with his
warm tears, he might perceive a panting breath to possess him, unto which
taking good heed, washing his face, and clearing it from the congealed blood,
he opened his jaws, pouring into his mouth, of that wine which he brought for
his provision, and after rubbing and chafing his vytall powers, he recovered
his life: so comforting him with the heat of his hands, rubbing and other
careful handling, that his spirit waxing strong, his tongue had some use, when
looking ghastly up, as one revived from a new world, he called for his Lady,
and missing her, taking good notice of the Knight, which was a stranger unto
him, he thus said. Noble Gentlemen, and my friends, what you are I know not,
neither can I remember that ever I have had any friendship with you, yet as you
are Gentlemen, tell me of my Lady, what is bec^me of her, whether alive or
dead? next, what you are, whether friends, or those that brought me to this
misery?

The Knight whose heart was overcome with sudden joy, beholding the supposed
dead to live, and speak, answered: worthy and noble Governor of that most
honored Island, know, we are Christians as you are who hearing of thy
distress, have undertaken to find thy body, supposed to be slain, by
spoylers of such as pass these mountains, and here have their reside^ce. Thy
Lady I have received from their tyranny, and on their lives, have revenged the
evil offered, by them unto her, and by my maker, whose soldier I am vowed,
will not depart these deserts, until I be acquitted, of all your wrongs, or
loose my life in your causes. Therefore take comfort, and thank God for your
safety, whom I doubt not, but will be so gracious to restore you: your wounds
I will undertake by Gods grace to recure, and deliver in safety your love and
Lady: who living, dies with very sorrow for your great mishap. The Governor
hearing this comfort, well noating the manlike countenance and courage of the
Knight, bending himself unto him, rendered many hearty thanks for those
kind favors, and embracing the Knight as his weak arms would giu^ him
leave, protested by the faith and honor of arms, for ever to become a firm
freende and faithful coepartner of his adventures, so pleased him to accept of
his love and fellowship.

The Knight whom no Spaniard could match, either in courtesy or honor of
Arms, taking his proffered love as kindly as they were offered, gave him many
hearty thanks. Then dressing his wounds with such comfortable Balmes as he
had, and binding them safe, they horsed him, pacing easily toward the place
where his company made their stay: where by the providence of him, who is the
strength and conduct of all those that trust in him, they arrived in safety,
though not before they were looked for, accompanied with their tenis, camills,
and their carriages, to the exceeding joy of the Lady, and the unspeakable
comfort of all his own followers. Their freendly embrasings, and other talk
of their fortunes, passing between the Governor and his Lady, I omit: to
recount what other adventures happened to them.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Knight of the Holy Cross, accompanied with the Easterling and his
Page, followed the robbers: with his adventure.
FAmous Edward, the honor of his country, whose valor was not not to be
matched, held his countries reputation in more regard then his life, whereon
now standing, scorning the Spaniards braues, or the scandal that might ensue
by his report, if he should leave them in such wise without revenge, which he
had promised: wherefore preferring his noble word, early in the morning,
according to the directions he had given, taking leave of the governor and his
Lady, accompanied with his Page and the Easterling, he set forward in search
of those bloody minded reprobates, following the direction of one of the
villains he had last taken, whom he takes for his guide, all that day riding
without any adventure happening, yet wearied with travail, desirous to refresh
himself with taking some sleep, he caused his Tent to be prepared, and his
viandes to be ordained: and when he had refreshed himself, not daring to
commit the trust of his person, to so vile a slave, which was not to be
trusted. After their horses were used as they ought, he commanded the slave to
be bound, taking order with his company that one should watch whilst the
other slept, and to take diligent care of their welfares, that they were not
surprised at unawares.

This charge the careful attendaunts faithfully kept and performed, the day
appearing, they loosed the Villain from his bonds, ordering the horses and
each thing in readiness: which done, they awaked the Knight, who seeing the
morning well spent, was not long preparing, but hastening with all the speed he
might, betook him to his intended pursuit of those homecides. So long they
travailed, that ye heat of the day increasing, they alighted, and seating them
close on the bank of a pleasant river (taking such viands as they had, merrily
spending the time with pleasant parlie) they might perceive those gallants, who
returning from the death of a heathen Prince, and spoil of his people, missing
their Lady, vowed by all their gods never to surcease their travail, until
they had recovered knowledge of her. For which, coursing like men possessed with
a fury in pursuit of the Lady, the knight has gained his desires, who
requi^ing of the slave what they were, mounted on such swift coursers: he
recounted unto him what they were, aduising him to regard himself, and to
fly while he had time, for that they were many, and men of great puissance,
having done many great outrages, and surprised sundry troops of gallant men,
travailing that way. Peasant (quoth the knight) it is not thy speech of their
valor that can daunt me, or cause me to turn my back, upon those devilish
companions. But as I am a Knight, and a true English man, or ever have hope to
behold my native Country, were they a thousand to my self alone, armed as I
am, in the name of my God, and hope of my rightful cause, I would assail them.
And so arming himself, chearing his Page, and his associates, he mounted his
horse, couching his staff in his rest, he put forwards to meet the company
of robbing thieves, who was no sooner espied of them, but without word speaking
most furiously they all assailed him, who were all so well resisted, and so
eagerly encountered of the Knight, as they had small cause to boast them of
their gains. Every blow, with blow, redoubled this noble Brytaine on the
robbers, doing such feats of honor and chivalry, that it amazed them to see:
but more terrified they were, that must of force abide his fury, who sparing
not his strength, laid on them with such courage, crying Saint George, that
after many sharp alarums on either part, many of th^n were sent to seek their
passeports in hell. Thus our noble knight encouraged with the hope of victory,
so behaved himself, that they were all well near brought to end. The
Captain of which route, with four others his confederates, being men of
valor, and resolution, seeing the massacre of their company, sought to
revenge their bloods with their greatest power. And enclosing him on each side,
laid about them in such manner, that the Knight was by them greatly
endaungered. In this assault was his horse slain, when fighting a foot,
espying his best advantage, he gored their horses as they came, and gave them
that their mothers never provided for them: yet in despite of what he could
do, as the mightiest many times be forced to yield, fighting on the
ground, and in the greatest danger of life. The Page which singled himself
from the broyle, wherein he left the Easterling, bestirred him, whereby he
had leave to breathe, and being somewhat refreshed, reaching violently one of
the robbers by the leg, pulled him perforce from his horse, mounting himself
thereon, and dashing out his masters brains with his heels.

The Knight now again mounted, so bestirred him, in that the most brauest of
them that lived, could well have affoorded to been further off, but they
which are bound must obey. The game was now vied, and they must needs see
it. So long vied and reuied was it by the Knight, that not one was left to
count the stake.

The broyle ended, and every act in this massacre performed, the Knight
beholding those brauing hell-houndes, weltering in their blood, first thanking
God for his favor, in strengthening him in that distress, resting himself
after his weary travail, he disarmed himself, refreshing his weary body
for a time: which done, he hasteneth him unto the place where they Governor
and his Lady remained, whom in the company of his beloved wife was comforted,
where with great joy he was welcomed, to all his folowers, who with the Lady,
ceased not to pray for his good success.

Thus leave we this frollicke company, ioying in the good fortunes of the
Knight, who reposed him self with those friends, until the Governor had
recovered his full strength, to travail, when leaving the desartes, they
proceeded on their journey to the City of Jerusalem. In which travail we
leave them, to show you the fortunes of the noble and virtuous Lady Vallia,
remaining with the Emperor in Rome.

CHAP. XIX.
How the Lady Vallia, sorowing for the death of her father, traveled with
child, and what then chanced her.
Now the time and place of the History serves us to leave the noble Edward
and his company, to let you hear of the virtuous Lady Vallia, who travailing
with women's ordinary grief, had not long to look of her time, wherein she
expected an heir so the worthy knight of the Cross: which caused the
Emperor to detain the heavy tidinges of her fathers death from her. But as
novelties have wings, and fly with the light breath of every tatling tongue:
so this lamentable story came unto the ears of Vallia, who for her recreation
and pleasure, walking in a Park adjoining to the Palace, was encountered by a
simple Soldier, who having lost his limbs in service, awayted to impart his
suite unto the Emperor for relief.

With this Soldier, the Lady questioning what services he had seen, as one
that had knowledge of many honorable services done, but especially glad to
hear of her Lord and husband, whose demands the Soldier answered with much
courage, not letting for his own good to utter all: in which his speech,
declaring the worthy conquest of Philip her father (where he was,) a sudden
fear so possessed him, that his tongue with grief denied further speech: which
of the Lady being perceived, moved with pity of his sorrow, enquired
diligently what moved him on such a sudden to stay his talk, beginning now
the most delight, willing him to say on whatsoever he had: for sure she was,
that naught but honorable should be said of her father, or her love, who was
with him in all those services.

This blunt companion recomforted by her honorable counsel, and good
encouragement, seeing he must utter his hearts grief, albeit he had no
thought or knowledge to whom he spoke it, after some small pause, he said.
Pardon me, gracious Lady, for my heavy tidings, and account me no dastard for
daring to speak, what is my hearts grief, to utter the subject of my
tragical swonding sorrow, to all the hearers. For the loss of our noble
general, whose untimely death has caused such heaviness and hearts
discontent amongst all those of his government, that will never be blotted
from their minds, so long as any one breaths that did know him. The
sorrowful Lady hearing these doleful tidings of her fathers loss, could not
answer his talk, nor had power to speak, but as one ready to leave this
life, presently fell in a trance to the ground, whom her grieved attendants
Alynda, and the rest, by their careful industry revived again, though with
much extremity. The poor soldier which saw how ill his talk was taken,
brooked no longer stay in that place, doubting his Princes displeasure, but got
him from the City with all speed.

Vallia her sudden grief urged her pains, that her Midwiues were sent for,
and with great peril of life, was not long after, delivered of two goodly
Sons, whose sight, and other comfortable persuasions of the Emperor, and
those Ladies that were about her, removed a little her heaviness, which she
most honorably endured to all their joys, for this good fortune of the
Lady, solemn Processions were made, Belles were rung, and Bonefices were
plentiful throughout the City, with all other shows and signs of gladness
that might be devised. But to whom so ever these two new borne Gentlemen was
most welcome, there could none take more pleasure in beholding them, then the
Emperor, who would never have any time from his affairs of state, but the
Nurces were sure of his company, to their joy, and pleasures. In this offspring
I leave them, to recount the accidenis happening in Genoway.

CHAP. XX.
How Albert Duke of Millaine, hearing of the death of Philip Duke of Genoway,
supposing his Daughter to be dead, made claim to the Segnorie, and what
chanced.
WHen the high commander of men, had by death taken from his Country the hope
and comfort of this most loving and honorable Prince, Philip Albert, Duke of
Mill^ine, swelling with ambition, to (...) ^ouernement, s^^^osing Vallia (...)
heir of Philip, to be (...): first summoned the Vicegerent by his Heralde, to
(...), and the little he had, for their sovereign, or abide the chances of
wars, which with all the power, both of him and his friends, he would
presently inflict upon them.

This peremptory message delivered, the Vicegerent having care to his oath and
promise made, summoned the Nobility, and governors of each port, within those
confines, unto whom he recounteth the message received from the Millaine Duke,
with all the large circumstances, declaring his title to be but usurped, and
desiring their aids in the right of the Lady Vallia, heir and lawful
inheritrix of their late deceased Lord, whom they should most highly wrong,
if dastardly they should entitle another in her right. Therefore my Lords and
loving friends, (quoth the Governor) show in mainteining the honor and
right of this Lady, your love to her father, in which you gain more love and
honor, then to be invested with title of great worth. For no greater blemish
can be to the Noble, then to be termed a cowarde, especially in a cause of
such honor as this. Therefore, if you will join with me in full consent,
esteem his threats not worth a pin, and provide to give him such a
welcome, as is fit for an enemy.

The Nobles and all estates there assembled, hearing the honorable resolution
of the Governor, with general consent lawding his magnanimity, committed
themselves unto him, promising on their honors, to maintain with their
bodies, goods, lives, and lands, whatsoever he resolved on.

This willingness with general consent when the Governor had seen and heard
first giving them all hearty thanks for their honorable love to their
Princess, and careful regard of their common wealth, which they were all
bound by oath to the Church, as well as the figniorie to maintain. After some
other speech, he caused the Millaine herald to be brought before them, to whom
he says: Herald, thy message from thy Lord so peremptorily sent, and by thee
delivered, with grave advise of the whole state of our Province, we have
advisedly considered. And finding by law, or natures right, he has no right
nor just interest in the same, we have determined to deny his demand, and
with our dearest blood will maintain the lawful issue of our late deceassed
Duke Philip, whose honorable deserts can not be so suddenly worn out. Thou
know what we intend, if thy Lord be friend to us, and our state, we will
requite his love with the like again, if a foe, he shall find that Philippes
rightful inheritour shall not be wronged, so long as we shall live. And so
finishing his speech, the Heraulde thus replied.

Nobles of Genoway, whose gravity is spoken of in all places, deceive not your
selves by presumption. My Lord is puissant and mighty, and not to be dared by
them of far greater and more force then you: wherefore weighing your own
goods, and welfare of your Country and state, consider with whom you are to
deal, his honor, state, power, and what is to be required in Majesty,
bethinking what a friend he is to his friends, and what a terror to his
enemies. In weighing all which I doubt not, but your gravity and wisdom will
alter these fond resolutions, before you provoke him to fury, least when you
would submit your selves, he be as far of from hearing you, as you at
peremptory in refusing him. In your answer, consider your welfare, or
subversion. Therefore let not overboldness lead you to mischief: I speak as
I wish, that you might prevent your own mischiefs.

The Governor hearing the Herald speak so much of submission, as though his
Lords countenance might terrify and affright them, even as Bugbeares do
children, thus said.

Heraulde, what weenest thou we of the state of Genoway are, that thus thou
menacest us with thy masters high actions, power, and friends? Is Albert
become such a Bugge to fear his bordering neighbors? No, let him dare
children and fools, with his threats. If he come as a friend, as he did
when our good Philip lived, he shall be welcome: if otherwise, it is neither
power, friends, nor his valor we esteem. Our honor we will maintain in
despite of his Bearde, maugre all the friends Spain, or Italy can affoorde
him. And so thou have thy answer: reply no more: for what we say, we will
perform on our honors, as thy Lord shall find, when he dares make trial.

The Heraulde having his answer, like a Malcontent, doing his duty,
deprated. The Noble and states of Genoway, taking careful order for the
mustering of their soldiers, and making force, that there enemy might not
take them sleeping, but always in readiness, when occasion should serve to
defend themselves, and offend the enemy.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Herald returning his answer from the Ienowaies, Albert puruaied his
armies.
THe Millaine Duke expecting his Heralds return, with the Genowaies offer of
obedience, after long looking, arrived at the Court, to whom the Duke gave
honorable welcomes, enquiring the answer to his Embassage. To whom the Herald
at large recounted the honorable resolution of the governor, who would not
deliver their title of government to any stranger whatsoever, willing him to
rest content, or abide what chance war will alot him.

The Millaine Duke raging with fury, at this unexpected answer: vowed by no
simple oaths to revenge him on the governor, whom he threatened with great
afflictions, if he prevailed: And hasting to see the event of his
determinations, presently dispatcheth his Embassage to Florence, the prowess
of Marcellus and Telone, and other his friends, for their aid in this exployt,
willing them to be ready by a day prefixed, at some port of his, to them best
beseeming good, and most easy for their convey. With these letters, the
messengers being gone, great was the preparation made in his own territories,
of men, victuals and munition, whereof there wanted none, such as the Country
yields. Such was the have and care of those unto whom the charge of those
affairs were committed, that in short time, althings were prouidedin such good
order as could be besired, their only stay was, for their expected power,
which accordingly was puruaide, some marching by land, others with their
provision by Sea, so that in short time they are all well met, at Millaine,
where they made no long stay, but every man receiving his charge.

The companies appointed for the land, marched forwards in three battles, the
foremost of which, was led by the Duke of Florence, the vauward by the
governor of Marcellus, and the Rereward, by the Duke of Millaine, who had
under his conduct, all the horsemen, with the carriage and provision. For the
Sea service, was appointed for to be Admiral, Alfonce Earl of Pyemont,
having under his charge of Gallyes, Bregandines and Foystes, one hundred and
fifty sails, warlike and well appointed, with all needful provision, having
also under his charge, a number apprdoued and Noble Captains, trained to the
Sea, all carrying minds of resolution to inuest their Noble Freende the Duke
of Millaine, in his challenged Dukedom.

The Genowayes, whose provident care was to provide for their Countries
safety, was not idle in all these times: but making ready what power they
could, both of theyrowne, and such other Friends as they could procure,
relying on the Justice of their cause, and naught at all fearing the multitudes
of their enemies, of whose numbers they were all advertised by their own
Espyalls.

The careful regard of the Governor, had so wrought, that all things were
ordered to his content, his Friends, the Neapolitan Duke with his powers
being come, and all others that they expect, their Galleys and ships
furnished, the conduct of each several company was appointed to men of worth
and honorable resolution, who encamped themselves with wonderful great
pollycye without the City, even in the enemies chief passage.

Their power of ships and galleys likewise appointed at point device, a
Council was called, and the Admiral sworn in the open assembly not to
yield, nor in any sort to discontinue the fight, but taking all advantage, to
do his best for their defense, and discomfiting of the enemy. This done, and
the ships halled forth, they harbored every man being aboard, that they
had charge of. They cheered their company, exhorting them to valor and
courage, not omitting often to recounte the right cause of defense, with the
enemies entrucion, with all other persuasions that might tend to their
encouragement, to the great comfort of all the company, who with one voice
yielded signs of great joy, vowing every one to the other, to live
conquerours, or die ten thousand deaths, rather then incur the odious name
of coward.

Thus cheering themselves with hope of victory, with a ringing peale of
cannons, that made the air rattle, and the earth to shake, they set sail,
bidding their friends a short farewell, who attending their enemies coming,
we leave them houering at the sea for a time, till they meet again.

CHAP. XXII.
How the two armies meeting at sea, the Millaine Duke with his power was
discomfited.
THese honorable Armies well appointed, both by land and Sea, a general
expectation was made on both sides, for their meeting, wherein each one hoping
for victory, wished for to see the event of their fortunes (long looked for
comes at the last) and time has brought the two fleetes in sight one of the
other, which descried, all policy was wrought for the advantage in the fight,
wherein those gallants of Genoway showed their best skill, keeping in despite
of the Millaine army, the wind, and in great bravery halled the enemies with
their warlike music, in such sort, that the skies resounding the echoes of
their noise, which was not vnaunswered by the Millaine fleet, made as gallant
a show as the other, where some time was spent in triumph between them, and
the Galleys and ships within shot, their prowess with great courage was
discharged, and every man with such weapon as he used did his best.

Long time and much powder was spent on both sides, with much effusion of
blood, either part doubtful of the victory, which the General of the
Genowayes perceiving, halling his Viceadmirall, and the Admiral and
Viceadmirall of each Squadrone, with a flagge of parley, they drew near unto
him to hear what he had to say, who charged them upon their allegiance,
without any more forbearing or consuming of time, to board withal speed
every man as he could have advantage, and so to make quick and short trial
of their fortunes.

This counsel of the general was welc^me to every man, who were very glad
and joyful of that commandment, which was that which they expected, for they
attended but to see him, being advised to follow his deceivers. And thereuppon
forcing their Galleys by maine strength of Oars aboard, with great courage and
valor they gave this onset, in which was many feats of honor and arms
achieved, where many a man of worth left his life, others lost their limbs,
and many spoiled and wounded to the death. The Galleys fired, and diverse sunk,
all hazards that day were with great perrill espaped, after many bloody
strokes and much other mischief on both sides, the hour of the victory
befell the Genowayes, who took their Admiral gallie, flew their chiefetaine,
and burned and sunk many of the rest, such good success followed their just
cause, that few of their enemies escaped without great hurt from the fight.

The fight ended, night approaching, a retreat by the Admiral was sounded,
which done, a view was taken of the prisoners, and the gentlemen and
commanders of the Millenaries, sent aboard the general, for the rest order was
given, that they should remain aboard their several galleys, which done, a
general laud was given to God for their victory, and every one following the
course of the Admiral, they made their way for Genoway, and in short time with
the diligence of the Captives, and good encouragement of the commanders of each
gallie, they had sight of their port, and not long after recovered the same,
where their ioies were increased by the sight of their friends happy return,
as by their solemn shows of gladness was manifest, to the great encouragement
of all the adventurers, and increasing of the prisoners great grief, who made
such sure account to triumph in their overthrows, and like Lords to command
over them, now to be subject to their enemies. Thus their heavy sighs
bewraying their sorrow, the general of the fleet moved with pity of their
care, being a man very debonaire and kind, with a countenance full of pity,
his bonnet vayled, came unto the caualleres, persuading them to comfort
themselves, and to extend this unexpected chance as one of fortunes bandies,
whose inconstancy was not to be wondered at, for (quoth he) they that gain
to day, may loose to morrow, the fortunes of wars are difficil, a clear
conscience and a just cause armeth men with courage, and they that fight in
right are often fortunate. Our cause God has righted, whom your duke sought to
wrong: he is the giver of victory, to whom be all glory. Yet gentlemen (quoth
he) dismay not, neither clogge your hearts with too much care of your bad
fortunes, you are fallen into the hands of a kind and most noble enemy, who
will well entreat you, and for mine own part, which am at the Governors
command, I assure you, your ransomes shall be so easy as you shall like well
of.

The Milleneres captive hearing their kind enemy use such words of comfort,
where he might menace with death and cruel revenge, being at his mercy,
with courtesy returned great thanks for his most friendly counsel and good
persuasions, vowing themselves his obedient prisoners, never to depart, or
offer any manner of discourtesie in word or action, until they were lawfully
licensed so to do. Which word the General accepting, each man had free
liberty within the City, to go at his or their pleasures.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Armies by land meeting, what happened them.
AS God sent the sea power of these Princes to try first their forces, so not
long after their armies approaching, the Millaine Duke being advertised by his
espialles of their readiness, hearing of the ill succesle of his fleet, loath
to put all on hazard without some more pause and resting his people which
were very sore wearied with their long and hard travail, for which cause, as
well to consult with his leaders and copartners, he caused his Tents to be
picht, giving good directions for sure watch to be kept throughout the Camp:
which done, and they having reposed themselves that night, the next day a
parley by flagge was sommoned, wherein every man was heard, both for advise in
marshalling the Army, as for policy in surprising the enemy, where in each
man's opinion said, the Duke melancholic for his ill success and loss of his
fleet was so malcontent, that nothing might be said wherein he took pleasure:
yet gave he leave to every one to say his mind, which humors nothing
contenting his nobility and such as were drawn thither by his cause, loath
that his headstrong humors should dishonor them, the Ferr^ra Duke, as one
that might be most bold with him, said. Cousin of Millaine, for your sake we
have gathered bordering neighbors, maintaining no just cause of our own, but
your intended quarrel, wherein if we reap any dishonor, we have our
deserts, Led by your counsel we have been, as sheep to be slain, and
now having had a little cross, dismay you, that our people seeing your
discomfort, may leave us here in the midst of our enemies. It is dastardlike
to fear in such a cause, and may breed all our euerthrow: wherefore resolve
either to maintain your honor, and with resolution finish what you determined
before our coming from our own homes, or on mine honor, I will draw my
forces again to their own habitation, and leave you to your best fortunes:
say therefore your intent, for we may not here long continue, the enemy
being strong, and in their own confines, where we are strangers, assured of
no favor, but what we can purchase with the sword.

The Millaine Duke hearing his cousin of Ferrara so plain, thought best to make
show of good content, whatsoever he thought, wherefore without longer
pausing, as one that in that extremity desired some counsel, he said. Most
honorable cousin, pardon me, that have not showed my self in this action as I
ought, and consider the cause I have of discontent, which has made me
forgette my honorable good friends: yet good Cousin, dishonor me not so much
to adiudge me of cowardice, for ever my heart has abhorred that odious fault:
but what your pleasure is to attempt, I will perform, and thereon giving his
word of honor. The Duke consented to his will, who gave in charge the next
morning every man with his company to be marching by the break of day, that
lying near the anemie, they might by their sedaine scaties see what advantage
there was to be gotten.

According to whose command every thing was effected, and the companyes
marched near to the City, within half a league where the Genowayes camp
lay, where they strongly en scanced themselves, and having taken three or
four days respit, wherewith their company was well refreshed, a Herald was
sent from the Governor of Genoway, to know the cause of their coming in
arms, against the laws of Christian Princes, to disturb their peace, having
no just cause so to do, commanding him and his friends, confederates, and
followers, either to raise their camp and be gone, or provide them to battle,
and therein try the event of eythers fortunes.

The Millaine Duke having attentively hearkened to the Heralds message, moved
with choler at his brauing speech, without regard of honor or law of arms,
had like to have beaten the Herald, but being persuaded by the Duke of
Ferrara from so dishonorable a fact, he says. Herald, goo tell that usurping
Governor of my right, that I am come to chastise his insolency, and learn
him to know his duty to his liege Lord, neither shall any one of his
rebellious companions escape the fury of my wrath, without they come presently
in submissiue manner, and acknowledge their fault and great offense committed
against me, which if they refuse, by that time the sun has wise made her
recourse about the earth, I will meet him, and those sleeping curres his
companions, in the plain that lies Eastward from the city, so God say Amen.
Therefore depart, my word shall be thy safe concuct for this tune.

The Herald having his answer, without long stay hastneth to the camp, where
unto the governor and his compeeres in arms, he recounted the Dukes resolute
determination, willing him to prepare against the time appointed to meet him,
wherewith the governor and the rest were all well pleased, committing their
cause to God, and relying on their just Title. And thus resolving to meet him
at the time and place appoynied for the same, he presently gave order to
dislodge his Camp, to draw more near the place by the Duke appointed,
sending his most expert men at arms to view the ground, for their best
advantage, which with great care was so accomplished, that the sun nor enemy
could not greatly annoye them. The Millaine Duke and his accomplises careful
of what they had in hand, slept no time, but with great care and regard,
proceeded with their companies more near the place appointed, where all things
framed by marshall discipline and good advise of the Captains, they expect a
happy day of trial.

Time that finisheth all things, has brought the appointed day, in which the
careful leaders so busily employed themselves, that all things were ordered
in most honorable and decent manner, where no policy of either part was
omitted for the advantage: which done, and the battles ready to join, a
Herald was sent from the Governor of Genoway, willing him before he
committed the justice of his cause to the battle, to call to mind the
justice of God, in delivering his sea powers into their hands, wishing him not
so much to dishonor his noble house and followers, to hazard all to fortune.
If he would accept this proffer, and confess the wrong offered his estate
and commons, he would remit the journey past, and give him free leave to pass
in quiet through his country, if not, and he prevailed, he should find in
justice what it is to disturb the quiet government of so peaceable an estate.

This message delivered, the Duke fretting at the Governors kind and
courteous motion, swear by no small power, to acquit his pride, and learn him
to know to his great grief, what it is to move his Prince to fury, and so
with a sh^rt reply to his message, sent the Herald away.

Scantly had the the Herau'd recovered the Pauillion of his Lord, but a
Braueado was made by the Forara Duke, who was the first that began the sight,
and was gallantly encountered with the Duke of Naples, who met him hand to hand,
each knowing other by their colors. Between those Princes began a fierce and
deadly fight, who singling themselves, both hoping of honor, so applied their
forces one against the other, that it was doubtful whether should have the
glory of the day. Both of them by their prowess giving courage to their
followers, between whom many hardy feats of arms were achieved, the
battle on both sides being very doubtful. In this conflict, the two Dukes
like Lions, bear themselves, until the Ferara Duke, with long continuance of
the fight, fell from his horse, who was presently rescued by a Band of his own
company, that in the parting, had like to have slain the Duke of Naples, if
the Duke his enemy had not been more honorably minded, that rescued from
danger by his friends, he left the field that time. Night growing on them,
a retreat was sounded on either part, and every man withdrew them to their
Tents: in which battle, was taken many Prisoners, on either part, which by
compremise of the Governors of both paprts, was redeliuered. Thus for a time
we leave them to their repose, and hopes of their good success, to tell you
of the Princess Vallia.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How the two children of the lady Vallia was solemnly christened, with other
adventures.
THe most renowned and noble minded Emperor, devising to honor the Christning
of the two children, had invited all the nobility and Princes near bordering
on his confines, to be witnesses of that solemnity, appointing for that time,
great tryumphes to be performed: and for that purpose, caused challenges to be
set up, against all comers, to be maintained by his champions, the winners to
have rich rewards.

The day of solemnity being come, many Princes and Noble personages assembled
themselves to the Triumph, the Emperor in person, being Godfather to both the
sons of the Knight of the holy Cross: unto whom, many rich presents were
given, by sundry Princes, that honored and loved their Father.

At these bankets, among many others which harkned of foreign novelties,
Alinda, busying her self to hear, and ouerheare strange tidings, heard two
noble gentlemen discourse of the state of Genowaye, recounting at large, the
honorable demeanor of ye Governor thereof, and his success, in their sea
adventures, with each particular chance, happening in these wars, which
waited of Alynda, that needed no orator to tell her tale, her tongue carrying
a heavy weight, until she had opportunity to reveal the same unto her
Lady: which she sought, yet could not obtain it, until late in the evening,
when every Guest had withdrawn themselves to rest: when having time fit to
her desire, she began first in pleasant motions to feel the humor of her
Lady, whether pleasantly or melancholy disposed, and finding her pleasant
humor, she said. Madame, since the heavy tidings from Genoway, I have not
seen one pleasant motion possess you, let me your old servant, entreat
this favor at your hands, to say, what you could well frame your feeble and
unable hands to do, in defense of your own rightful inheritance of Genoway?

Alinda (quoth the Princes) thy fond prattle will never be left, what moves
these sudden motions, and recounting Genoway, say, what occasions are offered
in those parts, I pray thee say?

Madame (quoth Alinda) your Ladyship always is pleased to mistake me, and my
simple meaning, what I intend herein, is nothing, you know I am none of
those that seek common: wealths benifit, but say good Madam, that I were, as
I am never like to be, the rightful heir to the Dukedom of Millaine, and
should by violence seek to usurp your right in your Dukedom by force, what
duest you do for defense of your self and your people? Alinda (quoth the
Princess) seeing thou say thy talk begun is in jest, I will as
heedlesly answer thy demands.

Suppose Alinda to be my enemy, and in Arms in my Country, spoiling my
commons, and ruinating my Country, thou might well accuse me of cowardice,
if in Arms I should not meet thee, revenging my just cause on my enemy: for
thus, and in this manner, would I chastise the Millaine Duke: laying good
strokes on the back of her maiden, with a cudgel, which she easily found.
Which chaftisment that she could well demean her self, turned in this manner.
Madam, if to be Duke of Millaine, be so painful, and that to a usurper, there
belong such punishment, let them be Dukes that list, Alinda will be her self
as long as she can. The^ good Duke of Millaine answered the Princess, I am
very sorye that I should so suddainlye vntytle your grace: but upon some
conditions, I will make your Majesty recompense.

Madame quoth Alynda, promotion I feel is heavy, the name of Duke is
imprinted I fear me in black and blew on my shoulders. But since they be
badges of your Ladyships colors, and your gift, in hope of better I must
accept these. But may it please you to let me know your conditions, that liking
thereof, I may deserve your reward. I marie Alinda (quoth the Princess, but
first swear unto me to answer justly my demands, and then ask thy reward.

Alynda hearing the Princess so pleasant, was loath to hinder her begnune
mirth: but feeding her vain, of put her from those dampes, said.

Madame, since it is your Ladyships pleasure to bring me from a zealous
prophesier, using no oath, but yea, yea, and nay nay, cock and pie, and such
like, to rend those creatures that God has made, say by what you will have me
swear, and I will parforme it.

How now Alinda (quoth the Princess) where blows the wind now? the Moon I
dare gage my life is in some merry corner, that has brought thee to this
conceited pleasures: but leaving all, tell me as thou tenderest my love: What
moved thee to name the Duke of Millaine? my mind presageth some unexpected
chance has happened: my people by his means if they have, and thou therewith
acquainted, I swear by that love I bear my Lord Edward, never to forgive it
thee, unless thou reveal thy meaning therein, and tell me the truth of what
thou have heard.

The maiden hearing her jest prove so contrary, loath to offend her, which
she honored above all the creatures on the earth, thus said. Madame, I have
often heard it amongst the learned, observed for a principle, not to jest with
superiors, dreading the mistaking of any simple meaning, whereof I might have
taken heed, but seeing my tongue has been so long hanged to utter the hearts
secrets, pardon what I have to say, and I will hide nothing to satisfy your
desire. Then proceed (quoth the Princess) and whatsoever thou say, I
freely forgive it thee.

Alynda, whom all entreaties might not pardon from telling her mind, said:
This day my gracious Lady, the banquet being now furnished, with many an
honorable Guest, two gallaunt youths whose names I know not, questioning one
with the other, of the state of Genowaye, and of the Province thereof, coming
lately from those confines, a tale of joy, and much lamentations he
delivered, which wroong many tears from my heart, at hearing thereof, it
caused many exceeding joys to possess me. Yet disposed to cross me (quoth
the Princess) leave off I say these fond delusions, and say how both joy
and care at one entir time assailed thee.

Madame (quoth Alynda) when he delivered the pride and incolencye of the
Millaine Duke, seeking first by entreaty to obtain your right in the
Dukedom, by winning the regent to his will, whose trust when he could not
abuse, he raised a mighty power by sea, and another huge host by (...),
joining with other Princes near adjoining, to accomplish his will. The ^auy
discomfited by your Captains, and they obtaining a most honorable victory,
the Duke himself forageth your confines, and has fought a most honorable
battle, each side doing their deuoyre, in such wise, as it was doubtful
whether had the best, and thus they left them: and this has bredde both my
care and great joy.

The Princes who tendered her native Country as her own life, premeditating
on her maidens speech, and recounting each several accident, many times wished
her Lord present to chastise those usurpers: vowing to revenge those wrongs on
Millaine, and all partakers: yet this in her womanish fury, reasonable means
she had none to make, without acquainting the Emperor therewith, which she
was very loath to do: Yet beating her Brains, to find outsome shift, to
behold the manner of their doings, she was ever crossed by some other
contrary accident, which made her sollitarie to abandon the company of all
people, only her trusty servant excepted, who seeing her heaviness, lamented
her rashness in revealing those tidings, which yet renewed her sorrows.

CHAP. XXV.
How the henourable Princess Vallia, performing her Church duties, after her
travail, went disguised from Rome.
THe Princess which sought many means to attain her desire, longing more
deeply to see the estate of her commons, then for any worldly benifite, and to
yield them comfort in their distress. The time of her Churching being now
finished, she bethought her self of one secret intent, which she would
assuredly put in proof, if Alynda would thereunto give her consent, denising
many ways how to acquaint the maiden with her purpose, yet fearing to discover
the simple intent of her former purpose, who knowing her Alynda to be of a
most sharp and ready wit, she first by many circumstances bound her to
her secrets, which done she said.

Alynda, in many extremes, thou have been my faithful counselor, and
conselor of my secrets, from whom the deepest thoughts of my heart has never
been hid, and having found thyloyaitie, I doubt not the like at this time,
which I will requite to thy content: to hold thee longer from what thou
expectest to know, I have since I heard thee discourse the distress of my
poor subjects, vowed to GOD my Redeemer to see them, and to lend them all such
help as my power will stretch unto, only for furthering my intent herein,
advise me what secret course to take, in which thou shall highlye pleasure
me: But as thou love me, stand not upon any denialls, or persuasions to
withdraw me from this determination, for whatsoever betide of me, I will
execute what I have here intended.

Alynda which saw her earnestness to perform her will herein: be sought her
of pardone, her wits being to simple, to give ready advise in a case so
full of danger. But Madame (quoth she) that you shall know, my love is as
firm as ever it was, devise you the mean, and I will do my best to enact it,
keeping your secrets if I dye for it.

Enough, my own sweet Alinda, I take thy word, and on thy faith, charge
thee presently to provide me some trusty freende to accompanye me, which an
disguised in man's attire, armed like a Knight of the Emperors, will travail,
my companion knowing nothing what I am: Wherefore say to him, whom thou shall
appoint for my guide, I am thy Brother, that for some occasions of thy Ladies,
is bound for those parts of Italye, and on thy word, assure him of a good
reward for his pain, to his very good lyking. But haste thee, for I can
enjoy no quiet content, until I have honourblye performed my will.

Madame (quoth Alynda) this shift may go as current as heretofore. But say
good Madame, how shall I answer your absence when the Emperor shall enquire
for you? Marry this my Alynda, thou shall give it out amongst the Ladies of
the Court, as well as amongst mine own attendaunts, that I have made a solemn
vow, to fast certain days: In which time, performing my other penance for my
sins past, I will not be seen or spoken unto of any but your self: this
shift, I doubt not, but may suffice.

Excellent my good Lady, (quoth Alynda,) I see now a willing horse needs no
spur, God send your Ladishippe well to prosper in your journey: for I never
saw your wits so sharpened before.

But now for horses, where will you speed? Thy self, Alinda shall be my
credit, thy honest word shall be enraged to the master of the Emperors
Horse, for two such as shall be most excellent, if not, mine own assurance
shall serve with him, to do thy own adopted Brother any pleasure.

Believe me Madame, I like your plat well, and doubt not, but that shall be as
well performed it. I have bethought me of a propper Gentleman, a wooer of mine
own, in sooth he is: whom I will conjure, of that love he has so often
professed, to bear my Brother company, and to provide him some good guide for
his conduct: in mean time, I will prouid^ your furniture, which shall all be
bought to your own person.

What say then Alinda? will thou name me in buying for me those needful
things? No Madame (qooth she) you mistake me, (...) that to my charge, and
cumber you no more with these cares.

The plat being laid for the Princes journey, Alynda so applies her self in
puruaying each needful thing, that many days were not spent, before each
necessary was brought into the Princes lodging, and exquisitly fitted her,
guide and other consorts, to her own very good lyking. Which being ^oone,
and the doye appoieted for their departure, Alynda calling her Freende before
the Princess, said.

Most gracious Lady, let your humble scruant entreat your Ladyship to grace
this freende a kinsman of mine, with your favorable countenance. And seeing I
have made choice of him amongst all the gallants of this royal Court, I
beseech you witness with me, what trust I repose in him, that commitmine own
and only brother to his guiding, in a journey for my good, which he
vnde^ta^eth. Young he is, and not able to endure such hard travail, without
some good guide: and sickness, incident to all men, may oppress him: of which
(my good Hortelious, for so was he named) take thou especial regard, for that
what thou do to him, is done to my self, and as great shall thy thanks be
in doing him pleasure. To morrow by that time the morning shall give light at
the gate, behind these lodgings he shall attend you, where fail not to meet
him, and me: and so for this time farewell.

This kind lover which had no thought what service he undertook, was careful
of his charge, loath to be accouncounted negligent at this first entertainment,
slept not until he had all things in good sort ready. The Princess minding
her journey, was all night, or the better part, in arming and providing her
self, attending the coming of her trusty guard, who failed not his hour
appointed, where the Princess accompanied with her Alynda, met him. And making
small stay, taking their loath depart each of other, we leave them to their
journey, and Alynda to her studious thoughts, how to beguile the Emperor, in
her Ladies absence, as hereafter you shall hear.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the Emperor with great regard of the infants good fortunes, caused a
man of Art to calculate their natiuities.
THe Emperor whose ^elicitie was in those noble children, of whom he had
more care th^n of an ordinary friend, desirous to know what in their birthes
was predestinate unto them, sought many ways to attain unto his desire, and
acquainted sundry his friends with his intent. Atter long care taking to
attain his desire, had intelligence of a reverent Hermet, which had his being
on Alps leading from Rome to Naples, whose Art was matchless in the Art
Methimaticke. Unto this hermet he sent his trusty councellor Anthony
Buscatho, entreating him, (whom he might command) to satisfy his pleasure
herein sending, by him, the hour, day, and month, truly set down of their
natiuities.

Such haste made this noble man, that he came unto the Cell of the Hermet,
whom he kindly entreated to satisfy the Emperors pleasure herein, who loath
to be drawn from his heavenly motions, could not a long time be persuaded to
it. In the end, so many were the entreaties, and importunate suites of the
noble Messenger, that he granted his good will, promising by a certain time
to fulfill the Emperors suite, and by writing to satisfy him.

Anthony having what he desired, returned the Emperor his answer, who
spending the time in many thoughts of his desires, took no rest until he
heard what the Hermet said. As time spends, so time brought the limited time
to end, of which the Emperor was careful, when calling his Anthony, he
caused him to speed unto the Hermet, where making no stay, posted about his
business, and in happy time arrived at his Cell: where entering conference
with the aged father, touching his questions, he received no words at all,
whereon he might take any occasion of judgment. But after some r^past taken,
he said.

Friendly Anthony, whose pains has been such, to see my homely Cell,
thanks for your pains, to my gracious Prince heartily commend me, and unto
him deliver these few lines, which shall import that small knowledge I can
give.

The noble man having received his message, would not make more inquiry of
ought, but taking his friendly farewell, hasteneth unto the Court, of whose
coming the Emperor was glad: who calling him into his Closet, enquired the
news he had. At which drawing his packet, signed with the Hermets signet, he
deliued the same unto his Majesty, who renting the seals, read the contents
thereof following.

The Nobles borne within the stately Court,
Among Princes great, shall bear a kingly port.
The latter borne, a stranger hence shall steal,
By whom great good shall chance thy common weal.
In arms with many matchless Princes he shall fight,
Yet never be foylde by any humane wight.
Gods glorious name by power he shall advance,
And shall be known at length by happy chance.
Who gave him life, of him shall life receive,
Where he took life, there shall he life bereave.
In travail shall this worthy champion bide,
Until this lucklesse fortune to him shall betide.
Marry he shall, with a most princely wife,
And end his days in religiou^ kind a of life.
The Elder brother like a Lion fierce,
The Pagans proud his prowes shall menace.
The flying birds his parents shall bewray,
And raging beast, shall unto him obey.
Most strange events by him performde shall be,
Myrrour of knighthood, and of chivalry.
For over East to west, their honors shall be spread,
And Romans through his might shall be magnified.
These dark and close couched lines, when the Emperor had read, and ouer-read
many times, and could not conceive the meaning thereof, he was more troubled in
spirit then before. But when he was warned, that the younger should be borne
from him by a stranger, he took order that their nurces should be in one of
the chiefest fortresses about the City, where he usually visited them: in
whom he took more delight, then in any thing, especially in Constantine
the yoonger, which bare his name, of whom his fear was most. The elder whom
had to name Nartelions, he was not so watchful of, yet had he a fatherly care
of both. In this great regard, and heedful care, these princes were seven years
within the fortress of the City nourished. What after happened them, the
History shall show you as it comes.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Princess Vallia arrived at Genoway, and what happened her.
LOng and weary travail has brought the Lady in sight of Genoway. Before
she could recover the City, she was encountered by the Ambuscadoes of the
Millaine Duke, who took her prisoner, and brought her to the Dukes Pauillion.
The Duke seeing so fair and beautiful a face, questioned him (for so we must
teame her now) of whence he was, and what affairs led him thither, whether
he came as a friend or an enemy. Vallia, whose se^e are not to seek of
ready answers, seeing her self in the hands of him that would not
willingly part with her, if he had knowledge of her, dissembling (as well she
could) what she was, said. Noble Prince, the desire I have to make trial of my
manhood, has brought me to thee, for that I have heard thy honors spoken of
amongst many. A Gentleman I am, desirous to see the manner of war: and if
thou vouchsafe it, the price of my service shall be employed for thee.

The Duke which noted her beautiful face, her kind speech, and affable
countenance, held her for nloesse then she seemed. And without using any
circumstances, gave her entertainme^t: appointing her a place near his own
person: which kindness she very grateful accepted, returning many thanks
for his honorable acceptance.

Not long had our young warrior remained in the camp, whom in her attire we
name Philipo, but a scallie was made by the Citizens, whose vittailes waring
scant, would gladly seek all possible means to be quit of their enemies.

The larum in the camp given, all armed and in array, Philipo was not last, but
mounted, in very comely and brave manner demeaned her self, ventering so far
in pursuit of the enemy to the gates, that she was with her guide taken
prisoner, which the Millaine Duke seeing, commending the forwardness of his
new entertained soldier, sought to rescue her. But his aid came too late. No
sooner was the Lady within the City, but carrying the show of a Cauelere, she
had good entertainment, and well entreated. That night the Governor with his
commanders being pleasantly delighted at supper, and every man recounting
what service they had seen and done that day, the captain whose prisoner she
was, acquainted the Governor what a prize he had that day gotten, leaving
nothing vnremembered that might honor her, whom he made reckoning would
purchase him store of crowns.

The Governor on this report of the Captain, was very desirous to see this
prisoner, yet for that night made little reckoning of it, in the morning early,
his mind devising of his nights resolution, accompanied with his best friends,
took his occasion to walk by the house of signiour Vincencio, where she
remained, with whom he questioned of sundry occasions. After some friuilous
speech, he enquired for the prisoner, who was presently brought before him,
whom he saluted very kindly, requiring him to say of what country he was,
and what name and parentage. Sir quoth Philipo, for so let her be remembered,
what you are I know not, neither desire I to know, but have heard that laws of
arms allow not every man to examine, especially a gentleman. Therefore pardon
me, for without the governor or his special authority, I will not acquaint
any with my estate, and so good sir quoth she rest satisfied. Sir quoth the
governor, your peremptory speech shows some great mind, which I pray God
prove so happy for your hosts sake. If then I can entreat the governor to
come or send for you, will you vouchsafe to acquaint him with what I have
required? True sir (quoth Philipo) you construe my mind right, for which I am
beholding unto you. You are very pleasant gentle, man (quoth the Governor)
which I wish to continue, and would gladly crave this favor, that I might on
mine own authority demand whether you know the governor, which you would
see. Sir answered Philipo, the honorable gentleman yet I never saw, but in
regard of his virtues and honorable commendations, I both love and honor him.

Thanks (quoth the Governor) for your good opinion and report of him which
you hold an enemy, but happily may prove otherwise, for which, if any have any
thing to say, either in secret or otherwise, speak as a friend, I am the man,
unworthy though I be of so honorable a place, wherefore if thou have ought to
speak, say boldly thy mind, for by the honor of that seat which I do now
possess, I will freely hear thee, and pardon whatsoever.

Philipo which saw how harshly she had demeaned her self, with a blushing
countenance which might well have bewrayed what she was, humbly besought him of
pardon for her unwilling offense protesting by the honor of a soldier, she
had no knowledge of him, which the honorable governor believing and
forgiving, she said. Noble minded Governor, hearing of the wrongs offered you
and your people, I craved pardon and leave of my sovereign the Emperor, to be
partaker of your service, as well to right your injury offered you, as for the
love and duty I owe this country where I had my being first, and iourneying
hither, intending what I say, was suddenly surprised by the Ambassadors of the
Millaine Duke, who taking me at advantage, there was small resistance, but
yielding me their prisoner, had entertainment of the Duke, who used me most
kindly, yet not content with his favor, being enemy fo your state, and heir
of my late deceased Lord Duke Phillip, in the last service I willingly
aduensured my self in that manner to come unto you, and in sign of my
loyalty and faith, though I be young and a stranger, whose credit yet is not
requisite you should trust too far in a time so dangerous, yet as I am a
Gentleman (which title with my life I will for ever maintain) be ruled by
me, and doubt not the sudden remoouing of your usurping enemy.

The Governor listening to her long discourse, noted her modest countenance and
courage in delivering the same, yet holding it wisdom to have better
knowledge of any man, whom he should trust in a cause of such importance,
thanked him for his proffer, craving respit for his resolution therein. And so
after some other courteous speeches, giving his word to his host for his
liberty, he invited him to his lodging, where he was feasted with great
welcome, the governor delighting much in his company and pleasant parley,
which in their secret discourses, was for matters of state, touching the weal
of her people, though the governors least suspect was of her, whose right he
governed. To her delight, being now in place of her most cheifest delight, we
leave her a time.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Alinda taking care to keep secret her Ladies absence, demeaned her self.
ALynda the trust of her Lady, and the faithful secret keeper of her
mistress, after she had carefully provided all things, and seen her horsed
to her journey, began now to devise in what a laborinth of danger she had
wrapped her her self, if ought should betide her Lady, but well to avoid her
own danger, and to free her Lady of suspect, her subtle pate was not free
from careful study, which way she might best keep her secrets close,
imagining sometime one way, sometine another: at length a more better presents
it self to her memory. But standing in an extafie, holding it wisdom not to
be provided if occasion should serve, she gave it out, that her Lady vowing a
long fast and secret, would not be seen or spoken to of her Alynda.

This plotte working effectually, Alinda orderly as she was accustomed, went to
visit the children, from whence she returning, she puruaid with her own hand
her diet, as for her Ladies service, and then attyring her self in her Ladies
attire, would show her self. In this manner continued she without suspect of
her Ladies absence, until the Emperor pitying the Lady, doubting least her
long solitariness should move her to melancholy, and thereby some dangerous
sickness might ensue, when he had often solicited her by her sernant Alinda
for the same, and received such answers by her as he liked not, moved with a
kind desire to see her, he vowed that if ^he left not her chamber by a time
limited, passing the bonds of honor, he would violently break the doors
upon her.

This wind of fury made Alyndaes heart cold, fearing her Mistresses honor
should not by absence be questioned of, and her self without confession of
her being where she might not be known, in danger of the Emperors
displeasure, and loss of credit and life: to anoyde all which, many ways
she devised, yet none safe enough, as she thought: but as women have always
some shift, if it were to deceive the Devil, so Alynda devised this mean,
unto her Ladies confessor. In a morning earlye she went, where after her,
many pretty questions and aunsweres passed between them, Alynda to try the
constancy of this holy father, charged him on his holy orders, and by the
reverent zeal he bore to religion, to say what he would do for her Lady,
in maintaining her honor and reputation.

The Friar who thought on no such matter as the subtle Alinda, willing to make
a show of zeal and duty, protested by all holy vows, that whatsoever rested
within his power, he would gladly effect for her Ladyship, if the loss ^^ life
and credit depended thereon. This gear wrought fit for Alyndaes purpose,
which she thus answered. Holy Father, well have you said, in vowing your self
the fauouret of ^^ noble a Lady whose reputation and honor depends in your
secrecy: which seeing your holy vows ought to be held^ in regard, both
with God, and the world, I will reveal a matter most rare and strange unto
you, and crave your counsel in the same.

My Lady (holy Father) hearing of the wrong offered the Governor and state of
Genoway, whose right the Dukedom is, inspired with courage, sprung from the
loyne^ if a noble soldier, and possessing the spirit of her lovely Lord, the
knight of the holy Cross determning to try her fortune i^ those wars, bound
me by oath to her secret intent, never for forture of death, or whatsoever
punishment, to reveal her will, and noble determination therein: which done,
and my vow past, she enjoined me to provide horse and armor for her with a
guide. And so decking herself in the attire of a man, only accompanied with
a Gentleman of the Court, who knowing her but for my brother, are gone for
Genoway, since whose departure, my care being great to keep her credit, have
given it out, as well to the Emperor, as to all other, that my Lady has made
a holy vow, and observes a fast for certain weeks, in which time she will
have no conference, or be seen of any, but my self. But the Emperor
dreading through her solitariness, some melancholic infirmity, should
ensue, has sworn, if she come not abroad in a certain time, to draw her
perforce into his company.

To salve all which, let me entreat you, by shat promise you have made, to
morrow morning by that hour the Emperor does usually walk about his privy
garden, to come unto the Court, where I will attend you, and be your guide to
her chamber, where my self disguised in my Ladies apparel, will with you
feigning great conference, show us at the window where we may be both seen
of his excellency. By which means; and your further persuasions to his
Majesty, in telling him what vengeance he shall incur of God, in frustrating
the holy vows of any religiously made, he may be drawn from ^ deed so
far unseeming his honor, and (...)

Gentlewomen, (quoth she confessor) thy faith to thy Lady, I admire (as well
I may) for as rare a matter is it to see a woman of such secrecy, as a million
of black swannes. Thy words has woonne me to execute thy will, what thou
have devised I will (God willing) perform. And I pray that our devises have as
good effect for thy Ladies honor, as thine heart wishes. In the morning expect
me, when God saying Amen, I will visit thee, until that time farewell.

Alynda seeing her work have effect to her wish, returned him many thanks for
his courtesies, promising large rewards for his friendship: which done,
committing him to his devout services, she speedeth to her lodging, about her
ordinary affairs. Where we leave her till fitter occasion of the History
serves.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the feigned Philipo by good government and behavior, obtained the good
will of the Governor, and what chanced her in the fight.
PHilipo having a care of finishing her intended business, ought by all means
to gain the good will of the Governor: so that leaving no occasion which was
offered, he always took oppostunitie to move the Governor, by battle to
try the event of their fortunes But the Governor having lost many of his
company, expecting some aid from his friends, detracted ^he time, in such
manner, as Philipo wearied with their lingering, and respecting her promise with
Alynda, finding opportunity, having the Gouerneur at conueinent time and place
to speak, thus she said.

Noble Governor if I might without suspect of villainy, or incurring your
displeasure, boldly speak, I would then make offer of my simple service to
your honor, and your peoples great good. The Governor whom ^ffection had
woonne to like him, willed him to say what he would freely, he would hear
him, and further his honest suites to his best power. Thanks, (noble
Gentleman, quoth Phillipo) seeing you vouchsafe me this favor, I see and note
the great disiresse of your people, and pity them, for whose relief from this
captivity, and freedom from these enemies, I will adventure my body in
single combat, to try my fortune with the bes^ man at arms in that (...)
^^^ps, if you dare on the goodness of your first quarrel, adventure your
right: or if to this, you, or that proud enemy will not condescend, by
battle to end the wars in this sort, give me leave to try by policy, what
affect God which (...) the just actions of men will do.

The Governor musing at the resolution of Philipo, whose smooth face argued
his young years, and (...) knowledge in marshall discipline, would not di^able
his (...). But thanking him for his friendly pr^ffer, recounted (...) him, the
experience of wars the eneme had, (...) Souldious amongst them, so that his
(...) waii^ing strength, was insufficient to inc^^nter the woorst of many
hundreds, and their policy not to pre^^nted. Yet G^n^eman, (quoth he,) that I
may not show any vngreatfulnesse to you, whose care and offer is such for our
good, let me heat your device, and as I like, we will accept or refuse it.
Philipo de^^ding her ill su^cesse in her suite, besought the Governor of
yardon, unless of his honor he vouchsafed to grant him his suite.

The Governor seeing his willingness, and what discontent he had at his
deuiall, and dispairing of his good hap, hoping on God, which by the power of
David, discomfited a more huge army, granted his request. Whose words no
sooner uttered, but he might perceive her hearts content by her cheerful
countenance* After a small stay, little needing long premeditation she said:
Know (my good Lord) that during the time I remained in field with the Duke,
having an intent to do you and yours, what good I best could, I gave my studi^
to search the secrets of his camp, noting his whole order and manner in every
thing, watching by night to see their observation, and warding the day, to know
their customs. In which times, I saw how carelessely they demeaned
themselves, wishing at some times your honor were acquainted with my thoughts:
so with a small power might they have been furprised. In hope of which (good
my Lord) give me leave to choose unto me, those whose years require honor by
their deserts, such Gentlemen as I can entreat to accompany me, my self
will give the attempt, entering first the camp, like a fugetiue, having
stolen from the City, pretending honorable love to the duke, whom I will
with my (...) talk so besot, as until heavy sleep oppress him, he shall
never be weary to hear me: which done, and every one in the dead of their
sleep, binding them safe, I will with hi^ Signet, command the Officers of
the watch to give me the word, pretending the Dukes meaning to visit every
watch secretly that night. These things falling so out by showing a fl^ming
Torch, I will give notice to my company, whom I will meet, and unto them
deliver the word, which by small companies shall pass the courts of gaide,
until we (...) the Dukes own lodging, where having some strength, my self
(on my life) will undertake to bring the Duke prisoner, and (...) (by your
h^lpe, and Gods assistance) your enemies.

Philipo, devise (q^oth the Governor) i^ it be as well perfo^^ed, which God
grant, to thy industris (noble minded Gentleman) I comment this service, and
will my self reposing over thy loyalty: be ready at giving the sign, with
five hundred of my trustiest friends to aid thee, the honor whereof, shall be
Philippoes, if we prevail, then proceed when thou shall best please.

Philippo, having his desire, and the gouerners good consent, attyred like a
common soldier, at setting the watch, issued the City, commending the
success of his service to GOD: far had he not gone from the City, but taken
by the enemies Espyalls, he craved access to the Duke, unto whom after they
had rifeled him, they brought him. No sooner came he to the presence of the
Duke, but prostrating himselfs at his feet, he says. Most noble Lord, and my
dread sovereign, pardon thy humble servant, who by my overboldness, desirous
to gain your gracious love, so far adventured in pursuit of thy enemies:
That being past rescew, and the enemies number less, my strength failing me,
with the loss of much blood issuing from my wounds, I was in hapless time,
taken Prisoner, where I have there ever since remained, until this time: I
then slaying my keeper, taking his apparel and furniture, I thus escaped their
furye, who for my harsh speeches, used in defending your noble reputation, was
doomed to be shot to death by the soldiers. The Duke glad to see his safe
return with life, for whom he had great care, giving him hearty thanks for
his good love, and dangerous aduenturing for him, and in his service, gave him
a chain of gold from his neck: commanding his Master of the wardrop, to
suit him presentlye in a rich suit which he appointed: which done, seating him
by his side, accompanied with ^he cheifest of his men at Arms, and nobility,
he discoursed unto him much matter to their lyking: touching the misery of
the town, assuring them on his life, before many days were ended, the
commons in despite of the Governor would yield themselves, if in time he and
his accomplices sought not his highness favor. With these pleasing speeches,
and often carrowsing between the^, at finishing of each story, the night was
well spent, Philippo for his welcome, was lodged on a Pallet in the Dukes Tent:
which done, and every man at his quiet, the Court of guarde about the Tent,
being half a sleep, as one that reguarded his honor with the governor,
seeing all sound, serched the Dukes pocket, where finding the signet, he issued
out the Tent, commanding the Captain of his guard to send him the word, for
that disguised, he would walk that night about the Camp.

The Captains seeing the Dukes signet, gave him the word, which obtained,
about his other business he goes, effecting all things as he wished. The Duke
being fast, thrusting out his torche at the Tent door, as though the Duke
intended to visit the Ferrara Duke, which lay not far off, he fained speech
with the guarde, until he thought the Governors espyalls had seen the sign:
When making no longer stay, with a Holbart on his neck, taking his way toward
the City, he past with the word without any molesting. The Governor which had
hope in his champion, slept not his time, but with his horse, and many other a
foot, attended the coming of Philippo, to direct them, which made all
possible haste, and in good time to all their comforts, met the Governor: Unto
whom he briefly delivered what was done, beseeching him to let his footmen
pass, by small companies, to a place by him assigned, whither he would conduct
them, and at the allarome given, to make have with his horsemen to their
reschew. The Governor having good hope of success, commending his policy
and resolution, appointed his men by him to be led, straightly charging them to
be governed by him, who giving them the word, marched on to a side of a small
hill, close on the back side: the Dukes tent where they stayed, until their
guide Philippo had appointed them what to do.

Philippo, applying his businesses, bringing the company close to the Tent,
having the Duke fast bound, wrapped him in his night gown, accompanied with
two or three good follows more of his crewe, with their weapons drawn, drew
him from his naked bed: with which awaking, and perceiving them strangers
which were about him, he would have cried out for help, which Philippo
perceiving, thrust his gloves into his mouth, swearing by all holiness, that
if he spoke any word, he should presently have his pasport, to hell, which
was the habitation of such usurpers: Therefore willed him, as he tendered his
life, to be silent, and his body should have no harm, which to do, he was
enforced: Taking what they would with patience, having him within their power,
they cut the coardes of the Tent, and pulled him out underneath, bestowing
him at their own pleasures: that done, leaving him in safe keeping, they gave
the allarome, killing and slaying without mercy. To whose aid, came the
watchful Governor, who with his power, did such feats of Arms, that the
whole Army was discomfited, some fled, but most ^laine. The Dukes with the
principal were taken Prisoners, with many others, which were delivered
presently. But the Duke with his accomplices, he sent unto the City, to take
better assurance of his loyalty.

Thus the pollitie of Philippo preuayling, and those Lords of their riches and
provision, which they hoped to have made their Captives, the Governor sent
unto the Town, the happy success of their services, marching himself by
easy paces, doing Philippo all the honor he could. Who being mounted on a
beautiful Ienet of Spain, led the two Dukes his prisoners.

The happy tidings of this honorable victory suddainlye spread throughout
the City: great was the tryumphing they made, where no solemnity was left
there vneffected for honor of the same, every one lauding the policy of
Philippo, and doing him all the honor that might be devised.

To the exceeding grief and hearts discontent of the Dukes, who blaming their
light credence of a stranger, whom they never saw before in their lives,
would on his words, uttered of purpose to serve his own turn, admit him
to such favor and trust: but after warnings comes too late. They are now to
be used at the pleasure of the Governor, unto whom Philippo became an earnest
suitor, for their courteous entertainment, and honorable usage.

The Governor, whose honor was increased by the industry of Philippo,
imbrasing him in his Arms, committed the whole estate of those Princes and
Nobles, unto his direction: by whom he solemnly vowed to be governed, for
which, as one that could demean himself to all estates like himself, he
returned many hearty thanks, and accepted his kind proffer.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Philippo gave thesentence on the usurping dukes, and the honor done at
his departure.
PHilipo, praising God for his prosperous success, reioyseth now to be w^^h
her Alinda, whom she greatly feared might encurre some danger, by her long
absence: to avoid which, she besought the governor of lysence to depart:
pretending businesses of great importance. To whose suit, although willingly
he would have condiscended, yet with earnest intreati^ and love he bare him,
he besought him to stay with him, promising on the faith and honor of a
Gentleman, as himself, he should participate in all living Land and goods,
which he had, or should ever have. For which Philippo rendered many hearty
thanks, but might not be entreated: for which the governor, as well as many
other his followers, and friends, were heartily sorry, surceasing their
bootelesse suits, least their importunity might breed offense, yet they
besought him, to accept the ransom of the prisoners which were to be
disposed by him.

When Philippo saw the honorable minds of those his friends, which he had good
cause to love, for maintaining his right, and every way discharging the
honorable part of a trusty subject, loath that so great favors should go
unrecompensed, he first on their alleagance to the rightful heir of the
Dukddome, charged them straightly to fulfill what he should give in charge,
being no disparagement to their honors and estate, to which they willingly
agreed, confirming by oath what he had set down, and then said. In
performance of the words you have given, this shall you do, before thee month
is fully expired, you shall in person repair unto Rome, where before the
imperial majesty of my sovereign Lord the Emperor, you shall present these
Dukes your prisoners, where I will recount your honorable deserts, and
deserved commendations, that your Princess Vallia may reward your honorable
service. Till when, honorable Governor, wear this ring, by which you shall
find me, if you forget the name of Philippo. Which said, and the ring
delivered, the governor wondering at the gravity and noble mind of the
resolute gentleman, overcome with his noble proffer, could not fell what way to
recompense the least of his deserts, but rendering him many thanks, besought
him in the most humble manner, to acknowledge their duties to their sovereign
Lady Vallia, whose seruadts thee vowed them in all loyalty. These conditions
agreed upon, and every thing with consent finished, the time appointed for
Philippos departure, a band of soldiers were appointed for his convey to
Rome, the captain of which company, having great charge for his honorable
usage, unto whom ten thousand crowns was delivered at their leave taking of
him. The time of his departure being come, Philippo taking a solemn farewell
of the Dukes of Millaine and Ferrara, with the other noble prisoners, the
governor with the most noblest of the country, conducted him on his journey,
of whom when they took their leaves, many tears were shed: such was the sorrow
for his departure. whom they had no knowledge of. Whom after many loath
farewels, we leave to his journey, accompanied with his guard and the
governors, to many honorable thoughts of this noble stranger.

CHAP. XXX.
How Philippo arrived in Rome, and what chanced Alinda.
THe Governor having lost our noble Philippo, there needed none to hasten hun,
whose thoughts was of his Alinda, whom he had engaged for his return. As time
works many effects, so long travel has brought this noble lady within one
days journey of the City, her long desired place of rest, when calling the
captain and his companions, he discharged them from their further travail,
largely rewarding them for their pains: where the Captain was loath to leave
her, before he had seen her in safety in the City: but when no persuasions
might serve but they must needs leave her, the Captain making ready the
gold, presented it unto her, desiring her to accept it as the gift of his
loving friends of Genoway.

Philippo wondering at the bounty of the Governor, gave them many thanks,
but no entreatie might cause him to touch one penny, the Captain on his part
loath to offend the, Governor again to return it, protested by his honor in
arms, and faith of a soldier, to leave it to his disposition. Which oaths
Philippo was not willing he should violate, but measuring his honorable mind,
received the Gold, the one half of which, he freely imparted amongst the
Soldiers, who accepted it without denial, with many thanks, the other half
between the Captain and his guide he equally shared, unto whom yielding many
thanks for his bounty, taking their leaves, they left him on his way for
Rome, and they returned for Genoway.

The time of her expected return was now near expired, wherein Alynda was to
prove her wits yet again as she had done: whose cunning by the good help
of the Friar, took such effect, that the Emperor by his godly counsel was
reclaimed from his intended purpose, although the Princesses absence wrought
his great disquiet, yet patienting himself, he was content with hearing of
her good health, for which he diligently enquired every day of Alynda, whom
to quiet from further care or discontent, Vallia arrived at Rome, and taking
her lodging in an Os^ria, sent her guide to the court in secret, to give notise
to Alynda of her return, willing her in the evening to meet her at the place
where they last parted.

This tidings to Alynda was welcome, who was not a little comforted with that
news of her Ladies good success, for which giving GOD thanks for his favor,
and keeping and preserving her in her journey, she awaighted with diligence
the good hour of her Ladies home return, where giving her attendance, she
had not long stayed before she had sight of her, the most welcome of the
world. What joy at their meeting there was, with their sundry discourses, I
omit, until in quiet content she was placed in her lodging, from whence
after she had discharged her guide, she was not long absent, where being
with her secret Alynda all alone, she questioned her of all the chances that
had happened since her departure from thence. Which answered, Alynda
forgatte not to tell her the perplexed estate wherein shes was at the Emperors
words, menacing her to see her Lady, no occasions whatsoever so prevent him:
with the policy she used, and aid of her confessor. At which discourse the
Princess might not forbear heartily to laugh. What other prattle happened,
magine you Gentlemen, that are acquainted with woers merry meetings, to let
you hear more of Edward and his company, what in their journey happened them.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Edward accompanied with the Governor of the Rodes, and his Lady having
performed their ryttes in the holy land, returned home, and what chanced.
YOu have heard gentiles of the recovery of the governor of the Rodes, by the
noble knight of the Cross, who gathering strength and some ease of his wounds,
by the knight his good recure, arrived at ye holy City, where they made their
stay, doing such religious ceremonies, as to vowed trauailers appertains:
where their welcome was great for the knights love, whose honor they wished
for the service done, in defense of the holy City. After the governor was
well recovered, and all things to their content finished, the knight desirous
to see his Lady whom he never heard off since their parting, causing their
company to be ready to depart, and their attendants to puruay them of
victuals, for provision passing the mountains: which done, taking their leave
of the high priests, and the chief of all the city, who conducted them on
their way, they travailed without any adventure, until they came to the City
of Aleppo, where they stayed to refresh themselves. In this City, there was
resident certain Spanish merchants, who envying the good countenance of the
knight, and the love was made him by the viceroy there, moved with revenge of
his count general, slain by the Knight of the Cross, after their return
from the wars, seeking many ways to intrappe him, and finding no cause or
mean to accuse him of any ill, whereby to procure his trouble, he consorted
with his Ianesaries, who were appointed to wait on him by some policy to do
him to death, promising great rewards for his pains. Thy fact being
committed, these hell hounds whom no conscience moved to remorse, in hope of
gain, undertook the action. And under show of kindness and zeal to him
that was a knight at Arms, intruded themselves into his company, admitting
him to many bankets, the better to work their wills on him, seeking
opportunity to slay him, taking their occasion to quarrel for pledging a
carrous: which the Knight refusing, a stir began between them, where he
received many injuries, and some wounds, before he offered any offense: when
the multitude growing about him, and he unarmed, winding his Mantle about his
arm, he reft from one of the Turks his semitarie, with which he made such way,
that they held themselves most happiest, that were farthest off.

The rumor of which broyle, was noysed through the City, that thither they
came from al parts, to take parts, and to be beholders of the fight. In which,
after many deep wounds given, and many of the ungoverned Ianesaries sent to
hell, when he could make no more resistance, compelled by the heat of the
place, and weariness of the fight, he yielded himself unto the hands of the
Iwae, chief Judge of the City, who promised him to be his warrant from all
men, that no danger should betide him: on which promise he deliuerd his
weapon. The Spanish Merchant, whom they called Guido, standing on his house top
to behold this tumult, hoped well that the Knight had bin slain, but it
proved contrary, at which he stormed greatly, but more grieved to pay his
promised sums, which for his life he durst not deny, fearing the Ianesaries
should have slain himself. Which second grief, caused the traitorous
Spaniard to seek his further trouble, urging these Ienesaries, to lay unto the
Knights charge, matters of treason in the state of the City, thereby to cut
him off by law, which he, nor the best Cauileres of his Country, durst out
look in the face, in any sort to attempt ought against him of force.

These Ianesaries suborned by large gifts, wrought others to take part with
them, who were near the Viceroy, and the Gawr, which upon their reports
summoned the Knight to their judgment hall, from the prison where he lay
chayned, unto whom matter of great untruth was objected, concerning the state,
which he stoutly denied. But those Curres, which had sold his life for
money, storming that he had favor to speak, offered to swear by their holy
Alcaron, that he with the rest of his confederates, viewing the City in their
secret walks, had taken notice of their forces, inquyring by circumstaunces,
of such as they accompanied which, what numbers of men they had, and how with
vittailes they were relieved. These accusations so vehemently uttered against
him, the Viceroy could not but examine: and finding him guilty of the same by
their false judgment, sentence of death should with all severity pass
against him.

The Knight seeing his cause dangerous, putting his hope on him that never
left him comfortless, with a bold undaunted spirit, and as one that feared
not their threats, knowing death was the woorst, thus said. Reverend fathers,
Judges of men's causes, you have here by your laws condemned an innocent man to
death, for no cause justly offered, but falsely and untruly by envy, and of
your own imaginations, wrought against me. First, by force they pretending
love unto me, in that place where they gave me vittailes, they sought to take
my life from me. Their intended purposes that way failing, standing on mine
one safety and defense, they have here falsely accused me of matter never
thought on by me. But say (patrones of justice and honor) that I should have
viewed your forces, what may one naked man do, where are thousands of brave and
gallant soldiers? If your wisdom would but in justice sift the cause, you
should then find the wrong offered me, that am here a stranger amongst you:
from whom I appeal to the Grand Seigniorie for justice, or being a soldier
and a man at Arms, in your City, which are most men at Arms, let me in
combat try mine innocence. If to neither of these my lawful suites you do
agree, the world which hears of your unjust dealing with me, will scorn
your laws, and to your great reproof, to report your wrongs done a gentleman
and a soldier.

The King which was a Runnagatho, an Easterling borne, and was not to learn
the Christian laws, and good nuriture, hearing his reasonable request, said
he spoke reason, and called before his accusers, unto whom he said. Countrymen
and fellows, you have here on your words, brought a Christian and soldier to
judgment, whom our laws has condemned by your reports, whether of truth, or
in revenge of some of those who lost their lives in the broile begun by you
aamongst your selves, we cannot say: but as I am appointed your governor, and
expressly charged by his Imperial majesty, whose authority I bear, to use
justice to all men without favor: in which, I hope I have hitherto borne an
equal hand, neither sparing my f^iends, nor favoring my enemies: so in this
case, you must use what law of Arms requires. Therefore this is my sentence,
which if you be soldiers, and your cause just, you may not deny, that you two
his accusers, shall in single combat (according to the laws of our land)
maintain your accusation by fight: for which, appoint your selves against to
morrow, or revoke your words before the whole assembly.

The Ianesaries, who least looked for this favor to be showed a Christian,
moved some other of their friends to urge against him the slaughter of those
soldiers by him murdered, and justice to proceed for breaking the peace in
their city, being the principal fort of the land, against the law of Arms:
which the knight thus answered. Your grace has heard ye malice of those
people, whose intent, if they may have their wills, is my life, of which if your
grace consider, that what I did was in mine own defense and safety of my life,
having received sundry wounds, which are yet to be seen, before I offered any
one a blow: if a worm having no fence, will turn being trodden on, worthy of
blame may not that man be, which will defend his life, who once lost can never
be rec^lled.

The king interrupting his speech, turning him to the accusers, said: You are
to maintain your evidence, attend your limited time, or confess your
accusation false: which said, he committed the guard of the prisoner unto a
Captain, to see him forth coming at the time appointed.

CHAP. XXXII.
How the Ianesaries loath to maintain the fight, labored the Spaniard to buy
his liberty.
THe faint-hearted Villains, who had seen the feats of Arms done by the
Knight, doubting their force, which was far unable to encounter a man of such
worth and experience in Arms, fearing by their foil ever to be dishonored,
persuaded the Spanish Guido, in friendship to make offer of love unto the
Knight, who being a Christian, for a sum of money might deliver him,
threatening him, if he wrought not some means for to free them from the
combatte, they would discover his pretended evil, and cause him for his
treason loose his head. The Spaniard vexed at the heart, to see his business
take no better effect, persuaded himself of two evils to choose the least:
without any more pause taking, accompanied with others of his confederates in
the action, sleeping no time, came to the Knight of the holy Cross, whom with
great show of kindness, and many courtesies he saluted, feining great sorrow for
the wrong offered, persuading him to patience, for that there was no right to
be expected, from them, who sold their laws, lives, and whatsoever for money.
And (quoth the traitorous Spaniard) where such government is, accursed is the
land, but more accursed the people: wherefore (quoth he) if you will be ruled
by me, that am a Christian, and bound in conscience to relieve every man
professing God, much more a man of such esteem as your self, which with your
life has maintained his honor in many places, doing good to all people in
distress. Stand not on any thought of your being, or what you have bin, but
considering where you are, rather yield your self unto their favor for money:
without further trial or danger, I will undertake to buy your liberty. The^
(noble English man) prefer not money before your life: for being here, if you
prevail against your accusers, yet shall you ever go in danger of secret
enemies which will not be satisfied before they have your life. I speak as a
friend, whose welfare I esteem. Therefore with wisdom censure of your good,
by being counseled, or your peril by being too headstrong: if you accept of my
profer, I will take order for your liberty, without any charge of yours: which
don, you shall presently be transported to Valencia, a famous city of Spain,
my ship being ready fraughted for that place, attending but a fair wind. When
the knight which during his long preambulation, had considered o^ his speech,
he was persuaded yt he spoke but truth, yet could not judge his secret intent,
which made him that he thought not of any evil to be pretended by him that
professed conscience and christianity, making this account, that he were
better howsoever, to be with Christians, then in the hands of such reprobates,
being but a money matter, which by his friends, wheresoever he became, might
shortly be provided. Wherefore, with many kind courtesies returning hearty
thanks to his traitorous friend, he said. Kind friend, whose friendship offered
I know not how to merit, albeeit my conscience persuades me I shall prosper
well in the combatte, assuring my self on God, who protecteth his people, yet
in regard of these my followers here present, as for my liberty, I accept
your offer, which I will requite, causing the mightiest Prince of Christendom
to reward thee with thanks, and my self with large sums, to satisfy thy
debt: wherefore if you intend what you say, speed about it, that I may know
to what event our friendship will sort.

The Spaniard glad to hear his purposed determination grow to so good a pass,
embracing him, like a second Judas, whom he sought to betray, besought him,
not to dismay in any thing, for all the goods he had were at his disposing.
And so for that time taking his solemn farewell, he left the Knight to many
conceited thoughts of his new professed friend, himself speeding to find the
traitorous Ianesaries, who were as feign of his good success in his business,
longing to hear what would become of it, whether the Knight cetermined to try
the cause by fight, or otherwise by friendship end it, as the next Chapter
shall show you.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the traitorous Spaniard Guido, compounded with the Bashaw for the Knights
liberty, with his departure toward Spain, and what then chanced.
Never was the tidings of pardon more welcome to the condemned pris^ner,
expecting death, then this good consent of Edward to Guido, who travailing in
care as the painful woman laboring with child birth, was in a moment freed
from that painful extacie where with joy near overcome, his tongue bewraying
his hearts content, making small stay, but Judas like (as a Spaniard practicing
treason) taking his farewell, he looks not behind him, until he came to
the lodging of the Ianesaries, unto whom he came not before he was long looked
for: who resting in a quandarie, was as fearful to try their accusation by
fight, as the Spaniard to abide the hazard thereof, who noting Guidoes
guilfull countenance, their guilty minds began presage some good event Being
met, as you hear, imagine Gentiles, whether there were any questions left
vndemaunded of the Spaniard, touching his late accomplished business, which
might tend to their welfare, or that the knight intended ought which might
breed their discredit. Of all which, when the Spaniard had at large resolved
them, recounting from point to point each several accident chauncing between
the knight and him, with what curtefie he offered peace and friendship unto
him, whose death he most desired, cloking his villainie with such shows of
love and friendship of Christianity, they all laughing for great joy at the
Knights simplicity, and the traitors knauerie, spent the time froliking
together, until the next morning, where in their quaffing and drunken
discourses, a matter of more peril for the Knight was plotted between them:
whose heart being free from all guile, had not the least suspect of what was
intended against him, as you shall hear hereafter, where the History
recounteth it, and return now to the Ianesaries: who drunk with delight of
their glad tidings, wished long for the sight of that joyful day to end all
their doubts, which no sooner appeared, but the Ianesaries loath to be
prevented in what they intended, speedeth them first unto their commander the
Gaw, and unto him delivered the Spaniards suite, and the Bashaw which was for
the deliverance of the Knight for ransom, beguiling the simplicity of the
Gaw, with the earnest suit of the Spaniard for him. And offering their good
consents, so that therewith contented, omitting nothing which might give
liking, or gain the good will of those they sought, to their wish. All which
reports of them made, was so soothed by Gindo, that the Gaw, moved partly
with pity of the knight, and more with gain of the Crowns offered for his
freedom and liberty, calling for his company, speedeth unto the Bashaw,
whom he found preparing himself with all his bravery to behold the event of
those Combatters, who seeing the speedy coming of the Gaw, thought verily
that they had been already attending for his presence, and began earnestly
to enquire the cause of his sudden coming so early.

The Gaw which was wise and experienced, as be fitted his authority, be sought
the Bashaw to withdraw him from the company when he would deliver what he had
to say. Which done, and they all alone, Gaw delivered each particular which the
Iauesaries and Spaniards had moved him with all, with his opinion in the same,
al tending to that those traitors desired: and the knights liberty, of all
which when they had advisedly considered, although they could well have given
their consent to have ended all matters, yet for fashion sake, they called the
rest of their council, who hearing the matter, stood not long on terms, but
called for the Spaniard, demanding whether the motion were made by the knight,
or of any other of good will toward him: which Guydo affirmed to come from the
knight, and besought him of favor therein, undertaking to pay the ransom,
whatsoever they would inflict upon him.

At hearing of the Spaniards large proffer, silence was again proclaimed, and
the Spaniard dismissed, between them agreeing on the sum, and days of
payment which they rated him: but howsoever the Spaniard must not forsake his
word, least he pay the price of the ransom with his head.

This done, and the articles by them setdowne, which the Spaniard must
confirm, he was again called, unto whom the Bashaw said. Signior Guydo,
those goods parts and discreet carriage of your self ever since your coming
amongst us, we have diligently noted, as your self in all your business have
found more then all other strangers, and as tofore, so now in this motion you
have made for the releese of this Christian, whom although our laws have
condemned for a fact not to be tolerated in any, yet at thy earnest request,
and motion of those his adversaries, it is concluded, that for his liberty you
pay ten thousand crowns, the one half instantly, and the other at your next
return of shipping from your country: which done, and he delivered, you
shall awarrant his departure with his companions: the first fair wind to
carry your shipping hence, or otherwise on his longer stay to be again
apprehended, and judged as before, to endure the penalty of death, as already
without further trial. To these conditions if thou agree, prepare thy money,
and ^^ay the Combat, which must otherwise presently proceed. The Spaniard
which had all that he exspected, having his life and possession of him whom he
hated decay, humbly thanking the Bashaw for their favor, thought the prise was
high which he was for his pretended treasons was enjoined to pay, setting a
counterfeit joy on his grieved heart, he departed to his lodging, where, by his
own store, and his Country men's aid, he furnished the same: which he
presently paid, and had the Prisoner delivered, whom he most kindly entreated,
feasting and ioying with him, so long as he remained with him, how vile soever
he intended he should be used at his departure. In which time, came the
ship, as I have already told you, stayed of purpose for his deliverance, to
carry him from thence. Whereof, how glad soever the Knight and his company was
to be freed from the dangers of those helhoundes, yet was his exchange
little amended, as you shall hereafter know further. Only now here
rests to show you his embarquing from thence, what success his had, and
of his Traiterous usage at Sea, by Guydoes command, you must a while pardon,
to hear of the Arrival of the Governor of Genowaye, with the rest of his
Nobility at Rome.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How the Governor of Genoway holding his word with the counterfeit Knight
arrived in Rome, and of their entertainment.
IT is here remembered, that Vallia in her Knights attire, after she had by her
policy and valor freed her commons and country from the tyranny of the
Dukes of Florence, as you have heard, enjoined by solemn oath, the Governor
and the pheres of the Country, to appear before the Emperor, who in the
behalf of the Princess Vallia should requite their faithful trust.

The Governor regarding his honor, but more his oath, when he had settled all
things in good sort, he paid his own Soldiers, and richly rewarded his
foreign friends, with the spoil of his enemies, to every man's good content,
having puruaied a rich and most sumptuous train to accompany him: taking good
order for the state and welfare of his commons, attended with the cheifest
Lords and gentles of the country, he left the City and by easy iournies,
passed on the way to Rome beguiling the weariness of their journey with sundry
pastimes and sports, until they came by long and diligent travail to draw
toward the City, when by their messengers, they advertised the Emperor of
their coming: unto whom they all were most heartilye welcome, as was manifest
by the favorable and kind entertainment of their tidings bringer: Whom the
Emperor most honorably feasted, doing him all the honor that could be
devised. With this news, the Emperor could not be quiet until he had
advertised the Princess Vallia with the same: Who knowing better then the
Emperor, the only cause of their coming, settled a show of much gladness at
the hearing thereof: then questioning the occasions that brought them thither,
wherewith the Emperor was nothing acquainted.

The Emperor when he had emparted his news to the Princess, summoning his
state, and principal of his most honorable counsel, gave straight charge,
for the royal entertainment of those states, in the most honorable and best
sort that might be devised: taking the like order, that all things with such
company as he appointed should be ready. The next morning by rising of the
Sun, they were horsed to meet those noble strangers on the way, which
accordinglye was done in the most gallauntest order that ever could be devised.

This done, sending their curreres before to give notice of their near
approaching, they left the City, ryding near, until the son had brought
the mid day to an end. At which time, the first intelligencer gave word, they
had discryed them within ten miles: and so as on their journey they drew
near, they were ever advertised, as time brings the matters of most moment
to end, so these states had end of their desires, time and trauails brings
both companies, in view one of the other, to their great delights: at which
enter-viewe a pleasure it was to behold the youthful troop of nobles and
gentles, how gallantly they demean themselves, doing many brave and
commendable feats on their horses, on both sides deserving such praise as was
admirable. In this sort doing their kind courtesies they pass by either
company, until the governor meet the Emperor: When prostrating himself on
his knee, he drew near the Emperor offering to kiss his styrrope: which in
no wise the most courteous Emperor would suffer, but taking him with great
love and honor from the ground, bid him oftentimes heartily welcome to these
confines, which shows of love, the Governor and his people very well
accepted, in such manner, as the joy thereof enforced them to shed many
tears.

This done, and every Nobleman and Gentleman have don the like, enquiring the
principal of the Governors train they equally matched themselves, and passed
on their way, discoursing very lovingly of many pleasant matters, until they
came to a Castle of the Emperors, called Forte Vencencio: Where that night
they were most royally feasted, with all delicacye. The next day, after their
repast taken for their breakfast, they left that place, proceeding on to the
end of their weary journey, ryding so long, and with such pleasure, that they
had sight of that City. The s^ituation whereof, they admyred to behold, with
the beauty of Churches, and state of the houses, of honor: but that which
most pleased their delights, was to behold the most beautiful River Tybres
from whose flowing streams, so many pleasant Creekes were filled, and whereon
floated so many huge ships, of enestimable worth, and whereon showed the
Emperors fleet of Gallyes, who seeming to be environed with the assayling
enemies, most pleasantly, and full of warlike policies, lay battering one the
other, with their ordinances, and as the advantage was offered, here they
entered, and took, them others they fired: and the Conquerours tryumphing,
brought the others away Captive, after the manner of the Sea.

No sooner had this pleasant fight left their labor, wherein every one
took great pleasure, passing on thereof discoursing, every man speaking his
opinion of the honorable fight, and commending the manner of the same, and
good performance of the leaders, when suddainlye Ambushed on a greenes side,
where they were assailed by a company of soldiers, which came to give them
welcome in like sort: from this Ambuscado, discharged they their ordinance, and
after issued, bravely assailing the horsemen, who suddenly were encountered by
another company, which in like manner first played on them with their field
ordinance, and after spent some time in showing their agilitie and nimblenesse
in discharging their shots, doing many notable and commendable feats of arms,
to the great joy and cheering of their wearied spirits. That pastime in list
manner ended, the soylers casting themselves by their captains commandment
into warlike rings, marching close to the stirrup of the Emperor, and the
Governor, discharging their pieces in their march with great cunning, they
bid the strangers all heartily welcome, who with great content and courtesy,
returned them all most hearty thanks.

This show with excellent commendations of all beholders performed, the
soldiers marching with their colors displaid, conducted the Emperor and his
troop to the city, where with other solemn shows they were by the senate
and states, as well abbots as other of authority, both spiritual and
temporal, as for the vulgar fort, whose cries and voices of joy might well
persuade those strangers for whose sake they were assembled, to be all welcome
to them, as to their sovereign. In this content they arrived at the royal
court of the Emperor, where their Princess Vallia accompanied with a train
of beautiful Ladies, gave them many hearty welcomes: unto whom in all humble
acknowledging their loves and duties, by their shows of obedience, they were
all conducted to their several lodgings, royally feasted by the Emperor and
his nobility, during their stay in the city, of which you shall hear more
as it shall be required: leaving them to their pastimes and several discourses
of their common weal, and state of their countries, with the princes: to tell
you further of the knight, and his hard entertainment at the sea.

CHAP. XXXV.
How the Master of the ship, by the commandment of Guydo their Merchant,
chained and imprisoned the knight, and what chanced him.
ALso it has been in the former history declared of the knights departure to
the sea, where they had not long been, and they from the shore scantly loosing
sight of the ship, but the master which had his lesson before, calling up
his company together, willed them to follow him into the cabine, and there to
chain the knight, which he said he must do for his and their security.
The company, whose love the knights courtesy had de generally gained, hearing
this intended evil against him, who wished them all well, began to persuade
the master from this intent, which would not hear them, but prosecuted his
will, although to his great cost, as it after happened, for the master whom
no persuasions might enduce from his rigor, having the chain in his hand,
entered the cabine, with him other officers of the ship, and without saying
any word unto him, violently laid hands upon him.

The knight wondering to see this unexpected wrong offered him, who suspected
no such matter, and not knowing their pretense, force perforce grasped with the
Master, and wringing his chain out of his hands, gave him so sore a blow on
the head, as his brain was therewith besprinckled, and he lay gaping for that
which he never more obtained. The boate-swayne and some others of the chief,
who who were acquainted with the treason, seeing their Master slain,
assaulted the knight, entending with great tyranny to revenge his death, and to
make him fast as they had promised: but too easy a reckoning made they, for
he was more of account then millions of the slaves, as with their limbs they
were compelled to witness, for when the knight who took them all for
friends, saw their intents of evil, and could imagine no cause, defending
himself, he so manfully bare him, that to the devil he sent them all to
accompany him.

When he had made way in the cabine, and cleared him self of those that there
assailed him, taking one of their weapons, he rushed violently out upon the
rest, who fled like sheep from a dog: such was the power of an Englishman
in multitudes of Spaniards.

By this time the Page and the knight of the Roades who by treachery was
clapped up in a cabine, had made way for themselves, and with such weapons
as they could get, was come unto him, who noting the timorousness of the
base villains, said. Unfaithful Spaniards, more bruit then beasts, more
cruel to Christianity then the enemies of Christ: what wrong have I offered
you, that thus you goo about to bereave me of life, whom I loved so dearly:
But seeing you base gromes (quoth he) thus have without cause moved my
patience, I will not leave one mothers son of you all alive, to declare your
hapleste tragedyes, unless you acknowledge your guiltiness, and timely
recount unto me the original of this mischief, which do, and save your
lives, or otherwise prepare your selves to follow those traitors that lie
before you.

The poor Mariners which were as sorry for the wrong which was offered as
himself, grieved, humbling themselves at his feet, besought him of pardon,
and not to impute the blame of their Masters crime unto them, for quoth they,
we are his hirelings, unacquainted with any intended evil against you whom
we all honor and was glad of, if our master had any such charge by the
Merchants, or otherwise had any motion of his own free will to offend you,
that is altogether unknown. To show our innocence herein, behold his son
that lately commanded us, him before your eyes will we with all cruelty
entreat, thereby to find the occasion if we can. And then taking the boy they
stripped him, and tying him to the breech of a piece, with cords, whipped him,
to make him confess what the cause was of the wrong offered by his father to
the knight. But for any cruelty they could show, he would not confess
neither his fathers intent in the action, or where the Merchants letters were
bestowed, wherewith the knight was satisfied, and commanded them to rest
satisfied: but they which were well used to the boys subtlety, threatened him
with death, without he confessed what they had required, which obstinately he
ever refused, until a bold and merciless villain, which in despite of the
boy, more then of trust to the knight, heating oil boyloing hot, bedropped his
naked skin therewith, which torment the poor boy no longer able to endure,
kneeling, cried out for mercy to the knight, and he would not only deliver
the letters, but his armor and weapons, so that his life might be saved. At
which words, ye knight commanded them to cease their cruelty, promising on his
word of honor, that no man should do him wrong, but he would protect him, so
that he performed what he had promised, and thereon ceasing their punishment at
the knights commandment, they expected now to be satisfied from him, what
should clear them from all jealous doubts, wherein the knight held them, for
his harsh and bad entertainment, which made them hasten the boy to his
business, urging him to that task which he was very loath to be drawn unto,
but perforce compelled unto it, he caused the knight to defend the hold of
the ship, where enclosed in a huge drifat, he found his armor and all other his
abiliments, and furniture for his bodies defense, in which a packet of letters
was enclosed, directed to an honorable person, near alyed to the Spaniard
slain long before, and master to this Guydo, his last hateful enemy. The
sight of al which so moved the Knight to pleasure, that forgetting all other
occasions, or minding his Packet, he ioyed only in possessing his arms,
causing the boy to be freed from his bonds, and with good store of crowns
rewarded him.

Now Gentles is to be remembered, the careful love of the Knights Page, who
seeing his masters small regard of those Letters, closely conveyed them into
his Pocket, without acquainting any man with them, longing to know the
contents, yet loath to make their secrets known to any man.

In this Laborinth of discontent rested the Page two days, and more, being
very desirous to know the effect of those lines. At last fit opportunity
being offered by one of the company, who in the watch singling the Page,
which was ever wakefull for his Knights welfare, he besought the Page of favor
in commending an earnest suite he had to his master, which himself durst not
utter. To which the Page willingly agreed, on such conditions as he bound him
unto. One of the Articles of which was, that he should faythfullie read, and
interpret unto him truly, either in Italian or French, which the boy best
understood, the true effect of those Letters: And having read them
faithfully, with great secrecy to conceal them without revealing the least
word, syllable, or letter therein contained.

This done, and his solemn oath for performaunce made by all holy rites that
Spaniards use to swear, he brake the seals, and read the contents of the
chiefest, touching our matter, and the knights occasion of further trouble.

To the mighty and most honored Knight Don Philiberto, Duke of Medina, Lord
high commander of the forces of the most Catholic King of Spain, in all his
wars, kingdoms, Islands, and al other his territories, and one of the knights
of the holy City of Rhodes.
MOst mighty Prince, carrying a longing desire to do your highness service,
and many ways bending my studious affairs for some matter of acceptance, to
your excellency. It happened in this city of Alexandria, to arrive this
English homicide, a fugitive from his Country, who making no conscience of
murder, killed that most renowned General your Nephew at Rome, after the last
wars of the Christian Princes against the Souldan Don Whose death, to my
hearts great g^iefe I write, I have often seen your highness with tears to
lament, and our most famous king bewail, of whose blood none could ever yet
sufficiently be revenged, albeit, there has sundry attempts bin given: whereof
with advice and good regard, considreing, finding him in the Cirte of the
Turks, where I now remain, as well to requite the wrongs done to that noble
Prince by him slain, as to show my duty to your excellency, I first
practiced with large expense of crowns to accuse him of treason to the state
here, and by suborning two perjured Ianesaries, maintained the actions, for
which he had judgment of death by their laws: yet by the Bashaw, and other
chief ministers, he had grant of combat against the Ianesaries, in trial of
his innocence, wherein the Ianesaries quailed in courage, though I offered
great sums for their performance: but they dreading the event, or stricken
with fear of his puissance, who showed himself at the time of his
apprehension, more like a devil then a man, doing many to death, would not
by any offers of Crowns be woonne to continie what they had begun, but
enforced me with threats, in such manner, that fearing mine own life, if my
pretense should have been known, I feigned a show of most kind Christian
love unto the English churl, and woonne him by my protestations, to become a
suitor to the Bashaw, for ransom to redeem him, aduising him as a friend that
wished him well, how deeply so ever in my heart (for the causes above
remembered) I hated him deadly: all which my feigned friendships he accepted for
current, and I gained his good liking to compound for his ransom which I have
paid, amounting to the sum of ten thousand crowns. And for proof of my
loialtie to your excellency, and duty to your noble house, make him my
present unto your highness, with his page and other associates, his armor,
weapons, and what he else here had, not doubting but your excellency will
acquit your royal blood by him traitor like shed, or sa isfie you and them by
his death, in most extremity, or in his wretched endless slavery, which all
the race of your noble house heartily required. And so resting a faithful
suppliant to your family, and whole alie, and a hateful ememie to all of that
devilish nation, of which he is descended, I commit your excellency to your
honorable will, and cruel torment of this hateful English wretch. From
Alexandria in Assyria,

Your highness in all truth and loyalty: Guydo Fredericano.


The Page, whose heart burned with extreme grief to hear these conspiracies
against his Lord, and was assured hereby, that all their troubles proceeded
from that canker of humanity, and traitorous Spaniard, their most supposed
friend, pouring forth tears like rivers, which restrained his tongues liberty
of speech, after he had a while be thought him on this wretched Guydo, envying
ag^ynst that Vyper, and his Nation, he said.

Treacherous and most exe^rable homicide, scorn of men, and ^onster of
Christianity, which under show of truth have hatched such damnable treason,
Villain that thou art, in place, where all them that profess God is hated,
and where love of Christ and Christians should be most holilie regarded, there
to conspire the death, defame, and subucrsion of a man so honorable and famous
as this most noble and well deferuing Knight: for which (perjured wretch as
thou art) Gods vengeance shall sufficiently requite it, and all those thy
abbettors and fauourits in this stratagem, false and dissembling Spaniard. And
thou my most renowned master, princely Lord Edward, how simple wast thou in
crediting so lightly aslaue of no more worth then this vilde misereant,
harboring in thy simple breast the serpent that sought thy life, not like a
man in any valorous manner, but like a Spaniard, by treason and subornation of
perjury, for money, buying and selling him, whose worth is more worth then
Spain, and all whatsoever is resident within the terrifories of that accursed
Nation. But why spend I time exclaiming on thee and them that sought my Lords
life; and acquaint not his honor with those practices of this slave borne
Spaniard, this Judas that betrayed the life of this so renowned Knight, that
he knowing the treasons conspired against him, may first on these Villains of
that crewe and cursed fellowship, be extremely revenged, and after on all
those Vipers, till he has rooted from the earth all such as carry but the
name of Spaniardes: so should the brood and spring of treason be pulled up
by the root, and those aspiring enemies, which seek by treach^rie to invade
Kingdoms, and by coin to draw subiertes duties from their Sovereigns,
buying Kings, and Countries for money, be laid open to their cursed and
devilish practices: from whose deceytes, fair promises, and high conspiring
treasons, God keep every English heart, confound in his wrath all those
practices they intend against the state, and commons of my blessed and
peaceable Country England. Whilst he was in his inuertiue against Spain and
Spaniards, the Knight whom regard of his welfare kept from sleep, hearing
all quiet abroad, and the night calm and fair, left his loathsome Cabin to
take the air, and coming unawares by the Page, heard the conclusion of his
long perambulation: with which he desired to be acquainted. But the Page on the
sudden being taken, though he would, could not color with any show those
Practices. But drawing those letters, whose contents he so lately had knowledge
off, besought his Lord with very earnest suit to peruse them, and as he found,
so to take heed how he or any Englishman hereafter, trust any traiterous
Spaniard. The Knight musing what moved the Page to these humors, retired
again to his Cabine, calling for a light: read their contents, which moved his
patience, and cloyed him with melancholy, to which we leave him.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How the Governor and Nobles of Genoway, in triumph before the Emperor had
knowledge of their Champion Don Philippo, and what chanced.
IT has been recounted, of the honorable enterfainment of the governor and
his company, with the honors done them by the Emperor, who in favor of the
Princess Alinda, graced them with all the kindness and honor that might
extend to strangers and the subjects of his beloved friend: These noble
strangers renowned in the Court, passing the time with all honorable pastimes,
night and day, which could be devised. Many ways by their own favorers and
followers, they diligently enquired of their champion Philippo, as well to
thank him for his service, employed for their good, and freeing them from
their enemies, as to grace him with the Emperor, by their good reports of his
deserts, which albeit they had often acquainted the Emperor with all, yet was
not that sufficient recompense as they thought, for a man of such worth, and
his desert, This strangeness of the knight caused many doubts to arise among
them, for that he had joined them on their honors to make their apperance
before his Imperial majesty, and he absent, whom they with such loving desire
wished to see. But if they grew perplexed thereat, judge the Emperors
discontent, who measuring all honorable actions, especially the forward
aduenturing soldier, was more moved at his silence and concealing himself
then the rest, and the more for that his service in a time of such danger and
hazard of the whole seignorie, had for his friends benefit and good of the
whole Dukedom, been so employed, that amongst his cogitations and thoughts of
discontent, ioyed in hearing the honorable adventures of the knight, so
largely recounted.

Resting thus in an ecstasy, often moved to melancholy, through the knights
absence, whom he more desired to know, then to enjoy great riches, the nobles
and he in their secret conference many ways devised how they might attain
what they so earnestly wished, in the end, after many imaginations how to
effect their purpose, the Emperor being verily persuaded he was not of his
Court, that had for honor of his excellency favored him with Title of one
of his Knights, for that by their description he could enquire none such, to
be resident in the City, or might for any inquiry find any hope of, never
knowing him, yet as the desirous mind loving to effect his purpose, leaves no
way unsearched, how hard or unlikely soever.

The Emperor bethought him to proclaims a general challenge at arms,
appoynting great prises for them that best deserved them, believing verily that
if he were either in his Court or his regiment, he could not being a man at
Arms, hold himself in secret from a place where honor was to be gained:
Hereof the whole estate concluding, Heralds were dispatched to all Cities
within the empire, proclaiming very diligently the triumph which was to be
holden before the Emperor, at tilt, turney and barriers, with their several
prises.

Alinda which had often conference with the nobles of her country, took great
pleasure to hear them discourse the honor of the knight, which although she
could better acquaint them with, yet to show a mind of honor, she wished to
know him, to the end she might reward him: but all in vain, the time was not
come until she pleased to reveal her self.

The time spending limited by proclamation, for those that intended to show
their forces, and gain honor, brought from all places Princes and Nobles of
great account, every one like themselves, desiring the Emperors grace, spared
no charge, as well in sumptuous furnishing their retinew, as in their excellent
devises, and show of rare and incomparable wealth, which greatly pleased the
Emperor to behold, who longed for the day wherein he might see the issue of
this devise, and end of his hope in knowing the kn^ght.

The princess Vallia, whose head was not idle, devising what she might best
do for her honor, and satisfying the Emperor and those nobles who loved and
honored her in her melancholy dumps, called unto her Alynda her trusty
servant, and to her disclosed the great desire of the nobles and the Emperor
to meet the knight, which had with such honor behaved him in their wars,
earnestly entreating her, as before in many exigents, now she would bethink
her how she might in the assembly show her self, and escape unknown. Alinda
which was not unacquainted with the princesses conditions, felt her presently,
and bethinking how desirous she was to show the nobleness of her mind,
took that charge upon her, assuring the Princess that if she would be
ruled by her, she would now satisfy her mind herein, and against the
time, though it were but short, furnish her with all things necessary to her
content: at which consent of her Alynda, without whom she was not her self,
embracing her, and after for joy kissng her cheeks, she gave her many
thanks, and many bountiful promises of reward, which was as much as Ailnda
required, whose care was wholly to win and maintain the Princesses love unto
her, as by her dutiful love and service was ever shown.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How the Princess, by Alindaes help, was furnished like: Knight at arms.
NOw follows (gentles) that I recount unto you, the care and great regard of
Alinda for the Princess, who used such diligence, that against the prefixed
time of turney, the princess was puruaide of al needful things, horse,
armor, lance, and cur^elex, fitting the most accomplished knight in those
confines.

The princess seeing all thing so exquisite puruaide, highly in her heart
commended her trusty servant, whose kindness and love she valued of more
esteem then all the treasures the earth can afford, contemplating some time
on the worthiness of a faithful friend, and the deliverance of a servant:
she called suddenly her Alynda unto her, unto whom she said. Alinda,
faithful and kind Alinda, in many experiments and great occasions I have found
thy loyalty and trust such, that my studies are wholly how to requite thee,
wherefore my trust (quoth the princess) and therewithal embracing her in her
arms of tender love, bedewing her cheeks with tears, willed her to ask
whatsoever was in her power to give, and she should have it. Alinda which saw
her Lady in this humor, thought she looked for no less then was then offered,
rendering thanks for her gracious opinion, with pretty conceited parley put off
their talk for that time, beseeching her to make trial of those things which
she had promised, whereunto the princess agreed.

Alynda first opening her Trunk, suited her first in a doublet and hose: that
done, arming her in all points, she seemed second to none, but a knight of as
great worth as any. What several speeches of commendations passed at her
arming, I omit, let Ladies which for recreation sometimes amongst
themselves use like merriment, censure of the rest, only I shall recount unto
you Alinda her forgetfulness, that having all other things beseeming what she
had undertaken, wanted a shield with some devise to present his imperial
majesty, as the manner of men at arms is. This forgetfulness Alinda in her
self greatly blamed, that prettily excused her self to anoyde blame, which
the princess with a pretty jest put off, laying both their heads together for
performance of their want, and fitting their devise answerable, first setting
down one thing, then another, all seeming good and very effectual, yet
every several counsel surpassing other, they were doubtful which to except,
Standing thus astonished, Alinda, which was ever at the dead lift most sharpest
witted, thus said. Madame, your grace has many times carried good and gracious
opinions of me, which I desire may ever be continued toward me, if now my
credit may be such with you, refer this charge unto me, and doubt not but it
shall be effected to your content. Enough Alinda quoth the princess, I take thy
word, and on thy care rely, be it as shou wilt: so disarming her self, and
attyring her in her own attire, accompanied with her ladies and Gentlewomen of
honor, entered the presence, where she found the Emperor and those nobles of
Genoway, unto whom she was most heartily welcome: whom to their pleasant
discourses we leave, to tell you further of Alynda, and her careful regard of
her promise to the princess.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How Alinda against the prefixed time of trumph, presented her Lady in the
appointed place of triumph, and what chanced.
YOu have heard gentles in the former chapter of the princess fortunate
meeting with the nobles in presence of the Empe^erour, wherein was many
discourses as occasion was offered, but among al, whether serious matters for
the state, or iole ^oying ^rattle to beguile time, the remembrance of
Philippo, the knight so much of the Genoway nobles applauded and honored was
never forgotten, for whom they oftentimes with tears, di^taining their tender
cheeks, bewailed his want of company, and more grieved for that they all
doubted of his welfare, by reason of his breach of promise with them, not
showing himself to them, which came only of purpose to meet him there. But
to our matter.

As time nor tide stays not, so the long desired day is come, wherein those
noble personages, whereof the numbers was great, that from al princes courts
where they there assembled, must try their for^es, amongst which there wanted
nothing, which to honor and arms appertained, each thing with such cost and
diversity of devises, as not only the rareness of the shows delighted, but
the cost and exceeding richness was more admired, so that a general plauditie
was given the Emperor for his bounty, courtesy, and exceeding cost.

These things ordered and all other needful matters befitting the time and the
place. The princess which were before appointed to be principal beholders of
these pastimes, could not devise with what cunning devise to bring her desires
to effect, for which she grew so melancholic, that her nearest attendants
durst not come near her, fearing to offend her. These passions Alinda well
noted, and sought many ways in her subtle shifting head, to disburthen her
Lady of those great greeses: so long devising, that she thought no way so
sufficient as to cause her cunningly to counterfeit some distemperature of her
body, and hereon resolving, without acquainting the Princess therewith, she
presently sent word by the Princess Squire to the Emperor, of the ill
distemperature of the Princess, whom she willed further to say as occasions
were offered and questions demanded, of the manner of her agony, to tell him,
that about the midst of the night, all being in their dead sleep, suddenly
the princess started out of her bed, running about the chamber like one
lumatike, crying nothing but on her Lord, Edward, Edward, of England, bitterly
crying and exclaiming her Lord Edward was slain, that she would come to avenge
her on those miscreants that had murdered him.

With this message the gentleman being parted, hasteneth to the Court, and came
so early, as none of the privy chamber were stirring, yet made such means as
he best could to deliver his message, which no sooner the Emperor heard,
with the manner and strange efficacy of her malady, but nearely touched with
the unhappy hearing thereof, he called for his apparel, and sending for his
learnedest physicians, he questioned of the occasion of the princess grief
and vnaccustoined agonyes, wherewith they were all astonished, yet taking advise
amongst themselves, diversely censuring the occasion, they delivered their
opinions thus, that the princess often meditating on her Lord in his absence
by some fearful dream, might be in her sleep combred, and doubted not
after some quiet rest, but she should recover her health again. This
comforted the Emperor, who more regarded her health then all the world, of
such tender affection was his love to the Princess planted.

Now Alynda that had platted her devise unknown to the princess, when she had
sent her messenger away, came unto the Princess, and unto her delivered the
discourse of her intention, which somewhat astonished the princess, and put
her to an nonplus, that not knowing how a matter so began, should be so
cunningly effected, but some likelihood of dissembling would appear, she
exclaimed on Alinda, rattling and reuiling her for her presumption in
attempting a matter so nearely touching her honor, without acquainting her
therewith.

Alinda which had endured more showers and greater thunder cracks then the
princess could now rattle, quietly disgested her extremity of speech, but no
sooner began the wind to ouerblow, and the heat of her rage allayed: but Alynda
which held her credit great, and carefully heeding her Ladies good, submitting
her self to the princess, she besought her to regard all their goods, who had
done this for her Ladyships good, and to color all which, and well effect her
desires, feign some long sleep, that if the Emperor should send to see her, they
which should come might have no speech with her. To this counsel of her old
suresby the princess listened, and promised to perform what she directed.
Scantly had they questioned of effecting what they wished, but one knocking
easily at the chamber door, brought word that the Emperor with his physicians
were come to visit the princess: to whom Alinda returned this answer with out
aduisement, that she was lately fallen asleep, and besought his highness to
pardon her a while, and forbear to comber her, whom they all hoped would be
well amended by her rest. The Emperor whose careful doubts of her health,
might not so be satisfied, would have no denial, but taking with him two
physicians, entered her chamber, so easily as might not awake her: all which
demeanor of theirs, the princess listened heedefully unto, and with great
delight noted the lamentable discourse of Alinda, relating the mean of her
disease, which made the Princess smile to her self, and oftentimes to frame
her fittes accordingly, to the great admiration of the Emperor and all the
beholders, which more grieved them, especially the emperor, for that the time
of pastime was so near, which they might not with honor recall. This dispairing
of the Princes health, when the Emperor had bin an^ie witness of, what was
reported, loath to awake her whom he thought slept soundly: as quietly without
any noise making as he could, he left her to her rest, calling a council
amongst his nobility what was best to be done, either for proroging ye
appointed pastimes, or performing the^, according as they were expected. On
which they had with diversity of counsel, and sundry opinions debated, it
was generally concluded, the triumphs to begin and hold, whereon a trumpet
sounded at the court gate, to give every combattant notice thereof, whereat
the Princes and Alynda ioyed much. The Emperor, though his care was great, and
sorrow more for the Princes sickness, yet showed himself froilike, the better
to welcome the Princes strangers, who^ he would not willingly discontent. But
framing himself to mirth, as he best could, not without some touch of
heaviness, he bad them almost heartily welcome, passing the time of dinner
which they made shorter, by reason of their great business, whom to their
preparations we leave, to return to the princess and Alynda, who not idle,
but busily employed about their affairs: after the Princess by Alynda had
given straight charge, that none should be so hardy to come near her lodging,
she armed herself, and at the time appointed was fully furnished as she could
desire, Alynda being likewise suited, in rich attire, be fitting more the
gallantest Courtier, then a Lady. After she had prepared all things and their
horses orderly brought to the place by her appointed, the princes attending to
hear of the Emperors coming to the place of triumph, word was brought
Alynda, by her trusty messenger, which was no sooner heard, but Alynda
mounting herself on her hackney with a horn richly bawderickt about her
neck, posted toward the Emperor. By which time the tilters were ready to
join. But hearing Alinda wind her horn (as the usual manner of pastimes is)
they made stay of their courses, and discharged their staves. The Emperor and
all the Nobles hearing this sudden approach of a post, sent presently a herald
to know the meaning, and what he was that entered the place in such manner, by
whom she was brought to the Emperors presence, where doing her duty as she
that could well demean her self, she said. Muse not (magnificent and mighty
Prince) at this sudden coming of a stranger: the simple messenger of a
Knight aduenturous, who on some urgent occasions has made longer stay, then
either he desired, or his duty would allow: yet not willing to loose this
opportunity of showing his love unto your excellency, is now, though too too
late, arrived in this city, and by me craves to be accepted into this noble
assembly, to show his forces in honor of your highness, amongst those
honored Princes and estates. The Emperor, and all the assembly attentively
listening to the messenger, commended highly the audacious d^meanor of the
supposed young man, thinking his master to be no other but as the messenger
reported, and loath to refuse his proffer, without inquiry from whence he was,
or of what degree, they willing with a general voice said, he should be most
heartily welcome, causing a herald to command the company to stay until the
Knights coming. Alynda having made this intermedium to their purpose, made no
tarrying, but with all possible haste returned where she left the Princess, who
being already mounted, attending her Alynda, who no sooner had the Emperors
answer, but setting forwards, guided by her trusty Page Alynda, they arrived
shortly at the place of triumph, into which entering, bowing her self unto her
horse neck, unto those she first met, she passed her horse by ye tilt, with
such a countenance, and maiestical grace, that every one admired, both her
person, and good demeanor, every one censuring of her, yet none knowing what
he should be: coming near unto the place where the Emperor was, in like manner
with three lowly and courtlike courtesies, she saluted him: where staying,
Alynda delivered her sheeld, unto his princely hands whereon was portraied her
own pioure aruied, holding in chains three princes, which subjected themselves
to her, sw^aring their loyalty unto her: her word, keep faith with thy
friend. The sheelde ^eliuered, among all the (...) many times reuiewed, as
this, (...) which he much admired, craving of those (...) of the same, and
desirous to know (if they (...) knight was: The knights having al their
company (...) the stranger knight, desiring him to make choice of (...) run
against, desiring the king of heralds which there waited, to read the names of
the the Tilters unto him, which he had in a C^talogue. The princesss humbly
thanking the^ for their love an^ (...) calling Alynda unto her, commanded her
to go the Emperor, and to crave at his hands, to try against all comers, his
(...), for that by oath he was so enjoined, by the Lady he most honour^d,
beseeching the princes and royal company not to take in any ^ll part this
request of his, which was ready to kiss (...) humbleness. The Emperor which
saw (...) show of body in armor, was loath to hazard him to any gr^^t (...)
or by his too hasty license, to grant that he might After report knowing the
toil, and peril incedent to such assayres: yet considering his vow made, as
his messenger delivered, and not knowing what sufficiency the knight ^und in
himself, craved him in his behalf, the company would accept him, whereon they
stood not long, put granted: at which the Princess was most joyful: so
preparing her self, with such courage she discharged on the Polonian Prince
that first met her, as she bare him violently to the ground, with such
force, that had not help been near, he had been spoiled of his limbs, so
that wearied with this first bad fortune, and dishonor in the action, he gave
over that days triumph, in whose place met her Armedes of Tusran, a noble
Duke, which she likewise foiled: at which such admiration grew, that there was
no speech, but of the white Knight, so called by his Arms, being not
other-wise known. Let it suffice, the honor of the day by general consent
was given unto her, whom the Emperor and all the rest, desired to know,
invited her to lodge within his Court, which she humbly denied, returning
many great thanks (...) herself in such sor^, as the (...) to recount his
courtesies, bu^ (...) gallant courage of him self in arms. (...) by the
Emperor to depart, we leave the (...) her pleasure, ioying in her good
fortunes, and (...) herself, and the Emperor to his imaginations (...)
knights, what sundry speeches at supper passed in court, of her honors gained,
I omit, let it suffice all persons, as well that received foil, as others,
gave the honor and commendations to her. What other occasions happened her,
with the Emperors knowledge of this feigned Knight, I omit: for that the
History leaves them so. The third and last part shall show Prince Edward his
success in all his troubles happening in his travails: the meeting of the
Princess with her ^oble husband, and honors of the two young Lords,
Nartellion, and Constantine, with their conquest: which shall bring thee more
delight, if so thou accept this* Till when, and ever, I crave your pardons and
good opinions, to be censured of this, which shall encourage me to finish the
rest, and ever de at your devotion.

FINIS.

