A JUST AND NECESSARY APOLOGY OF CERTAIN CHRISTIANS, no less contumeliously
then commonly called Brownists or Barrowists.

By Mr. JOHN ROBINSON, Pastor of the English Church at Leyden, first published
in Latin in his and the Churches name over which he was set, after translated
into English by himself, and now republished for the special and common good
of our own Countrymen.

Psalm. 41. 2. O Blessed is he that prudently attends to the poore-weakling.

Printed in the year of our Lord M.DC.XXV.

A Just and Necessary APOLOGY.
THE crime of Heresy none ought patiently to endure, Ierom to P^^^mach.
said Ierom of old; and that not without cause: For whereas in other
accusations, either a man's goods, or good name, or bodily life, at the most, is
indaungered; in this, the life of the soul (which faith is) comes in question.

But well it is for the servants of Jesus Christ, that they have him (their
gracious Lord, and Savior) for their Judge: by whose alone judgment
(notwithstanding all men's prejudices) they shall stand, or fall for ever. And,
if any others any where, surely I, and they with me, have need to get this
divine comfort deeply printed in our hearts; whose profession gives occasion
to many, as does our condition liberty unto all, to spare no severitie of
censure upon us.

Four sorts of heavy friends we have found, and felt in sorrowful experience
wheresoever we have become. The first whereof is the unhallowed multitude, who
living without God in the world; Ioh. 3.
and walking themselves perversely, and in the works of darkness, cannot but
hate, as the light it self, so all those, who have received grace of God, to
walk therein with good conscience. And as the Apostles in their days were
every where most vexed with the hatred of the unbeleeving Jews, their own
countrymen; so are we by the like of ours like minded. Of whom whilst the most
do want their country for causes so unlike unto ours, no marvayl though there
be no better concurrance of either affection, or action between us.

The second is of them, who are enamoured on that Romish Hierarchy, as on a
stately, and potent Lady. Against which, and for the holy presbyteriall
government, as Christ's institution by his Apostles, whilst we do in word and
deed, give a free, and full testimony; alas, with how many, and how great
waves of affliction are we overwhelmed by their ^atred, and power? Dem^trius of
Ephesus, with his Silver-smiths, was of all other men, to the Apostle Paul
(opposing himself to the Majesty of Diana, and the^^ profit withal) the most
infestuous. And who will marvayl, if we nothing obsequio^s to the Hierarchicall
Diana (in her self, magnificent enough, and enough advantageable unto hers) be
abominable unto this kind of people, above all others, even Atheists, Papists
and most flagitious persons not excepted, whom they have devout enough, and
over, unto that Goddess.

A third kind is of those, who so servily inbondage themselves, and their
consciences, either to the edicts of Princes, or to the determinations of
certain doctors, or to both these jointly, as that they think nothing well
done in case of Religion, which either these teach not, or they command not:
and on the other side, almost any thing warrantable, which is commended by the
one of them, or commanded by the other. And as of these some are so
transported with wa^pish zeal, as they can scarcely without a fit of an ague,
either speak to, or think of him, who a little steps out of their troad; so
others of them are so cunning, and wot so well how to make their market, that
though they be indeed almost like minded with us in all things, yet do they
vehemently affect unchristian emnitie with us: not because they themselves
judge us so deserving; but others, whom therein they think it a point of their
wisdom to gratify.

The fourth, and last sort are they, who through credulity, and lightness of
belief have their ears open to the false, and feigned suggestions of
slanderous tongues. These men whilst they are over good, and easy toward the
evil, and injurious, unto whom they give credence; become injurious themselus
to the good, and innocent: though in truth it be hard to say, unto which of
three they do the greatest wrong* whether to their brethren, of whom they
causelessly conceive amiss, whilst either they greedily devour, or easily
receave such false reports, and vituperies, as venomous tongues spit out
against them: or to their own souls, which they thereby make accessorie to
others malice: or to the calumniators themselus, whom they put in heart to go
bouldly on in reproaching the innocent, whilst they know, where to find
receavers for their slanders, as do thieves for their stolen goods.

Now, alas, what sufficient bulwark of defense have we (poor people) to
oppose unto the violence of so many, and mighty adversaries? First, and most
(as a brazen wall) (...) cons^^ence before God, and men (so far as humain
frailty will permit) pure, and unsteyned. Next, thine equanimitie joined with
wisdom (godly, and christian Reader): for whose cause we have pe^^ed, and
published this our just, and necessary defense: lest being circumvented by
prejudice, thou may happen to hate that whereof thou art ignorant: then which
nothing in Tertullians judgment, is more unjust, no not though the thing in it
self justly deserve hatred. Tertullian (...) the (...).
By this we do earnestly crave, that (as thou safely may, so) thou wilst
ingenuously pass sentence upon us, and our profession and not by the
unsavourie reports either in word, or writing, of our adversaries whomsoever:
who do most commonly take liberty to suggest against us (underlings,) not what
in truth and conscience they should; but what either fame reports, or
ignorance suspecteth, or malice inventeth, or proud contempt deems suiteing
with our meannes and simplicity.

Two opprobries (amongst others infinite) have been of late by our adversaries
cast upon us; by which we are not only occasioned, but after a sort
necessitated to the publishing of this our Apology: lest by not resuting such
criminations (so great, Cypr. tr^ct. (...)
and grievous) we should seem to acknowledge a crime, as Cyprian speaks. The
former, by some of those, who in our own country, are reputed the chief
Masters and Patrons both of Religion and truth: by whom there has been, not a
flying bruit spread amongst the multitude; but a solemn accusation to them in
special authority, framed against us: First, that we (lewd Brownists) do
refuse, and reject one of the Sacraments: secondly, that we have amongst us no
ecclesiastical ministry, but do give liberty to every mechanical person
to preach publicly in the church. Thirdly, that we are in error about the
very Trinity. Fourthly, and lastly, that being become so odious to the
magistrates here, as that we are by violence to be driven the country, we are
now constreyned to seek some other, and far part of the world to settle in.

The other contumely is in a Duch Rhyme without name, framed it may be, (and
as commonly it comes to pass) between the cup and the wall, as says the
proverb. This balad-maker comparing the received religion in the Dutch churches
to a tree: the Sectaries in the country (of which he names not a few) to
certain beasts endeavoring this trees ruin, and overthrow, likens the
Brownists to a little worm, gnawing at the root thereof; and not having less
will, but less power to hurt, then the residue. We are indeed worms and not
men, Psalm. 22, 9.
the reproach of men, and despised of the people, whom high and low, and all
that will, may without danger, tread, and trample under foot.

But to give thee satisfaction (Christian and indifferent Reader) whosoever
thou art, that chusest rather to take knowledge of men's innocence, then to
condemn the same unknown; and that it may appear unto thee, how alike unhonest
our adversaries are in their accusations, though of unlike condition in
themselus, We do profess before God and men, that such is our accord in the
case of religion, with the Duch reformed churches, as that we are ready to
subscribe to all, and every article of faith in the same church, as they are
laid down in the Harmony of Confessions of faith, published in their name: one
only particle (and the same not of the greatest weight) in the sixth Article,
touching the Scriptures, being conveniently interpreted, and conformably to it
self, and the general judgment of the learned amongst them.

The scope of the Article is, (as appears in the margent) to distinguish
between the books Canonical, and Apocriphall, as they are called. Touching
which Apocryphal notwithstanding it is judged, and affirmed, that they may be
read in the Church. Which if it be meant of their private reading by the
members of the church, we willingly assent: if of public, pastoral, and
ecclesiastical reading, we are indeed otherwise minded: neither admit we any
other books to that dignity in the church, then such as were penned by the
Holy men of God, moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1, 21. And as the Apostle
James testified of the Jews, Act. 15. 21.
that they had Moses read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day: so we think it
sufficient for the Christian assemblyes, that with Moses Christ, that is, the
books of the new testament be joined with the old, and they alone be read.

Neither need we seek further, or for other Arguments to confirm our opinion,
then the Article it self affoardeth us. The words thereof are these:

Moreover, we put a difference between the Holy writings, Harmony of Confess.
Of the script. Art. 6, Conf. Belg.
and those which they call Apocryphal, to wit, so as the Apocryphal may indeed
(...) read in the church, and that it may be lawful to take instructions from
them, so far sorth, as they agree with the canonical books: but such (...)
hand is their authority, or firmnes, that upon their testimony any doctrine
of faith, and Christian Religion may be founded, much less that they have
force to infringe, or weaken the others authority.

And first, if the Apocriphall books be publicly read in the Church, as well
as the Canonical, the difference which in word is professed, seems indeed by
this so reading them, to be taken away: since the self same religious act
(viz. public reading) is performed about the one and other, although not
altogether to the same end. And if public reading of the Canonical
Scriptures be commanded of God in his worship, either the reading of these
Apocripha books is a part of Gods worship also, (which the Belgic Churches do
not beleiv) or else they must be unlawful to be read publicly in the Church,
especially coming together for that only end of worshipping God. Publicly,
I say; for the private reading of them, as of other books, comes not under the
respect of worship properly, but of an act, and exercise preparati^^ unto
worship, as both Law^ers, and Divines speak.

Secondly, in this very Article, the Canonical books, as opposed to the
Apocriphall, are called holy writeings. The Apocriphall then are not holy, as
not being hallowed to this end, that is not commanded of God in the holy
writeings of the Prophets, and Apostles. Now what have the holy assemblies to
do, especially convening, and meeting together for the solemn worship of God,
and exercising themselus in the same, with books not holy, that is, not
hallowed, or enjoined of God, for his most holy service^

Thirdly, seeing these books are Apocriphall, that is, hidden, and concealed,
their very name may put them in mind of their duty in concealing themselves
within the veil of privacie. And surely no small immodestie it is in them,
which ought to conteyn themselus in private use, and interteynment, thus
bouldly to press into public assembly. They must therefore change either
their names, or their manners; as women by their sex, so they by their name,
well expressing their nature, are inhibited all liberty of speaking in the
church.

I^d, and conclude out of our countrie-man M. Broughton, that those Apocriphall
books are so stuffed with trifles, fables, lies and superstitions of all sorts;
that the middle place between the old and new Testament, as ill becomes them,
as it would do a Turkish slave, and leaper, between two the noblest Princes of
all Europe.

But to return whence I dig^essed. Seeing that (as appears in the preface) the
intention of the Belgic Churches was, as in divulging their Confession,
Preface to the ^arm of Confess.
to render a reason of the hope, which is in them, and plainly to make known
their persuasion in the matter of faith; so also in publishing the Harmony of
Confessions, to give all men to understand, and take knowledge of that most near
conjunction which they have with the sacred, and truly Catholic church of
God, and all the holy and sound members thereof: by what tight, or rather
injury could we be excluded from the followship of the same churches, who do
(...) better accord, and have greater congruitie with them in the matter of
faith and religion, then the greatest part of those, whose confessions they do
publi^^ to the veiw of all men, as the congnissance, and badges of their
Christian consociation? And with what conscience of a Christian, or rather
licentiousnes of a Rhymer, could that adversary traduce us to the world, as
endeavoring the ruin of the reformed churches?

But perhaps, that which may be, is suspected to be by some, (which also the
false accuser does insinuate in his libell against us) and that, what in word
we profess, we deny in deed; and what we would seem to build with our
tongues, we do, as it were, with our hands pull down. If so it be, and that in
deed we be found to be such, I do freely confess, that no censure upon us can
be too severe, no hatred more grievous then we do deserv.

Now the guilt of this evil must cleav unto our fingers, if at all, one of
these two wa^es, either in regard of our selves, or of the reformed Churches.
For our selves, and our course of life, (for necessity compels, as it were
foolishly to babble out that, wherein modesty persuades silence) and how we
converse with God, and men, whether publicly in the Church, or privately in
the family, we refuse not, by the grace of God bestowed upon frayl creatures,
laboring of the same humain infirmities with other men, the search and censure
of our most bitter adversaries, if not destitute of all, both honesty, and
wisdom.

Touching the reformed Churches, what more shall I say? We account them the
true Churches of Jesus Christ, and both profess, and practice communion with
them in the holy things of God, what in us lies; their sermons such of ours
frequent, as understand the Dutch tongue; the sacraments we do administer unto
their known members, if by occasion any of them be present with us; their
distractions, and other evils we do seriously bewayl, and do desire from the
Lord their holy, and firm peace.

But happily, it will be objected, that we are not like-mynded with them in all
things, nor do approve of sundry practices in use amongst them, if not by
public institution (which it seems they want) yet by almost universal
consent, and uniform custom. I grant it; neither doubt I, but that there are
many godly, and prudent men in the same churches, who also dislike in effect
the things which we do: and amongst other things, this mal^part, and unbridled
bouldnes of unskilful men, who make it a very May Game to pass most rash
censure upon the faith, and so by consequence, upon the eternal salvation of
their brethren, and to impeach their credit, whom they neither do, nor perhaps
willingly would know: lest that which they lust to condemn unknown, they should
be constreyned to allow, if they once knew it: and withal to disallow that,
into which they themselves have been led formerly by common error of the times.
Which malady is also so frequent, and ordinary, as that it may truly be said
of many, that they then think themselus most acceptable unto God, when they can
make their brethren (differing from them in some smaller matters) most odious
unto men. This rageing plague except the Lord God in mercy assuage, and bend
the minds of godly, and modest men (the Ministers of his word) to put to their
helping hand that way, it wi^ without all doubt, come to pass, (which God
forbid) that the multitude of Christians will come to judge of their estate with
the Lo^^ not so much by the christian virtues, which themselves indeed have as
which they imagine others want.

But that it may appear unto thee (Christian Reader) wherein (...) do dissent
from the Dutch reformed Churches, and upon wha^ grounds: and that none may take
occasion of suspicion, that the things are either greater, or more absurd, for
which those hateful^ Brownists are had by many in such detestation, then indeed
an^ truth they are, I will briefly, as I can, present unto thy christian vei^
either all, or the most, and our greatest differences, with the ground^ thereof.

CHAP. I. Of the largenes of Churches.
AND first, it is evident, that the most, especially cittie-churches, are so
great and populous, as that two or three dive^ temples are not sufficient for
one, and the same Church to meet^ at once. We on the contrary, so judge, that
no particular church under the New Testament, ought to consist of more members,
the^ can meet together in one place; because,

1. The Holy Scriptures speaking definitely of the political, or ministerial,
commonly called, visible church, instituted by Christ and his Apostles, by his
power, understand none other then on^ congregation convening, and coming
together, ordinary at least in one place. Math. 18, 17, 20. gathered together
in my name: wi^^ 1 Corinthians. 5, 4. when you are come together. Act. 2, 44. Al^
that believed were together: and chap. 5, 12. They were all with one accord in
Salomons porch. Also chap. 6, 2, 5. and chap. 13, 1, 2. with ^4, 27. and 14,
23. with Tit. 1, 5. Act. 15, 4, 22, 25. and 21, 22. So 1 Corinthians. 11, 20. when
ye therefore come together in one, to wit place, not mind, as some conceit,
for from that the Corinthians were to far: and lastly chap. 14, 23. If the
whole church come together into some place.

2. There is then had the most full, and perfect communion of the body in the
holy things of God, which is the next and immediate end of the visible Church,
Act. 2, 42.
when all the members thereof do convene, and assemble together in some one
place. And if nature, Heb. 10, 25.
as Philosophers teach, ever intend that which is most persit, much more grace.
Now that the church (commonly called visible) is then most truly visible
indeed, when it is assembled in one place; and the communion thereof then most
full, and entire, when all its members inspired, as it were, with the same
presence of the holy ghost, do from the same Pastor, rec^av the same
provocations of grace, at the same time, and in the same place: when they all
by the same voice, (banding as it were together) do with one accord pour out
their prayers unto God: Te^tul Apol. chapter 37.
when they all participate of one, and the same holy bread; and lastly, when
they all together consent unanimously, 1 Cor. 10. 17
either in the choice of the same officer, or censuring of the same offender,
no man admitting a due thought of things, can make doubt of.

3. We have the Apostle Paul giving it in charge to the Elders of every
particular Church (as was that of Ephesus) that they take heed unto all the
flock, whereof the holy ghost made them Bishops, Act. 20, 17, 28.
or overseers, to feed the church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. But surely, as that flock is very inordinate, if not monstrous, which
for the largenes thereof, neither ever does, nor possibly can feed together; so
that shepherd of the Lords flock seems not aright, and as he ought, to
fulfill his charge, which does not at the least, every Lords day, minister
unto the same, the wholesome food of Gods word. Ad hereunto, that in these huge
and vast flocks, the governers cannot take knowledge of the manners of the
people private, or public; no nor so much, as of their presence at, or absence
from the church assemblies: whereby what damage comes unto true piety, any
man may easily conjecture, and miserable experience makes too too manifest in
the reformed Churches. I conclude therefore, since (as Iunius says) it
concerns the Pastor thoroughly to know the church committed unto him, the
persons, their works and courses, Iunius (...). lib. 1, cap. 2.
without the knowledge of which things, he shall profit them no more then a
tincking cymball, etc. that it were a point of good provision both for the
conscience of the officers, and edification of the people, that a division were
made of the cittie-churches, which by continual accession of members, are thus
grown out of kind, into different, and distinct congregations, under their
certain, and distinct Pastors, and Elders.

If any object, that there is one visible, and catholic Church, comprehending
as the parts thereof, Object.
all the particular Churches, and several congregations of diverse places; as
there is one Ocean, or Sea, dive^sly called, according to the diverse regions by
whose shores it passes; and that therefore this matter is not worth labor
spending about it, Answ.
I answer, First, that the Catholic church neither is, nor can be called
visible: since only things singular are visible, and discerned by sense:
whereas universals, or things catholic, are either only in the understanding,
See Sadell against Tur. in solut. 2. sylog on Math. 1^. Scalig de subul. ex^^.
^07.
as some are of mind, or as others think better, are made such, to wit
universals, by the understanding, abstracting from them all circumstanstiall
accidents, considering that the kinds intelligible have their existence in
nature, that is in the Individuals.

2. The Catholic church, with due reverence unto learned ned men be it spoken,
is very unskilfully said to be one, as the sea is one. For, first, it is
expressedly said Genesis 1, 9, 10. that the waters which were under the heavens,
were gathered into one place, or conceptacle, which God called Sea, or seas.
But the Catholic church, which is said to comprehend al particular
congregations in her bosom, is not gathered together into one place, nor ever
shall be, before the glorious coming of Christ. 2. The Ocean is a body so
continued, as that all, and every part thereof is continually fluent, so as
the self same waters, which in their flux do make one sea, do in their reflux
by contrary winds, make another, and so contrariewise. But thus to affirm of
particular churches, and their material constitutive cause, were most absurd.
3. If some one particular sea were drawn dry, or should fail his course, a
disturbance of all the rest would necessarily follow; But and if the sea should
in diverse places at once happen to be exhausted, or drawn dry, there would
then be a failing of the Ocean: neither were the waters now gathered into one
place, neither made they one sea, and body of water, either continued, or
conjoined. But now, on the other side, upon the defection, or dissipation of
this or that particular church, no such impediment should come in the way, but
that the rest might hold their full course, as before. Yea, I add moreover,
if all, and every particular assembly in the world should languish, and fall
away, (one only excepted) that (only) one did still remain the true, and
entire Church of Christ, without any either subordination, or coordination, or
dependencie spiritual, save unto Christ alone. The reason is plain, because
this singular, and sole assembly may under Christ the head, use, and enjoy
every one of his institutions: the communion of Saints combyned together in
solemn, and sacred covenant, the word of God, Sacraments, Censures, and
ministrations whatsoever by Christ appointed, and therewith the same Christ's
most gracious presence.

And upon this ground it is, that the Apostle Paul does entitle the particular
congregation, which was at Corinth, and which properly, and immediately he did
instruct, and admonish, 1 Cor. 12, 27. 2 Cor. 6, 10^ and 11, 2.
to the body of Christ, the temple of God, and one virgin espoused to one
housband Christ. We may not therefore under pretense of antiquity, unity,
humain prudence, or any color whatsoever, remove the ancient bounds of the
visible and ministerial church, which our right fathers, to wit, the Apostles,
have set, in compar^son of whom, the most ancient of those, which are so
called, are but infants, (...). ^n Prove.
and beardlesse, as one truly, and wittily says.

There is indeed one church, and as the Apostle speaks, one body, as one
spirit, one hope of our calling, one says, one baptism; Ephesians. 4, 4, 5.
that is, of one kind, and nature; not one in number, as one Ocean. Neither
was the church at Rome in the Apostles days, more one with the Church of
Corinth, then was the baptism of Peter one with Paul's baptism, or then Peter,
and Paul were one. Neither was Peter or Paul more one, whole, entire, and
perfect man (consisting of their parts essential, and integrall) without
relation unto other men; then is a particular congregation (rightly instituted,
and ordered) a whole, entire, and perfect Church immediately, and independently,
in respect of other Churches, under Christ.

To conclude, since the Pastor is not a minister of some part of a Church, but
of the whole particular Church, Act. 20, 28. Attend to the whole Flock, or
Church, whereof the holy Ghost has made you Bishops etc. if the ministers
office be to be confined within the circle of a particular congregation, then
also the ministerial church it self. Now the Pastors office is either
circumscribed within these bounds, or else the Angel of the Church of Ephesus
was also the Angel of the Church of S^^rna; and so the Pastor of this Church
is also the Pastor of that; and by consequence, of all; that is, every
Pastor is an universal Bishop, or Pope by office, if not for exeq^ution, yet
for power; according to which power, we are to judge of the office.

What then? will some man say. Is it not lawful for a Pastor to exequute his
pastoral office but in the congregation over which he is set? I answer with
the Apostle No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that^ is called of
God, as Aaron, Hebr. 5, 3, 4. It is not lawful for thee (reverend brother) to
do the work of a Pastor where thou art no Pastor, lest thou arrogate to thy
self that honor, which apperteyns not unto thee. Thou art called, that is
elected, and ordained a Pastor of some particular Church, and not of all
churches. It is not only lawful, but requisite, that the Pastor of one
Church (or ^aither he that is the Pastor) and so any other member, imparte the
gift either spiritual, or bodily, which he has received, to other churches,
out of the common bond of charity, in which he is obliged: not so, to exequute
a public office over them by the prerogative of authority, which he has not
but only over his own. We will illustrate this by a similitude. Any citizen
of Leyd^n may enjoy certain priveledges in the city of Delph, by virtue of
the politic combination of the united provinces, and city, under the supreme
heads thereof the States general; which he is bound also to help and assist
with all his power if necessity require; but that the ordinary magistrate of
Leyden should presume to exequute his public office in the city of Delph,
were an insolent, and unheard of usurpation. The very same, and not otherwise,
is to be said of Pastors, and particular Churches, in respect of that
spiritual combination mutual under their chief, and sole Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II. Of the administration of Baptism.
THE Dutch Reformed Churches (as is evident by their practice compared with
then profession) are neither so true unto their own grounds, See I^arm. of
C^nfess. Belg. and French, Calvin, Be^a. etc.
as they ought, neither do they so well provide for the dignity of the thing,
whilst they administer the Sacrament of Baptism to the infants of such, as are
not within the Covenant, nor have either parent a member of any Church, because

1. Baptism now (as circumcision of old) is the seal of the covenant of God
with the faithful, and their seed, C^los. 2, 11, 12.
I will be thy God and the God of thy seed. Genes. 17, 9. and the seal of the
righteousness of faith. Romans 4, 11. and is one, as there is one says, and one
baptism. Ephesians. 4, 4, 5. and therefore ought not to be administered to others,
then those within the compass of the same covenant: nor but upon faith coming
between, either of the party to be baptized, or of one parent at the least. If
any shall answer, that this gracious promise of God is not to be restreined to
the next immediate children, but is extended even to those, who follow a fa^r
off, I grant it, except infidelity, or other sin come between; by which the
parents with themselves break off their seed externally and actually from the
communion of the church, and holy things thereof. And if we be not to insist in
the next, and immediate parent, why in the grandfather, or great-grand-father,
and so for the rest, till we climb up, as high, as to No^h himself? Whereupon
it should follow, that not the Infants of Jews, nor of Turks, no nor of
Gentiles neither, should have baptism denied them. Surely the grace of Christ
must needs be universal, and wherein all have interest, if the seal thereof
apperteyn unto all. Neither should the Church (amongst whose sacred furniture
Baptism is) by this rule be any more the house of God, peculiar to his children
and servants; but more like a common In, whose door stands wide open to all
that pass by the high way.

2. The Apostle 1 Corinthians. 7, 14. upon this ground, that the one parent is a
believer, avoweth the child holy: which otherwise he pronounces impure, in
respect of the Covenant, and holiness thereof (leaving unto God his secret
judgments). Now what have the impure, and unhallowed to do with the holy things
of God? And what has the Pastor, and shepherd in holy things to do with
them, who are no portion of the Lords flock? What have I to do (says the
Apostle) to judge them that are without? Do not ye judge them that are within? 1
Cor. 5, 12.
So (reverend brethren) what have you to do, to baptize them that are without?
do you not baptize them that are within, and them alone? In the number of whom
yet you reckon not those infants (though baptized by you) nor belonging to your
charge. Whence also (God knows) it comes to pass, for the most part, that
they who are thus by you baptized into the name of the Lord, are by their
godless parents education made the servants of Satan.

3. The Baptism of Infants, in all soundnes of judgment, serves, and that
immediately for the comfort of their godly parents; whose hearts it fills
with no small joy, whilst they behold the gracious promise of God made to them
and their seed, ratified and confirmed by this seal: even as of old the
circumcision of Isaak was granted, and enjoined by God unto Abraham his, and
our father, first and immediately, for the confirmation of his faith. Whence I
conclude, that the seal of the righteousness of faith (which baptism is) does no
more belong to the seed of godless parents, then does the comfort flowing from
the righteousness of faith unto the parents themselves. Whom as it would
effectually move to more serious, and sad thoughts of their own estate with
God, if they beheld their infants (so dear unto them) excluded thorough their
default from the comfortable ^eal of Gods Covenant; so can they not but, by the
undue administration of the same, take occasion of hardening themselves in their
accustomed perverseness. I conclude then with Tertullian speaking (as Iunius
interprets him) of the children of such, T^^tul of ^ipt. chapter 18. Iu^us annot.
in ide^ cap.
as were strangers from the covenant of God, Let them come, when they are grown
to year^s; let them when they have learned, and are taught wherefore they come;
let them then be made Christians, when they can know Christ.

CHAP. III. Of written Leyturgies.
WE cannot but mislike that custom in use, by which the Pastor is wont to
repeat and read out of a prayer book certain forms, for his and the Churches
prayers, and that for these reasons,

1. Because this external mean and manner of worshipping God in prayer is no
where found in the written word, Psay 29, 13. Mat. 28, 10. Co^os. 2, 23.
(by the prescript whereof alone he is to be worshipped) whatsoever either the
Jews fable of the Leyturgie of Ezra; or the Papists of S. Peter's, or S. James
Leyturgies. Yea, contrariwise, I add for overplusse, that it did not seem good
to the Apostles, the last penmen of the (...). ghost, that any such prescript
form for such end should come in use, in the churches. And this seems unto me
very clear, from the former Epistle of Paul to Timothy, chap. 2, 1, 2. The
kings of the earth in those days, and such as were in authority under them,
being, as it were, so many sworn enemies of the name of Christ, this conceit
might easily (and it seems did) creep into the minds of diverse Christians,
that these kinds of men were raither to be prayed against, then for, by the
servants of Christ. And now, what was the medicine prescribed by the Apostle
for this malad^e in that Epistle written to Timothy for that very end, 1
(...). 3. 1^.
that he might know how to converse in the church of God? Did he now either
send Timothy to any Leyturgie formerly let forth for his own and others
da^^tion? Or did he himself frame any for the purpose, whose b^^ten troad the
Churches following afterward should not err? Nothing less: although a more
^it, and full occasion for that business scarce be offered: which without doubt,
Paul would ^o more have let slip, th^n did the other Apostles, that which was
more light, for the introduction of Deacons, if ^t had seemed good to the (...)
6.
H. Ghost (by whose singe^ he was guided in the ordering of the Churches) that
any such book-prayer should have come into use.

Three things especially are objected, which must here be cleared. The first
is, that David, and other Prophets penned the book of Psalms for the mother
Church of Israel. The second, that Christ himself delivered to his disciples a
certain form of prayer, commonly called, The Lords prayer. The third, that
Moses from the Lord Numb. 6. gave direction to Aa^on, and his sons, in what
form of words they should bless the children of Israel.

I answer first generally, that the consequence follows not from the
authority of Christ, and of Moses, and of the Apostles, in ordeyning these,
and these forms of divine worship, for the like authority in ordinance
Bishops, and Pastors, to ordeyn other, and diverse forms, for the same end.
What can be spoken more insolently? Christ the Lord, Moses, the Prophets, and
Apostles being immediately, and infallibly guided by the spirit of Christ, have
prescribed certain set forms of Gods worship; therefore others though not
immediately and infallibly guided by the same spirit, may also prescribe them.
Why may they not by this argumentation, as well frame us a new Canon of holy
Scriptures, considering that even th^se very forms, wherewith also they
equalize their own, are parts, and portions of the same Scriptures. More
particularly. And first for Psalms. I deny that there is the same reason of a
prayer, and of a Psalm; or (whereupon the difference hangs) that singing, and
praying are all one. For the question is not, which I desire the Reader once
for all to bea^^^n mind) either of the internal affection of him which
sings, or prays, or of the subject matter of the song or prayer: but of the
external act, and exercise of praying and singing. Now these two exercises
both the holy Scriptures, and common sense in every man, that pleases but to
open his eyes, and look upon them, do plainly difference.

For first, if to sing be to pray, then whosoever sings prays: but how far
from truth this is, the Psalms of David, 1, 2, and many others in which not
the least parcel of prayer is to be found, do plainly evince.

2. Is any man sad amongst you, Iam. 5. 17.
(says the Apostle) let him pray: is he merry let him sing. To pray then, and
to sing, are not the same, nor which do agree (to wit primarily) with the same
constitution of the mind.

3. In prayer the Pastors voice is only heard, unto which the people, 1 Cor.
14, 16
as the Apostle teaches, are to add their Ame^ but in singing, all the
multitude have as well their part for tunable voice, as the pastor himself.
Neither can diverse possibly sing together, without confusion, but by a certain,
and set form both of words, and syllables: which yet may be done in church
prayer, and is every where.

4. We have the same Apostle else where teaching us thus: ^ phes 5, 19.
Speaking to your selves in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs, etc. And again,
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, with all wisdom, Colos. 3, 16.
teaching and admonishing yourselvs mutually in Psalms Hymns, etc. In singing
then we do speak to our selves, or one to another mutually: but in praying,
neither to our selves, nor to our brethren, but unto God alone. And the reason
hereof is evident. When as we read or sing the Psalms of David (for what other
thing is it to sing out of a book, Scalig. po^t. li 1. c^. 2.
then to read with a loud, and harmonious voice? of which Harmony singing is a
kind): these self same Psalms in this very use do still remain, and so are
read or sung, as a part of the word of God in the holy Scriptures: and in which
God speaks unto us: whereas on the other side, we do speak unto God, in all
our prayers, whether mental only, or vocal withal.

5. Even these very Psalms, whose matter is prayer, and thanksgiving, were
framed, and composed by the prophets into Psalms, and spiritual songs, for
this very end, that the men of God might in them teach us, as in the written
word of God, whereof they are parts, both what petitions they in their
distresses put up to the Lord, and also what thanksgiving they returned upon
their deliverance, that so we in reading and singing them, might instruct and
admonish ourselvs both publicly, and privately, whether by way of doctrine, or
admonition, or consolation, for the promoteing of the glory of God in our
hearts.

Lastly, that I may descend unto them, who are only taught by experience; If
any going out of the temple, wh^lst the Church were singing a Psalm, either
before, or after sermon, being asked of one that met him, what the church were
then doing, should answer that it were at prayer; would he not be judged by all
men to tell a ly? But altogether without cause, if to sing be to pray, as many
imagine.

Touching the Lords prayer. We deny it to be the meaning of Christ, teaching
his dise ples, when they pray to say, Our father, etc. to bind them, and the
Holy Ghost in them, by which they ought to pray, to a certain form of words,
Jude 21.
and sillables, which they should repeat by heart, or (which is our question,)
read out of a book. Because, 1. the two Evangelists Matthew, and Luke of whom
both the one and other did aright both understand, and express the meaning of
Christ, do not precisely keep the same words. 2. By these words, when you pray,
is meant, whenever you pray: whereupon it should follow, that we were tied to
this stint of words alone, and always: and so might lawfully use none other,
except it be lawful for us sometimes to pray raither by the level of our own
dev^se, then of Christ's prescript. The words therefore of Cyprian are good in a
good sense. Cyprian. de ^at. domin. Mat. 6, 6.
To pray otherwise then Christ has taught, is not only ignorance, but guilt,
seeing he himself has said, you reject the precept of God, that you may observe
your own tradition. 3. Amongst the many, and manifould prayers of the Apostles
to be seen in the holy scriptures, this form of words is not found: and yet can
it not be denied, but they always prayed as they were taught in this place by
their Master Christ: whose meaning therefore it could not be to tie them
necessarily to any such certain of words. 4. It appears by the context, that
the purpose of Christ is to speak of private, or raither secret prayer, and
such as every Christian apart from others, and in his closet, with the door
shut unto him, should pour out unto the Lord. Now that one alone, and by
himself should say, Our father, seems not very congtuous. Lastly, seeing of
the like there is the like consideration, If the Apostle James in these words,
Go to now, ye that say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a city etc.
Iam. 4, 13.
and verse. 15. For that ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and
do this or that, do neither simply fault with the form of words, Calv. in
Iam. chapter 4. v. 15.
nor prescribe necessarily any other, but only (to use Calvin's words) wakens
them from their dream, who without respect of the divine providence, will make
themselves masters of a whole year, when there is not a moment in their power:
so neither are we to conceav that our Savior Christ Math. 6. and Luke 11 does
injoin unto his any set words to pray in, Idem in Mat 6, 9.
but only shows whither all our prayers and vows ought to be referred,
Vrsiu^s, B^can^s, Piscator, P^^^ins, etc.
as with all other orthodox writers about this matter, the said Author
speaks: howsoever diverse uns^kilfull men cease not still to sing unto us,
even to loathsomnes, the song, when you pray say, as the Papists do theirs,
This is my body: as though the controversy were about the words, and not
raither about the meaning of them.

But for that we are very odiously traduced by diverse, as abhorring from this
form, and that we will not (as they use to speak) say the Lords prayer, I will
in few, and plain terms set down what our judgment is about it.

1. And seeing that, as the Poet has it, the names do commonly suit with the
things, we may see, and sorrow withal, in the phrases in common use about this
most Christian duty of prayer, what it is with the unhallowed multitude of
Christians to pray, namely to say prayer, to read prayer, to hear prayer, and
raither any thing then indeed to pray, that is, then to pour out the
conceptions of a godly and devout mind unto God, from faith and feeling of our
wants, by the holy Ghost.

2. We do affirm, that this form of words is unproperly, how commonly soever,
called the Lords prayer: as neither being a prayer as it is the Lords, nor the
Lords as it is a prayer. As it is of the Lord Christ, and so the Lords (whether
by himself uttered in words, or committed to writing by his Euangel^sts) it
has the consideration, and respect of a sermon, and of Evangelical doctrine,
in which Christ taught his disciples; and not of a prayer put up to his Father:
as on the contrary it neither was, nor could be used prayer wise by Christ, in
so many words; with whose most persit sanctimonie it did not agree for him to
say, forgive us our trespasses.

3. We do firmly beleiv, that all, and every both Church and person is bound
always to pray, as Christ has there taught: whether we respect the matter
there propounded, or the affections there enjoined, or the commodious, and
compend^ous simplicity, which Christ our Savior, and only master, there
opposes, both to the vain bablings, and often repetitions of the heathens: and
that in these things, and them alone, the commandment of Christ does consist,
we both firmly beleiv, and confidently avow.

4. And lastly, we doubt not but that this very form of words may be, and is
rightly used in prayer unto God, provided there be neither opinion of
necessity, by which superstitious persons think themselves stinted by the Lord
to words, and sillables, nor of perfection, by which many are of mind, that
they have then at the last, and not before prayed per^itly, when they have
repeated this form of words. And it is well, if some spot of this mire cleav
not to the fingers of many ministers; which make it a matter of great
conscience not to conclude their, and the churches prayers applied specially to
the present state of things, with this number, and measure of words. Which
custom as it is used very commonly, so in my judgment, with no great reason,
for these two causes.

First, it seems to cross all good order, and method, by which men should
d^scend from the more general unto that which is more special: and not go the
clean contrary way, as in this they do.

Secondly, Since the rule, according to Phylosophie, and good reason, is
always before the thing ruled, and that this form is by Christ inst^tuted, for
this purpose, that it might be the rule, and squire of all our prayers, Tertull
lib. de Ora^.
and as Tertullian says, is premised, as the foundation of all our accessorie
d^s^^es, me thinks the same should raither be used in the first place; upon
which as the same author has it, every one should build the circumstances of
his occasioned requests.

It remains that in a few words I answer that, which is by some objected
touching those solemn blessings, at the first imparted by the Patriarks to
their first born, and after by the Priests to Israel the first born of God.
Exodus 4, 22.


And to let pass, 1. that the composers, and imposers of the Leyturg^es now in
use have not equal authority with Moses the man of God, not are th^^ writings
any way comparable with his: 2. That Moses did not prescribe unto the Priests a
st^nt of words for blessing (much less to be read out of a book) but the
substance of the thing; See M. (...) son of written (...).
which by many Arguments, save that I study for brevitie, might be proved. 3.
If that were Moses his mind, and the Lords by him, the minister were bound to
the same form of blessing upon the Israel of God now, Gal. 6, 16.
which the church is: since there is nothing in it not moral, and perpetual,
or not concerning the church now, Calvin. in Gene^. c. 27 1.
as then. I do answer this one thing, and the same in Calvin's words, viz. that
these blessings were not ordinary prayers, but a lawful author^tie divinely
interposed to testify the grace of election: which (...) also confirms by
diverse reasons. Neither can any man who considers the words of the text make
question, but that the Priests in blessing (Israel, not God) do direct their
speech unto Israel by way of promise, and not unto God by way of prayer. So
bless you (says Moses) the children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord
bless thee, etc. The same is to be judged of the salutations of the Apostles
in their Epistles, (whereof they are a part, and so a part of the holy
Scriptures): albeit yet they in them, as the Priests in their blessings,
desired to have their truly loving affection taken knowledge of by them to whom
they wrote: and what good things they both desired at the hands of the Lord for
them, and also promised them in his name.

2. We dislike all reading of prayer in the act of praying, as inconvenient,
yea directly contrary unto that act? In prayer we do pour out matter, to wit
the holy conceptions of the mind, from within to without; that is, from the
heart to God: on the contrary, in reading, we do receav and admit matter from
without to within; that is from the book, into the heart. Let him that prays
do that which he does, not another thing, not a diverse thing. Let the whole
man, and all that he is, both in soul and body, be b^nt upon God, with whom he
converseth. The eyes of the mind are lifted to God in prayer; and why not the
eyes of the body also? both which ^e that prays, by intending them upon a
book, both depresseth, and averteth from God. The Apostle exhorts, that the
men pray, lifting up pure hands to God in every place. 1 Timothy 2, 8*
In like manner, (besides the reason of the thing, we have the Patriarks,
Prophets, Christ himself, with his Apostles, and disciples, for insample of
lifting up the eyes to heaven in prayer. Not this gesture of body is simply
necessary but most convenient, (save in some great temptation, and depression
of mind, both to express, and further the intention of a godly heart.

Let devout and learned men (if they please, commit to writing their holy
meditations, and secret conferences with God, as did Austin, and others amongst
the ancients; and many of later time^ which may be read, and that with no small
benefit both by Pastor and people; but privately, and for better preparation
unto prayer. Now the preparation unto prayer is very unseasonable at the
selfsame time of the solemn performance thereof; and unreasonable in, and by
the self same act.

3. Seeing that public prayer (as Bucanus says) is a second part of the
ministry; Bucanus co^m^n places of prayer.
as also that amongst the gifts of the holy Ghost, wherewith the Pastor is
endued from above, that is not small, not to be despised, by which he is able
conveniently both for matter, and form, to conceav a prayer according to the
churches present occasion;, and necessities; by the reading of this prescript
form that (truly excellent) gift given of God for this end is made void, and of
none use, and the spirit (contrary to that which ought to be) extinguished. 1
These. 5, 19.
The manifestation of the spirit (says the Apostle) is given to every one
(especially to every Pastor) to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12, 7.
But he who reads a form of prayer conceaved, and consigned by another, does
not manifest the pastoral gift, (for of the internal affection our question
is not) of the spirit given to him to profit withal, but to that other by whom
the form of prayer was ind^ted.

4. If to read such a form of prayer be to pray aright, and pastor like no
probable reason can be rendered, wherefore to read a sermon, or homily, is not
as well to preach aright, and as is required of the Pastor of the Church.
Which so being, small reason had the Apostle, Act. 6.
treating of the ecclesiastical ministry, which principally consists in
these two exercises, 2 Cor. 2, 16.
to cry out, as he did, who is sufficient for these things? For who is not
sufficient even of the vulgar sort? who can not read a Leiturgie, and an
Homily?

5. The spirit (says the same Apostle, Romans 8, 26.
speaking of all Christians) helps our infirmities, for we know not what to
pray, as we ought. Yes, Paul, (with your l^av right well; for we have in our
prayer book, what we ought to pray, word for word, whether the spirit be
present or not. What then is to be done in this business? That which Tertullian
says the Christians of his time did. T^tul. Apol. against the Gentles.
We pray (says he) without any to prompt us, because we pray from the heart.
But he who reads his prayers, or rather the prayers of him that p^nned them,
and his lesson out of a book, has one that prompts him, and that diligently,
both what, and how much, and after what manner, and with what words and
sillables he ought to pray.

Lastly, if it would be just matter of shame to any earthly Father, that his
child, who desired of him bread, fish, or an egg, should need to read out of
a book, or paper, Father, pray you give me bread, fish, or egg; how much more
contumel^ous is it, to our heavenly father, and his holy spirit, Zac. 12, 10.
Romans 8, 26, Jude ^0. Zac 11, 15.
wherewith he furnishes all his children, specially his ministers according to
their place, that an help so unworthie, and more then babe^sh, and indeed the
instrument of a foolish shepherd, namely a bare reader (with which kind of
vermin Rome, and England are pestered) should be used by such godly, and
learned pastors, as wherewith the reformed churches are furnished

CHAP. IIII. Of the Ecclesiastical Presbytery.
WE do so acknowledge, and approve of, as divinely instituted, the Presbyte^^es
of the particular churches, as with all we judge them sundry wai^es defective.
As first we require: that all received into the college, 1 Timothy ^ 2. Tit. 1, 5,
7, 9
and company of Elders, even those which are called governers, should be apt to
teach, and able to exhort with sound doctrine, and convince g^^nsayers, and
that not only privately, or in the consistory, but in the public assembly
also, as the nature of their public office requires. I am not ignorant, what
that learned man Gersom Bucer in his late treatise has published about this
matter, (...) gov. nam. p4. 32, 33, 44.
neither do I unwillingly assent thereunto: provided only, that what he
requires in those Elders, that they be able to perform publicly, and in the
church assembly, if not exactly, yet competently.

A second defect, which we wish supplied is, that of annual, o^ tryennuall or
temporary, they might be perpetual, and for l^fe, (except by some casualtie,
or occurrence they be disabled) as the pastors themselves. This term of years
for the Elders administration in the Reformed Churches, page 34. 35, 36.
the forenamed author in the same place does not so much defend, as excuse; but
it seems raithe^ needful to have it reformed (which is also the desire of
the said learned man) and that for these reasons.

1. The Apostle Paul calling unto him the Elders of the church of Ephesus to
M^letum, Act. 20, 17, 28.
does pronounce of them all, as well the governers, as those that labored in
the word, that they were made Bishops or overseers of the same Church, by the
holy Ghost. Now the authority of that the appo^nter ought to work in the
appointed great conscience, not lightly to relinquish that charge, which by the
disposition of the holy Ghost they had taken upon them.

2. The same Apostle does in the same place admonish, (...). 28, 29, 30, 31.
and exhort the same Elders that they should take heed unto themselves, and to
all the fl^^k, lest the same, after his departure should unhappily be
damnified, either by wolves entering in among them, or such as should rise up
from themselves speaking perverse things. Now if the date of their Eldership,
and charge were shortly to be out, they might well think with themselves, that
the Apostles admonition for after times did not much concern them, whose term
of office should so shortly be expired, and were perhaps to follow the Apostles
departure at the heels.

3. It was sacriledg for the Levites being consecrated to the Lord, for the
service of the Tabernacle and Temple, to retire from the office undertaken by
them, although (age growing upon them) they were exempted from some the more
labo^^ous works of that ministration: Numb. 8.
How then is it lawful for the Elders, or Deacons (being now no more at their
own disposing, but as the Levites of old, the Lords sacred and consecrated
ones) to withdraw so lightly from his special service? No man under the Law
might change a beast, I^vi. 17, 9, 10.
if clean, no not a better for a worse, if once hallowed to the Lord. How much
less may the church then discharge her officers (or they themselves)
ministering faithfully, and as they ought?

Lastly, 1 Timothy 5, 21. and 6, 14. 1 Corm. 14, 37. 1 Timothy 5, 11, ^2.
the Apostle Paul instructing the Church in Timothy to keep the commandment of
Christ unrebukeable until that his glorious appearing, does not permit, no not
to the widows and D^aconesses to ^elinquish the office once taken upon them:
unto whom for that very cause he forbids marriage it self, otherwise permitted
to all, and to some enjoined. How much less lawful is it for the Elders, or
Deacons of the church (whose both condition, and ministry is far more
excellent) for far lighter causes, to look back, and relinquish their vocation,
wherein Christ has in such sort placed them?

A third thing there is, and that of most moment, viz. that the Elders do not
administer their public office publicly, as they should, but only in their
private consistory. And first, the administrat on of every office does ^n
right follow the nature of the same; whether domestical in the family, or
civil in the common wealth, or spiritual in the Church: the Elders office
then being public, requires answerable, and public administrat on. Not that
it is unlawful for the Elders to convene, and meet apart from the body, and
to deliberate of such things as concerns the same, and so to do sundry things
by virtue of their office, but because that is not sufficient, Colos. 4, 17.
neither do they indeed fulfill their public, and church- office, office,
which in the Lord they have received, except as privately, and and in their
consistory, so also (and that specially) publicly, and in the face of the
congregation they exequute the same.

2. The Apostle beseeches them of Thessalonica that they would in love highly
esteem for their works sake, 1 These 5, 12, 13.
not only them which labored among them, to wit, in doctrine; but them also,
which were over them in the Lord, and admonished them. 1 Timothy 5, 17.
But of the work of their Elders which govern, the Reformed churches must needs
be ignorant; neither do, or can they know, whether they be good, or bad. Their
pastors they do prosequute with due love, and honor, out of their own certain
knowledge of them and their work, but their Elders only by hearsay.

Lastly, Act. 20, 17, 28.
the same Apostle warns the Elders of ^phesus, that they attend and take heed
to the whole flock, in which they were made Bishops. But it cannot be, that he
should ministerially, as he ought, feed the whole church, whose voice the
greatest part thereof never so much as once hears. To lead, or receav a she^p
now and then into the sheepfould, to confirm one that is weak, or correct one
that strayeth, and that apart from the flock, is in no wise to feed the whole
flock, as the Apostle requires.

And that this point may be made the more plain, let us descend unto some such
particulars, as in which the Elders office seems specially to consist. And
they are, the admitting of members into the church, upon profession of faith
made, and the reproving and censuring of obstinate offenders, whether sinning
publicly, or privately with scandal. As we willingly leave the exequut on,
and administration of these things to the Elders alone in the settled, and well
ordered state of the church, so do we deny plainly, that they are, or can be
rightly, and orderly done, but with the peoples privat^e and consent.

For the first, Christ the Lord gave in charge to his Apostles to preach in his
name remission of sins, and therewith life eternal: and that such Jews, or
Gentiles, as should beleiv, and repent, viz. profess holily faith and
repentance, (for to judge of the heart is Gods prerogative) they should receav
into the fellowship of the Church, and baptize. And that these all, and every
of them were publicly, and in the face of the congregation to be administered,
the Acts of the Apostles do plent^ously make known. And if Baptism, the
consequent of the confession of faith, in them baptized, and the badg of our
consociation with Christ and his Church, be to be celebrated publicly, why is
not the profession of says proportionably (although by the formerly baptized
through a kind of unorderly anticipation) to be made publicly also, and
therewithal the consociation ecclesiastical, as the former? The covenant
privately made, and the s^al publicly annexed are disproportionate.

I further add, that since persons admitted into the Church, are by the whole
body, if not of enemies, at least of strangers become and are to be reputed
brethren ^n Christ most nearly joined, and they with whom, they are to call
upon one common Father publicly to participate of one holy bread, and with
whom they are to have all things, 1 Cor. 10, 17
even bodily goods after a sort common, as every one has need, Act. 2, 44, 45.
it seems most equal, that not only the Presbyters (the churches servants
under Christ) but the whole commonaltie also should take knowledge in their
persons, both of their holy profession of faith, and voluntary submission made
as unto Christ himself, so to his most holy institutions in his Church.

To come to the second head. And 1. those who sin, that is, with public
scandal, rebuke publicly, 1 Timothy 5, 20.
says the Apostle, that others also may fear. And if the Elders themselves, of
whom he speaks, for whose credit the greatest care is to be taken much more
any other, Beza in ann. on the place.
as Beza rightly observes. And that not for this cause alone, that when the
punishment comes to one, the fear might reach unto many, which yet wise men in
all public exequutions would have carefully provided for, but also that both
he that so sins may be the more ashamed, and others both within, and without
may withal take knowledge, how little indulgent the Church is to her own dearest
ones in their enormous sins.

2. With this also it well conforteth, that Christ the only Doctor of his
Church would have not only sins scandalous committed in public, publicly
reproved, Math. 18, 15 1^, 17.
and before the multitude, but even those which are private, obstinately
persisted in, when he says, Tell the Church, etc.

I am not ignorant how diversely diverse men do interpret these words: whilst
some by the Church do understand the civil come of the Magistrate; others the
Hierarchicall Bishop, with his officials; others the senate of Elders excluding
the people. And thus whilst these strive for the power, and name withal of the
church amongst themselves, the church indeed, and which Christ the Lord means
is well nigh stripped both of power, and name.

The first of these three interpretations I will not trouble my self with;
Beza, Zanch^us, Parker, G Bucer, etc.
as being almost of all, and that worthily expleded, and rejected; and
abundantly refuted by diverse learned men: the two latter are to be aslau^t^d
with almost the same weapons.

The former of these two, though it be in it self the more different from
Christ's meaning, yet comes it in this circumstance now in consideration, the
nearer the truth in our judgment, considered in its exequution: since neither
the Bishops, nor their officials, Chauncelours, Commisaries, or other
Court-keepers do exclude the people from their consistories, and courts: but to
offer themselves in their public judgments, and censures to the ve^w of all,
who please to be present thereat. And I think (...) of either amongst Gentiles
or Jews, or Christians (be it spoken without offense) before this last age,
that public judgments and other acts of public nature, as these are, should
be privately exercised, and without the peoples privitie. It was not so in
Israel of old, where by Gods appointment the Elders were to sit, and judge in
the gates of the city: nor in the synagogues themselves, from which many are
of mind, how truly I will not say, that the Christian Eldership was derived,
after the Roman tyranny had confined into them the Jews civil conventions,
and judgments; nor in the primative church, no not in some ages after the
Apostles, as might easily be proved out of Tertullian, Cyptian, and others, if
I would try the matter in that court: Aug^^^t of Ch^^^. (...) lib. 3.
but it is much more safe, as Austin says, to walk by the divine Scriptures.

And first the word (...) church, originally Greek, answering to the Hebrew
(...), does primarily, and properly signify a convention of citizens called
from their houses by the publ^que c^yer, either to hear some public sentence
or charge given: but translated to religious use, denotes an assembly of
persons called out of the state of corrupt nature into that of supernatural
grace, by the publishing of the gospel. Now the Elders, or presbyters (as
such) are, and so are said to be, called, to wit, to their office of Eldership,
but called out they are not, being themselves to call out the church, and unto
it to perform the cryers office. Neither do I think that the name Ecclesia,
Church, has been used by any Greek author, before the Apostles times, or in
their days, or in the age after them for the assembly of sole governers in
the act of their government, or indeed before the same governers had seized
into their own, and only hands the churches both name and power.

But you will say, as learned men use to do, that these Elders susteyn the
person of the whole multitude, and supply their room, for the avoiding of
confusion; and so are ^ightly, as commonly called The church representative.

I answer. First, no godly, no nor reasonable man will affirm, that this
representation is to be extended to all the acts of religion, or indeed to
others, then these, which are exercised in the governing of the Church. What is
it then? The Elders in ruling, and governing the Church must represent the
people, and ocupie their place. It should seem then, that it appe^teyns unto
the people, unto the people primarily, and originally (under Christ) to rule
and govern the church, that is, themselves. But who will so say of a government
not personal, but public, and instituted, as the churches is?

2. If the Elders in their consistory represent the church, then whatsoever
they either decree, or do agreeing to the word of God whether respecting faith
or manners, that also the church decrees and does, though absent, though
ignorant both what the thing is, which is done, and upon what grounds it is
done by the Elders: this being the nature of representations, that what the
representing does within the bounds of his commission, that the represented
does primarily, and much more, as but using the other for his instrument. Now
how dissonant this is to true faith and piety, how consonant unto the Papists
implicit faith, no man can be ignorant: and I had raither wise men should
consider, then I aggravate.

3. The constant, and universal practice of the Apostles and Apostolic
churches do quite cross this consistorian course. The Apostle Paul, well
acquainted with the meaning of Christ, does 1 Cor. 5. so reduce into practice,
the rule and prescript of his master Matthew. 18. or to use the words of the
Bishop of Chester, Bish of Winch^^^, ans^^^ to Tertus pa. 43.
There commands to bring into practice this power, In the name of Christ, with
his spirit, as he seems to leav no place for doubting to him, who with
diligence, and without prejudice, will compare together these two places, what
the Lord means, when he says, Tell the Church, This our Apostle does in that
place reprove not the Elders or governers alone, but with them also the whole
commonaltie and body, for tolerating the incestuous person amongst them. Which
therefore accordingly, as his authority Apostolical, 2 Ge^in. 11, 28.
and care for all the churches d^d require, he admonishes, and directs, that
as mindful both of the sinners repentance, and salvation, and therewith of
their own purity, they would exclude, by due order, that wicked man from their
holy fellowship. And that by these words, (when ye are come together) the whole
church is to be understood, many, but heavy friends to the peoples liberty,
Jesuits, P^clatists, and others do grant. But we will annex certain reasons
for the further clearing of the thing.

1. They among whom the fornicatour was, who were puffed up, ver. 1, 2, 4, 7*
13.
when they should have sorrowed, and out of the midst of whom, he was to be
put, who had done that thing; they were to be gathered together in one, and to
judge and excommunicate that incestuous person. But the fornicatour was not
amongst the Elders alone, neither were they alone puffed up when they should
have sorrowed, neither was that wicked man to be taken out of the midst of
them, and still left in the midst of the people; and therefore not to be judged
by them alone, but by the church with them, though governed by them.

2. It did not of old apperteyn only to the Levites and Elders in Israel, v.
1. 7.
to purge out of their houses the material leven, but to every father of
family also: so by proportion to the whole church now to purge out the leven
spiritual there spoken of: which also could not leven the whole lump, or
church, in the Apostles meaning, except it had concerned the whole church to
purge it out.

3. The Apostle wrote not to the Elders only, but with them to the whole
body, i^s. 9.
not to be commingled with fornicators, covet^us persons, or the like, called
brethren: he therefore admonishes them, as the other, 11.
to cast their stone at the incestuous man, for the taking him away from the
Lords people.

Many more Arguments, and the same very clear, might be drawn to this end,
out of the text it self; but for brevitie sake I will omit them, and annex this
only one which follows, from the second chapter of the second Epistle. The
same Apostle writing to these same Corinthians about the same incestuous
person, but now penitent, as before delinquent, seriously exhorts them, that
look what severitie they had formerly showed in censuring him for his sin, the
like compassion they would now show, in ^eceaving him again upon his
repentance: therein plainly insinuateing, that this business was not in the
hands of the Elders alone, except we will say, that they alone were made sad by
the Apostles reproof, that they alone by their study, defense, indignation,
zeal, chapter 7, 9, 11. and 2, 7, 8.
etc. testified, that they were pure in the thing, and except it belonged to
them alone to pardon, and comfort the repentant sinner, and to confirm their
love unto him.

And whereas some would enclose this whole power within the Apostles circuit;
as if he alone, Bishop-like, had passed sentence judicia^ie upon the offender,
and only committed the declaration, and publication of it in the church, to
some his substitute, I deem it not lost labor briefly to show how erroneous
this opinion is of external monarchical government, yea power also, which is
more, in the church of Christ.

And, first, one alone, how great soever, cannot suffice to make the Church,
See the Bishop of Church, answer to Tertus p. 41, 42.
or a congregation, which Christ has furnished with power of binding, and
loosing Math. 18, 17, 18. both reason, and scripture teaching, that for an
assembly, and congregation at least two or three are required. ver. 19. The
Church (which name signifies a multitude, designeing by a new trope, one alone
singular person, Whitakers of the authority of the Script. lib. 1.
as says D. Whitakers against Stapleton, going about to prove that the name of
the church belongs to the Pastors, or Bishops, or Pope alone.

2. It is expressly affirmed 2 Cor. 2, 6. that the incestuous person was
censured by many: which many or more, the Apostle opposes to himself alone, as
appears by the context; and not to all, as some erroneously think.

3. The Apostle plainly, and sharply reproves the Corinthians for that before
his writing they had not voyded that sinful man, their holy fellowship, and so
prevented the report by which such a crime, and the same unpunished came to
his ears. This their power then the man of God does not seize into his own
hands as forfeyt by their default in not using it, but vehemently (and as
became a faithful minister) exhorts and admonist^es them to use it, as they
ought in the judging, purging out, and taking from among themselves that wicked
man, and so any other within, or called a brother, sinning in the like manner.

4. If the Apostle Paul being absent from Corinth had excommunicated this
sinner, then had he judicially condemned, See (...) chap. 2.
and judged a man unaccused, unconvicted, and unreproved (at least face to
face, and before his judge): then which what more unjust can be imagined of, or
ascribed unto the holy Apostle? I conclude therefore with Peter Martyr, The
Apostle, as great as he was, Pet. Man. (...) 1 ^or. chapter 5.
does not so far usurp to himself power, as that he one, and alone by himself
should excommunicate: which yet the Pope, and ma^y Bishops (both Romish and
English) dare do: Injudging he goes before others, as it is meet the chief in
the Church should do, that so the less skillful multitude might be directed in
judging by their voting before them.

Thus much of this place. The next follows, which is Acts 1, Act. 1.
When another was to succeed in the room of Judas the traitor, not Peter
alone, or the Apostles with him, but (that the ordination might be just and
lawful, being made with the knowledge of the people assistent, Cyprian l. 1.
Epist. 4.
and examined by the verdit, and judgment of all) the multitude of the
disciples together did substitute two, ver. 15.
whom they deemed most excellent, that of them the Lord, who knew the hearts of
all men, might take unto himself the man, which he knew most fit. That which
belonged unto God, Gal. 1, 1.
namely, to design an Apostle immediately, was left unto him: the disciples
also in this work, rete^^ing what might be their liberty: Calvin in Act. 1.
which Calvin notes upon this place, to have been a kind of middle temper.

The third place follows, Act. 6.
which is Act. 6. handling the choice of Deacons, and that by the same Church
in Jerusalem, not now small, as before, but (which I wish may be marked to stop
the passage, which some think lies open for escape through smaller assemblies)
now become great, and populous. In this business the Apostles inform the church
what kind of men they ought to choose: the multitude chooses whom they judge
fit, and meet accordingly; and the same present to the Apostles: upon whom so
chosen by the people, the said Apostles impose hands as a solemn symbol of
their consecration, joining therewith common prayer. Now if the Deacons only
betrusted with the churches money were not to be made but by the peoples
suffrage, and election, much less Pastors and Elders, unto whose fidelity
under Christ the same Church does commit the incomparable treasure of their
souls.

To the same purpose (in regard of the matter in hand) serves that, Act. 14.
which we read Act. 14, 23. where Paul and Barnabas do ordeyn Elders in every
Church, by suffrages (not their own as some fancy, unto whom to lift up, and
to lay on hands is all one) but the peoples; or by the lifting up of hands, by
which sign, the Grecians, as appears in Demosthenes, and others, the peoples
vote or voyce-giving in their popular assemblies was wont to be made. I ad
(which is especially to be observed) that the Apostles in doing their part in
the ordination of Elders, did what they did, as it were, by the way: staying
only, most like, two or three days in a place: so as they could not possibly
by their own experience take sufficient knowledge, what persons in the church
were apt to teach or govern: who able to exhort with sound doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.
and to convince the gainsayers: how unblamable they were, how watchful, given
to hospitality, temperate, Tit. 1.
etc. and with these, how mannered wives, and children they had. These things
only the brethren which conversed with them publicly, and privately, could
sufficiently take knowledge, and experience of. Upon their electing them did the
ordination conferred by the Apostles, as the hands of the Church, depend. By
election the persons elected have right to their offices; into the actual
possession whereof they are solemnly admitted by ordination.

This troup of proofs, that known, Act 15.
and notable place Act. 15. shall shut up: in which we have the peoples
liberty in the churches both of Antioch, and Jerusalem plentifully confirmed
and commended by Apostolic practice to ensueing churches, and times.

And first, See Whit k. of the author. of II. (...) lib. 1, chapter 5. sect. 1.
it is evident, that in the church of Antioch together with the Elders (which
it appears then it had Act. 14, 21, 23.) the brethren were admitted into the
fellowship of the business, and disquisition made about circumcision: Paul and
Barnabas with the rest of the delegates then sent being brought on their
journey by the church. ver. 3. the letters also being written back from
Jerusalem to the brethren which were at Antioch, ver. 23. and which is
specially to be noted, then, and not before, delivered when the multitude were
come together. verse. 30. So in the church at Jerusalem the messengers from
Antioch were received not only of the Apostles and Elders, but of the Church
with them, verse. 4. And as the question was propounded so was it, discussed
before the whole church by the Apostles, and Elders coming together to look
unto that business. ver. 6. yet not so as the brethren were wholly bound to
silence, seeing that ver. 11. the whole multitude is said to have held their
peace, that is, to have yielded to Peter's speech, and reasons. Lastly, as Silas
and Judas were sent with Paul and Barnabas, by the Apostles, and Elders with
the whole Church unto Antioch, verse. 22. so were the letters written back in
the name of them all to the brethren at Antioch. ver. 23. And although the
decrees to be observed by the churches of the Gentiles, (whereof no one,
excepting Antioch, had any delegates present) which were also part of the word
of God, and holy Canon, could come from none other then the Apostles, See
Johan. Wolph. in 2 long. c. 23.
immediately inspired by the H. Ghost, they notwithstanding in the publishing
of the same, did not disdam the consenting suffrage of the brethren of that
particular church of Jerusalem, where the assembly was.

And surely, if it ever did, or could apperteyn to any church officers or
governers whatsoever to represent the church assemblies, in elections,
censures, and other Ecclesiastical judgments, and occurrences; then without
doubt unto the Apostles in an eminent, and peculiar manner (especially living
in that rude, and childish state of the church) considering both how
superlative their office was, and how admirable their gifts, and endowments of
the holy Ghost, together with their incomparable both piety, and prudence: by
which they were both most able, and willing to promote the Christian faith in
holiness. And although this constant, and uniform both practice, and institution
of the Apostles unto diverse (politic persons, swelling with pride of fleshly
reason, dispising Apostolical simplicity, and who, as ^^eneus speaks, would
be rectifiers of the Apostles, (...). against Here Is. ^ib. 3. Theodor. dial. 1.
Tertull. against Hermog.
seem worthy of light regard, yet to us, who beleiv with Theodoret, that we
ought to rest in the Apostolical, and prophetical demonstrations, and who
with Tertullian do adore the fulness of the Scriptures, they seem of singular
weight, and moment.

And whilst I consider with my self in the fear of God, how it was the Apostles
duty to teach the disciples of Christ to observe whatsoever he commanded them;
Mat. 28, 20. ^ Cor. 14, 37 chapter 4. 1. a Cor. 5, 5.
and how the Apostle Paul testifies, that even the things, which he wrote
touching order, and comlynes to be observed in the church-exercises, were the
commandments of the Lord, as also how the same Apostle clearly professes,
that he and his fellow officers were only to be reputed as ministers and
ambassadors of Christ, to whom therefore in the exequution of their office it
was not permitted to do, or speak the least thing, which they had not in charge
from him, it is unto me a matter of great scruple, and conscience, to depart
one hair-breadth (extraordinary accidents ever excepted) from their practice,
and institution, in any thing truly ecclesiastical, though never so small in
it self: whatsoever, by whomsoever, and with what color soever is invented,
and imposed, touching the government of the church which is the house and
tabernacle of the living God. ^ Tim. 3.
And a partner in this faith I do hope to live, and die, and to appear before
Jesus Christ, with bouldnes in that great and fearful day of his coming.

I add, that seeing the Christian congregation as the spouse of Christ, free,
and ingenuous, has the church officers whosoever, as Christ Jesus her
housbands, so also her servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 4, 16, chapter
5, 17, 18.
whom under Christ she trusts with her eternal salvation, and unto whom for
their labor she owes wages for releif and maintenance; Considering also how
much it makes both to whet on the diligence of the ministers, and to enforce
the diligence of the people, whilst these on the one side consider with
themselves, how they have them set over them, whom above others themselves have
liked, and made choice of; and they on the other side, that they are set over
those by whom they before others were made choice of, and elected: that which
Cyprian has, seems most equal, and of institution moral, and unchangeable,
that the commonaltie fearing God and keeping his commandments, Cypr. Epist.
4, li. 4, 1.
should have the special hand either in choosing of worthy Priests, or
ministers, or of rejecting the unworthie: which also, says he, we see to be
founded upon divine authority.

The same is to be held of excommunication. Seeing that it behooveth the
Christian multitude to avoid the fellowship of the excommunicated not only in
the course of religion, but even in common, and familiar conversation (the
rights of nature, family, and common wealth ever kept inviolated): and that
whom yesterday I was to repute a brother near, and dear in Christ, to morrow I
must hold as an Heathen, and Publican, and as, Math. 18. 1 Corinthians. 5.
for the destruction of the flesh, delivered to Satan: who is so unequal a
judge, as not to think it a most equal thing, that the multitude should
clearly, and undoubtedly take knowledge both of the heynousnes of the crime, and
incorrigeable contumacie of the person, after the use of all means, and
remedies for reclayming him. This if it be not done, then does not the church
herein live by her own, but by her officers faith; neither are her governers to
be reputed as servants, but Lords unto her; neither do they exercise their
office popular^lie in the church as they ought, but tyrannically, as they
ought not, by Chrisostoms verdit. Chrisost. in Epist. to Tit,
His words are these. He who bears himself upon an external and worldly power,
because he rules legally, and that men must of necessity obey him, does often
times, and that not without cause, exercise authority against the will, and
wel-liking of his subjects? But on the other side, he who will be over those,
who voluntarily submit unto him, and can him thank, and yet will presume to do
things as himself likes, and as if he were to give account to none other
thereof, that man raither exercises his author^tie tyrannically then popularly.

The Lord God put it into the hearts of those who bear greatest sway in the
reformed churches, to endeavor the furnishing of the same with such Elders, as
may both fully, and constantly, and popularly, discharge their place, for the
peace of their own consc^ences before God, the edification of the Churches over
which they are set, as also for the abateing, if not abolishing, of that
contempt in which Prelat^sts, and supercilious persons use to hold these
Lay Elders, as they call them.

But now lest any should take occasion, either by the things here spoken by us,
or else where of us, to conceave, that we either exercise amongst our selves, or
would thrust upon others, any popular, or democraticall Church Government; may
it please the Christian Reader to make estimate of both our judgment, and
practice in this point, according to these three declarations following.

First, we beleev, that the external Church Government under Christ the only
mediator, See Bodin of Commonu^. book 1. chap. last.
and monarch thereof is plainly aristocraticall, and to be administered by some
certain choice men, although the state, which many unskilfully confound with
the government, be after a sort popular, and democraticall. By this it
apperteyns to the people freely to vote in elections and judgments of the
church: in respect of the other we make account, it behooves the Elders to
govern the people even in their voting in just liberty, 1 Cor. 12. 28 1 Timothy
5, 17 Heb. 13, 17.
given by Christ whatsoever. Let the Elders publicly propound, and order all
things in the church, and so give their sentence on them; let them reprove them
that sin, convince the gainsayers, comfort the repentant, and so administer
all things according to the prescript of Gods word: Let the people of faith,
give their assent to their Elders holy and lawful administration: that so the
ecclesiastical elections, and censures may be ratified, and put into solemn
exequution by the Elders, either in the ordination of officers after election,
or excommunication of offenders after obstinacy in sin.

2. We doubt not but that the Elders both lawfully may, and necessarily ought,
and that by virtue of their office, Act. 20, 18.
to meet apart at times from the body of the Church, to deliberate of such
things as concern her welfare, as for the preventing of things unnecessarie, so
for the preparing (according to just order) of things necessary, so as
publicly, and before the people, they may be prosequuted with most
conveniencie, and least trouble that may be.

3. By the people whose liberty, and right in voteing we thus avow, and stand
for; in matters truly public and ecclesiastical, we do not understand (as it
has pleased some contumeliously to upbraid us) women, and children; but only
men, and them grown, and of discretion: making account, 1 Cor. 14, 34, 35. 1 Timothy 2, 12.
that as children by their nonage, so women by their sex are debarred of the
use of authority in the Church.

CHAP. V. Of Holy Days.
IT seems not without all leven of superstition, that the Duch reformed
Churches do observe certain days consecrated as holy to the Nativity,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, and the same also (as it commonly comes
to pass where humain devices are reared up by the side of divine institutions)
much more holy then the Lords day, by him himself appointed.

And for this, first we are taught by Moses, thus speaking unto the people of
Israel in the name of the Lord. Exodus 31, 13
Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep for it is a sign between me and you
thoroughout your generations that ye may know that I am the Lord that does
sanctify you, that it appertayns unto God alone (and to no man, or Angel) as
to sanctify whether person, or thing, so to institute the signs, or means of
sanctification, of which number holy days are. I ad, if the Lord as lehovah,
and the God of his people Is^ael, and supreme Lawgiver, Exodus 20.
do ordeyn the sanctification of a day in the decalogue, how far should Gods
servants be, either Magistrates from taking this honor of God unto themselves
by commanding a holy day; or subjects by observing it to give the same unto
any other save God alone?

2. It was not the least part of Isreal's defection, first in the wilderness,
afterward under Jeroboam; that they ordained a ^east to Ichovah, whom they
represented to themselves by the goulden calvs which they had made.

3. Seeing that every first day of the week (called by John the Lords day) is
consecrated by Christ himself and his Apostles to the memorial of Christ's
resurrection, and Gods solemn worship; it seems too much for any mortal man
to appoint, or make an anniversarie memorial (and the same most solemn and
sacred) of the same resurrection, or so to observe it.

Lastly, that you may see it was a man, from whom this device came, and so
erred, as one says (not to meddle with the uncertaintie either of the day of
the month, or month of the year in which Christ was born, as it is most
certain on the contrary that, this 25 of December cannot be the time, what
good reason (I would know) can be rendered, why a day should be consecrated
rather to the birth, circumcision, and ascension of Christ, then to his death,
seeing that the Scriptures every where do ascribe our redemption and salvation
to his death, and passion in special manner?

CHAP. VI. Of the celebration of Marriage by the Pastors of the Church.
Sixthly, and lastly, we cannot assent to the received opinion and practice
answerable in the Reformed Churches, by which the Pastors thereof do celebrate
marriage publicly, and by virtue of their office: (...). 3, 16, ^.
because

1 The holy S^r^pture divinely inspired, that the man of God, that is the
minister, may be perfitly furnished to every good work, does no where furnish
or oblige the minister to this work.

2. Marriage does properly and imediately appertein to the family, (which is
primarily framed of man, and wife) and Cities, K^ch^m. cu^s phyl. d^^p. 28, c.
6.
and other political bodies consisting of many familyes. Secondarily, and
mediately to the common wealth, and public governers of the same: who
therefore weighing their office, and what concerns them do accordingly, in
the low countries, comelily, and in good order^^y that knott of marriage
amongst such their subjects, as require it at their hands. G^n. 1, 27. and 2,
22. Chem. ^xam. part. 2 of mar.
Neither did God as a minister join in marriage our first parents (as some
would make him) but as their common father by right of creation, and the chief
master of the marriage: neither ought the Pastors office to be streched to
any other acts then those of religion, and such as are peculiar to christians:
Bu^anu^ in Common places.
amongst which marriage (common to Gentiles as well, as to them) has no place.

Lastly, considering how popish superstitition has so far prevailed, that
marriage in the Romish church has got a room amongst the sacraments, truly,
and properly so called, (...)
and by Christ the Lord instituted; the celebration, and consecration whereof
the patrons, and consorts of that superstition will have so tied to the priests
fingers, that, by the decree of Evaristus the first, they account the marriage
no better then incestuous, which the priest consecrates not; it the more
concerns the reverend brethren, and Pastors of the reformed Churches to see
unto it, that by their practice they neither do, nor seem to advantage this
popish error. And these are the points of our difference from the Belgic
churches: which are neither so small; as that they deserv to be neglected,
especially of them unto whom nothing seems small; which proceeds from the
gracious either mouth or spirit of the Lord Jesus: nor yet so great, as to
dissolv the bond of brotherly charity, and communion.

If any now shall object, that there are yet other things beside these, in which
we consort not so well with them, nor they with us; as for example, 1. In the
sanctification of the Lords day, in which we seem even superstitiously rigid.
2. In a certain popular exercise of prophesi amongst us: 3. In our dislike of
the public Temples, and sundry other indifferent things, as they are termed;
besides, that we are accused by some for not having in due estimation the
magistrates authority in matters of religion; I do answer, and first, that in
the two first of these, the same Churches do not differ from us in judgment,
but in practice: as appears evidently by the Harmony of the Belgic Synods
lately published by S. R. Of the former of those two, the author of the same
book, testifies in his Preface to the Reader, page 11, 12.
that the Synod held at Middleborough in Zeland, 1581. did supplicate unto the
magistrate, that by his authority he would decree the sanctification of the
Lords day, abolishing the manifould abuses thereof. That sanctification then of
the Lords day which the reformed churches do endeavor unto, and desire to have
fortified by the magistrates authority, that we (considering it as immediately
imposed by Christ upon his churches) by the grace of God, labor to perform,
being thereunto induced by these, amongst other reasons.

CHAP. VII. Of the sanctification of the Lords day.
FIrst the sanctification of the Sabbath is a part of the Decalogue, or moral
law, written in tables of stone by the finger of God: of which Christ our Lord
pronounces, that no one ^o^e, or title shall pass away. Math. 5, 18.
Now if it be unpossible for one title of the law to be dissolved, much more
for a whole word, or commandment, and one of ten; by which it should come to
pass, that Christians now were not to count of ten commandments of the moral
law, but of nine only.

If reply be made that the fourth commandment is so ceremonial, that
notwithstanding it has this moral in it, that some time be assigned, and
taken for the public ministry, and exercises of religion, I answer:

1. That the same may be said in general, of the Mosaicall ceremonies
whatsoever: all, and every one whereof affoardeth something moral. For
instance, The Mosaicall Temple, or Tabernacle had this moral in it, and
perteyning to us, as well as to the Israelites, that it was a fit and
convenient place for the Church assembly. Is therefore the precept for the
tabernacle as well moral, Exodus 25, and 26. Exodus 20.
as that for the Sabbath? Is it alike a part of the decalogue, and moral law?
Is it alike one of the ten Commandments?

2. If the moral sanctification of the Sabbath stand in this, that sometime be
assigned to the public ministry, then were the Israelites, especially the
priests, and Levites, bound to an every day sabbath and sanctification moral,
Number. 29, 38
being bound every day to offer in the tabernacle, and temple, two young
lambs, the one at morning, the other at evening for a daily sacrifice.

3. If the second precept of the Decalogue do in the affirmative part enjoin
all outward instituted worship of God; then also by consequence it requi^es
some set time (as a natural circumstance absolutely necessary to every
finite action) in which the same worship is to be performed. In va^n then is
the fourth commandment, and to no purpose, if it enjoin nothing at all, but
that which was enjoined before, namely in the second.

4. The very essence of the fourth commaundment consists in this, that a day
of seven be kept holy, that is separated from common use, and consecrated to
God, in which as in a holy day the works of divine worship, and such as serve
for the spiritual man ought to be exercised, as appears plainly by the reason
taken from Gods example, upon which the commandment is founded. Take this
away, and the life of the precept seems to suffer violence. The truly godly
take some time for the exercises of Gods worship not only public, and
Ecclesiastical, but private also, and domestical: yea in their closets, as
Christ teaches. Yet are not these either times, or places, in which such
things are done, then others ar^* Either therefore a day in it self must be
holy, by divine institution, or the Decalogue is may^ed in the fourth
commandment.

But you will doubtless object the change made from the last day, to the
first day of the week. I answer, 1. that change is mee^ly circumstantiall, and
in which also the essence of the precept i^ not abolished, but established. As
for example. God promised unto children duly honoring their parents a long
life in that land (to wit of Ex^d. 20.
Canaan, then to be possessed by his people) which the Lord thy God gave unto
them. Ephesians. 6, 2.
The same promise by the Apostles testimony still stands good to obedient
children, though out of Canaan, and in another land, so does the same precept
stand in force for the sanctification of the sabbath, though removed to another
of the seven days by the Lords hand.

2. It is evident that this alteration was made both upon weighty ground, and
warrantable authority. The ground is Christ our Saviors resurrection from the
dead: 2 Cor. 8. 17
in which man's new creation (at least in respect of Christ working the same in
the state of humiliation for that and undertaken) was perfeited: a new kind of
kingdom of God, Luke 7, 28.
after a sort established: and, as the Scriptures speak, all things made new.
And why not also a new sabbath after a sort? in which yet notwithstanding the
former (as ^he creation also by Christ^ is not so properly abolished, as
perfited.

The authority upon which this change lea^eth, is no less then of Christ
himself: who, first, by word of mouth for the forty days after his
resurrection, Calv. in Act 1, 3. Ioh. 20, 19 26. Luke 24. 36 (...) Gen 2, 2.
taught the disciples the things, which apperteyned to the kingdom of God, that
is, as Calvin says, whatsoever things they published either by word or writing
afterward. 2. By his example, or fact, setting himself in the midst of the
same his Apostles, the first day of the week, and as Iunius says, every eigth
day, till his ascension into heaven: and therein not only blessing them with
his bodily, but much more, with his spiritual, and that special presence. 3.
By his spirit speaking in his Apostles, whose office it was to teach his
disciples to observe what things soever he had commanded them, Mat. 28, 18. Act.
20, 26. 1 Cor. 4, 1.
and to declare unto them the whole counsel of God: who also in their whole
ministration were to be reputed none other then the ministers of Christ, and
lastly whose both writing (and preachings accordingly) even about order and
comlines to be kept in the church exercises were the commandments of the Lord
Jesus. 1 Cor. 14, 37
Agreeable hereunto it was, that the Apostle Paul coming to Troa^, and there
with his company abid^ng seven days, Act. 20, 66, 27.
he did not till the first day of the week (which yet was the last of the
seven) call together the a^sciples to eat bread, 1 Cor. 16, 1, 2.
that is to communicate in the Lords supper. Hereupon also it was, that the
same Apostle ordained, that on every first day of the week, as on a day
sanctified for the holy assemblies, and ^ttest for most effectual
provocations to the supplying of the necessities of the poor Saints, every
one of the richer sort, should lay something apart, as God had blessed him, for
the releif of the Churches in Syria, at that time oppressed with great penury,
and want. Lastly upon none other ground but this, was this day, by John the
Apostle, named expressly the Lords day, Rev 1. 10* ^gnat ad Magnes. ^ull.
Martyr. Apol. 2. Tertull. de Idol Eus^b. l. 4, 23 de Dionis. August. de verb.
Apoll. sermon. 15.
as being consecrated to the resurrection and service of the Lord Jesus: for
which end also it was kept in the primitive Churches, as appears by most
ancient and authentic writers. Neither did Pathmos more distinctly denote a
certain and known Island, and John a certain and known person, then did the
Lords day a day certain, and known especially unto Christians, unto whom the
Apostle wrote. Whereunto also agrees that of Austin, This Lords day is
therefore so called, because on that day the Lord rose again, or that by the
very name i^ might teach us, how it ought to be consecrated to the Lord.

The second reason is, because the sanctification of the Sabbath (the
circumstantiall change notwithstanding) does as well belong to us in our times,
as to the Israelites in theirs; whether we respect the Reason of the
commandment, or the end. The reason is taken from the example of God himself,
who rested the seventh day from the works of creation. The ends are, 1, that we
framing our selves to Gods example, after six days spent in servile works, or
works of acquisition, might rest the seventh. 2. That we might recount with
our selves, not only with thankful, but also composed hearts, as the creation
of man, 1 Pet. 1, 3.
and of all other things for man's good, so also his re-creation, and renovation
clearly shineing in the resurrection of Christ from the dead. 3. That
sequest^ing our hearts, tongues, Esaias 58, 13.
and hands from every servile work (so far as humain infirmity will bea^) we
might cons^crate unto God a certain and set time, and day, for the works of
piety toward him, and of charity toward men. And albeit the state of
Israel of old compared with ours, Gal. 4, 1.
was childish, and elementa^ie, and so needed the more helps both for
restraint, and supportance; yet have not we atteyned to such manlike
perfection, as that we need none at all in this kind.

And (not to meddle with the table of Christians, whose ave^s^es from the due
sanctification of this day gives no obscure testamonie, that the same is
sacred, and of God, from which their profane conversation so much abhors)
how behooffull, and necessary it is for the true worshippers of God, that for
some certain, and whole day they should empty, and disburden their hearts of
their earthly cares (though in themselves lawful) that so they might wholly
consecrate themselves to God, publicly in his house, and privately in their
own; partly by preparing themselves, and theirs for the public worship, and
ministry, and partly by calling to mind in themselves, and instructing, and
examining of those which belong unto them, as they ought, touching the things
which they have publicly heard; as also in m^ditateing of the most glorious
works of Gods hands, the very experience of every godly, and devout man may
teach him. He that sels himself to the holy, and severe observation of this the
Lords Sabbath, turning away his foot from the Sabbath, not to do that wherein he
delights, Esaias. 58, 13, 14.
on the Lords holy day, and calling the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, and honorable and shall honor him, not doing hi^ own ways, nor
performing his own pleasure, or speaking his own words; then shall he delight
himself in the Lord, and he will cause him to ^ide upon the high places of the
earth, and feed him with the heritage of Jacob his father, because the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it: Where as on the contrary, no man does or can neglect
the same without apparent prejudice and wrong to piety, and goodness both in
himself, and those under him. To let pass other things, how easily does this
thought steal into the heart not thoroughly persuaded of the holiness of this
day? what now! There is in the day no holiness by Gods appointment, save only,
as in it, the public sermons of the church with prayer, and thanksgiving are
to be frequented, and performed: for me to be present at every sermon,
specially made in the city, both on the Lords day, and every other day of
the week, my special calling, and worldly affairs will not permit: Besides, it
were very commodious for me on this Lords day, to make an end of such or such
a work which I have in hand, to deal in such a business, to undertake such a
journey; And what should hinder me from so doing? But provided always, upon
this condition, that look what this day wants, the morrow, or next day shall
plentifully supply: or, if it so fall out, thorough mine importunate bu^sines,
that I be something more behind this week in these things, I will certainly,
and at the furthest, the next week be so much the more frequent in them, and so
make God, and my soul amends. And why (as is the guise of ill debtors) will not
men desire, and take longer day, even to months, and years also? considering
how on the one side the heart of man is daily faster taken and held by the bait
of worldly profit, and pleasure; and on the other, less affectioned to Gods
holy word, by the less frequent hearing of it. And hence, alas, comes it to
pass, that true piety languisheth so much in the most, and with it such other
christian virtues as use to accompany it. Hence flow those tears of sorrow,
and lamenting, which no true christian casting his eyes upon the reformed
churches can forbear.

The third Reason is taken from that Apostolical determination (wrested by
many to a contrary meaning) Coloss. 2, 16, 17. Colos. 2, 16. 17.
Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or drink, or in respect of a feast or
new moon, or sabbaths; which are the shadow of good things to come, but the
body is Christ. Whence it appears more then plainly, that only those
sabboths are abolished by Christ's comeing in the flesh, which were types and
figures of Christ to come, of which sort as there were not a few instituted of
God by Moses, so does this Apostle here, and elsewhere sufficiently declare the
abrogateing, and abolishing of the same by Christ. But that the Sabbath, of
which we now speak comes in that reckoning we plainly deny.

For, 1. In its primary institution Genesis 2. there can nothing be found not
wholly moral. Let a man having many e^es as Argus, search the same with a
candle, he seeks (as we say) a knot in a bul^ush, if he think to find in it
any either shadow of Christ, or shadow of shadow. If any shall except, that God
by Moses did enjoin unto the Israelites the sanctification of this day, that it
might be a sign between him, and Israel throughout their generations, Exodus
31, 13.
that they might know, that he is the Lord that does sanctify them, I do
answer, first, in the words of Arminius, Armin. in theol. disp. pr^v. p. 186,
187.
that the Reason upon which God did afterward commend unto his people, the
sanctification of the sabbath because it was a sign between God and his
people, that it was Jehovah that sanctified them, may be applied to the times
of the new testament, and further with them also the sabboths sanctification.
2. Admit that this use were ceremonial, and typical in the fourth
commandment, yet were there no force in the consequence from one end and use
typical, and ceremonial, superinduced, and brought in upon the precept, to
prove the precept it self ceremonial, and typical in the institution. By the
same reason it may be affirmed, that both the Covenant of God made with
Abraham, I will be thy God, Genesis 49, 3.
and the God of thy seed, as also the right of the first born, for a double
port on, and many things more of like consideration, were merely ceremonial,
and typical, seeing that even unto them also, were annexed, and that by Gods
appointment, diverse typical, and temporal respects: Gal. 3. 8, 16, 17.
of which notwithstanding none soundly minded will deny, that the one is
evangelical, and the other natural. 3. Considering that the observation of
this sabbath was either enjoined (as I persuade my self it was from Genesis 2, 1,
2, 3. and Exodus 16, 26, 30.) to Adam, in innocence and not yet needing Christ;
or at least, that the reason of the institution did fit the state of innocence
as well, as it did the Israelites afterward I do undoubtedly conclude, that
the same Sabbath in the primarie, and essential institution thereof is not to
come upon their file, which as the shadows of future things had Christ for the
body.

Fourthly, I argue from that premonition of Christ Math. 24, 20. Pray that your
flight be not in winter nor on the Sabbath. Mat. 24, 20
I am not ignorant how the most divines both ancient, and later do understand
this sermon (as Chrisostom says) as made of the Jews; seeing that, Chrisost
ho^^ 77. (...) Mat. 24.
as the same author has it, neither the Apostles did observe the Sabbath day,
neither yet were they in Judea when these things were done of the Romans: many
of them having departed this life, and the rest (if any survived) having
bestowed themselves in other places. But (with due reverence to them all be it
spoken) it seems by the text to be otherwise. For 1. Christ made not this
sermon to the Jews, (...). 3.
as Jews, but to his disciples, and those alone, and the same coming unto him
secretly to be taught by him: whom he forewarned in the same place how that
first at the hands of the Jews in Judea, and after, of the Gentiles every
where, they should be evil entreated for his names sake. v. 3, 4, 9. 25, 26.
with Luke 21. 12. Secondly, our Savior in saying Pray ye, makes it plain, that
that he speaks of them, and their associates unto whom he speaks, to wit,
Christians. Lastly how could it be that Christ, who by his death (now drawing
so near as that there was but a step unto it) was to abrogate, and abolish all
Jewish ceremonies, and shadows, should to carefully provide for the so
religious observation of a shadowish, and ceremonial sabbath: and that not for
a day or two, but for so many years after the same his death; Could any thing
more weighty be spoken by Christ, or which could more deeply imprint in the
hearts of men a religious regard of the Sabbath, then that it behooved them to
obte^n by prayer at Gods hands, that they might not be const^eined unto that
thing although permitted them of God in case of urgent necessity, which might
violate and interrupt the public, and solemn sanctification thereof; It is
true then which Chrysostom says, that the Apostles did not observe the
Sabbath, to wit, Jewish: but the Christian Sabbath, o^ Lords day they did
undoubtedly celebrate.

The fifth and last Reason may be fetched from the very Gentiles themselves, who
directed by the glimps of the light of nature, how darkly soever shineing in
them, had their holy days, and some of the same such, as in which not so much
as the pleading, Var (...)
and determining of suites were admitted. It seems natural, that some day,
and moral that some day certain, and distinct, be sacred unto God: and the
same (as Iunius says) every seventh day): (...) Genesis 2, 2.
in which men forbearing all servile works, may consecrate, and give themselves
to God in the duties of piety, and of charity to men. Which with what
hinderance unto the one, and other is every where neglected, can scarce either
be uttered, or conceaved. For what tra^va^l if upon the overslipping of the
most seasonable seed-time, a slender harvest follow; or that (the market day
being neglected) penu^ie of provision should be found in the family; We christ
an^ have the Lords day by the Lord Christ assigned us for the exercises of
piety, and mercy, in which he offers, and exhibits h^rself in the fruits of
his gracious presence in a singular manner to be seen, and enjoyed of his,
religiously observing the same. Let us at no hand (as alike unmindfull of Gods
ordinance and man's infirmity suffer) the fruit of such a benefit to die in our
hands: but let us accordingly acknowledge the same in thought, word, and work,
to his honor, and our own good.

CHAP. VIII. Of the exercise of Prophecy.
THere are they (whose names I forbear, for their credits sake) who have not
spared, and that in their public writings, to lay to our charge, that we will
needs have all, and every member of the Church a Prophet, and to prophecy
publicly. With what minds they let loose their tongues to utter these, and
many mo most false and absurd vituperies against us, we leav it to God to
judge, who knows: with what conscience, and desert of credit therein, unto
thee (Christian Reader) into whose hands this our Apology shall come.

We learn from the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 14, 3. that he who prophesies speaks
unto men to edification, exhortation, and comfort: which to perform
conveniently, and as becomes the church-assemblie, we make account comes within
the compass but of a few of the multitude; happily two or three in each of our
churches, considering their weak, and depressed estate. Touching prophecy then
we think the very same, that the Synod held at Embden 1571 has decreed in
these words. 1. In all churches, whether but springing up, Harm Synod (...).
page 21 22.
or grown to some ripenes, let the order of prophecy be observed, according to
Paul's institution. 2. Into the fellowship of this work are to be admitted not
only the ministers, but the teachers too, as also of the Elders and Deacons,
yea even of the multitude, which are willing to confir their gift received of
God, to the common utilitie of the Church: but so as they first be allowed by
the judgment of the ministers, And as the Apostle somet^mes said, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
We beleev, and therefore we speak, so because we beleev with the Belgic
churches, that this exercise is to be observed in all congregations, therefore
we also observe it in ours. Luke 2, 46, 47 and (...) 4, 15, 16. Ad. 8, 4 n^th 11
19, 20. 21. and chapter 13. 14 15 16 and chapter 18, 24, 25, 26, and ^
Of this our both faith and practice, we have these amongst other special
foundations.

The first we fetch from the examples in the Jewish church, where liberty both
for teaching and disputing publicly both in temple and synagogue, was freely
given to all gifted accordingly, without respect had to any office.

If any object, that the examples of Christ, and the Apostles in this case are
incompetent, seeing that Christ was furnished with his own, and the Apostles
with his authority; he alleges that which is true in it self, but to small
purpose; considering we lay not our foundation in this, that Christ and his
Apostles so d^d; but in that liberty so to do, was always, and in all places
granted, and sometimes offered them. This liberty they obtained not by the
authority of Christ, which the Rulers of the Synagogues and Temple no more
acknowledged then they did Christ himself: but by the order then received, and
still continued to this day amongst the Jews, In. 18, 18.
that they whom with the Scriptures they call wise men, without all regard of
public office, having any word of exhortation to the people, should say on,
as we have it written Act. 13, 23. Mat. 23. 34. 1 Cor. 1, 20.
Whereunto ^ad, that diverse of them in whom we instance were furnished with no
such authority specially from Christ.

The second we take from the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 14* where to the full, he
informs the church at Corinth of the order of that exercise, which they had
formerly violated. (...) 1 Cor 14 (...) P. 1. (...) on 1 Cor. 14, 31.
Which whole order (according to Bezaj is apparently taken, from the received
custom in the Jewish Synagogues. Which custom says Peter Martyr) seeing it was
of ^uld both good and laudable in the synagogues of the Jews, the Apostle
disdeyns not to transfer it to the church of Christ. of which also he tenders
this reason, because it was not a legal ceremony, but servs to the
edification of the Church. If this be so, then must they needs take their marks
amiss, who imagine that the Apostle in this place speaks of the extraordinary
gift, and exercise of prophecy. And although it be not like, that the Church
of Corinth was, in that so plenteous effusion of the gifts of the spirit,
altogether destitute of extraordinary prophets, yet that the Apostle did not
in that place aim at them, may be proved by many mo, and the same (as I
think) firm arguments drawn from the self same text. Which that I may do the
more commodiously, the prudent reader must call to mind, that upon the
foundation of the extraordinary prophets, ^ph. 2, 20.
as well as of the very Apostles, the church is built; and that that mystery
of Christ, chapter 3, 4. 5.
by the spirit immediately, and infalliblie inlightining their mind, was in
the same manner, though not in all in the same degree, revealed to them, and
the other.

This so considered, 1. It seems altogether unprobable, that so many Prophets
of this rank (although inf^riour in gifts) should have been found in that one
small congregation, as the Apostle insinuates ver. 24, 29, 31, that Corinth had.

2. The Apostles in Corinth not only behaved themselves inordinately in the
church, but withal (as by interpreters from ver. 29, and 32 is generally
delivered were subject to error in the very doctrine which they propounded;
which to affirm of the extraordinary Prophets, these skillful m^ister
builders, who together with the Apostles la^d the foundation, together
participated the same holy spirit, seems not a little to shake the foundation
of Christian religion. And if one of these extraordinary prophets might (...),
why not they all: And (...) the Prophets, why not the Apostles. And ^f they
might (...), how should it appear, that they have not cried? And so by
consequence, what either then was, o^ now is the firmnes and certainty of the
Christian faith?

3. Seeing that the Apostle ver. 34, 35, injoyns women deep silence in this
church exercise, not permitting them a all to speak; it seems most plain that
he has no^y, nor respect at all, to these extraordinary gifts and endowments
of prophecy authorizing even women furnished with them, Fool 15, 21. Judge. 5,
1. ^ Kin. 22, 14 (...) 2, 36. Apoc. 2, 20.
to speak publicly, and in men's presence, as appears in Mirjam, Deborah,
Huldah, Anna, as also even in Iezabel her self in regard of order, and others.

Lastly, the Apostle ver. 36, upbraideth those very Prophets unto whom he
directs his speech, as such, as from whom the word of God came not: but
without cause, yea not without notable injury, if they were extraordinary
Prophets, that is, inspired with the holy Ghost, and his immediate instruments:
seeing that from these kind of Prophets, as well as from Paul the Apostle the
word of God came, though in different degree, and measure.

The third foundation of this exercise is laid in the manifould, and the same
most excellent ends atteynable only by this means. 1. That God may be
glorified, whilst every one does administer to another the gift, 1 Pet. 4, 10,
11.
which he has received, as good dispensers of the ma^^ssuld grace of God. 2.
That the spirit be not extinguished, that is the gift of prophecy, 1 This. 5,
9 2^.
or teaching; in which it may so come to pass, that some in the church, though
no ministers, may excel the very pastors themselves. 3. That such as are to
be taken into the ministry of the church, 1 Timothy 1, 3. 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Apo. 2,
2, 7. with c. 1, 11.
may both become, and appear apt to teach. This seeing the Apostle would have
done, he would questionless have some order for the doing of it: which,
excepting this of prophecy, we have none of Apostolical institution. 4. That
the doctrine of the church may be preserved pure, See (...). Acent. ^ra^ag.
^ath. page 168, 169. Iuke 2, 40. and 4, 21, 2^. Act. 17, 2. and 18, 24, 26, 28.
1 Cor 14 35 (...) l. 6, c. 12, 3^ 1 Cor. 14, 4, 24, 25. Act. 20 28. (...)
against Tu^^. S^^h. pa. 67, 68. (...) Mart. in 1 (...). 14, 29.
from the insection of error: which is far more easily corrupted, when some
one or two alone in the church speak all, and all the rest have deep, and
perpetual silence enjoined them. 5. That things doubtful arising in teaching
may be cleared, things obscure opened, things (...) convinced; and lastly, that
as by the beating together of two stones (...) appears, so may the light of
the truth more clearly ^hine by disputations, quest^ons, and answers modestly
had, and made, and as becomes the church of Saints, and work of God. 6. For
the edification of the church, and conversion of them that beleiv not: and this
the raither because it apperteyneth not properly to the pasteurs, as Pastors,
to turn goats or wolves into sheep, but raither to (...) the flock and sheep of
Christ, in which the H. Ghost has made them overseers. 7. And lastly, lest by
excluding the commonaltie and multitude from Church affairs, the people of God
be divided, and charity lestened, and familiarity, and good will be
extinguished between the order of ministers and people.

CHAP. IX. Of Temples.
TO speak nothing of the office of the Christian magistrate in demolishing the
monuments, and snares of Idolatry (which these Temples want not, if themselves
be not such) I account that the consideration is one of a temple, (...) 2, 15.
as a temple, that is, a holy place, as it is counted of the most, consecrated
either to God himself, or to some Saint (made therein a false God, Pet. Mart
(...) 2 (...). 10, 27.
though being a true Saint) whose name it bears; and which for its magnificent
building, and superstitious form agrees far better to the (...) religion
pompous, and idolatrous as it is, then to the Reformed, Ioh. Wolph ^n 2 King.
17, 19, and 19, 6.
and Apostolical simplicity. And another, and the same far diverse, of a
place, although in the house sometimes consecrated for such a temple, partly
natural, which is simply necessary to every (...) action; partly civil, in
which the church may well, and conveniently assemble together. The former use I
deem altogether unlawful; the latter not so, but lawful, provided always
that the opinion of holiness be removed, and withal such blemishes of
superstition, as wherewith things lawful in themselves are usually stained.

CHAP. X. Of things indifferent.
WE do so repute many things as indifferent, or mean in themselves and then
own nature (and as houlding a middle place as it were, between the things
simply commanded, and the things simply forbidden of God, as that the same
things being once drawn into use, and practice, do necessarily undergo the
respect and consideration of good or evil. This the Apostle teaches 1 Corinthians. 14. in his so diligent warning the Church of Corinth, that all things
be done decently, in order, and to edification. The things then thus accounted
indifferent, when they once come into use in the church, do either work the
exercises of religion the more comely, orderly, and edificative, and are such
as without which, the same exercises cannot be performed but confusedly,
uncomelily, and un^iuitfully, at least in part, or else they swarve from the
Apostolical Canon. With this commandment of the Apostle, yea of Christ the
Lord, agrees the rule of the philosophers, The accessorie fell^w^th the nature
of the principal. For example. Let the principal, as they speak, be some
natural good thing, the very least accessorie or circumstance, by which this
principal is rightly, and orderly furthered, and promoted undergoes also the
consideration of a natural good. The same rule houlds in actions civil: much
more in the things, which appertein to religion, and Gods worship. I therefore
conclude, that the least ^ite, or ceremony serving rightly, and orderly to
further the principal act, and exercise of religion, does worthily obteyn,
after a sort, the respect and denomination of a religious, and ecclesiastical
good thing: which principal act if it do not truly, and effectually promote
and advance, it is a vain addition at the best, beseeming only vain purposes,
and persons, Math. 15, 9.
which worship God in vain, teaching for doctrines men's traditions: seeing
whatsoever is to be done in the church, is also, and first to be taught, that
so it may be done.

2. Whatsoever has being in nature, is some certain thing first, and properly,
and to be reduced to some certain, and distinct head. Now all things whatsoever
in use, either in, or about Gods worship, may and must be referred necessarily
to some one of these three heads. Either they are things natural, and simply
necessary to the exercise; of which sort are the natural circumstances of
time, and place, without which no finite action can be performed: also for the
administering of Baptism, either a font or other vessel to hold water: and so
for other adjoints absolutely necessary for the administering of the holy
things of the Church: or secondly, they are things civil, and comely: as for
example, A convenient place in which the church may conveniently, and comelily
meet together, not a stable, or swynestye, also that habit of the minister,
that coveting of the L. Table, those ministering vessels, and other accessories,
and appurt^nances whatsoever, without which the holy things of God, cannot be
dispensed so ^^villy, and comely, as is meet. Or lastly, they are properly
things sacred, and holy, and by consequence, parts of external divine worship:
and the same either commanded by God, and so lawful, or of man's devise, and
therefore superst^t^ous.

Now if any shall further ask me, what power then I ascribe either to the
civil magistrate, or Church-governors for mak^ng laws about things
indifferent? I answer touching Church-governers first, Izec. 44. 11 Man. 20.
2^. 2 Cor. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1, 3.
being to treat by and by of the Magistrate, that no such power, to speak
properly, belongs unto them; as being not Lords but servants of the church,
under Christ the only Lord thereof: exercising, as says Austin, from Christ,
and the Apostles a m^mb^^^, not a Lordship: and who therefore are to learn, if
there will be c^ment with their (...), August of the (...) of God l. 19. B^r^t.
of Cause. (...). 2.
Which (...) them, that a (...) better becomes them, then as^pter, as Bernard
speaks, For to ^^ake laws, by all men's grant, belongs to them, and them
only, who do swey ^^^pters, (...) Lords (...).

Moreover the holy scriptures every where teach, that the highest
Church Officers, and governers are but ambassadors of God, and interpreters,
and proclaymers or cryers of his word. But neither (...) nor interpreter, nor
crier, no nor the herald, the most honorable of all proclaimers, (...) contr.
3. l. 5, c. 7,
or publishers of Edicts, can command any thing (...) of the least matter by
his own authority, as lunius says rightly. It is certain, that the governers
of Churches do stand in need of wisdom and discretion for the applying, and
determining of the common rules of order and comlynes taken from the Scripture,
and common sense, to certain cases, and according to certain circumstances: But
what makes this for the power of making laws in the Church? which as M.
Perkins makes account, is a part of Christ's prerogative royal: (...) c. 18.
considering withal, that neither the Church, not the meanest member thereof
is further bound unto these their determinations, then they apper to agree with
order, and comlines: neither are the ministers in any thing at all, (as are the
magistrates in many things to be obeyed for the authority of the commander,
(...) on 2 (...). of (...).
but for the reason of the commaundment, which the ministers are also bound in
duty to manifest, and approve unto the consciences of him over whom they are
set.

CHAP. XI. Of civil Magistrates.
WE beleev the very same touching the civil Magistrate with the Belgic
reformed Churches, and willingly subscribe to their confession: and the more,
because, what is by many restreyned to the Christian Magistrate, they extend
indefinitely, and absolutely to the Magistrate whomsoever. And that surely upon
good ground: seeing the magistracy is one, and the power the same, whether the
person be christian or heathen: neither is there wanting in an heathen
magistrate (that he might rule as he ought) authority of order, but will of
person: neither is his power increased by the accession of christianity, but
only sanctified, as is first his person. The Prince rules over his subjects,
as he is a Prince, and they subjects simply, not as faithful or christian, he
or they. Only Christ the Lord of our faith has the faithful (as faithful)
for his subjects: neither are the subjects of Kings as subjects, ^ame part of
the church, but of the kingdom. ^p of Ch^^. to ^citus ^. 35.


Besides, there is one and the same christian faith of the Prince and subject,
and all things common unto both, which spring from the same; seeing that in
Christ Jesus there is neither servant, nor freeman, I ad neither magistrate,
nor subject, but all are one in him. As therefore none, no not the least power
of public administrat on comes to the subjects by their christianity; to
neither is the Princes, thereby at all increased. And indeed how can it? The
magistrate though^-Heathen has power, as the minister of God for the good of
his subjects to command and procure in and by good, R^n. 13, 4.
and lawful manner, and means, whatsoever apperteines either to their
natural, or spiritual life, so the same be not contrary to Gods word: upon
which word of God if it beat, God forbid, that the christian magistrate should
take liberty to use or rather abuse his authority for the same: which yet if
he do either the one, or other, whether by commanding what God forbids, or by
forbidding what God commands, seeing it comes by the fault of the person, not
of the office, the subject is not f^^ed from the bond of allegiance, but as
still tied to obedience as active for the doing of the thing commanded if it be
lawful, so passive, if unlawful, by suffering patiently the punishment though
unjustly inflicted.

Lastly if any civil, and coactive power in things whether civil, or
ecclesiastical, come to the magistrate, by his christianity, then if it so
fall out that he make defection from the same, whether by idolatry, or
heresy, or profanes, it must follow, that thereupon his kingly power is
dim^nished, and abridged: whereby how wide a window, or gate rather would be
opened to sed^tions subjects under pretext (specially catholic) religion, to
taise tumults in kingdoms, no man can be ignorant.

CHAP. XII. Of the Church of England.
THere remains one, and that a great matter of exception against us, and the
same the fountain well nigh of all our calamity: to wit, that we seem
evill-affected toward the church of England, and so averse from the same, as
that we do no less then make a plain secession, and separation from it.

I answer, First, that our faith is not negative: as Papists use to object to
the Evangelical churches, nor which consists in the condemning of others, and
wipeing their names out of the bead-^oul of churches, but in the edifying of
our selves: neither require we of any of ours in the confession of their faith,
that they either renounce, or in one word contest with the church of England,
whatsoever the world clamours of us this way. Our faith is founded upon the
writings of the prophets, and Apostles, in which ^o mention of the church of
England is made. We deem it our duty what is found in them to beleev with the
heart to righteousness, and to confess with the tongue to salvation. Romans 10,
10*


Secondly, we accord (as far as the Belgic, and other Reformed churches) with
the Church of England in the Articles of faith, and heads of Christian religion
published in the name of that church, and to be found in the Harmony of the
Confessions of faith.

Thirdly, if by the Church be understood the Catholic Church dispersed upon
the face of the whole earth, we do willingly acknowledge, that a singular part
thereof, and the same visible, and conspicuous is to be found in the land, and
with it, do profess and practice what in us lays, communion in all things in
themselves lawful, and done in right order.

But and if by the word Church be understood a spiritual politic body, such
as was in her time, the Church of Israel; and in hers the church of Rome,
Corinth, the seven churches of Asia, and others with them partaking of the same
Apostolical constitution, and as unto which do apperteyn the Oracles of God,
Sacraments, Censures, Government, and ministry ecclesiastical, with other
sacred institutions of Christ; I cannot but confess, and profess (though with
great grief) that it is to us matter of scruple, which we cannot overcome, to
give that honor unto it, which is due from the servants of Christ to the
Church of Christ, rightly collected, and constituted.

And, that there may be place left in the eyes of the prudent Reader for our
defense in this case, so far forth as equity and reason will permit, he must
once, and again be entreated by me, seriously to weigh with himself, and in his
heart, this one advertizement following.

That a man may do a thing truly pleasing, and acceptable to God, it suffices
not, that both the door in his person be accepted of God, the thing done
commanded by God, and that he do it with good, and holy affection before God,
except withal, and first he be possessed of that state, and condition of life,
which may affoard him a lawful calling to that work. That a man, though never
so good, with never so good a mind, should exercise the office, or do (though
the best) works of a Magistrate, father of famillie, housband, steward,
citizen, or messenger, except he were first lawfully called, and preferred to
the state of a Magistrate, master of sam^lie, housband, or the like; so far
were he from deserving any praise for so doing, as on the contrary he most
justly incur^ed the censure of great rashness, and violation of all order in
family and common wealth; as taking unto himself that honor, unto which he
was not called of God. He^^. 5. 4.
The same houldeth, and that specially in course of Religion, which is the
specially state of man's life: so as if any either as a Pastor dispense the
holy things of the ministerial Church, without a lawful pastoral calling
going before; or participate in the same, out of a just, and lawful
Church State; neither that dispensation, nor this participation can be
warranted, but both the one, and other are usurpations, and in which is seen
not the use, but abuse of holy things, and confusion of order. And as it
behooves every person first to beleev, and know, that he is truly a Christian,
and partaker of the grace of Christ, before he can hope to please God in the
performance of this or that particular Christian work; so does it also concern
every Christian to provide, that he be first possessed of a just, and lawful
Church Order, before he so much as touch with his least finger the holy things
of the Church thereunto proper, and peculiar. Proper, I say, and peculiar,
amongst which I do not simpl^e reckon the hearing of the word, which both
lawfully may, and necessarily ought to be done, not only of Christians though
members of no particular church, but even of Infidels, profane persons,
excommunicates, and any others: as being that in which no communion spiritual
passes, either ecclesiastical, or personal, between the teacher, and heater,
but according to some union ecclesiastical or personal going before: seeing
that Christian says comes by hearing the gospel, by faith union, and from
union communion.

This thus prem sed, I will speak a few things of the Church of England; not by
way of accusation of it, but for our own purgation in the eyes of the godly,
and equal Reader, of the imputed c^ime of Schism, so far as truth, and equity
will bear.

And first, seeing that the people of God is materially (as they speak, the
church of God, it is required to the constitution of a holy Church of God, Rom
1, 7. 1 Cor. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 1, 1.
that the people be holy, or saints and sanctified i^ Christ Jesus: truly, and
internally in regard of God, and their own consciences; externally, and in
appearance in respect of others, whom it concerns to discern and judge of them,
according to the word of God, and rule of charity. And considering that our
question is about the Church external, and visible, as it is called, we are
not so fond, or raitha^ frant^ck, as to require, in respect of others, other
holiness in the members thereof, then that which is visible and external.

Now how marvaylous a thing is it, and lamentable withal, that amongst
Christians any should be found so far at ods, with Christian holiness, as to
think that others then apparently holy at the least, deserved admittance into
the fellowship of Christ's church, and therewith of Christ? Do, or can the
grat^ous promises of God made to the Church, the heavenly blessings due to the
Church, the seals of divine grace given to the Church, apperteyn to others
then such? Are others to be admitted into the family of God, the kingdom of
Christ, and as it were the suburbs of heaven? The Church of God is by him
called, and destinated to advance his glory in the holiness of their lives, and
conversations; Calvin in 1 Conn. c. 5.
what then have those to do with it, or it with those, who, as Calvin says,
Idem in Romans 2, 24.
live not but with Gods dishonor? For they, as the same author both truly and
holily affirms) who are called, and accounted the people of God, do bear as
it were in their forheads, the name of God, whereupon it cannot but come to
pass, Revel. 4. 8.
that before men even God himself after a sort should be steyned with their
filth. And this I deem the raither to be observed, seeing that there are to be
found, and these not a few, who would thrust upon the churches of our thrice
holy Lord, a very stage-like holiness: stoutly striveving to make it good, that
to constitute a true, and lawful member of the visible church, no more is
required, then that a man with his mouth confess Christ, although in his works
he plainly declare himself to be of the synagogue of Satan. Tit. 1, 16.
But what says the holy spirit of these impure spirits? They profess they
know God, says the Apostle, but in their works they deny him, being
abominable, and rebellious, and to every good work reprobate. Are abominable
persons to be brought into the temple of God? rebellious persons into the
kingdom of God? such as are reprobate unto every good work into the family of
God, 1 Cor. 5.
which is as it were the Storehouse of all good works? If any one that is
called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or idolatour, or rayler, or
drunkard, or extortioner, or any way a wicked one, such a one by the Apostles
direction, is to be expelled, and driven out of the churches confines. And
seeing that, as one truly says, It is a matter of greater contumely to thrust
out, then to keep out a guest, with what conscience can such plagues be
received into the church, to the purgeing out whereof the same church, furnished
for that end with the power of Christ, stands in conscience bound? or by what
authority I pray, can such persons be compelled into the bosom of the spouse
of Christ, as for the expelling of whom far from her fellowship, 1 Ioh. 1, 6.
and imbraceing all authority ought to conspire? He that says he has
fellowship with God, and walks in darkness is a liar, and does not truly.
Profession of Christ therefore with the mouth, Ioh. 8. 40.
in those that work the works of darkness, and so by consequence, that by which
a man is raither branded for a natural child of the devil, then marked for a
true member of the Church. Psa. 101, 7.
Lastly, David that holy man of God, and tipe of Christ, does holily profess,
that he who works deceit, shall not continue in his house: And shall the
workers of decept, and of all wickedness not only be admitted, but even
constreyned into the house of the living God, Psalm. 93, 5.
which the church is: O Jehovah, holiness becomes thine house to length of
days. Which notwithstanding (a sickness desperate of all remedy) that so it
stands with the Church of England, no man to whom England is known, can be
ignorant: seeing that all the natives there, and subjects of the kingdom,
although never such strangers from all show of true piety, and goodness, and
fraught never so full with many most heinous impieties, and vices (of which
rank whether there be not an infinite, and far the greater number, I would to
God it could with any reason be doubted) are without difference compelled, and
enforced by most seveere laws civil and ecclesiastical, into the body of
that church. And of this confused heap (a few, compared with the rest, godly
persons mingled among) is that national church, commonly called the Church of
England, collected, and framed. And such is the material constitution of that
church. But if now you demand of me, how it is formally constituted; and
whether upon profession of faith, and repentance (in word at least) made by
them of years, any combynation, and consociation of the members into particular
congregations, (which consociation does formally constitute the ministerial
Church, and members thereof, as both the Scriptures and reason manifest) either
is, or has been made since the universal and Antichristian apostasy and
defection in popery? Nothing less; but only by their parrish perambulation,
as they call it, and standing of the houses in which they dwell. Every subject
of the kingdom dwelling in this or that parrish, whether in city, or
country, whether in his own or other man's house, is thereby, ipso facto, made
legally a member of the same parrish in which that house is situated: and
bound, will he, nill he, fit, or unfit, as with iron bonds, and all his with
him, to participate in all holy things, and some unholy also in that same
parrish church.

If any object, that yet the minister of the parish may suspend from the supper
of the Lord flagitious persons, and so by complaint made to M. Chancelour, or
M. Official, procure their excommunication; to let pass, that this is merely
a matter of form for the most part, and a remedy as ill, as the disease, I do
answer, that even by this is proved undeniablie that which I intend: viz. that
all these parrishioners before mentioned, are not without, 1 Corin. 5, 11, 12.
but within, and members of the Church (and the same, as before constituted)
whom she judges.

There is besides these a third evil in the way, and the same as predominant,
and overtopping all other things in that church, as was Saul higher then all
the rest of the people: and with whose Rehoboam-like ^inger we miserable men
are pressed, and oppressed: and that is, the Hierarchicall church government in
the hands of the Lord Bishops and their substitutes: (the very same with that
of Rome, the Pope the head only cut off, upon whose shoulders also many,
though not without notable injury, would place the supreme Magistrate) and
administered by the self same Canon law.

Now this vast, and unsatiable Hierarchicall gulf, swallowing up and devouring
the whole order, Park. eccles. pol 3, 35. and Hier. generally.
and use of the presbytery, and therewith the peoples liberty, and withal,
by M. Parkers testimony (with whom a Bishop in England is the Pastor of the
whole diocese, and the Priests or ministers, only his delegates and helpers)
the very office of the Pastors themselves, as did the seven lean, and evil
favored kine the seven fat, and the seven wizened ears the seven full that
went before them, Genesis 41.
and so by consequence, not being of Christ the Lord, 2 These. 2, 4.
but of him rayther, who opposes and advances himself against whatsoever is
called God, or is worshipped; so as he sits in the Temple of God, as God, 1
Chran. 29, 11, 12, 13, 19.
(for unto God alone dwelling in his Temple it apperteyns to appoint the
offices of the ministers, and to prescribe the peoples bonds) our hands are
bound by that supreme, and sole authority of Jesus Christ in his Churches,
upon which both the order of Presbytery, and liberty of people, and office of
Pastor are founded, 1 Cor. 5, 4.
and from whom as the one only Lord, all ecclesiastical power flows, ch,
12, 5, 28.
and by whom all ministeries are instituted, from giving any the least honor
or obedience to the same hie^archicall exaltation in it self, or its
subordinates, which (as phylosophi^ teaches) are one with it.

Wherein yet I would not so be understood, as if we were at any defiance with
the persons of the Bishops, much less with the kings civil authority whereof
they are possessed, whether in matters civil or ecclesiastical. Romans 14, 14
Of their persons their own Lords shall judge, to whom they stand or fall. There
have been of that rank who in our Marian da^es have preferred the profession
of the truth of the gospel before their lives: I hope there are also of their
successors, who, if pressed with the same necessity (which God forbid) would
give the same testimony, though at the same rate, unto the same truth of God
revealed unto them.

Now as concerning their civil authority; albeit we do not beleev, that the
same is at all competent to the true ministers of the gospel, especially in
that eminency, external glory, and pomp of this world, in which they far
exceed many worldly princes, and rayther seem to represent the tryumphant,
then the militant church; yet for so much as they both obteyn the same by the
gift of the king, and exercise it in his name, we do not unwillingly yeald
honor, and obedience unto it, and to his majesty in it.

But whereas it seems unto many plain, and evident, that we may adjoin our
selves to the Church of England without any subjection, or relation unto the
spiritual government, and governers thereof; that is altogether beyond our
capacities: neither can we comprehend it, how it may be that he, who subjects,
and joins himself to any public, and politic body, or community, whether
spiritual, or civil, becomes not in so doing, ipso facto, subject to the
public government, and governers thereof, and undergoes not a relation, and
respect actually unto them. They raither are with all seriousnes to consider,
how faithfully, and sincerely they quit themselves, and their consciences before
God, and men, who contending, and proving in and by so many words, and
arguments, that the hierarchicall government is papal, and Antichristian, do
nevertheless submit themselves thereunto both in the respect, and relation
political formerly mentioned, and also in acts properly ecclesiastical, into
which the ecclesiastical government, and spiritual policy of the church does
necessarily diffuse it self. Now I do earnestly entreat thee, whosoever thou
art, acquainted with Belgic, or raither Christian liberty, Theodoret. Dial. 1.
and either free from the mists of prejudice, or if any way prejudiced, yet
not choosing raither to serve a preconceaved opinion, then to follow an apparent
truth, that thou would truly and ingenuously tell, whether if the
Magistrates here (from which they are far) should by public edict, under
severe penalty constreyn all, and every the native subjects of the country
into the bosom of the church, without any difference made, either in respect
of faith or manners, according to the place of their habitation, and should set
over this church so collected and constituted, an Hierarchicall Bishop
provincial or diocesan, in whose hands alone, with his Officials,
Chauncellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Court-keepers, canonical
authority should be placed, to constitute and depose ministers, excommunicate,
and absolve both ministers, and people, yea whole churches (yea with the living
the dead, that they may obteyn Christian burial): whether now in this confused
heap, and under this spiritual Lordship, thou would endure to remain either
Pastor or member. I suppose not. Colos. 2, 5.
You (brethren) have not so learned Christ; whom you acknowledge both for the
author of your faith, and instituter of your order ecclesiastical. Neither yet
we, having learned otherwise by the grace of God. Christ the king does gather,
and form unto himself another kind of kingdom amongst men, and the same to be
administered by other officers, and according to other laws. And if no place
upon the face of the truth should be free for us (poor creatures) refusing
upon mere conscience of God (as thou God the judge, and searcher of hearts
know) to commingle, and prostitute our selves in and unto this confusion, and
domination hierarchicall, we have most assured hope, that heaven it self is
open for us by Christ, who is the way, and whom in this duty also we do serve,
in which we shall at the length be fully free from this, and all other
encumbrances.

Our adversaries bear in hand not only others, but even us our selves also,
that we do for certain trifleing matters, and as they speak, circumstantiall
corruptions, sequester our selves from the Church of England. And as nurses use
to lisp with children, so they, that they might descend to our capacities, do
often and much instruct us, that unworthie members must be born in the church,
especially of private persons; that some corruptions at least in the discipline
and external rites, are to be tolerated; that there may be the temple of God,
though profaned; the holy city though without a wall; the field of the Lord,
though the enemy sowtares amongst the wheat; also a heap of wheat, though much
chafe commingled therewithal. And that we, dul-bayards as we are; may at the
length conceav those things, they very seriously inculcate and whet upon us in
these and the like considerations: as that the Israelitish church in its time
was steyned with almost all enormities, both for manners and faith: that unto
the same all Israelites and Jews whatsoever without difference, were violently
compelled by King Josiah and others; as also, that in the parable, all were
compelled to come to the marriage, good and bad, that the house might be filled.
Lastly, that in the Apostolic Churches themselves, there were not wanting some
who practiced, and others who taught vile, and evil things: that in one place
the discipline was neglected, in another the very doctrine of faith corrupted,
and many the like matters, which it were to long to repeat.

Surely, foolish were we if we knew not these things, impudent, if we denied
them to be true for the most part; and lastly, unequal, if we acknowledged
not, that many the same, or like blemishes after a sort, will, and do creep
into the Churches of our days: which yet to disclaym as unlawful for the
same, stood neither with wisdom, nor charity. But the prudent Reader may
plainly observe by the premises, that they are other matters, and of greater
weight, for the most part, wherewith we, and our consciences are pressed.

We do not judge it an evil intolerable (though greatly to be bewailed) that
evil men should be suffered in the church; but that all of most vile, and
desperate condition, that such, and so great a kingdom affoards, should
thereinto will they, nill they, be compelled: nor that the discipline (as they
call it) or ecclesiast call government instituted by Christ, is neglected or
violated, but that another plain contrary unto it is set up by law, and fully,
and publicly every where exercised: Neither lies our exception against any
personal, or acc^dentarie profanation of the Temple, but against the faulty
frame of it, in respect of the causes constitutive, matter and form: Neither
strive we about the walls of the city, but about the true, and lawful
citizens, the policy and government of the city of God, and essential
administration of the same.

But to give more full satisfaction to the indifferent reader, it seems worth
the labor to descend particularly to a few, and the same the chiefest
objections made on the contrary behalf. And of them, that which may and ought
to be said touching the Church of Israel, and its condition compared with the
christian churches seems to deserve the first place. And touching it; first,
the constitution of the Church of Israel is not to be considered in that whole,
much less apostaticall, nation, but in holy Abraham, from whom it came, and in
whom it was holy, as the lump in the first fruits, and the branches in the holy
root: Romans 11, 16.
and that by virtue of the gracious covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed, Genesis 17. 7.
first contracted with Abraham himself, and after renewed with his seed, whole
Israel. But now to affirm any such thing of the whole English nation were
foolish; to prove it impossible.

2. God does not now a days select, Exodus 10. 6. L^v. ^0 25.
and seve^ from others as his peculiar, any whole nation or people, as
sometimes he did the people of Israel, both ecclesiastically, and civilly: Act.
10, 35.
but in every nation they who fear God, and work righteousness are accepted of
him. These, in what nation soever combyning together in holy covenant, and
worshipping God after the prescript of his H. word are that holy nation, the
common wealth of Israel, 1 Cor 5, 10.
the Israel of God, the temple and tabernacle of the living God, in which he
has promised to dwell: these he would have scattered in all places of the
world, and to hold intercourse with the men of the world in the common affairs
of this life, for their gaming if it may be unto Christ: Act. 2, 42.
God adding daily unto the church such as should be saved. Whereas on the
contrary, unto the church of England, whereof all natural English are
together, and at once made members, it can hardly be, if at all, that any at
any time should be added.

3. The very land of Canaan was legally holy, (...) 19, ^^, 25. Genesis 14. (...).
and the land of the Lords inheritance, and whose fruit was to be circumcised,
and her sabbaths kept, by the Lords appointment: and in which alone by divine
^^ght (...) were to be paid. And as holy things are not to be mingled with, or
prost^tuted unto profane, so neither was any place in this land to be
permitted unto profane persons to dwell in. The seven profane nations, which
formerly had inhabited it, (...) 7, 15 Number. 1^. 13.
were altogether to be destroyed by the Israelites being to possess it for
their inheritance, neither was mercy to be showed them. After, if any, whether
born in the land, or strangers, did ought with an high hand, he was to be cut
off from among his people. (...) 15. 12 1^.
Herewith accords that of David the king, I will betime destroy all the wicked
of the land. Lastly, ^e that did not seek the Lord God of Israel with all his
heart, was to be put (...) death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.
Far be it from Godly princes, and other potentates in the world, to think, that
it behooveth them in this rigorous manner to deal with their subjects: although
there want not, who partly from a preposterous, and Iudaizeing zeal, and partly
to serve their own ambition, cease not to inculcate unto the kings of the earth,
above that is meet, the examples of the kings of Judah.

4. It is not true that the kings of Judah or Israel did const^^yn any into the
church by force, or compel them to undergo the condition of members, but only
being members, to do their duty. All the Israel^tes and posterity of Iakob,
had their part in the Lords covenant: unto which also they were bound to stand
under peril of cutting off from the Lords people, both spiritually and bodily,
according to the dispensation of the old Testament in the land of Canaan. But
of this our question is not for the present: That neither is to be considered,
whether king David, Solomon, Iehosaphat and others did force circumcision, and
other Mosaicall institutions upon the Edom^tes, Ammonites, and others by them
subdued, and held in civil subjection; or whether they compelled them by
coactive laws, would they, nould they, fit or unfit, into the Church of God.
That this was so, cannot be affirmed with modesty: which yet except it so
were, has nothing in it, which e^ther can hurt our cause, or help our
adversaries.

Lastly, he who well weighs with himself what legal, and typical holiness
was in use of old in Israel, shadowing out the true, and sp^ritual holiness; and
withal by how much, both the more clear revelat on of heavenly things, and
more plenteous grace of the spirit ^s afforded to the churches since Christ,
then was formerly to Israel, he shall see many things making for the
tolerating of much in Israel; which in us (...) plainly intolerable: See Rev.
2, 5. and 3, 16. and ^^thall Par^u^ on 1 Cor. 7, 11.
and that God will not use that patience and long-suffering toward any church
now, nor permit, or wink at those things in it, which for the hardness of their
hearts, he bore in that ancient people.

The parable of the tares Matthew. 13. follows; with which as with some
thunderboult, men both learned, and unlearned think us beaten all to fitters.

But first, these words, Let both grow together till the harvest, v. 30. (from
which alone they do dispute) Christ the Lord does not expound nor meddle with,
in the opening of the parable: from them therefore nothing firm can be
concluded. 2. Christ himself interprets the field, not the Churh, but the world
v. 38. as also the harvest not the end of the Church, but of the world, v. 39.
And if by the world, you understand the Church, you must needs say, that Christ
in the expounding of one parable, used another. 3. Both the text it self, verse.
28, 29, 30, 31.
and reason of the thing do plainly teach that he does not speak at all of
excommunication, which servs for the bettering of the tares, but of their
final rooting up to perd^tion. Lastly, admit Christ spoke of men apparently
wicked in the Church, Se^ S^ee. of chapter di^cip. 2 part m^th. 2. p. 24, 27, 25 28.
either not to be excommunicated in certain cases (which with Gellius Snecanus
I confidently deny) or not excommunicated as they ought to be, and therefore
to be born of private members; the former of which is too ordinary, especially
in Churches enjoying peace, and prosperity: the latter of which (the Church
not being desperately bent on evil) I easily assent to, yet does this place
affoard no medicine for our grief; which arises not from any corrupt, or
negligent administration of the Churches discipline, thorough the car^lesnes or
want of wisdom (it may be too much wisdom such as it is) of the administers
thereof, which are personal things; but from the very constitution of the
church it self, and subject of ecclesiastical both government and power. Yea,
I ad unto all these things, that we for our parts are willing in the business,
and controversy in hand to appeal unto the tribunal of this very parable,
and that expounded by our adversaries themselves, and do willingly condescend,
that by it alone judgment be given in this matter.

Our Savior Christ does plainly teach, that this field was sown with good seed
alone; and that after, whilst men slept, the enemy, the devil came, and sowed
^ares amongst the wheat. But on the contrary, in the sowing the English f^^ld,
whether we respect the nat^onall or parochial churches, together with the
wheat the tares, and that exceeding the other infinitely, were at first, and
yet are sown, and that of purpose, and under most severe penalt^^s. And hence
is the first and princ^pall pr^judice to our English harvest, and from which I
conceav all the rest to come. For unto this Chapter thus clapped, and clouted
together of all persons of all sorts, and spirits without difference, no man
equally and prudently weighing things, can deny, but that the pompous and
imperious Hierarchicall government, together with all its accessories does
right well accord.

To the things objected from the parable of the marriage Luke 14. and Mat. 22. I
only answer, that those servants were the Prophets and Apostles; the son
Christ himself; the compulsion to be made no otherwise, then by the preaching
of the word: by which, as Calvin has it, God does importunately solicit our
slo^thfulnes, not only pricking us with exhortations, Calvin in Math. 22, 9.
but co^pelling us with threatenings to come unto him: which word of God as it
is by some wholly contemned, so does it extort from others, only an external
and hypocritical obedience, but by many is received, through the blessing of
God, with all holy and devout affection.

Now unto these pa^ables of Christ many are wont, and that very busily, to
annex one of their own. A heap, say they, of wheat although it have much chaf
mixed with it, and the (...) more in quantity then the wheat is, (...)
notwithstanding truly, and is rightly termed a heap of wheat; according to the
Phylo^ophers rule, The den^mination to not of the greater, but better part.

I answer; first, that this axiom is not simply true: for if in the church, or
any other convention popular, or in which things pass by voices, the greater
part hap to exceed the better, the denominat on of that passage, or decree, and
so the whole process of the matter, is according to the greater, though the
worser part.

2. The chaf in that wheat is either of the same wheat, or of other, and
brought from else where: if of that same, then it makes nothing to the present
purpose, since wicked men appe^^ein not to the persons of the godly, no^ are
their chaf: if of other, and from else where, it may easily be added in that
quantity and proportion, as that neither it may deserv the name of an heap of
wheat, but of chaf; nor he that sels it for wheat, of an honest merchant, but
of a deceiptfull impostour.

4. The things objected from the Apostolical Churches are altogether
personal, and accidental; from which that the churches gathered of men, and
by men governed, should be exempted, is ^aither to be desired, then hoped for.
But for us, the things which most afflict us in the Chapter of England, and press
us in the respect forementioned to a secession from the same, do concern the
very material, and formal constitution of the ministerial church, together
with the essential administration of the Church-policie. And how different
these things are, who sees not?

Lastly, it is objected, that in the Chapter of England lively faith, and true
piety are both begotten, and nourished, in the hearts of many, by the
preaching of the gospel there. God forbid, that we should not acknowledge that,
and withal, that infinite thanks for the same are due to Gods great power and
goodness, both in respect of our selves and others: Who notwithstanding the great
confusion, both of persons, and things there to be found, vouchsafes to his
elect so plentiful grace, covering under the vayl of his superaboundant
goodness and mercy, by their ^^ncere faith in Christ Jesus, their sins and
aberrations, whether of ignorance, or infirmity. What then must be done?
should we continue in sin, that grace might abound? or shall we against
knowledge go on to walk inordinately, because in our ignorance God has
vouchsafed us of his grace in that disordered state of things? without the
ministerial church (of which we speak) the preaching of the gospel both may,
and uses to be had, and by it says to be ingenerated, except christian
churches be to be gathered of infidels and unbeleevers. Besides, what Minos, or
Rha^amant will deny, that even in the bosom of the Romish church some fa^thfull
persons may be found? how much more in that of England, in which the main
truths of the gospel, the most and greatest errors of popery being banished,
are taught by so many godly and learned men, with such zeal, and earnestnes?
Now what of these things? Is it therefore lawful for a Christian, either to
content himself with himself, without joining to any christian congregation; or
to continue still in the bosom of the church of Rome, as a member under the
Pope the head? I therefore conclude out of M. Brightman, whose words I had
raither use then mine own, M. Bright on Rev ch verse. 26.
speaking of the government and ministry of the Church of England, The fruit,
to wit, of the word preached, does no more exempt from blame our corruptions,
then a true child does adultery.

And here thou have (Christian Reader) the whole order of our conversation in
the work of Christian religion, set down both as briefly, and plainly, as I
could. If in any thing we^er, advertise us brotherly, with desire of our
information, and not (as our countrimens manner for the most part is) with a
mind of reproaching us, or great fying of others: and whom thou find in
error, thou shall not leave in obstinacy, nor as having a mind prone to
schism. E^re we may (alas too easily): but heretics (by the grace of God)
we will not be? But and if the things which we do, seem ^ight in thine eyes,
(as to us certainly they do) I do earnestly, and by the Lord Jesus admonish and
exhort thy godly mind, that thou wilst neither withould thy due obedience from
his truth, no^ just succor from thy distressed brethren. Neither do thou
endure, that either the smalnes of the number, or meannes of the ^ondition of
those that profess it, Ter^u^ pre^er (...) Heret.
should prejudice with thee the pro^ssion of the truth: but have in mind that
of Te^tullian, Do we measure men's faith by their persons, or their persons by
their faith? as also that of Austin, Austin against Maxim. 3, 14. James 2, 1.
Let matter weigh with matter, and cause with cause, and rea^^^ with reason:
but especially that of the Apostle, My brethren, have (...) the faith of our
glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons. But now, it so come to pass
(which God forbid) that the most being either forestalled by prejudice, or by
prosperity made secure, there be few found especially men of learning, who
will so far vouchsafe to stoop, as to look upon so despised creatures, and
their cause; this alone remains that we turn our faces and mouths unto thee
(o most powerful Lord, and gracious father) humbly imploreing help from God
toward those, who are by men left desolate. There is with thee no respect of
persons, neither are men less regarders of thee, if regarders of thee, so the
worlds disregarding them. They who truly fear thee, and wo^^ righteousness,
although constreyned to live by leav in a foreign land, exiled from country,
spoiled of goods, destitute of friends, few in number, and mean in condition,
are for all that unto thee (O gracious God) nothing the less acceptable: Thou
numbrest all their wanderings, and put their tears into thy bottels: Are
they not written in thy book? Toward thee, O Lord, are our eyes; confirm our
hearts, and bend thine ear, and suffer not our feet to slip, or our face to be
ashamed, O thou both just, and merciful God. To him through Christ be praise,
for ever, in the Church of Saints; and to thee (loving and Christian Reader)
grace, peace, and eternal happiness. Amen.

FINIS.

