Haigh for Devonshire.

A pleasant Discourse of six gallant Merchants of Devonshire.

Their lives, Adventures and Travails: With sundry their rare shows and
pastimes showed before the King in Exeter.

Besides many pretty merry Ieasts by them performed: as well in foreign
Countries, as in their own.

Very delightful for the Reader.

Written by H. R.

VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE
TC

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold at his shop in
Watlingstreete, over against the sign of the Cock, near Friday-streete. 16^^.

TO THE Worshipful and most toward Gentleman, accomplished with all virtues and
graces of true Gentilitie, Henry Cromwell: son and heir to the honored
Oliver Cromwell Esquire, high Sheriff of the Counties of Cambridge and
Huntington: H. R. your Worships professed humble servant, wishes increase of
all honorable virtues, with long life, and eternal happiness.
IDelnesse is a sin (says the Text) yet better idle, then ill employed.
That Is as it is taken, (so said the good wife that kissed her own Cow): all
men has their humors, each Plant his property, the vildest weed does some
good, and the unskillful writer, may either delight or admonish. The ancient
learned, took sometimes as great content to publish pleasant Ieasts, as to
profit.

If the learned writers had their pleasure in conceited mirth, my hope is the
more, of your Worshippes favorable acceptance of this Pamphlet: albeit it may
seem rude to your judgment, yet therein may you note the manners of sundry
people, where the verteous are honored, and the ignoble discovered. From the
inferiousest flowers, the industrious Be gathers honey: the Rose is not cast
away for her cankor: the sweet Eglentine disdained for the rough stalk, nor
good men's worth blemished by unskillful lines: from the virtuous good notes may
be taken, remembered and followed.

Faithful subjects, and good men in the common wealth, were these famous
Merchants of who^ I entreat, wealthy, charitable, and honest. How pleasant
conceited or merry you find them in their well ordered Ieasts, offending none,
but desirous to do good to all, The censure of such, to your worship I humbly
commend: with the zealous Present of his dutiful affection, that voweth himself
in all power and ability, a devoted servant to you and all your worshipful
ancestors, from whose root, your worcester* being a lively bra^ch, may by the
assistance of the omnipote^t deity, many years in happiness continue among us,
the joy of your renowned parents, your con^tries general comfort, a firm
pillar, supporter, and maintainer of those honored virtues and love, by your
ancestors gained, and long time maintained.

At your Wor. service so long as ever. H. Robarts.

To the well intending and courteous Reader.
AMongst many famous Merchants inhabiting the Western confines of this
fertile I Will, there was dwelling near, and in the renowned City of Exeter,
Totnes, Plymouth, Barnestable, and Tyuerton, many of great substance, as
wealthy for virtue, as rich in coin and credit: such they were as for pelf
passed not, niggardnesse came not near their Mansions: their gates to the
stranger always opened, and their liberal hands relieved the poor. Two of
which famous Merchants, viz. William and Oliver, had residence in Exeter,
Walter in Totnes, Otho in Plymouth, John in Barnestable, and Robert in
Tyuerton.

These men whom God blessed with wealth, had thankful minds to the giver,
acknowledging his goodness, whose stewards they were: Noblemen for their
bounty, mirth, and fellowship, loved them: and Gentlemen of their Country,
desired their familiar company: their neighbors well esteemed them, holding
their friendship in great regard: and the poor duly prayed for them, whom they
daily comforted. Love and good opinions, generally they gained at home: lyking,
grace, favor and countenance abroad: where ever they became, friends flocked
unto them, no man envied their happiness: with foreign Princes and their
subjects, who better esteemed, or more welcomed? with the best they brauedit:
their countries credit, more then coin preferred: their Prince in all places
honored, and countenanced their Countrymen: in any action where fame was
sought, who more forward? wrong they offered no man, nor could they brook
injuries: in good causes as ready to fight as to feast: with usury they dealt
not: advantages of bonds they sought not: Covetousness they abhorred: their
honest Trade they lived by, gaining wealth with conscience, and worship by
desert: in mirth and good fellowship they delighted, for Gold they cared not:
having this Proverb common among them, (A straw for a Peck of Ryalls)
hospitality they maintained, and did good to all that sought unto them. What
worthy commendations they deserved, their ensuing History shall show you:
(perusing which) if you find they were not as merry companions as the maddest
Greeks you ever met, I Will burn my Cap, say Cut is a Jade, the Shepherds Dog
a Curre, and a baked white Pot, no good meat.

Vale.
To the friendly Reader.
IN Stories old,
It has been told,
That many a Franion,
And boon companion,
In this Land dwelled,
Which in virtue excelled:
Whose pleasant profession
Won commendation,
Despising nigardie,
Fraughted with bounty:
Among many such men,
I frame my Pen,
Vno you to tell,
What of yore besell:
Six Merchants bold,
More worth then gold,
Whose names intolde,
Are highly extolde:
In Deuon, there dwelled,
As fame telled:
Gallants most brave,
Valiant wise and grave,
As few now a days,
That every ways,
With them might compare'
Men excellent rare,
Of six such men,
Of whom my Pen
Is now to unfold,
Their stories old,
Greatly I fear,
This many a year,
You shall not hear,
As to you shall appear,
So honest so kind,
So sranke of mind,
From England to India
You shall not find:
Far they traueiled,
Much they dispended,
And truth to feign,
Favor did gain,
Where ere they came,
They had the name:
For pelf they card not,
For crowns they spard not,
By sea they sail,
For Englands weal,
And bring commodities
From many Countries:
The poor they fed,
The naked clothed:
A goodly rabble,
Of men seruice-able,
This is no fable,
They feed at their Table,
When peace they enjoy,
Their stocks to employ,
To France and Spain,
Flanders and Brytaine:
They venture the seas,
Where so they best please:
Of these famous men,
And deeds done by them,
When you shall hear,
How far and near,
They do maintain,
A worthy train,
Of gallant men:
You will say then,
That worthy they are,
To have a share,
In the worlds glory,
And not to lie
In dark oblivion:
Thoe hence they be gone,
In place where they lived,
They never grieved,
Either rich or poor,
But sought evermore,
Peace to maintain,
Not private gain:
Pleasant they were,
And full debonayre,
Courteous to all,
Hating to brawle:
There Prince duly,
They served truly:
Valliantly in field,
They made the foe yield:
And one the salt seas
Fought many stout frayes,
In hazerd of blood,
For their countries good:
Men of Courage,
And good equipage,
Well they be deemde,
And highly esteemde:
All men of skill,
Great matches they make,
And would undertake,
With any that came,
For all kind of game,
Shooting, and foote-ball,
Wresling with all,
A hundredth pound a fall,
To any that call,
Come that come will,
They should have their fill,
For any round sum,
As many as come,
For thousa^ds they card not,
For cheer they sparde not:
Come Prince, come King,
They wanted nothing:
For all that come,
Be he Lord or Groom,
Mirth was their delight,
Their purposes of might,
Great charge to defray,
Either to feast or play,
The king they intertainde,
And his favor gainde,
By great bounty,
There mind were so free,
Since other are named,
And for their deeds famed
Let these merry men,
With fames golden pen,
Be brought to view,
Of that worthy Crew,
Which take delight,
Such praises to write,
That in oblivion,
They rest not unknown.
For merry they were,
As to you shall appear,
If you will read,
Each several deed,
By them performed,
Their mirth and glee,
When you shall see,
Say Deuonshirs Laddes,
Are no clowns or swaddes.
Your delight ended,
Let them be so friended,
In their behalf to say,
Would more such this day,
In this land there lived:
That so our foes grieved,
And our enemies quell,
So Gentilles farewell:
My Rhyme here I end,
And to you commend*
Their story at large,
As I took the charge:
Whose actions to view*
Shall better please you*
FINIS.
A Table containing the contence of this Book.
HOw these gallant Merchants of the West, began first their familiarity* and
what happened them. Chap. 1. How these new acquainted friends iournied to
Roane in Normandy* and what happened them. Chap. 2. How Robert and John, were
lodged in the Nunnery of Saint Bennets in Roane, and were by the Lady Abbess,
cured of their wounder. Chap. 3. How Oliver for his irreverence in time of
Procession, was committed to prison, and all his companions. Chap. 4. How
Oliver, Robert and Otho, departed to Burdeux: and William and his two
compainions arrived in England. Chap. 5. How William after his return to
England, traded in the City of Exeter, where he wooed a wife. Chap. 6. How
James, Williams prentise, abused his master to his love, to hinder the
marriage. Chap. 7. How the father and mother of Ioane, Williams love, sent for
him. Chap. 8. How James V(...) troubled in mind for his bad doings, and
wha(...) because of his grief. Chap. 9. How the six merchants in their
journey to Bristow met by chance, and what chanced. Chap. 10. How William in
his journey home from Bristow was robde, and how in mer(...)t his company paid
his loss. Chap. 11. How these famous Merchants for wrongs done them by the
French nation, furnished the (...) ships to the sea, with their victories.
Chap. 12. How Ioane, Williams wife could not endure her servant James, with
his depart^e to Spain. Chap. 13. How the king with his army marched to Exeter,
and relieved the City, besieged by the Cornish rebels. Chap. 14. How William
and his other friends, to make the king sport, made challenge to all comers:
at wresling, hurling, and footeball. Chap. 15. How the Cardinal leaving the
king at Exeter, iournied to London, and what jests happened. Chap. 16. How
James, Williams servant, being his Factour in Spain, at one cast at dice,
lost to the Dukes of Florence, and Medina, fitie thousand Ducats. Chap 17. How
James traveling from Callice to saint Lucas, encountered a Lady, widow to a
Cauileere of Spain, in man's apparel. Chap. 18. How James lay with the
Spaniard, and found her to be a woman. Chap. 19. How James accompanied the Lady
to Cheryes, and what entertainment she gave him. Chap. 20. How William by one
of her neighbors, was made acquainted with James his man's fortunes, with his
answer to him. Chap. 21* How William, Otho, and Oliver, from Plymouth passed
to Spain, and their fortunes. Chap. 22. How the English Marchantes arrived at
Cheres, at James his marriage. Chap. 23. How James with his wives honorable
friends, being at their cheer, William and his company visited them, with
their welcomes. Chap. 24. How Otho and Oliver at the house of a Curtizan, was
robde of their moneys and apparel. Chap. 25. How James at his master
Williams departure, cleared all his accounts with recompance, and his wives
kind favors. Chap. 26.
FINIS.
AA


A pleasant discourse of six gallant Merchants of Devonshire.
CHAP. I. How these gallant Merchants of the West, began their first
familiarity, and what happened them.
THe famous City of Burdeux is situated in Britain, part of the French
Confines: in which City, yearly near the month of September, is held a Mart
of long continuance: to which Mart or Uyntage, from all places Merchants make
their traffic, for such wines as the countries thereabouts does plentifully
yield. Amongst many of sundry countries, which made their voyage to this famous
Port, three gallant youths Merchants of great reputation, wealth, and credit,
having to names, William, Robart, and Otho, all from the well known and
honorable City of Exeter, had residence at Roane in Normandy: where their
great affairs ended, having some idle time, and waying not the expense of a
hundredth or two of Crowns, in a merriment, gave faithful promise each to
other, to pass for Burdeux, as well to see the manner of the Uyntage, and
order thereof, as witness to themselves, whether report of the great fleet
which yearly there laded might be true, as also to meet with some their
countrymen of Devonshire, and with them to frolic: for which journey,
according to time prefixed, being provided. To Burdeux they are come, where
they frequent the gallantest company of all Nations thereof, demeaning
themselves in such manner, that their company was acceptable and desired of all
men: companions for all sportes, or exercises, whether gaming, drinking,
sporting, or reuelling: what any durst do, they never refused it: such Boon
companions they are, and so of all men esteemed.

Not long after their coming to Burdeux, fortune brings with happiness from
the Western shore of England, a tall ship, well equipped and furnished, fit
for the voyage: of whose arrival, William and his accomplisses being
advertised, as men glad to hear of their countries welfare and friends, make
such inquiry for the ships company, that in good time they are met, with three
other gallants Merchants, (viz.) Walter, Oliver, and John: with whom as
strangers meeting, and questions propounded and answered, William knowing
curtesse, in kindness enuited the new arrived Merchants to his lodging that
night to supper: which with thanks they accepted, and accordingly at the
appointed hour came, where make no question, they were all as welcome, as
friends in foreign parts may be to friends: spending the evening sometimes in
discoursing of their Country and acquaintance there: sometimes in gaming, and
often carowsing hralths to their Country, kindred, and friends.

Amongst this delight, albeit Oliver, John, and Walter, were as well pleased in
their company, as countrymen might be: yet were their minds other where:
especially Oliver and John, who yearly traffickt for that Port, had there
loves near adjoining, one dwelling at Bloys, the other at S. Martines: such as
for beauty, wealth and reputation, might draw men of more worth to their
liking: of whom Oliver and John, in private whisperings, took great care,
entending that night to have seen them, and deliver such presents as they
brought from England: had not this meeting of their countrymen prevented them.

To all which private talk, William and Robert took good heed. But William
specially gave ear, and ouerheard their speech: understanding by many motions,
that willingly they would have been free from their companies, which he, could
well have wished them, to their best liking: but that he intended to search
them as he could, and make trial what metal his countrymen were of: and for
that purpose, when he had well lined their hoodes with the juice of Grape, a
potion that makes the coward bold, and overthrows the stoutest, William
singleth from his companion, the best demeaned Oliver, and with him, of many
matters discoursed: between whom, such enchatinting words passed, that an
inviolable league of friendship was professed, as nothing might have power to
violate: and consequently amongst them all.

William growing on this new-vowed friendship, to more familiar parley, besought
Oliver and the rest, having acquaintance in that place, to bring them to their
femall friends in the City, where they might spend that night to see the
fashions of those damsels, for that they were strangers and had no
acquaintance: for requital of which, he promised them if they could find
opportunity to come to Roane, where they had abiding, they would so quite
their kindness as they should well like of.

Oliver, as well disposed to mirth as his friend William, and as pleasantly
conceited, imagined that his own speech to his companion John was over heard,
whereon this question was propounded, took in good part his words, and
thankfully acepted all friendship offered, and cheer received. Beseeching
pardon, not accomplishing his desire, whom he assured was of more continuance
in the City, then himself, that had not been full four and twenty hours a
shore: and therefore rather ought to be a conductor to him and his companions,
his experience being more then twenty such Idiots as himself in such causes.
Therefore good brother (quoth Oliver) rather let us participate with your
teminine pleasures, that being Ledgers are not unprovided: and hereafter if you
have cause to use us, it may be we poor men may prove as kind to you upon
like occasion.

William thus pretily trumped by his friend Oliver, returning the point of his
own weapon into his bosom, thought it ill halting before a Cripple, and hereby
judged his countrymen no Clownes* nor their answers to seek, which on the
sudden could give them such bones to gnaw. Wherefore leaving to reply, least
words in jest spoken, might break their familiarity by acceptions taking,
they here with a fresh carouse, end their nights sportes, leaving every man to
his rest: taking this order with them by general consent, that every of them
should not fail at times ordinary for repast, to have their dyets at one
house, to be chosen by whole consent, where whosoever should be absent, not
having such business as the company might tolerate, must forfet a sum by
them to be agreed on. To this when they had all said Amen, and hands given for
continuing their begun friendship, they betook themselves to their rests.

CHAP. II. How these new acquainted friends iournied to Roane in Normandy, and
what happened to them.
THese gallant youths (as you have heard) using such continual company, their
liking increased, and their familiarity was admired, which was generally noted
of all strangers in the City of Burdeux, where they had commendations, not
only for their mirth, good fellowship, and company keeping, but in regard of
their business, (then whom) none more forward, using all times to fit purpose,
if leisure permitted: who more frolike? or what were they in the whole company
of any Nation, that durst undertake these six gallants at any sport,
exercise, or gaming whatsoever, whether in pleasure or for coin? whose purses
were not tied with misery, nor did they account of Crowns before their
countries honor.

Oliver, John and Walters being well acquainted in Burdeux, well beloved and
graced amongst the better sort of Merchants, with whom they did usually
traffic, had offer of most the best Wines that came thither, whereby they
made the sooner dispatch, laded their ship, and made ready wines for her
second return: which done, and they at leisure to take their pleasure,
William, Robert, and Otho, were called away to Roane for supply of business,
desirous of their good friends companies, with many suits importuning them for
the same, whom after many denialls they grant, providing them horses and other
necessaries for their journey: which done, and solemn farewell taken of their
friends that staid behind, forward they set, as pleasant and merrily disposed
as might be, each one glad of others company; framing occasions of solace,
the better to beguile their time of travel, continuing their iollitie all that
night in their lodging, fearing no man, nor dreading any ill to betide them.

But as the fairest days by clouds are soon over cast, the greatest joys
eclipsed with plaints, and all men subject to crosses, so fell it out with
these faithful friends, who taking their way by journey as it lay, through
the Forest of Ardine, were beset with a company of Outlawes, Thieves which
lay in ambush to entercept them: who coming near the thicket where the
treacherous villains lay, suddenly issued, and furiously assailed them: first
with their Pistolles, which daungerously they discharged against them, renewing
the fight with their Rapiers: in which first assault, Robert and John with
their Pistolles were dangerously hurt, William, Otho, Oliver and Walter,
maintained the fight with great courage, so applying themselves, that in short
time they made free passage, in despite of those villains which made sure
account to have had their spoil, of whom two were in fight slain, and diverse
hurt, who trusted better to their heels then staying, to save their lives.

William and his company seeing so good a riddance of these companions, and
none seen near them, not assured what rescue might come, made no stay, but
binding up the wounds of Robert and John as they could, hasteneth on their way,
making all speed to a Town not far from them, where, by a Friar skillful in
Surgery, they were dressed: this night reposing themselves, comforting their
friends, and the next day taking with them such Implaisters, Balmes, and other
provision needful to their wounds, to serve till they came to Roane, they set
forward, which within three days to their great content, they recovered.

CHAP. III. How Robert and John were lodged in the Nunnery of Saint Bennites in
Roane, where by the Lady Abbas they were cured.
AS soon as these good friends recovered Roane, and had housed their wounded
companions, to ease them whilst other provision was made: William and Otho
being best acquainted, knowing the Lady Abbas of S. Bennets to be a very
charitable and skillful woman in Surgery, made means unto her, for favor to
be shown to their wounded friends, loving the Country (as many kiss the
child for the Nourses sake) after small entreatie, was content to accept them
into the Monastery, whom she the more tendered, because they received their
wounds by treachery of her Country men: but when she saw their persons, she
wonderfully affected them: for whom beyond ordinary, she caused provision to be
made, both for diet and lodging, such their friends that visit them, her self
dressing their wounds, and so applying them, that the danger of their griefs
were soon past: which very much pleased the Lady, having a zeal to do them
good, for that she held it meritorious,

CHAP. IIII. How Oliver, for his vnreuerent demeanor at the Procession, was
committed to prison, with his companions.
Whilst the two wounded men, Robert and John, were recovering their health,
their other companions kept in the City of Roane, youthfully employing
themselves, imboldned by the countenance of William, whose acquaintance were
many, and friends great: by which means sundry lewd prankes were not seen,
which deserved imprisonment and punishment, (by their law) so long continuing
their boldness without regard, that a worse hap then chanced: Oliver, being
a very pleasant conceited fellow, (in his humor) chanced to be amongst a
multitude, standing in the chief street of the City, to view the solemn
Procession passing by, where on a sudden, to the great admiration and trouble
of the company, stepping to the Friar that carried the rich Cross, violently
took it from him, and dashed it so furiously against the ground, that it brake
all to pieces: which by the multitude was taken in such ill part, that by
commandment of the Clergy, he, and as many Englishmen as were then in his
company, were taken, and to straight prison committed, where they were cruelly
used, for whom no suit might prevail.

This mad pranke was generally spoken off, throughout the City of Roane, and
by ill hap, came to the hearing of John and Robert, who were now, by the help
of God and the Ladies good indurstry well recovered: but by their friends
trouble brought to such melancholy, bewayling their ill hap (which was
perilous) that nothing might move them to myrrth, or cause their content.
Albeit yet the good Abbas and other their friends did what possible they could:
that by their woe, many greefes arises, the Aabbas sorroweth, and the whole
company complains for their comfort, whom none but their friends liberty
can comfort, especially such of the Uirgins that exchanged there French purity
for English love, esteeming more of the imprisoned English then the whole
country. Amongst those that love had tied in liking, the Lady Abbas was not
least in affection, who daily dressing the wounds of Robert with her own
hands, began so well to be pleased in his company, that she forgot her
Paternosters, her stomach so wambled with this little god of love, that having
small time to cloth her, was often compelled to make her offerings a bed.

Robert, again of an humble and thankful spirit, having strength and ability
to perform the office of a man, has so well pleased the Lady, that she
rather desired private conference with Robert, (her new devoted servant) then
to hear the sweetest Channon chaunte in the Quire, descant he never so well,
yet the Ladies devotion is cold to the Church, but burning to the Chamber.

This love of the Lady Abbas to Robert, must be the mean now to relieve their
friends, and procure their liberty, whereof Robert promises himself
assurance: to effect which, knowing the Lady doated in his liking, and desired
his health and contentment, he continues his melancholy in such extreme
manner, demeaning himself in those passions, that his grief caused all the Nuns
sorrow, who never durst leave him, fearing his distemper might cause him use
violent hands one himself, but with many good words persuaded him to comfort,
whose ears were shut to the doctrine they preached.

So long continued this frantic humor on Robert, that the good Lady ganne to
find want of her delight, and missed Roberts recourse to her lodging, which
bred in her a great discontent, and more troubled in her want, then Robert was
for his destressed friends. Wherefore to reclaim him from these sullen
humors, she studied and devised all possible means she could to do them
good, for which having conceited a Plot, she sends her secret keeper with her
ring, entreating Robert of the love he professed her, instantly to visit her in
her closet: which kind message Robert refuses, railing and exclaming against
her, and her people, cursing and hauning, the Country, the city, and
Communaltie, that injured his friends: continuing this fit so long, that the
good Lady moved with remorse, in her night-gowne came to visit him: unto whom
having given much holesonie counsel, (which he hearkeneth unto) gently
wringing him by the tender hands, she entreats him to walk with her to her
gallerie, where by solemn oath she protests if he would frolickt it as he
was wont, and no more be crossed with these passions, to overthrow his own
estate and green those whose joy he is, by that means she had devised, his
friends ere two days be expired should have their liberty, and he enjoy his
own contentment.

Robert well pleased with these words, was in his mind more quieted, yet made
no semblance thereof, but accused her of flattery and dissimulation, seeming in
speech so vehement, as if he would have murdered all that came near him: which
the pitiful Lady with tears bewailed, vowing by* her holy Order, and by all
rights of her honor, to perform her promise, or it should cost all the
wealth she had, and hazard of her best friends, on which giving him her
hand, she leads him like a good Nurse, careful least harm should betyde
her Infant: conducting him to that place where so often she desired his
company, where he still continued, urging her to perform her promise.

Early in the morning, as careful of her charge by vow made, she sends
for the Prior of the Iacobins, an ancient* Benefactor to her house, whose
shame she had many times covered, and remitted his sin offending with her
Holy maids. With this Iacobine, she so by large promises and lamentable
speech preualeth, that in hope of performance, and free access to the house at
his pleasure, with liberty of his old love, the match is concluded, the
Iacobine has given his faith, swearing by his Cowle and Crooked staff, he
will not leave them until they were free, which by his friends he so labored
to those in authority, that by general consent of the whole Clergy, the
Englishmen enjoyed liberty, and the Iacobine his pleasure.

CHAP. V. How Oliver, Robert and Otho, departed toward Burdeux, William and
his two companions, arrived in England.
RObert by his great policy having purchased his countreymens liberty, and
being both perfectly cured of their wounds, time drawing on, appointed for
meeting their ship coming from England, after they had a while feasted with
the Marchantes of the City, (desiring their company) and frollickt with his
friends, which done, Robert and John, willing to show their thankfulness to the
Lady Abbas, which would receive no money, they procured two of the best Jewels
and rarest they could find, which in all humbleness they presented her, which
she thankfully accepted: with a heavy heart giving a loath farewell to her
beloved Robert, with whom when she had in secret conuersed, she commended
them to their prosperous journey, whom she promises in her prayers to
remember: giving unto Robert, a pair of Beads, so rich and beautiful as he
never saw the like: a Crucifire and chain valued at a thoutand crowns, with
rewards to John: which don, she gave commandment for her coach, and twelve of
her honest Tenants well mounted, to accompany them to Burduex.

Robert receiving these great favors, in requital, tendered his loyal
service, with many humble duties by vow to be performed: which was more vallued
at her Ladyships hands, then all the wealth he could offer: such was the
Ladies affection unto him, whose absence, howsoever she for fashion sake
colored, it causes her hearts extreme sorrow. But howsoever, the time is
now come to leave then his company bravely mounted, attend to bring him on his
way, which made known, the Abbas bids farewell with many kind favors, and a
million of Paternosters, Aue-maries, and Creedes, long fastings, often
watchings, and a world of religious ceremonies for his good success: what the
other prittie pure souls do for their loves, good Gentlemen imagine, for it
is like they would be as well used as their mistress.

Onwardes now are our Gallants toward Burdeux, where by the way, Robert
acquainted his friend William and the rest of his company with his fortunes,
continuing these pleasant discourses till they came to their lodging, where
that night, they had merry chatting and carousing to their friends, the Lady
Abbas, and the sisters healths: the next morning they took their leave one of
another: Oliver and his two friends for Burdeux, and William and his
companions, to Roane.

William had not long continued at Roane, but a ship arrived from Exeter, by
the merchants whereof, he received the woeful news of his masters death, with
commandment from his mistress and the executors, to gather in his debtes,
make sale of such goods as he had, perfect his accounts, and with the first
ship, to come for England. All which, when he had ouerpast his sudden sorrow
for the loss of so good a friend, like a careful man, to please the living as
he had his disceased master, with such effect followed his business, that by
the ships return, he was ready with the first to go aboard: For which
voyage, having shipped his provision and such goods as he had, he invited
sundry his good friends to banquet: which ended, with kind imbrasings, he
bids farewell to them that wish his prosperity at sea.

CHAP. VI. How William after his return to England, traded for himself in
the City of Exeter, and wooed a wife.
GOod Fortune and favorable winds, has safely landed William and other his
friends, who being careful, could not be quiet nor merry with any company, until
he had delivered his accounts, which to the good lyking of the widow and the
Executors he performed, having their quittance general: which done, advised by
his friends, he seated him in a good place, trading for himself, with good
success, in which he so profited, that wealth increased abundantly: gaining
by his good behavior, charity, and good conscience, the general good opinion
of the whole City: unto who^ many men tendered their daughters with great
dowries: but that life liked he not. When he had with great care and labor
spent some two or three years, substance increasing, and customers flocking,
he took to Prentise an honest Farmers son named James: shortly after this,
as time overcomes all things, and experience makes men wise, especially
where man with man persuade.

William after many kind aduertisements of friends, continually putting him in
mind of the comfort of marriage, and pleasures therein, the joys fathers have
of their children, and honors thereby obtained, was won at length to
consider thereoft and resolving to marry, offer was made him of a proper
Maiden, the only child of a very honest and wealthy man, not far from the
City: with whose Parents the friend^ of William having conference, hearing a
very good report of the man, her Father agreed, promising a good portion with
his daughter if they could like. Thereupon William was by his friends invited
to her Fathers house the Sunday following to dinner: against which time, Ione
(for so the Maidens name was called) in the best manner apparelled her self,
knowing to what end this jolly wooer came, where he was welcome to her father,
but better to the child that longed to be a wife: Dinner ended, where wanted
no good cheer, every man betaketh himself to pass the time as best
contenteth him. William not forgetting his errant was for a wife if he could
get her, desired the maiden to be his conducter to the Garden, where after they
had walked two or three turns, viewing the beauty thereof, and commending the
pleasure of the same: William being a bashful young man, after many frivolous
questions, fearing to be counted a coward having such advantage, solicites her
for love, with such pretty questions, and her witty answers, that William,
after the first assault became valiant, whetting his wits to answer her
parley, wherein he so prevailed, that the skirmish waxing faint, his hope was
the greater to scale the Forte without more danger. And like a conqueror might
vaunt with honor, the Town ^^ his, though with some faint denialls, for
modesty the said nay: yet upon conditions, her father said Amen. Ioane writes
Content.

This short work contented William well, who was now pleased in thought of
marriage* having such hope in his suit, hating to be long a wooing, and rather
choosing to live ever without a wife, then tied long to lingering suites: yet to
please Ioane whose joy he now is, how well soever his choice and her answers
pleased, kept it to himself, comforting her father, and his friends, that all
should be well he doubted not: but as they wished, after this first meeting and
love of either given secret to other, William every day with letters solicited
his Ioane* between whom many pretty tokens was enterchanged, and of both
parties accepted, all furthering love and good liking: and was pleasing to
father, mother, and his friends, before whom, shortly after they were made sure.

CHAP. VII. How James, Williams servant, abused his master to Ioane, hindering
their love.
WIlliam assured by promise to his Ioane, and the Banes publicly asked, many
his familiar friends, some in jest, others in good sooth, bad God give him
joy: his servant James, enquiring of his masters forwardness of many, was
somewhat discontented and grieved: considering the uncontrolled life he then
lived, and the care he should have to please a Mistress, had many knauish
devises hammering in his head to break the match, and to keep his Master a
Batcheler still. Amongst many other his practices, one only he intended to
effect, if oppertunitie would give him leave: which not many days after sorted
to his desires, and thus unhappily he practiced it.

Diverse Marchantes of Exeter, Williams very good friends, being ready to put
to sea, invited (as their custom is) their familiar acquaintance to their
parting banquet, amongst which guests, William was solemnly bidden, James
knowing his Master safe for stirring, provided a horse* and in all the have
poasted to Ioane, entending to try his wits: whither he came in the evening
near bed time, who seeing the old man and his wife sitting at the door,
earnestly desired to speak with Ione: unto whom he delivered a very solemn
message in name of his Master, desiring her of all the love she does
profess, speedily to come unto him, if she took pleasure in his life that was
dangerously sick on the sudden: so strangely taken, as no life was expected.

This sudden news appalled the whole household, Ioane cried, the father
lamented, and the mother with wringing hands bewailed this unhappy fortune of
William: to satisfy whose mind, preparation was made for Ioanes journey,
James hearing what was broached amongst them, laughed to himself, and very
earnestly hastened the old man to send away his Ioane, unto whom he made
tender of his service, to be her conuoy for so small a journey, if it pleased
them* whereof her father was glad: loath so late to be troubled himself, or his
servants, to James delivered her, commending them to good speed. James
possessed of his adopted mistress, having her from her fathers house,
bethought him of his intended knavery: having then the best opportunity, with a
deep sigh, and voice mournful, as a grave man moved to pity, began to commend
her bewty, personage, good gifts, honest parentage, and wealth likely, with
other her exceeding virtues, worthy for the best man in the City, to be
utterly cast away by marriage with his Master William.

Ioane hearing these protestations, albeit her mind was cumbred with James his
tidings, yet gave good ear to his speech: whereof taking the advantage, cut
him off, and with kind words besought him to explain his meaning, that
marrying his master she were cast away.

Which James by no means, either for promise of favor, gifts or entreatie
would grant against his master, whose welfare he esteemed as his life,
although it mightily concerned her good.

These latter speeches, put her into further dumps, causing more desire to be
resolved. But James in no wise would grant, until by great oaths he swore her
to conseale from all people, either the cause, or reuealer of the same. To all
which covenants Ioane swear to be just, and faithfully to keep, which done he
said: Sweet Mistress Ioane, though my years deny me that experience which
many good men prove, yet am I not so senseless, but can conceive the pleasures
parents have in virtuous children, the joys in wedlock, and the sweet
content therein: where husband and wife participate in one simpathie of love,
and so much the more grieve, to see such a one as your self, marked of God to
be the mother of many sweet Infants, wherein your fathers aged years should be
blessed, and the world by procreation increased, should be deprived of al
rights due in marriage to the poorest beggar: robbed of mothers honorable name,
and pleasure therein, all proceeding from the imperfections of nature, in him
whose wife by full grant you are.

Ioane hearing these reports from* Williams own servant, who thought she
sorrowed to the death, for his supposed sitnesse, wished his head off, so she
were rid of him: entering into consideration of James particular speech, the
loss of wombes pleasures, and mothers delight, so nearely touched her, that as
in a trance she had like to have fallen from her horse, if James had not the
more regarded her. Whose extremity when he saw, stricken with fear of his
mistress Ioanes well doing, he wished that undone which was begun: yet taking
heart of grace, knowing care must be comforted, cheared her with the best
speech he could: so long persuading, that she revived again: calling to mind,
the great loss of that she most hoped for: the thought of William was
loathsome unto her, wishing never to hear or see him more: earnestly desiring
James, as he tendered her life, to return to her fathers house: for if she
proceed, there is no hope but to expect death. James more willing to entreat
her, then Ioane to crave, (for fashions sake) be sought her to go forward to
his master. But nothing might prevail, home she would, no denial could
serve: whither James made such haste, that they came before the old man was in
bed.

The sudden coming of Ioane with her guide James, much amazed them: especially
seeing their dearest child in such a pitiful case: and not-knowing the
cause, thought verily that some hobgoblings or thieves had frighted them: which
to assure them, finding Ioane in weak case, and not to be questioned, the
mother and her maids were very careful in having her to bed: mean while the
father earnestly enquired of James, what the occasion of his daughters grief
was: who like himself, so suttelly pleaded, that the old man was not a whit
the wiser: James having broached this devise, how well or ill so ever it
speedeth in the end. After he had in secret coniured Ioane by her holy oaths
to remember her promise, with all speed hasteneth to Exeter, where he
discharged his horse, and recovered his masters house, long before the company
brake up: William little suspecting what his man had been about.

CHAP. VIII. How the Father and Mother of Ioane, seeing their daughters
sickness increase, sent for William.
IOane languishing in this conceited fear of her Williams want, ga^ grow so
weak, that her friends had small hope of her recovery, being in best comfort
when she might be alone: where with sighs and grievous complaints of her
fathers rashness, she exclaimeth on her hard fortune, being so unhappily
marked above all the women she has known: utterly inueying against William,
that knowing his imperfections, durst seduce any woman to his deceitful love:
defying wealth, honor, and not caring to be married to the greatest Monarke,
having those necessary wants.

Her good Father, whose comfort was his Ioanes health, when he could not learn
by all possible means the occasion, and sickness rather increasing then
ceasing, advised by his kindred, sent for her Love William, hoping his presence
might comfort her: who like a kind man, leaving al to his man James* presently
procured from the Apothecaries such comfortable drugges as he could get for
money, with sugars and spices of his own store, hastening to his love Ioane,
where to her father and mother he was a welcome man. But Ioane took little
pleasure in his sight or company, his presence being so irksome, and James his
tale troublesome, William offering her kindness, coming to her bed side to
speak with her, she violently thrust him from her, turning her to the other
side, not caring for his courtesy or him, but earnestly entreated them to take
him from her. This strangeness which she showed William, whom they thought
would have been a comfort, more troubled them, then any other accident,
especially William, whom it most concerned: who entered into all judgments
seeming reason, saving the principal, which they never suspected. William
censuring al things to the best of her whom he dearly loved, was therefore the
more in spirit cumbred: yet pacifying himself as he best might, walked abroad,
spending time until the evening, when he thought sleep might better quiet
her, and give some better temper to her wits: which happened not so well, for
no sooner came he in her sight, but presently she followed her old humor, to
Williams great grief, seeing other men well entreated and welcome to her, he
only despiced: in this chollericke humor he would have left the house, and
like to have sworn by great oaths never to come thither more, had not the
company which wished them both well pacified him: at whose request and great
entreatie, he stayed, though in small content all night, to see if any
alteration would be.

CHAP. IX. How James was troubled in mind for that which happened, and what
means was used to know the cause of Ioanes sickness.
James having ended his business, being at some leisure, began to consider
what wrongs he had offered his Master and his friend, and what might follow
this devilish practice, in this quandary, when he had waited some time
extraordinary for his Master that came not, he gat to bed, where the
guiltiness of his foul offense so cumbred him, that he took small rest. The
morning no sooner gave light, but James wearied with his nights disquiet, got
up about his business, and not long after came William home, as heavy and
full of passions as a man might be losing his delight, her Father and mother
with weeping near wearied, and the whole household mourned for their disquiet.
The old woman who had a motherly care of the Maiden, searching all ways and
means for her daughters health, principally noted the small content she took
in Williams company, who hearing that he was gone, began more cheerfully to
talk, calling for such things as she liked: this amendment caused her Mother
to imagine, some discontent it was that troubled her, which would be her
destruction if some mean were not found, to know the cause from whence it
proceeded. To effect which, pollitikely she insinuates with an ancient Maiden
servant of theirs, that had been her daughters bedfellow ever since she was
weaned, whom Ioane loved well: to her the Mother makes great moan, promising
money plentiful, and what other friendship they could do for her, if she could
by any devise attain the knowledge of her grief, for that they were assured
was the chiefest cause. The maiden wroght by her old Mistress, promised
faithfully to do her best to satisfy them, not forgetting her Master and
Mistress good words, and rich proffers of money, as one that could well handle
the matter, watching in ye night with Ioane, vttred many fair words, bemoaning
her extremity, and pitying her distress, saying she was persuaded that some
secret sorrow cumbred her, willing whatsoever was in her mind, to reveal it
to some one whom she best trusted therewith: which would be the more comfort
for her in sickness: so might she the better ease her heart of sorrow, and
have means to relieve her: otherwise there was no hope of life. Ioane
hearkening to her approved friends good counsel, after she had sworn her to
conseale what she had to impart unto her, and the servant promising faithfully
to fulfill whatsoever she was enjoined, with many sighs which like smoke came
from her stomach, out it came, which sore burned her heart and consumed her
body: vttring whereof; she enueyed against her Father, Mother, William, and all
friends thereto consenting. The servant hearing her, believed verily she had
found where the hurt lay, and smoothed her more to feel the bottom of her
heart, which Ioane faithfully discharged at full, leaving nothing hid from her.
With which news, the Maiden labored as a woman with child to be delivered,
waiting opportunity, to her Master and Mistress she came, and unto them
delivered what Ioane under Benedicitie had revealed: assuring her Master that
was the cause. Her mother at hearing thereof, grew into admiration how Ioane
should come to knowledge of so great a secret, yet was glad at the heart, she
had that given her to understand.

The better to eschew ill to such chances incident, with more tender
compassion, bemoning her, that being a woman as she was, should so be deluded,
loosing the benefit of youth, the rytes to marriage in duty appertaining.

The old woman finding by Ioanes trusty friend where her grief lay, on the
morrow came unto her, inciting her, by the duty of a child, to let her know
if any thing troubled her mind, and freely speaking without blame, she should
be comforted, if all the ability she had would procure it.

Ioane hearing her mothers speeches, though modesty willed her conseale it,
trusting her mother would be secret to her in like manner, revealed the
substance of James his tale and cause of her grief: which the old woman was
glad of, willing her to take comfort and be of good cheer, for she should not
have that wrong by her consent: blaming her most, for so long consealing the
occasion, so highly to grieve her self: which sooner made known, order had
been taken before that time, for a husband sufficient. Ioane well pleased with
her mothers saying, assured of her love, began to comfort her self in hope,
and by little and little recovered some strength.

Her mother whose secrets she could not keep, to a Gossop a neighbor of hers,
revealed the cause of her childs malladie, and the imbesilitie of William. So
long this news was carried, that it came by a Nourse dwelling in that parish,
to Exeter, who told her Mistress, which was wife to a wealthy Merchant, what
common talk was through their parish of William. The Merchants wife, whose
husband loved William well, could not be quiet, but as soon as her husband came
in, acquainted him with that report. The good man smiling at his wives
simplicity, that was no better employed then to spend her time hearing so bad
a tale. Wife (quoth he) I hope your modesty is more, then to be a carrier of
such tidings: to answer you, as I would do all others that speak it, I will
on my oath justify, that he is a man sufficient for any reasonable woman: what
I speak is truth, I know it well: having been his bedfellow almost three
years, learning our language in Spain.

The Merchant acquainted William herewith, who in choler, accompanied with
some friends, hyed to the Farmers house, requesting to see Ioane, who would
not be spoken with: wherefore taking her Father aside in private, he discoursed
how he was abused: and vehemently protested he would not be made a scorn by his
daughter if she were a Lady: therefore willed to let him know the original of
this scandal, or by heaven he protested, the next Sunday at divine service, in
their parish Church, to quit himself of so great an ignomy, he would naked
show himself, to her and their great shame, that devised the same. The old
man seeing William so angry, by mild speech brought him to more reason, and at
his entreaty discovered unto him, what modesty forbad: on which assurance,
her Father with his daughter and mother so prevailed, that taking his word for
current, and Williams for good payment, she apparelled her self, and came
amongst them: where all broils were ended, and promises faithfully given,
never more to be remembered: and shortly after to both their contents were
wedded. Ioane finding her man James to be a strife-maker, though she never for
her oath discovered his doings, secretly enuyed him ever after.

CHAP. X. How the six Merchants, William Oliver, Otho. John, Walter and
Robert, in their iourny to Bristow met, and what happened them.
WIlliam having espoused his Ioane, placed her in Exeter, he following his
business: which pleased Ioane and her Parents well, who has now found his
manhood, and reproved the scandales. Not long after the marriage, was the Fair
for Saint James at Bristow, to which, from all places of the West, comes
Merchants, Drapers, and Chapmen, to buy and sell: amongst which resort, these
sire Merchants, William, Otho, John, Walter, Oliver, and Robert, being from
their own homes on their journey at Tanton, by great fortune happily met, glad
of one the others company: having taken their Inn early, they bespake their
dyets to sup together, spending the time at bowels and other sports, till it
was ready, as frollicke and merry as ever they had been, none of them sparing,
having all wealth sufficient: the next day to Bristow they came, where they
lodged orderly together, for no friends or acquaintance might part them. Night
approaching, and their business for that time ended, William was by a Mercer
of London, invited to ye horshead a Tauern, to supper, which he refused,
saying: If I come, I must bring my good friends and companions with me, for we
go together. Content quoth the Mearcer, you shall all be welcome. Whom William
sought, and took them with him to the place appointed, where his friend the
Mearcer and other Londoners met them* To supper they go, where wanted no
cheer, wine nordaintie Music, to whose company the Western Merchants were
very welcome: supper ended, some betook them to dice, others to dance, as best
liked them. William, Oliver, and Robert. standing idle, seeing money so
plentiful and gamesters so frank, fell in amongst the company, where the dice
running cross, Robert and Oliver, was quite of all their coin, William
holding his own in reasonable manner.

The Londoners which were winners frumped them, and were pleasant, amongst
which, one challenged William, to throw one cast for all his money before him,
which was a good sum: which offer, Oliver and Robert would have taken,
offering to pawn their wares in the hall to make it good, scorning to be
braued by their betters. But William was the man they shot at, whom they
intended, to give as dry a shauing as his companions. William perceiving
whereat they aimed, was more moved with his companions that sought to hinder
him then the others: and in choler thrust his money from him, challenging the
proudest to cover it: who gaping for the money, making a sure reckoning it was
their own, was striving who should be the man: which William seeing, laughed
heartily, saying: by the holy Trinity, I never saw carrion crows more
greedy, then these good fellows of my money: which win (quoth William) and in
Gods name take it: when that is lost, if lost it will be, I have yet in money
and credit with my neighbors, a thousand crowns more which you shall have
amongst you.

The gamesters seeing his courage, left contending, covered the gold, for
which William had a chance and won it: whereat his companions showted. This
loss set our gallants in a heat, which William perceiving, thus cooled:
Gentlemen, we are poor men of the West, and you of the famous City: yet all
subjects to our Sovereign, friends I trust we are, if not, say so. Care that
will: hear you friends, square not without cause, our money you won, and with
good will had it, then be as well content to loose: if you be not well, lo
there it lies, pawn it, and a gods name win it and wear it: if we loose this,
we shall not beg to our homes.

The Londoners seeing his gallant mind, commended him for his bounty, loath to
be braued, put their heaps to one, and had a chance for it. William minding to
try what was in them, offered a thousand Crowns, praising his chance, either
win the horse (quoth he) or loose the saddle, fortune cannot beggar us with one
throw at dice, away the Boat, and a straw for a pecke of Ryalls. William
showing so pleasant a mind, and frank to the standers by, was wished well of
all the whole company: but his iollitie quelled his gamesters, that they durst
not praise their chances. The worse for William, whose fortune was to win their
moneys, and had all on the board in his possession, which with frowning
countenances, his fellow gamesters maligned: which William perceiving, thus
cheared. Gentlemen, you have made us poor men good cheer, bestowing on us,
Fiddlers fare, meat, drink, and money: for your sport we thank you: and that
you may know we travelers of the West be good fellows, wishing no man's harm
that would us well, the shot I will pay: friends we met, and so wish to
continue. Oliver take here your principal you drew, and Robert yours: this
hundredth pounds shall buy my Ioane pinnes: for the rest Gentlemen, if you
scorn not a good fellows proffer, share it amongst you that be loosers.

The Londoners which were far spent in this bravery, gave him thanks:
others better able to bear their loss, in scorn refused his profer, yet with
a little entreaty, won to take it: but generally, the whole company admired
and praised William: who bestowed on them a costly banquet, rewarded the
Musicians, largely paid the house and attendants. For that time parting
company, with thanks to William for his cheer and large gifts.

CHAP. XI. How William in his journey homewards was robbed, and how for a
couple of Connyes he made in meriment his company pay his losses.
William and his companions ending their business, took their journey by
Bathe, where pleasantly they spent a day or two, feasting and making merry
with their friends. From thence to Wells, and so to Bridgewater, over the
down called Poldonne, a place often frequented with such as lighten honest
travelers of their moneys. These good companions passing the down, the way
fair and green, and they pleasanty discoursing, William of a necessary
business was enforced to stay behind: wherein being earnestly employed, came
to him three tal fellows well appointed, with short swords and bucklers,
commanding him to deliver his money. William being thus surprised on the sudden,
nothing daunted with their words, presently said. It is done like cowards and
not men, to take me at such advantage. Now I see the old proverb verified, It
is easy kissing a man's tail when his hose are down.

If you be men, as you have the form of men, show me fair play and do your
worst. The thieves hearing him so pleasant, though their have to be gone was
great, dreading his company should rescue him, would try what was in him,
setting so good a face on it, willed him to choose his first man, and best do,
best have. William hearing such good words from so bad minds, took his
Capcase from his Saddle bow, settling himself to such weapons as he had. Good
fellows (quoth he) for Gentlemen I scorn to name you: that you may say
hereafter, you met with a true man and a good fellow, there lies my money,
twenty pounds I take it: on this condition, that if I hurt or foil this good
fellow, the money to be mine without more adoor further challenge of any of you:
if I receive the like, the money is yours, and much good may it do you: with
this consent of both parties, to it they went. William being a very tall man,
held him play until his sword brake, when closing with him, William showing a
Devonshire trick, laid him flat on his back, and might have slain him, had
not his fellows bin so near. With this the fray ended, and William craved
leave to pass with his money according to promise: which they delivered.
William having it at his Saddle bow ready to take horse, two of them holding
him fast by the arms, said. (Gentleman) I doubt not but you will confess to
your friends, we have used you as our honest promise was, you have your money
and we all good friends: which considered, though our wants be great, yet every
honest man is their words master: we will not steal, for that is forbidden:
marry we have here two good Rabbets, which you shall buy. William hearing the
thief talk so much of honesty, blessing himsefe, says: when the Fore
preaches, beware the Geese. My masters (quoth he) I have far home, and my
diet provided in every Inn if I have money, I have no use for your Rabbets,
therefore seek some other chapman. By our Lady (quoth the thief) but you
shall. Nay if you swear (said William) I am content so your price be
reasonable. What must I pay? all the money in your Capcasse (quoth they)
therefore dispatch, for we have business* Dispatch (quoth William) no have but
good: I must have some more time to view my commodity before I pay my money.
With that they laid all hands upon him to bind him, unto which he was loath to
subject himself: wherefore willed them to take his money and let him go: to
which, though they they were loath to agree, yet upon his oath that he should
not pursue them, they shaked the money into their hat and bad him farewell.

William having his Rabbets, the dearest commodity he ever bought, hastneth
after his company, who missing him, at the foot of a hill stayed his coming,
unto whom he showed no manner of discontent, but ieasting, said: you my masters
of Barnestable and Tiuertonne, being so near, make have to be with your wuies,
and miss all good bargains: see what I have bought to make my Ioane merry
when I come home. Nay quoth one, though they be good and well worth the
carriage, yet will they not keep so far, the weather being so hot.
Therefore let us eat them to dinner, and be merry together before we part.
Eat them quoth William, soft sirs, they cost me more. Why said they, you shall
have as much as they cost you with thanks. You say like honest men, said
William, let us ride no further then Bridgewater to night, and take my
bargain, on this condition you pay me what they cost, and my self go clear
for buying and carriage. To which they all assented, and forward they set a
round pace to Bridgewater, where they dined, bespake good cheer for supper,
where the Rabbets were a dish: enuited their friends of the Town, with whom
they were very merry at supper. William often demanding how they liked their
cheer, which they all commended. The guest gone, a reckoning was called and
the host paid. Now Signior William (quoth Oliver) what cost ye Rabbets? and
well remembered said Otho, we had like to have forgotten them. Yea had said
William, that is all one, forbearance is no quittance: give me my present money
as your promise was, and after I will bestow on you to bedward a gallon of the
best wine in the town. You will gain much by that said Robert. Get or loose I
will do it. Tell us then (quoth Walter) what cost they? My masters I doubt not
but you will all believe me: speaking on my credit, twenty pounds they cost
me, and some odd money, how much I do not perfectly remember: wherefore pay me
twenty pounds, and let the rest go. Muse not at my large account, for your
haste was cause thereof: leaving me in such manner without regard: recounting
all that happened between the thieves and him. Whereat though they were ashamed,
and more grieved for the danger he was in, they could not forbear to laugh.
Well my masters said William, jest on, you shall not escape one penney better
cheap: for as I am an honest man, you shall pay it, to teach you leave your
honest friends hereafter: whose life was by your negligence in great hazard. So
justly sharing the twenty pounds amongst them, turning it to a jest, with a
good will they delivered it. William called for his gallon of wine promised,
which they merrily drunk to wash down the Rabbets: and the next morning when
they had rid three or four hours together as their way lay, they parted every
man to his home faithful friends, and true lovers one of the other.

CHAP. XII. How these famous Merchants for wrongs done them by the Frenchmen,
equiped twelve ships of worth, by authority of the King, and their success.
THe Frenchmen in times past, having secret envy against our Nation, some
discord happening between the Kings of both the Realms: great broils were in
hand on either party, and many outrages by land and sea committed, the poor
Merchants ever having the worst, whose goods were taken, rifled and sold,
without recompense. Among those which had great cause to complain of their
loss, the Merchants of Exeter and the Western parts, had not their parts
least: being men of trade, aduenturing every where, lost much: so long
endured* without redress, that vexed thereat, and some of them near undone,
by humble suite to the King, obtained Letters of Reprisall, to serve against
those and their Adherents which spoiled them: whereupon the Merchants of Fxeter
furnished and manned in warlike manner, six tall ships, at their own proper
charge: of which Fleet, they made choice of William for Admiral: who having
the charge, minding carefully to accomplish what he had undertaken, sent unto
his Consorts of the other Towns, requesting their companies and aid: who
willing to accompany their friend, as also to recover part of their loss,
furnished in like manner, other six ships, themselves serving for Captains of
their own goods.

William having the charge of General, with such countenance demeaned
himself, valiant and courteous, that every man presaged good success in his
fortunes: that sundry Gentlemen and men of valor made suite for to accompany
him.

William careful of what he had in hand, having the most his own charge,
slacked no time: but hearing of the arrival of his Fleet at Dorthmouth, the
place appointed of meeting, frollikes with his friends, viewing and mustring
their companies, which were all goodly men, and well furnished. Not long after
a fair wind blowing, to the favor of God they commended their actions, and
the equity of their cause: putting forward with great resolution to the sea.
At their going forth, taking their farewell after the manner of such service,
as all the country admired and cheared their friends which were beholders
thereof.

These Gallants leaving our own coast, according to directions, plied for Bell
I Will, the trade, and other places fit to find their enemies. Of whose being upon
the Coast, the Admiral of France was advertised, who by chance was then in the
Road of Charleboyes, sharing English goods lately taken: and hearing of these
warlike ships, in the night fell lower to the mouth of the river, and in the
morning taking the advantage of the Tide, came to sea. Where shortly by our
Fleet, which looked sharply out for them, they were discovered, and a view
taken of their Fleet, which were twice as many, and more goodly ships: but
William resolved to see their courage and try it: after he had called his
fleet together, and given direction for the fight, assured of his company, and
their faithful industry, provided every way fit for the same, they Bare with
the French, displaying Saint George over their tops. The Frenchmen seeing
these Gallants, rather thought them mad then otherwise, so to boorde them,
having the odds, especially on their own Confines, stood with them, entending
to have compassed the whole Fleet, and so to have made quick dispatch:
Boording them, and carrying them away, wherein they were deceived. For William
^^^^^ with more resolution, as they afterward found to their cost. Our Fleet
coming up with them, after a defiance with Trumpets gives* William and his
Uice-Admirall Oliver, thrust amongst the Fleet, and in despite loorded the
Admiral, and took the General into their own ship, leaving some men aboorde
to keep her: and sending the French men all away with their boats, to seek
their fortunes. This onset beginning with good success, added courage to our
companies, and greatly discomforted the French, having lost their Admiral. Yet
continued ye fight very hotly four or five hours: In which time many of the
French lay drenched in the deep, both men and ships. William keeping his own,
who was so well followed by his companions, that the French wearied with the
fight, and their hope, past hope to escape, William and his company having the
advantage of the shore, lying between them and the sea, yielded themselves to
his mercy: of whom being possessed, he took the principal men prisoners, made
choice of the best ships, and manned them with their Ordinance, such
Merchandise and money, whereof they had a boundance aboard: freed many
Englishmen they had taken: sincking the most part of the ships, saving the
worst to carry men a shore. Which done, in despite of those on land which
should contradict his doings, went into the Road of conquest, fired the ships
in the Road, and brought two Galleys away. This finished, when he had houered
upon the coast two whole weeks, to see if any durst come and find fault with
what was done: with great wealth and more honor to the country, he returned
to Dorthmouth, recompencing his company, well satisfied for their loss, and
richly stoaring the kings treasure, to the good liking of his Majesty, who
gave the^ many thanks: and general joy of the whole land, whose honor it was.

CHAP. XIII. How Ioane UUilliams wife, for sundry mad parts played, could not
endure her servant James: and his departure to Spain.
Mistress Ioane growing now to more reckoning of her self, standing on her
husbands advancement, being Master Captains wife, expected from her
neighbors more honor then had of custom been tendered, especially of her
servants: which James her man perceiving, scorned to do as she commanded,
being the eldest servant, the principal dealer for his Master, having charge
of all: which Mistress Ioane stomacked much, and often would cross him with
tanting speeches, not forgetting the knauish pranke played between his Master
and her: albeit she consealed the same. Amongst many the mad tricks James
offered his Mistress, this one she took most exceptions at. In the time of
her husbands absence, her self lying in of a young son, many her neighbors
banquetted with her, as the custom is in that Country, at which time with
other Williams friends, sundry the best in the City often times to William* bad
themselves to supper, against whose coming, all dainty vyands that money or
friends could procure was provided, all things fit to content: on these
guestes, Ioane gave strict charge, diligent attendance by her servants be
given, for the better credit of themselves and their Master: which they
promised to do. The guests set, and their Cates orderly served, James waited
in good sort, yet not to Mistress Ioanes content, having many to employ: some
by chance wanted clean Trenchers, for which, she took occasion in open
presence to check her man James, commanding him to see if there wanted
nothing on the Table: and willed him to bring in a wheele-Barrow, to carry away
the bones and foul trenchers. James hereat moved, following her counsel, like
a diligent servant, ran hastily for the same, and brought it to the Table. At
which jest the company had good sport, and long time busied them with
laughter. But Mistress Ioane, seeing her self before her friends so scorned,
frowned, powted, and swelled on James, and hardly could forbear weeping: yet
let it pass amongst many other prankes, until her husbands return from seas:
unto whom with tears, she complained her of sundry wrongs done by her servant
James. Which William like a kind Master, waying his youth, and good service
he had received from him, sought to excuse with gentle words: persuading his
wife to the like. Which Ioane hearing, passing the bounds of modesty, she
protested, that if he kept him longer in his house, he accounted more of him
then of his wife: nor might she be brought otherwise to believe: and so vowed,
that either one or other of them two, must part, if William intended to live in
quiet. William wisely waying the benefit of so good a servant, was loath to
leave him, until by continual clamours of his wife he was enforced: whom to
content, he found means to send James his man to the ports of Cales and Saint
Lucas in Spain, with his merchandise that he had then shipped, as Merchant and
chief Factor: on which motion made to James by his Master, and assurance
there to continue three years, which was all the time he had to serve, James
was well pleased, being persuaded of his Masters love, how much soever he was
discontent with his Mistress, whose envy he was assured to be principal cause
thereof: which with patience he took in as good part as he could: providing
himself to go with the ship: which being ready, his Master delivered him his
chartie party, and Bills of lading, with many good and grave aduertisements:
So taking his farewell of Master and Mistress, and all his fellow servants,
he left behind him this Adieu in writing, and so betook him to his affairs.

Though parting be mourning
Where friendship is dear:
Yet better be packing,
Then stay longer here.
Our William, sweet William,
Is matched with Ione,
Whose will, not Williams,
Does cause me to moan.
The wrath of a woman
May no man endure:
For where they malign,
Their woe they procure.
Experience has taught it,
And true it does prove:
The Devil and a woman,
Seld conquered by love.
A woman envious,
Whose chance is to wed:
Were better be troubled
With a devil in his bed.
Therefore my good fellows
From whom I must part:
Forget not to learn
This lesson by heart.
What ever your Master
Appoint to be done:
Regard your Mistress
If blows you will shun.
The night Crows favor
Seek you to obtain:
More shall be your quiet,
But better your gain.
For women how ever
They chance speak you fair:
Will always be ready
Your woe to prepare.
If in the least sort
You cross their intent:
They Will dye in the quarrel
But they will cause you be she^t
Say James for his farewell
This lesson does give:
And please your Mistress
So long as you live.
CHAP. XIIII. How the Kings Army marched to Exeter, to relieve the City,
besieged by the Cornish Rebels.
AMongst sundry Tumults, and rebellious assemblies, wherewith in times past
this land was afflicted, a route of Traitors were gathered together in the
West, very mighty was their power, and their tyranny more, who spared not to
waste, spoil, and ruinate, all along the whole Country as they marched
together, without regard of God, Prince, or natural affection, of that clymat
where they received life. The tyranny of these Rebels bruted throughout the
Country, every man fled for safeguard of their lives, wives and children, to the
noble City of Exeter: as a place of sanctuary from those blood-thirstie
reprobates: Where the Rebels followed with their merciless army, and with
strong siege begirt it: using all possible means they could, by force and
policy to gain the possession thereof: which in vain they practiced, many
assaults they made, which were manfully resisted by the honorable and true
liegemen Citizens of the same: and sundry valiant and dangerous scalies made
by them upon the enemy, weakening their force with great slaughter, and pulling
from them of their store of victuals, to relieve their wants, which were very
many and great: yet dismayed they not, but continued their defense with great
valor, and everlasting honor unto them. In this time of trouble, was William
called to high office amongst them, in his own person doing great and worthy
service, to the encouragement of the multitude: whom of his own bounty and
charge of victuals he relieved: saving their lives both by valor and liberal
store of provision, famine had so generally possessed the same.

Of these outrages by the Rebels committed, the King was advertised, who
graciously tendering their distress, and pitying those his loving subjects,
whose vatour and constancy to him was such, speedily levied a power of men at
arms, and with such hasty iournies as was requisite, marched toward Exeter
for their relief. Of whose coming, the Rebels having knowledge, like a rabble
of faint hearted miscreants, raised their siege, and departed with bag and
baggage. The tidings of whose departure, by Posts to his highness was
signified, who notwithstanding continued his journey to Exeter, to see their
battered walls, and by his presence to encourage them and others his subjects
to like loyalty, if such chances should happen. Unto whom his Majesty was
most joyfully welcomed, as appeared by their entertainment: which was
graciously accepted, as by his honorable thanks given did appear.

CHAP. XV. How VViliiam and his companions, Oliver, Otho, and the rest, to make
the King sport challenged all comers, at wresling, foote-ball, and hurling,
which he performed.
THe King whose countenance has purchased the Cities liberty, reposed him
amongst those his loyal subjects of Exeter, who to show their love, enabled
their greatest diligence. Amongst which, William and Oliver, whose wealth was
matchless* and best able to perform what they undertook: entending to show
their Countries accustomed exercises of actiuitie before his Highness, made
general challenge throughout the Country of Deuon, and Cornwall, 24. men, to
24. choose them where they could, at Exeter before the King, on a day prefixed,
at these sportes, viz. wrestling, hurling, and footeball. This challenge given
out, William that had his felicity in keeping men of actiuitie, chiefly
excelled in these qualities: sent likewise to his friends, Walter of Totnes,
Otho of Plymouth, John of Barnestable, and Robert of Tyuerton, to furnish him
with such men as as they could of their own, which were able to maintain the
challenge. Who having notise thereof, and knowing the assured day, failed not
their old friend William, but accordingly brought to Exeter twelve good men of
theirs, to join with William and his twelve. To encounter which, according to
the proclamation, repaired to Exeter many worshipful Gentlemen, with their
followers, and sundry chief and well experienced in those qualities. William
and his companions, willing to encourage their people, has for the purpose,
against the first day, suited all their company in Crimson Satin, with scarlet
Cappes and Feathers, under which, every man to play in, wore a Wastcoate of
like colored Taffata. The time assgned come, and the King taking his place to
behold this exercise of wrestling, appointed for the first days pastime,
William and his friends above named, apparelled in Coats of black Ueluet and
Chains of Gold, accompanied with many Whiflers to guard the place, marched on
to the Green called Southing-Hay, without the City walls, followed with his
appointed troops, attyred as you have heard: who taking their places, were
instantly followed by the Country men. Then to answer them, apparelled in
suites of purple Satin, and led by a Knight of great name, who passing by
his highness place, bowed themselves, and marching once or twice about the
rayles took their stand, opposed with the Citizens. This done, proclamation
was made for the quiet of the Gamesters, who proceeded to their pastimes,
wherein of both sides was showed many manfull feats, and slights of policy,
to his Majesty's great pleasure: who by general voice of the whole company,
gave the honor of that days exercise, to Williams Prentises and their
fellows. Which done, they marched away in order as they came, the Citizens
tryumphing for their success.

The next day at the hour appointed, the King being placed, William with his
company marched in like manner to the field, who were apparelled in Wastcoates,
and Hose of white Laffata, with wrought Nightcaps on their heads, ready to
their pastime of hurling. And the defendants in watched Laffata, likely suited.
Where between them, much valor and agilitie of body was showed, as leaping,
vauting, running and wrestling, wherein they excelled: and for their cunning,
of the King worthily praised and rewarded, who highly commended the sport,
wishing all his subjects such as they were.

This days honor to the Prentises was likewise adjudged: who like Uictors
left the field this second day, to the great contentment of William and his
followers.

The third days sport which was footeball, appointed to be performed, William
and his comperes marched to the field, his companies apparelled as before, in
red and blew Taffata, and the Country defendants, in Orange Tawny. No sooner
entered they the field, their duties done, and the players stripped, the King
to do them grace and encourage them to their play, caused a Noble man of his
train to cast up their Ball, which came no sooner on the ground, but was taken
at advantage: then began the strength and nimblenesse of men to be tried, with
lifting, throwing, and casting one the other, some with violence, others with
fine slights, generally commended, continuing their sport without victory on
either side, along time, until by unhappy chance, one of Williams company, a
proper man, and a Gentleman borne, was with a fall from a lofty man's arms,
unfortunately slain. This Traget is more grieved the King and all his company,
then any thing, who commanded their pastime to cease, adiudging the honor to
Exeter Citizens, yet recompensed royally the defendants, and gave them many
gracious speeches of commendation: but sorrowed more for the slain Gentleman,
then for the loss of a million of Gold. The Gentleman he caused with great
pomp to be enterred, and gave the prize ever after to Devonshire and
Cornwall, for those exercises: which continue them matchless to this day.

CHAP. XVI. How the Cardinal for some especial business, leaning his
Highness at Exeter, departed toward London.
THe Cardinal then Legal from the Pope, accompanying the King on his journey,
hearing of Letters, and some spiritual embassage arrived, took leave of his
highness, for his journey to London: whom to accompany, William and his fellow
Aldermen of ye city, addressed themselves: ryding on, pleasantly discoursing of
their pastimes and entertainment, until they came to the stones, marks of the
Cities liberty, which the Cardinal taking notise of, said; Gentlemen I
perceive that here your liberties end, wherefore I will trouble you no further:
return now I beseech you, and acknowledge my duty to the King. William being
of more spirit then many of the others, that thought not on their pains, in a
pleasant humor thus said.

Pleases your Grace to pardon us, though here end our Cities liberties, yet
may we bring our friends further, and therefore will bring your Holiness to
the Gallows and there leave you: meaning a place of execution, distant from
the City a mile and better.

The Cardinal taking his words short, said: No no my masters, turning it to a
jest, without any exceptions, and accepted their companies to that place: In
which way thitherward, the Cardinals horse chanced to drink in a brook, where
his horse so pleasantly conceited, would feign have drunk, but he restrained
him: which the Cardinal perceiving, said. Sir, why let you your horse from
drinking?

Pleases your Grace (quoth he) he shall not drink before your Graces horse
has done. At which the Cardinal laughed heartily, saying: Sir, I know not how
to requite this great kindness, but if ever your horse come where mine may
show like courtesy, assure you, your horse shall drink first, in despite of
his teeth.

Thus passed they on the way merrily, to their journey appointed, to bring his
Holiness: where the Cardinal remembering his friends kind proffer, said.

Sir, I take it, this is the place, where by covenant we must bid farewell:
wherefore I thank you for my great cheer and sport, and for your pains. This
is the Gallows I take it, whither since you would needs accompany me, here I
mean to leave you, and so to you all gentle friends farewell. Where with
most friendly and loving imbrasings they left the Cardinal to his journey,
and the Citizens returned to Exeter: where to the King they recomunt what
happened them: who took great pleasure therein, and often would use in
merriment, the parting of the Cardinal, with the Citizens. Who, a waeke after,
feasted his highness and his train, and so with great thanks left them.

CHAP. XVII. How James UUilliams servant accompanied the Dukes of Medina and
Florence, at play, and how James at one cast, lost fifty thousand Ducats.
James, the first servant of William, continuing long in Cales and Saint Lucas,
on his masters business, by his good carriage and gentle behavior had more
credit then all the English Merchants there resident, or thither trading: not
only with the country, but with the Duke of Medina, who continually used
James as a companion at all exercises, or play whatsoever: such was his bounty
and nourture, who thought himself a Spanish Duke, or a Noble man at least.
Favor of all estates he had, as worthily deserved: his purse ever pliant to
the poor, who ever sought him in distress, whether Stranger or English, felt
his bounty.

These good parts of James, gained him love and favor, especially with the
Duke, who being a. Prince of noble mind, favored no Nation like the English,
or had pleasure with any but them. Frolike he was in their company, commending
their bounty, and wondering at their costly fare and attire, which would cause
him many times to leave his own Table and omit himself to their diet, gracing
them more then all Nations with his presence.

The Noble Duke who by often resort to their house, and other times had noated
their several dispositions, and highly commended them, purposed to try at
full what was in them, having on a time the Duke of Florence in his Court, unto
whom he had liberally spoken our Englishmens praise: and that he might better
credit his speech, he ordained a most costly banquet: to which he invited the
chiefest of our English Merchants: amongst which, Don laques de Engleterre, for
so he named him, was not forgotten.

James, which cared not for coin, but wayed his countries honor, against the
prefixed time, suited himself very rich after our country fashion: and with
his companions to the Court is come: where with great welcomes of both Dukes
they were entertained, and feasted most costly with rare Cates, spending the
time of dinner with mirth, and much pleasant parley.

Dinner ended, to sundry sportes they fell: some dance, some discourse, other
court the dames. James and other two of his companions, accompany the Dukes at
dice: between them was very great game, and store of money on each side
walking. The Duke setting great sums which was never refused. The Duke of
Medina perceiving it, thought verily to make them turn crauen. Being somewhat
discontent, loosing so much, and few Crowns before him, pulled a Jewel from
his chain, valued at fifty thousand Ducats: daring in high terms, the
proudest Englishman to throw at it. This stern challenge of the Duke, dismayed
our gallants, who looking one on the other, strained courtesy who should accept
it, none so so hardy to adventure thereon, the value being so great, all their
substance not able to counteruaile it, and loath to lie in prison for a cast at
Dice.

James nothing the timerousnesse of his companions, chearing their faint
sprites, said.

Countrymen, what all amort? has one proud word overthrown you, that
hitherto scorned to be dared, but like true Liegemen to our King, has
maintained his and our countries honor? No gallants no, were his King here and
would pawn his Crown, making so peremptory a challenge, my self would give
the adventure thereon: if life, goods, of credit would answer the loss
thereof. Therefore Saint George Englands honored Patron (quoth James) I am
the man: and stepping to the table, clapped hand on the Jewel, and covered it
with his pawn: promising to make good, the valued sum of fifty thousand
Ducats, if he lost it: which the Duke accepted.

But in unhappy time for James, who lost by fortune of the Dice, at that
throw, not only all the wealth he had gained, but his Masters stock, and all
the goods he had of other Merchants: to deal for as factor: all which never
daunted his courage, nor could the Duke perceive in his countenance any change,
but with great cheerfulness, drew the money he had of his own, and borrowed
of his companions all they had about them: he paid it in part, pawning his
honest word for the rest, to be satisfied within ten days next following.
Which don, spending some time in banketting, they took their leaves, all the
company grieved in heart for James, who in that humor had utterly undone
himself.

James recovering his lodging, heavy in heart, although he were light of
substance: began to consider of his estate, it grieved him more for his good
friends in England, his Master, and such whose goods he had lost, then for
himself. In these passions of discontent, when he had a while, like one lost
from himself remained, chearing his spirits, he thus said.

Base peasant, unworthy the name of Englishman: what dishonor were it for thee
and thy Nation, if thy cowards thoughts by these proud Spaniards could be
perceived? accountest thou more of trash then thy countries honor? or shall
this pelf alter thy former contented humor, drawing thy pleasant conceited
mind, to a laborinth of cares, and so quite overthrow thy self? No, no, cease
to sorrow, a pound of care never paid one ounce of debt. Let this be thy
comfort: thou wast for the time, companion to the greatest Prince in Spain,
then fail not to despair, quiet thy effects, follow thy business, and
satisfy the Duke: least this more disgrace thy country for none payment, then
the insolent Spaniards, has gained wealth by his Indies. Lis far better to
die a beggar in thine own country, then here to be disgraced, and
discountenanced: the which all those Gallants of my country, that shall come
hereafter into these Confines, with Millions of gold cannot redeem. Bestir
thee then, make sale of thy goods, call for thy debts, and having the sum,
glut the myser Duke with gold, though hereafter thou sterue.

Thus said, leaving his study, with diligence he applied him, against this
promised time to procure the money, which by his friends he conveyed to the
Dukes house, where he tendered the utmost farthing.

The Duke of a mild and honorable inclination, bethinking him what a great
loss it was for a Merchant, tendering his estate when he had sundry ways
discoursed with him, caused his Steward to return him the one half of his
money, dividing it between them: which James took in great scorn, and more
grieved to be found other in the latter end, then at the beginning: yet with
courtesy and thanks returned the same: saying to his companions, That never
Spaniard should report he was Benifactor to an Englishman. So taking leave of
the Dukes of Medina and Florence, departed to his lodging, lamented of those
Princes for his loss: but highly honored for his magnanimity and haughty
spyrit, which made the Dukes censure him, to be doubtless, the son of some
mighty Potentate, how basely so ever shrouded in those his accustomed attires.

CHAP. XVIII. How James traveling from Cales to Saint Lucas, encountered a
gallant Lady, widow of a Spanish Cauoleere of great honor.
James this Devonshire gallant, having finished with the Duke, and passed all
accounts with his friends, satisfying all such sums at full which he had
taken up, for clearing this great sum, had notise of the arrival of certain
English ships at Cheryes. To which place he hired a guide and post-horse to
hear the news from England: taking his adieu of his companions, away he
goes, only accompanied with his guide. So long traveling, that his horse
being weary, desired his Masters lodging in the fields, for lodging that
night he was not likely to recover: his guide fearing some hard measure, being
better horst left him, through his threatening speech, which brought him to a
very melancholy humor. While he was debating with himself what should betide
him that night, having brought himself within such a Thicket or Grove of
Drenge, Lemmon, or Pomgranat trees, casting up his eyes between the glimsing
of the light, he espied a gallant Cauolere bravely mounted, upon a swift
running Genat.

This sight happening in a place so suspicious, more appalled him then the loss
of his money, dreading more company and bad conditions, of some lurking thieves
to take away his life: yet arming himself with courage, resolved to make them
buy it dearly, if they did not ouermatch him: determining with himself for
his own safety, he came nearer to his suspected enemy, who crossed him the
way between the trees in such manner, as might drive a man to doubt.

James coming up to him, and having a vigilent eye, espied at his saddle bow
a Case of Pistolles, and a Case of Rapiers by his side, showing in his
countenance a stern and heavy look, which made him more mistrust, not
without cause, holding on his course with such speed as his tired Jade would
make: (at length well ouertooke) the Spaniard having seen James, making less
haste for his company: being met, according to the Spanish fashion, great
welcomes is enterchanged with the Basilanus Manus* the Spaniard pacing easily
by him, desiring his company, and questioning him, of what country and
profession he was.

James that never feared or shamed the name of Englishman, told him what he
was, and how by villainie of his guide, he was thus distressed. Which the
Spaniard hearing, tendered his estate being a stranger, swearing by his fathers
beard (for he had none of his own) that could he tell how to meet the
villain that offered the wrong, he would revenge it on him with his life. This
courtesy deserved thanks: which James very thankefully rendered him: yet
trusted nothing more his good words: passing on the way, diversely discoursing,
the Spaniard courteous in words said.

(Gentleman) albeit I have been no far traveler, the better to yield the
duty thereunto appertaining, yet the law of humanity tieth men by reason, one
man to tender other in distress: what my good or bad fortune may be, it is best
known to him that guides men's thoughts. I may perchance, be likewise
distressed as you are now, where I should be glad of favor. If therefore you
dare commit the charge of your self to my company, I will be this might your
conduct and warrantise from all harms: your host a worthy Gentleman, and my
very good friend, dwelling in these vallyes: where how ever you fare, your
welcome shall be good, and so much the better welcome to my self, being of
that famous Country of England.

James, that with Spanish courtesy could not be ouermatched, returned great
thanks for so kind an offer, howsoever he was affected to take or refuse it:
holding it small wisdom to accept every kind profer of strangers, for fear
of repentance: yet when he had considered how comfortless he was left, with
the peril he was subject too, lying all night in those Deserts, rather
consented to yield his life's safety to men endued with reason, then hazard it
amongst unreasonable beasts: wherefore commending his safety to his power,
against whom no enemy has resistance, with many kind thanks accepted the
Spaniards favor and accordingly was brought by him to the mansion of a very
brave Gentleman: who hearing of their arrival, commanded their horses to be
well ordered: themselves by the Master and Lady of the place, with more then
ordinary entertainment.

The Mistress of the house and her daughters, keeping them company in their
chamber, while their supper was puruaying, where in pleasant discoursing,
commending one the others Country, James for fashions sake praising the
courtesy of Spain, and the Spaniards the gallantnesse of England, and our
Countrymen.

CHAP. XIX. How James lay with the Spaniard his companion, and found him to be
a woman.
THeir respast taken, and the night growing on, every man requiring rest, a
servant of the house appointed for that service, demanded if they pleased to
lodge together, or have their beds sunderly prepared: which question, James
gave the Spaniard leave to answer, as best acquainted in the house, and loath
to offend with boldness, any one, especially him who had provided him of so
good an host.

The Spaniard having in his own choice, to take a bedfellow, said: Gentle
Englishman, seeing you have put it to my direction, and the weather requires
warm lodging, let it please you, to accept me for your bedfellow this night,
so shall our ease be the more, and the servant of the house less troubled.

Thanks good sir (quoth James) for this great favor, which I am careful how
to deserve: besides my payment, which I will largely in the house discharge.

Sir (quoth he) our host is a Gentleman, bountiful and courteous, who in his
own kind nature, does hold it meritorious, to entertain strangers,
especially such as are distressed.

While they were at this parley, word was brought them, their lodging was
prepared, to which they provide the^. James and his bedfellow contending who
should in courtesy make choice of their place: which in the end James
protested should be the Spaniards.

Where upon to bed he goes: James detracting time, lingering until he
perceived the Spaniard quiet a sleep, then slipping off his doublet, wherein
his most store of gold was quilted, he privily conveyed the same between the
mattresses, whereon they lay. That done, and the doors fast made, to bed he
hyeth, not so easily, but that his coming awakened his bedfellow.

Who very friendly bad hun welcome, with whom entering into discourse, the
Spaniard entreated him, to show him the difference if any were, between the
Spanish and his country Gentlewomen: which in such manner by James was
accomplished, as the one was not more praised, neither for beauty, or virtue,
then the other commended: which equal judgment, was thankfully balanced by
him, that gave him many thanks for the same.

Continuing their parley, the Spaniard under Benidicitie, besought him yet
further to tell him, if in time of all his soiournying in Spain, he had not
made choice of any one to participate with in marriage, or that he had bestowed
his love and liking on any his countreywomen. All which questions, James could
conceive no reason of, nor to what end they were demanded. But simply answered
the truth, he neither was married, or given consent to any, but his choice was
yet freely to be made, where fancy best pleased, and he was likeliest to
obtain.

With this, laying his hand over James naked breast, feeling his body, he
desired James to do the like: in search whereof, he found his bedfellow a
woman: bewtiful, and of an exceeding goodly personage, James astonished at this
metamorphosis, was by her thus revived.

Kind companion and courteous Englishman, let not this sudden motion dismay
thee, for no disparagement shall it be, to lend thy love and liking (if thou
can love) unto me, who am honorably descended, and sometime wife to a most
noble gentleman, as is any in this Country: sister I am to the principallest
man in account with our King: by whom if thou list to love, thy estate shall be
to honor advanced: with my coin, living, Jewels, and Plate, I will richly
endowe thee: in such abundance, that thou shall never need i^hazard to
adventure thy life: my people shall honor thee, and master shall thou be of
all my possessions. Then love brave man, love her that lives in the sweet
hope of thy contentment, and ever enjoy the loyalty of my true and spotless
love.

James that had many hammers beating in his brains, was more set a work by
this unexpected chance, looking more for death, then to purchase so good a
wife, his bedfellow rather resembling a Cauelere, then a Countess, began to
listen to the sweet notes of this pleasing Nightingale, tuning such high notes
of honor, wealth, and Wedlock, could hardly on the sudden be won to
credit her speech, but rather coniectured to be some Curtizan, then a Lady of
honor or worth: wherefore desirous to learn further, by fair words, neither
denying or granting her suit, he besought her in love to explain, for his
better satisfying, the occasion of her disguise, and place of habitation, armed
in such manner.

Know my dear Love (quoth she) for so let me entreat to call thee, my husband
of whom thou shall hear much honor, when thou shall arrive at Cheries, having
a deadly quarrel, ah deadly I may too well say, for to him so it proved: being
by his enemies watched, as harmless he was following for pleasure his Hawks,
was suddenly by the wretched homicyde surprised, and by his slaves,
blood-thirstie villains, ^utchered: whose death in mine own person, sundry
times as you see me disguised, I sought to revenge: working many means to
accomp^^^^ my will therein, as this day I did, having assurance by some near
him, (which with money I have subborned) to give me intelligence of his travel,
which unhappy, I have unfortunately missed, to my great discontent. Believe me
gentle friend, that speaks no more but truth, for no more but truth will I
say to thee, whose joy thou art, and whose love shall be more pleasing then the
worlds treasury, as thy self shall manifest when thou shall come to thy
iournies end: if Cheries be the place thou entendest to go.

Dear Love (quoth she) I am troublesome unto thee, which art weary and
discontent: wherefore pardon me, and with this kiss, let me commit thee to thy
sweet rest, which I hope shall prove both our contens.

James, that was not so bad a Pylat, but he had learned how many ancors longed
to the Trade, commended her likewise to rest: albeit his own was not like to
be much, so many sundry thoughts increasing of his sweet bedfellow, with whom
he could wish friendship to be continued, as well in regard of her person, as
her honor and great ability, which more affected, considering his estate,
desirous to clear with his good friends in England, whom in a humor he had
wronged, consuming their wealth, how ever he likes or disliketh, in spirit is
he cumbred: taking it for a great favor of God, in his distress to give him
this comfort in ieopardie of his life, in a wilderness unfrequented, where no
relief was to be found, by her to be favored and preferred, he determined how
ever to procure her Love, and requite it: but not with sure promise to tie
himself, that may not with conscience be recalled.

While he was at his Memento, in an extacie what should betide him, the Lady
awaked, imbrasing him in her arms, in in such kind manner and proffers of
love, as might have given life to Pygmalions Image. Whether it be Englishmens
unkindness to requite such favor with disdain, I refer to your censures.
But how so ever it fell out between them, the Lady was so exceedingly well
pleased, as she loved ever after Englishmen, better then her own Country men,
to her death.

The wearisome winters night is not more displeasant to a troubled spirit, then
the grief both conceived in enjoying so short a time of familiar contentment,
well content of either part, to have entertained their hard lodging for longer
time. But James hastening to see the end of these hoped fortunes, desired to be
on his journey, though better pleased with his Spanish bedfellow, then with all
his Country men: protesting by no small vows, that if all Spaniards in bed
brought such contentment, he would never desire to lie with Englishman more.

CHAP. XX. How James accompanied the Ladies to Cheryes, and what entertainment
she gave him there.
THe Suns bright beams so gloriously displaying, tells these contented
Lovers the morning is far spent, which hastened them to arise, making all the
speed they could to perform their journey: for which being provided, James
tendered money largely for his vyands, which of the Host and Mistress of the
house, was refused: wherefore bountifully rewarding the servants attendants,
they took their leaves, taking their horses which were well refreshed,
speeding them with all haste to Cheryes, where being arrived, James as it was
between them agreed, takes his lodging in an Ostrey, by her assigned him, her
self by a back way, secretly conuayed to her own house, appointing James to
stay the coming of her Messenger, which should be his conduct to her.

No sooner arrived James in this place of contentment, but sundry of his
Country men and acquaintance he meets, by whom he had certain knowledge of
the welfare of his Master and all his friends in England. With this company a
while he merrily conuersed, perusing his Letters, and taking order for discharge
of such goods as they brought, consealing the heaviness of his hearts sorrow,
and coloring his thoughts with shows of content.

The hour being come of appointment, when he should visit his new acquainted
friend, who failed not her time, as careful thereof, but accordingly
dispatched her conducter for her Love James, of whose coming, as soon as James
had knowledge, taking leave of his companions, he followed his guide to the
house of the Gentlewoman, whom in her own form we call Madam Petronella: who
desirous to show all kind welcome to her friend, provided to give him
entertainme^t with most costly and rare cheer, thinking all things too little,
how costly so ever, that money or love could procure, for a guest of so high
exteeme, which might command his Mistress and all she had.

James that came not before he was expected, was espied a far off, of his
kind Lady Petronella, who attended his coming at the gate, where lovingly
unbrasing him, she bad him most heartily welcome to his own house: leading him
by the hand to place appointed for supper. James, seeing this strange change
of his new bedfellow, being now her self most sumptuously apparelled and
adorned with rich Jewels of great value, was stricken into a dumpe, eftsoons
admiting her stately personage, beauty and grace, her modest countenance, and
costly furniture of her mansion, which rather resembled a Paradise then any
other thing.

In midst of these extremities, which reason required to end, calling himself
to mind, and not forgetting his duty to the kind Lady, he rendered many
thanks, returning her imbrasings, with kisses, and interest, far above ten
in the hundred. The Lady having welcomed her Love, as you have heard, to
beguile time, while supper was ready, led him to her bed Chamber, which for
the rare and rich hangings of Embrodery he never had seen the like: in which
the arms of her late husbands auncestries and her own, was with cunning
wrought, in such manner as Art could not amend. To please his mind yet
farther, she opens her Closet, her Casket of Jewels, Chests of Plate, and
bags of money: all which, with her self, she again tendered him. Long had
not James contemplated on this heavenly blessing of God provided for him, when
word was brought that supper attended their coming on the Table, at which they
past the time with much pleasant parley, but chiefly the Lady desires, to
discourse of English Ladies, and their guise, the manner of the Country, and
such which James with rare perfection fitted to her content, passing from one
discourse to an other, so long, that James calling to mind his Master William
and other good friends in England, his pleasant humor was abated, and his
mind not on his halfepenny, (as our English Proverb is), but studied how to
satisfy them, and maintain his credit.

To this alteration, Petronella gave good heed, imagining that her Love took
little regard of all her profer, wealth, love, or beauty, yet to bring him from
his passion, she said.

Signior Jacques, since our first acquaintance, which has not bin long,
regarding thy welfare, and tendering thy good, I have diligently noted thy
person, the only content of my soul on earth, and with all, thy melancholy
disposition, and deep fetched sighs, too too far vnbesaeming thy self,
which has made me much admire, and causes my great sorrow. The occasion
whereof, if thou please to participate with me, my endeavor shall be to
redress it, if in my power it rest: if not, but that you conseale your hearts
discontent, and thereby fall to dangerous sickness, thou shall increase my
grief that loves thee, and afflict on your self such a mischief as all thy
friends will grieve to behold.

Pardon me dear friend (quoth she) and since thou art mute and wilt not say
what thou think, let me guess, take these keys, the guard of thine own
treasury, which shall conduct thee to more coin then all Cheryes can afford:
besides my Plate and rare Jewels, (all which) with what else I possess,
b^^^ow, sell, or otherwise employ at thy pleasure: only I crave, thou frolic,
and cast from thee these passiens: if this will not suffice, what commodities
this Country affoordeth, bargain for, I and my friends will furnish thee with
them, on our credites: then my sweet Love, seeing all, and all I have is at
thy command, leave longer thus to care, and show thy self as thou seem, so
shall thou fill my heart with joy, command in Cheryes, and be honored of my
Noble friends for my sake.

James that with great pleasure heard the words of his sweet Lady, spoken in
love, and tender regard of his good health, was more revived, then Rosa
solies, or Aqua Celisties a fainting spirit: for which, yielding praise to God
for his comfort in this distress, rendering all courteous thanks to
Petronella, whom faithfully he assured to abolish all things should be
displeasing unto her, assuring her on the faith of an Englishman, that what she
would request he would fulfill: and on this profer, a solemn vow was
consumate between them, violable to endure to the end of their lives. Taking
their lodging together, and full possession of all the wealth he had seen,
they passed the night in content. Petronella blessed in her choice: having some
doubt, that James through his long abode in Spain, had learned the manner of
her Countrymen, who care not for a widow in marriage, how unworthy so ever he
be, and the widow of good account, especially the Noble and Gentlemen.

This thought arising in Petronella, which was loath to exchange her Love,
caused her early in the morning to send for her Confessor, unto whom she
revealed what had past, and had absolution: by whom all rytes and holy
ceremonies was in the Chamber performed betwixt them, for which he was well
rewarded, and they both pleased. Petronella at her husbands request, entreats
the holy Father to conseale what was done, till time should give leave to
summon his friends to their marriage, to which he said Amen. And taking leave,
departed to his College. James to his Country men, with whom he frolikes:
Petronella to her prayers, thanking God for so good and kind a husband.

CHAP. XXI. How William by one of his neighbors was advertised of James his
bad fortunes, and how William gave him his answer.
IT is commonly seen, that ill tidings suddenly tun far, as by this had
fortune of James appeared, who having in his prosperity many loving and kind
friends that loved him dearly, at his downfall has showed themselves secret
enemies, rather rejoicing at his misfortunes, then any way tendering it.
Amongst which envious company, one being kinsman to a Merchant for whom William
was Factor, by the first Poast advertised in his Letters James his
prodigality, particularly as it happened. The report whereof, was no sooner
come, but William by his neighbor was advertised thereof. The sudden hearing
whereof, somewhat appalled him, having his best part of wealth with him, yet
pacifying choler, and framing himself to patience, he again perused the
contents of the Letters, the effect and particulars whereof, when advisedly he
considered, rather commended James for his good mind, doing his Country that
honor, not to be dared with so great a Prince, but more admired his high
spirit, scorning to receive the one half offered him by the Duke. With these
conceits being reasonably pacified, turning him to his neighbor thus said.

Sir it is your bad hap to be the first messenger of any ill hap befallen me,
and I pray God you may be the last: for your loss, I am more sorry then for
mine own: which I will see in some sort recompensed, in my man's behalf: show
me your accounts, and bate me but ten in the hundredth, and I will clear you.
Provided this, that you do not by any scandalous speech deprave my servants
reputation, that has showed himself a true Englishman, and by his loss
gained his Country honor: preferring his reputation before coin, and his
credit above his life, for which I commend him: and joy to hear he has no
otherways consumed my substance, nor what he had of other men's: and while I
live, his good deserts shall be thought on, far beyond those puling Crauons his
Country men, that held it no dishonor to be by a stranger dared.

William being so earnest in his man James his cause, his neighbor was sorry to
see him so moved, being of such countenance in the City, besought him of
patience, desiring him, for that the example of riot was perilous to be known
amongst servants, he would conseale it, and reform his servants at home, who
spend their money in Lauernes liberally, and procured theirs to do the like, and
others: all consuming, both their goods and their own stocks.

William, who tendered his servants as himself, hearing this complaint, was
more displeased then before: charging him with great unkindness in such manner
to withdraw his love from his people, who were for the most part Gentlemen of
worship, being in number twenty, very proper men, well maintained, and of good
education, the most of them, commonly on his affairs in other Countries: said
in very great anger.

Sir, sir, if your coming be to no other end, then to teach me to order my
servants, you might have kept you still, where I care not how soon you be gone:
if thou dreadest thy wealth consumes too fast, look more heedfully to them
that spend it: for my men, what they do I allow: nor will I favor any one of
them, that shall more account of his purse, then my credit: or dares not spend
an Angel with the best, being better men of birth then my self, for as they
spend they get: therefore if thou fear their expenses and doubtest thy
people, keep thee at home with them, and look better to their doings: and for
my man James, I will be thy pay-maister, bring thy bills, and receive thy money:
but use him in thy words well, least thou hear of it, and so when you will,
begone: but never hereafter trouble me more with thy complaints, for it shall
not any thing avail thee.

Here showed William the perfect love of a Master to his servants, whom he
loved more dear then his children: neither should any wrong the poorest he
kept: such was his care of them, that every day their diet was provided with
his own, and if his guests were but ordinary, they diet at his own table, or
very near him, where they would: amongst themselves, in name of good Bear,
which they plentifully had, drank Claret Wine, and Sack with Sugar in Stone
Pottes: which though he suddenly met with diverse times, yet would he rather
smile, then take in ill part any of their honest doings.

CHAP. XXII. How William and his friend Oliver, accompanied with Otho of
Plymouth, passed to Spain.
WIlliam that had a great stay on his man James, albeit he consealed tro^ the
worlds watchful eyes his conceit of him, and the grief for his loss, had
this comfort: that James being so brave and gallant a Merchant, either by his
credit or friends would make all whole again. Yet could he not be pacified,
until he might know the certain estate of his James, which he was
persuaded, would never be by reports, men being so diversely ginen: some to
speak well, others to deiame: for his better contentment, he acquainted his
old friend Oliver, who concluded to freight a small Bark, with some
commodities, to defray charges, and unknown to any, no not to their wives, to
pass for Spain: and for this voyage, having provided their goods, left their
homes, in charge to their servants, and to Plymouth they are come of whose
arrival there, wheir Otho had notise, he sought, and found them. Whom he
invited as his guestes to lodge in his house: where they were very welcome, and
royally feasted. Otho walking on the hooe, with his companions, demanded
whether they came to buy commodities, or to ship some from thence. From whom
they concealed their pretense, framing an answer that past for current,
betook them to other parley: and sundry whyes, day by day, deferring time,
until their Bark was ready, and halled into the sound, only attending the
coming of William and Oliver: who only had made the Master privy to their
voyage to Cales, and their intent to carry Otho with them for company: laying
the plot to get him aboorde, which they easily accomplished, seeing the Bark in
the sound, framed an excuse, to deliver Letters for their men at Cales: so
aboard in the ships beat they came, and were entertained in the Masters
Cabine, with such vyands as was for them provided: passing the time so merrily,
that by the time Otho thought to go a shore, they had sight of the Lyzard:
whereat he being astonished, the company in merriment comforted, when acquainting
him with their business, he was better content: his chiefest care was for
linen and apparel, which they promised to supply. Otho, when he saw no
remedy, began to frolike with the best, shortning their voyage with pleasant
conceits.

Scantly had one whole week past his course, but drawing near the Coast, and
the day fair and clear, a boy from the top descried the Clitts of Cales, the
Road recovering in good time: where displaying S. George, well were they could
first get aboorde to learn the news: no sooner our English Li^gers entered the
Bark, but finding those three friends, to most of them well known, they
heartily welcomed them to that shore. Like entertainment gave the visitors
unto them, who albeit they were strangers, by their factors, had knowledge of
their great wealth, and what countnance they bear in their Country.

Their salutations ended, William enquireth of a trusty friend so James the
news of him, and where he was. Marry Sir, in good time (quoth the Merchant)
you arrive, to be a guest at his marriage. And drawing a Letter which by Post
from Cheryes that day he received, gave it him to read: wherein he invited all
his countrymen to his marriage, with a relation of the fortunes befallen him,
since his leaving Cales: which was great joy to them all to hear, but most
contented William, whom most it concerned: which made him thus pleasantly to
beseech the company, to conceal their being, and with all expedition to land
their commodities. Which done, (quoth he) like Country men and good fellows,
we will all go to him, as he requesteth: James is a good fellow, and may do as
much for you. It Is a very good motion (quoth the company) wherefore to dispatch
our business, let us a shore, and provide our necessaries. To which they
condiscended, taking their lodging in the English house, where their welcome
was great: there that night they reposed themselves, and the next day entered
their goods in the custom house, and laid it a shore: against which time,
wagons and horses were provided for their journey to Cheryes, where merrily
they went, each one glad of others company, sunderly decoursing of James and
his fortunes, with much variety to beguile time.

CHAP. XXIII. How the English Merchants arrived at Cheryes, with their welcomes.
THis pleasant company made such speed, that they drew near their iourneys
end: whither by the height of the Sun, they perceived (it was likely holding
on their way) that they should come thither too early: wherefore instantly
finding a place both pleasant and delightful, they reposed themselves under
the Pomegranet and Orange trees, pleasing their own fancies with those
fruits, and spending the day with such pastimes as was meet.

Time that stays not, calls them forwards: before their taking horse, the
ancient English Merchants, William, Oliver, and Otho, having a desire to try
their welcomes, thought it fit, to enter the Town before the company, and
lodge secretly in some other Inn, until the solemnity of the wedding was
consumate. And to this end, desired the company of kindness so to let it
pass, and to conseale their being there.

The young men which durst not gainesay their Masters, condiscended, granting
them license to take their own course: and thereupon, directions being given,
the Masters hastneth to the town, taking their lodging, closely keeping them
in their Chambers. About two hours after, and not long before the Suns down
full in the West, these gallant Merchants, in their bravery, all curiously
mounted, entered the Town, taking their lodging in the best Osterie in the
Town: of whose coming, James being advertised, he suddenly made his repair
unto the^ before they could shift their apparel, where you need not doubt of
their welcome by James given, to that place, where he intended to be a
free-Demson: as appeared by his cost and kind usage: which with all kindnesses
he showed, in their iolytie carowsing healthes to all their friends in England:
especially by name those worthy Patrons, William* Oliver, and Otho, who they
all very heartily wished present. But William chiefly was most desired by
James, who little suspected he was so near.

Thus met these gallant youths with joy and great content, that not long since
parted with sorrow and effusion of tears: here was their old passed sportes
revived, and their friendship acknowledged, with firm confirmance vowed each
to others, every man heartily rejoicing for James his good fortune.

At the good speed of this mirth, and knitting up this new league, James his
wife who had notice of their being, and what company they were, richly attiring
her self, came to the place where they all were: where she in all courteous
manner, welcomed them to Cheryes. Beseeching them, of that love and courtesy
they bear their Countreyman her Husband, to accept his house for their
lodging: where how homely so ever, your welcomes shall not be bettered amongst
your dearest friends in England.

This kind profer of the Lady, so courteous and heartily performed, the
Merchants admired, commending James his choice, to be absolute, the worthiest
in all Spain, for beauty, wealth, and good entertainment, wherein they thought
him blessed. Returning her many thanks for her kindness: besought pardon and
liberty to take their pleasures in their lodging, which were like otherways
to be troublesome unto her, and her Husband. To which request, though
unwilling, she condiscended. Taking her leave for that time, committed them to
their ease and best content.

CHAP. XXIIII. How James with his wives honorable friends being at their cheer,
was visited of William and his companions, and their welcome.
THe honest young men which accompanied William and his friends to Cheryes,
concealed their secret being in the Town, that it was not known to any but
themselves: where two days after their arrival and great entertainment by
James and his wife, that holy rights of Wedlock was openly confirmed at the
Church in presence of many of honor and great estimation, which between them
and the Priest, long before was consummat* to the good liking of both the
parties, their friends, and honorable Allies. Which done, great was their
cheer, and joys more abundant, where so good content was equally balanced.

William and his company hearing by their espialls, how the time of dinner grew
to end, was conducted to the Bridal house, where they intended to make trial
of their welcome: who by a messenger, gave James to understand, that certain
Merchants lately arrived from England, desired to see him. Which James hearing,
gave charge should be brought in. James sitting in his Majesty as Master of
the feast, was attired in a gown of wrought Ueluet, a fair Chain about his
neck, and other Abilliments fitly ordered. His Bride richly suited, sitting by
him. William beholding his man in this worshipful manner, admired it: but more
to see that honorable company: whom he saluted with dutiful reverence. James
seeing his Master, on whom his thoughts least harped on: and those other his
ancient friends, albeit he could willingly have done them that duty to him
appertaining: yet kept his place and countenance for that time: bidding them
with a courage, welcome to Cheryes* commanding them to take their places as
they came: where being set, James thus began.

Fellow William, of all the men England might afford, the best welcome to this
place: especially at this time, where so lately you have been often wished.
Brave Gallants of that noble City of Exeter, your companies has cheared my
spirits, to see you all kind lovers and friends: fall to your vyands, and be
merry, for you shall all have cause to be merry here, as you shall find.

These kind shows of love and courtesy, William and his friends more accepted,
then if his supposed lost moneys had been instantly tendered him: the conceit
whereof, being eyewitness of James happiness, and that honor done him by the
states present: for joy made him forbear his diet, but hardly tears: unto
whom, and his company, James carved often, drinking healths unto them and their
friends in England. Which favor, the whole company noted: who judged them to be
of worth: their countenance and attire showing it. To whose welcome, the
Spaniards in honor of James and his wife, added many good and kind speeches
of favor, which was more then ordinary in that proud Nation: all which, the
grave Englishmen with like courtesy returned.

Dinner ended with much mirth and pleasure, James in all loving and dutiful
manner, embraced his Master William: and his friends rendering more then a
Million of thanks for their pains that vouchsafed to honor him so,
unexpected at that solemnity: yet could not his mind be satisfied, doubting
some extraordinary occasion brought them thither: loath that any question
should be made of his ill husbandry in the Town, taking William into his
withdrawing Chamber, he said.

Dear Master, and especial friend: that you vouchsafed this undertaken
pains, to witness my happiness this day, I render thanks: yet greatly
fear, your coming so secret, and only travel, has been on reports of my
misdemeanor: for which, I am the more sorry, that you whose years require rest,
should in your age be so cumbred. But how ever, I am glad to see you: end for
your goods misspent, no loss to you shall redound: but your accounts, and all
men of your City, whose trust I was, shall be with such profit cleared, as
you and they, shall have no cause to blame my riotous demeanor. William to
quite his servant, hearing him so kind to comfort him, and give no occasion to
discontent, frankely acquitted him of all debts due to him: and for his coming
at that time excused it, of a voluntary match made with the Master of the
Bark, having his two friends a board, and the Bark bound for Cales, to bring
them unawares away. While they were in their earnest talk, the Bride having
some business, or taking occasion to give them their Been- Venew, seeing such
shows of love between them, bad them according to their Country manner, very
welcome. Beseeching them, to take her house for their Ostrey during their stay:
wherein they should honor their Countreyman her Husband, and do her great
favor. To which, William and his Comperes were easily entreated, the rather to
see the order and manner of entertainment of the Spanish Gentlewoman, which
they found costly, loving, and very kind to James and all his friends, as they
could command no more in their own houses.

CHAP. XXV. How Oliver and Otho at the house of a gallant Curtizan, was robbed
of their money and apparel.
James in the Haven of Bliss, joyful of his good friends company, loath on
the sudden to forgo them: by great suit of his wife, whom they all honored for
her kindness showed, consented to spend their time, fifteen days with them
to frolike: where having leisure, they viewed the Churches and Monuments of the
same, and all other places of content or pleasure. Wandering thus through the
Town, Oliver and Otho being alone, chanced to pass by the house of a most
rare and bewtifull Curtizan: who espying these strangers, seated her in a
window opposite with the street, playing on her Lute. To whose tunes, two
others chaunted excellent Dytties: unto which, Oliver and Otho gave good ear:
viewing and noting their persons and beauty, sometimes passing too and fro by
the window: which the Curtizan perceiving, as they that were not to learn all
fashions, sent her Pandora unto them, inuiting them to taste a Cup of their
Wine. Who like men forgetting themselves, was suddenly entreated: entered into
hells mouth, or the devils apron: where they found the gallant descended into a
lower room to entertain her pray, whom with kind embracings, and shows of
favor, she welcomemed.

These courtesies, when Otho and his companion saw, as they that could their
behavior to all estates, returned her thanks with like favor, gratifying her
kindness.

The Curtizan which saw the Fish nibling at the bayt, to bring them within
tuch, as well with pleasant parley as her other delights, thus said.

Gentlemen for so I must call you) if virtue with your graces and attire join
in simpathy, strangers you seem: and it may be, a gentlewomans courtesy, by
your nice curiosity, misconstrued, and our kindness with froward scandals
rewarded: blame me not Gentiles, to censure the worst: strangers you seem,
whom courtesy commands be well entreated: and so much the rather have I
dained you this favor for Englands honor: of whence, if I guess not amis^^,
you are: of which Nation I more tender the welfare, then of my native
Countrymen: if under correction I may so say.

Pardon Amoy* honorable Englishmen, that am so plain, women's tongues are long
hanged, and their hearts thoughts at the end thereof: but howeuer you please to
censure of my speech, if a Gentlewomans courtesy be not rejected, vouchsafe to
accept a Cup of Wine, a Lymon, and a piece of Sugar: this is all your cheer,
but your welcome as much, as if my gracious Duke were present.

The Merchants, albeit the conditions of those alluring Syrins were
sufficiently known, yet was their minds so besotted, that forgetting wife,
children, and the rumors of evil speech, both having lustful desires, Otho
foremost in the onset, thus said.

Gentlewoman, like Ulysses enchaunted companions, so are we overtaken, wondering
at your beauty and other good virtues: but more admiring your courtesy,
vouchsafing in such familiarity to accept of us, wherein you show your divine
nature, for nothing is so acceptable as courtesy: which if we reject, should
degenerate from what men ought, and stain our Country. With this gentle
parley they fell to tasting their wine, and so to Chestes and Premi^o, till the
day was spent, when they made haste to their lodging. But no excuses might
serve, but sup they must, and afterward having had good store of wine, to
sleep: bedtime drawing near, the Curtizan not assured of her pray, merrily
said. Gentlemen, I see our harsh music sounds not in your ears, they jar
too much: I wish your delight, and gladly would have you frolike if there be
anything in my power to content you. By your favor (quoth Otho) if a man
should challenge your word, you would be the first that would recant. If I do
(quoth she) let me be burned for an Heritick. I am very sorry your hard opinion
is such of me: for be it said, albeit not vaingloriously, never gave I such
cause to any Gentleman, to have such thoughts on me: for what I promise, I Will
perform* as it were the loss of my maydenhead, by holy S. Julian I swear.
Nay, nay (quoth Oliver) swear not so vainly: yea, and nay, Cock and Pie, are
sufficient for honest dealers. Trust me Lady, for my part, if I promise you, or
any these pretty souls to be their bedfellow, you may take my bare word
without any oath: if I fail, burn my Cap, and say Cut's a Jade. Is plain
dealing such a Jewel amongst you Englishmen (quoth she) and is it my good
fortune to find it? If you were of our Spanish minds, I should soon try what
metal you English Merchants are made of: for your Gentlemen are gallants that
I knew by good proof, having a Pilgrimage by holy vow to S. James in Galisia,
it was my good hap, to encounter for like devotion, a Gentleman of England,
whom I found so kind, that for his sake, what ere he be shall come in my Pater
Noster, he and his Countrymen are in my credit. Let that word stand (quoth
Otho) and Mistress, because an earnest penney binds, I take this sweet Farm
to mine own, to have and hold it this night, and for it there is my pawn,
kissing her sweetly on the lips. As the Mistress, so her servants proved
Tassells, gentle enough to come at any ture: how lofty so ever they Tower,
down they come with the Murren, as these honest Merchants found to their
costs: who were scantly quietly laid in their beds, but a crew of Russians,
birds of this neast, entered the house, swearing and tormenting with bitter
oaths, they were assured some villain was in the house, which they would
find. At which words, the Curtizan seemed to fear her husbands terror, and
cried mainly out. Oh Sir, I am undone: this is my husband returned from the
Court, who if he find you, will murder you. While they were in this fear,
the Russians brake the doors, with two or three Toarches, entered the chamber,
trailed the Curtizan by the hair from their bed, and threatened them with
death. The Merchants in fear, pleaded for pity: whereunto no regard was
given: but like tyrants they reigned over them: until one of the company in
cool terms, calling the chee^e by the name of brother, entreated for them,
and persuaded him to be as they seemed, men harmless, and for their Country,
to which he vowed love, be sought him let them pass. To whose words he began
somewhat to listen, medigated his rage, content to let the birds go, but so
pruned them, that they had neither money, Jewel or apparel left, but naked in
their shirts, driven out at doors: threatened vehemently, that if they made any
rumor of their loss, whereby any trouble might ensue, their lives should make
them recompense.

With this admonition, Otho and Oliver lightly attired for sweating, walked the
streets, and was by the Watch surprised: who enquiring the cause of their late
walking, excused themselves, being strangers, that as they were taking air of
the fields, they were by vagarant people, spoiled of all they had, and bound:
where they had continued all the night without rescue, if one by fortune had
not relieved the other: who besought the Watch to be their conduct to the house
of Don laques de Enylotoere, where they lodged: who like kind people showed
them that courtesy, and were let in: excusing them in like manner, to William,
and their host James and his wife: with whom their counterfeit coin went for
current, and was of them pitied: but most of the Spanish Gentlewoman bemoned,
that tendered more their welfare then her own nearest of blood. The Punelles
glad that it past so well of their sides, without more suspect, kept their own
counselles, and was never known but in jest in England, between themselves.

CHAP. XXVI. How James at his Master William his departure, cleared his
accounts, and his recompense, with the courtesy of his wife.
THe time of Williams promise with his ancient servant James, for his stay
after the marriage, grew now to end, and a parting time was come, how loath
soever: against which, James by his Factors, had provided ready at Cale* to be
laden, the best Spice, Wines, and Sugar, with costly and rich Merchandise, the
Country could afford, or money in many sought places might procure. William
and his friends being all wearied of that idle life, having some business for
fraught of their ship, could not be entreated longer to make their abode there.
But providing for their journey, James and his wife protested by religious
oaths, to accompany them to their Port, which they performed: passing the
time, by easy iournies, pleasantly solacing themselves, till they came to
Cales: against whose arrival, the servants of James had puruayed their
lodgings very bountiful: in which they reposed them that night. Next morning
gave order for sale of their goods, and lading the Bark: which albeit, by
those that vnderlook it, was suddenly done, yet James his own ship and goods
was as ready to set sail: for whom the wind favorably blowing, the Master
gave notice to William and his friends. At their leave taking, Iame, having his
bills of lading ready, and small hope ever to see his Master after that time,
made him tender of the moneys he owed him, and those sums due to such other
Merchants of Exeter he dealt for. Which by no means he would be drawn to
accept, but for his neighhours willed him to have regard: otherwise it might
prove his grief to hear him ill spoken of. Which kindness, James with tears
accepted. And on his knees craving pardon, besought his Master to grant him
one request, which William vouchsafed.

Then Sir, for your neighbors (quoth he) for whom you wish recompense, to my
honest Countrymen there left behind you, their stocks with interest I will
deliver, for the whole time I have detained the same. For your self, whom I
know not how to deserve so great favor, be now your words warrantife: for so I
challenge your grant: that seeing money or other commodities for that great
sum, lewdly wasted by me, you will not accept, in all humbleness to my good
Mistress commend me, and as a poor votary to her and you, deliver these
Letters, and other Papers therein closed. This ship halled into the Road,
shall wait upon you, wherein I have some servants to attend you: if for your
better ease, you will vouchsafe of her before your own appointed Bark: and so
in gods peace at your pleasure go aboard.

William circumuented by James, could not tell what thanks to give him, waying
his love and dutiful mind: though loath, would not gain say his vrgeant
request, but returned him many thanks: and after a solemn farewell taken by
their friends, aboard they went, commended by James and his wife to happy
fortune at sea, who could not forbear effusion of many tears, for the loss
of so good company. Who with rich Jewels and much store, commended her to the
father and mother of James, and Williams wife. Taking their last Adieu, they
stayed to see them under sail, sorrowing at full, for their departure: whom
the heavens so favored, that in less then eight days, they recovered the
haven of Dorthmouth: from whence taking horse, they posted to Exeter, where
they were all heartily welcome. Having reposed themselves two or three days,
William by his servants, gave order for discharge of his goods, feasted the
Spaniards, and them richly rewarded: delivered James and his wives tokens to
all his friends in presence of his men, to whom he made a great banquet:
recounting at large their sons estate, with his happy fortune, enjoying so
loving and kind a wife. Shortly after, furnishing the Sparash ship, with
vendable commodities into that country, he dispatched them, with his kind
Letters, and many Tokens, from sundry friends. So resting himself in quiet, he
enjoyed the blessing of God in that most famous City: a Patron and father of
the state, until the end of his days, which was not sudden: as hereafter
shall be showed.

FINIS.

