THE ANATOMY OF THE ENGLISH NVNNERY AT LISBON in PORTVGALL. DISSECTED AND laid
open by one that was sometime a younger Brother of the COVENT: Who (if the grace
of God had not prevented him) might have grown as old in a wicked life as the
oldest amongst them.

VIRG. Lib. 1. AENEID. -- Caecumque domus scelus omne retexit.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOWE, for Robert Mylbourne, and Philemon
Stephens: and are to be sold at the great South door of Rauls. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Mr THOMAS GVRLIN, MAYOR OF THE NO LESS ancient then
loyal and wel-gouerned town of Kings-Lynne in Norfolk, and his Worshipful
Brethren the Aldermen of the same, etc.
THE industrious and painful Seaman, Right Worshipful (that I may go no
farther for an example then mine own profession, because quod supranos, nihil
ad nos) being a long time crossed with unfavorable winds, persisteth
notwithstanding in attempting to attain to his desired Port: which not being
able to atchieue directly and upon a precise rhomb or point, he makes his way
by diverse Maeanders and crooked turnings, lying sometimes East, and anon West,
so near his course as the wind will permit, and by this means at length he
ankoreth in the wished harbor. Even so my self having of a long time desired
to recover some fit occasion or means (as my most wished port) to express a
thankful mind unto your Worships, for no small benefits formerly conferred
upon me, (and been apud memores veteris stat gratia facti) could never through
contrary winds of adverse fortune arrive there in safety: but have had a long
trauerse to and fro, with little likelihood of fairer weather, till now at
length with my bowlins sharp haled (pardon I pray you my ruder Sea-phrase) I
have doubled the Cape of good Hope: from whence I am bold to send you this
first return of what I long since took up of you upon interest, it being
notwithstanding no way of worth to countervaile any (though the least) part of
the debt I owe you. For it is now some years agone that I set sail from the
Haven of your help, bound for the Port of Prudence, (the University of
Cambridge) being fully fraughted with your favor and friendship: where,
through mine own negligence, (let me ever sigh to remember it) having
foreslowed my best market, and letting go my most precious commodity, (my Time)
at an undervalue, I remained a great loser by my voyage; not being able to
make unto you (my Worshipful creditors) such satisfaction as you might justly
expect. And now entering into a consideration of your gentle forbearance of me,
I doomed my self worthy to bear the brand of Ingratitude, if I should forget
you. Whereupon, not as any part of payment, but as a recognizance and
acknowledgement of that debt and duty, which I owe to your Wps, I presume to
send you this ensuing discourse, being not more plain in the manner, then true
in the matter. If you shall daigne to give it favorable acceptance, I have
what I desired, and in the hope thereof (always praying for your prosperity
and welfare) I rest

Your Worships dutiful debtor, THOMAS ROBINSON.

To the indifferent Reader.
READER, if the Title of this Book, being The Anatomy of the English Nunnery
at Lisbon, do make thee expect some Chyrurgicall mysteries, or profound
Lecture upon a dissected body, let me satisfy thee, and save thee a labor of
reading it; for thou art much deceived: the Author hereof is a man of no such
Science; being better skilled in Ta^kes, Sheats, Braces, Bowlins, etc. (strange
words perchance to thy understanding, and yet no canting) then in veins,
sinews, muscles, and arteries. Yet what he promises by the Title, he has
performed in the Treatise, and has truly anatomized this handmayd of the Whore
of Babylon; laying open her principal veins and sinews in such sort, that
he is bold to challenge the proudest Doctor of her acquaintance to traduce his
work, or to tax him of the least untruth in what he has written: for here is
no thing published, but what his own experience, being optima magistra, has
taught him, and whereof he has been oculatus testis. Only the phrase he
uses is like himself, blunt and vnelegant; for ex quolibet ligno non fit
Mercurius: wink therefore a little at the method, and survey the matter it
self with the wide open eyes of thy understanding, and spare not. And if thou
be not already addicted too much to Popery, thou may peradventure find a
preservative against it. Howsoever, here it presents it self to the view of
the world; be it well or ill accepted, it makes not much matter: for the
Author will always carry this comfort about him, A good Conscience is a
continual feast. Vale.

T. R.

THE ANATOMY OF THE ENGLISH NVNNERY, AT LISBON IN PORTVGALL.
HAVING by reason of my Calling been oftentimes occasioned to travel beyond
the Seas: it so chanced that I was once (through diverse accidents) driven to
have some conference with father Seth, alias, Joseph Foster an English Friar in
Lisbon, and the sole Confessor of a Covent of English Nuns residing in the
same City; who by his subtle and wily fetches enticed me to abide with him
in the house, employing me daily in copying out certain Treatises of
Obedience, which he had composed for the Nuns. And after a while having
deprived me of means to depart from him, by taking away my apparel, and
putting me into a disguized foolish habit (of which I was heartily ashamed)
both he and the Abbess, with some others of the sisters (as they call them)
never ceased to urge me by deepe-dissembled entreaties and persuasions, until
I had given consent to become a holy Brother and Mass Priest in the house, for
I had soon attained to more skill in the Rubric, then every shaueling is
ordinarily accustomed to have, and could readily There are not a few Friars and
Priests that have no other means to find their Mass; and when they have
found it, (if you would hang them) they are not able to construe two lines of
it.
find out and know any Mass by the great Letter at the beginning of it; and
more then that, I could sing Aue regina, and Salve Sancta parens, which is
learning enough in conscience for any Abbeylubber, unless he be too
unreasonable. So that now there wanted nothing to my taking of Orders, save
only that my minority and want of years hindered it; wherefore in the mean
time I continued in writing over diverse books for them, and amongst the rest,
the Register of their House, whereby I came to some understanding of their
estate, beginning and success until this present, which for the satisfaction
of the Reader, I thought good to set down as briefly as I could, before I
proceed any farther, or speak of their manners and conversation.

First therefore for the House. The Nuns thereof do challenge (and indeed
truly) a succession from the Abbey of Sion in England, now belonging unto the
Earl of Northumber land, See Stowes Chronicle at large.
which house, together with another Monastery of Carthusian Monks, called
Shine, being both situated upon the Thames, were erected and built by King
Henry the 5. at his return from his famous Conquest in France. In which two
houses, he established an Order, that to the end of the world there should be
an alternate course of Prayer; so that when the one had finished their
devotions, the other should instantly begin. And being thus founded, that of
Shine was peopled with Carthusian Monks, and the other with Nuns and Friars of
St Brigets Order.

But when it pleased the Lord of his infinite mercy to disperse and scatter
those thick clouds of ignorance and Superstition, which had a long time
bedimmed the eyes, and darkened the understanding of our forefathers, and that
the glorious light of the Gospel began to be more and more resplendent in the
latter end of the Reign of King Henry the 8. then as well these Houses, as all
other of the like superstition were subverted, and abolished, and the people of
them either dismissed and sent home to their friends, or else continuing more
obstinately in their blind zeal, exiled; save only some few who for
withstanding the Kings Supremacy, received the reward of Traitors. Amongst
which Father Raynolds the Confessor of these Nuns was executed. In memory of
whom, they have painted his Picture and manner of execution upon their Church
walls, esteeming him as a holy Martyr amongst them, as good as either Althongh
that Campian, Garnet, and such other of the Jesuits as dyed for Treason, are
no canonized Saints; yet are they beatified by the Pope, which is the highest
step to canonization: and every one of them is painted up in the Jesuits
Churches, with the Title of Beatus Pater.
St Campian, or Beatus Pater Henricus Garnet, although that amongst the
Jesuits these are little less then Saints.

After the death of this their ghostly Father, both they and the Carthusians of
Shine, translated themselves, and diverse of their If they carried no relics
with them, it makes not much matter, for little worth is that scull or dead
man's bone, which will not by becoming a holy relick, add something to the
Popes Exchequer.
Relics and trinkets beyond the Seas into Flanders. And the successors of
these banished runnagates, are now the only stumpe which remains of that
huge tree, that whilome ouerspred and shaddowed our whole Country: which the
Papists (in regard these two houses had both one foundation, and were as it
were linked and tied the one to the other) do hold as miraculous, and do take
it as a sure sign and token of their future return from banishment; The
Register book of their bouse, tells of many of these prophesies which were
spoken by sundry of the Sisters upon their deathbed.
nay, some of the holiest of our unholy Sisters, have not doubted (I think in
imitation of the old Sybils) to prophecy of another golden age, when they
shall again be installed in Syon: but Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda
sorores.

I know my Sisters at Lisbon for false prophets in more things then one. In the
mean time they of Shine remain at Macklyn in the Low Countries; and the
Nuns of Syon, after many transmigrations from Sierick-zee to their brethren
at Macklyn, and from thence to Roan, do now reside at Lisbon. And this shall
suffice for the foundation of the house, and the success thereof till this
present. And now (by the way) it shall not be likewise much amiss for the
satisfaction of such as have not been acquainted with Friars business, in a
word or two to declare the original of both these Orders, and from what
Patrons they first descended. For in the Catholic Roman Church, amongst all
the disordered orders of swarming Locusts, which are almost innumerable, there
is none but take their beginning from one supposed Saint or other: and as the
rest, so these.

For the Carthusians sprung up from Read Surius upon the life of Bruno.
one Bruno in the kingdom of France, who is said to have been present at the
Funeral of a certain Priest reputed for a holy man in his life: but when they
were executing the office of the dead for him, (according to the use of the
Papists) it seemed they had been deceived in their imagination. For when the
Deacon was come to the Lesson which begins Responde mihi quantas habeo
iniquitates, etc. the dead man suddenly start up, and said, Vocatus sum, or
accufatus sum, choose you whether; whereupon they deferred his Obsequies until
the next day, being all amazed at what had happened; when proceeding the second
time, and coming to the same words again, the dead body made answer,
Iudicatus sum. Then the third time they began their Service, and at the same
Responde he sat up and said, Condemnatus sum: wherewith this Bruno being
stricken into an extreme fear, and much troubled, to think, that a man so
generally reputed for holy, should yet be damned; determined to lead a most
austere and solitary life: and to that end being accompanied with a few others,
whom he had made privy to his purpose, he departed to a desert stupendous
mountain called Carthusia, where he lived (as they say) in great regularitie,
and from the name of that hill, they came to be called Carthusians; and to this
day they pretend more severity and strictness of discipline, then any other
Order of Monks or Friars what soever. Howbeit they remained not long in such
solitary and unfrequented places, but by little and little obtained their
houses in every great City and town, as magnificent, yea and more sumptuous
then their fellow-Locusts, witness the Charter House in London, which was once
a Cage of these unclean birds.

Now for the other house of Syon: the Nuns thereof take their beginning from
their holy mothers Read the revelations of Saint Briget.
Saint Briget, and her daughter Saint Katherine. This Saint Briget was of the
blood Royal of Suetia; a woman (questionless) of a good understanding and
singular memory, howbeit miserably seduced and led away by the subtle
allurements of her ghostly father, by whose persuasions and counsel, she went
to Rome as a Pilgrim, and coming before the Pope, she pretended to have
diverse revelations from God; amongst which, one was for the founding of this
Order of Nuns, which was indeed the chief mark, that both her ghostly
father and she aimed at. The rest of her pretended inspirations, were for the
reforming of sundry abuses in the Church. Yea, she spared not to tell the Popes
holiness of many faults in himself: but he (like a good blood-hound) quickly
scented her, and followed her footing, till he plainly perceived from whom she
was sent: who (being a fellow that might upon distaste prove a Schismatique,
and make some revolt in those remote Countries, from the Roman Church) he
thought best to be winked at; and thereupon condescended unto her request,
touching the erecting of a house of this Order, and so dismissed her. But she
lived not long after, (whether his Holiness had procured some modicum to be
ministered unto her or no, it is doubtful) yet in her daughters days the
business came to perfection: and the first House of this Order was at a place
called Watsteen in Swethland, from whence certain Nuns were procured into
England, to propagate their Rules and Ceremonies in Syon house, at the time
when it was first built.

The magnificence of this Covent in former times has been by the report of
the now-liuing Nuns very admirable: at this present it is not of any
extraordinary repute; neither are the people of it for birth and parentage
equal to their predecessors, who were wont to be of good descent: whereas now
(save only a few) they are Recusants daughters of the meaner sort, and silly
tenderhearted chambermaids, who have had the custody of such Seminaries and
Jesuits, as resorted to their Masters houses in England, at such times as they
have been mewed up for fear of Cross and his A perilous Curre to smell out
a Jesuit, or a Seminary, though they had been never so closely cooped up.
Dog, and durst not adventure abroad in any of their ruffling disguises, to
seek out for more change of pasture; (like fathers Strange the Jesuit) where,
making a virtue (or rather a vice) of necessity, the ghostly children have
ministered to their spiritual fathers in all things. And by such means having
gotten a clap, diverse of them It is no great miracle for a whore to become a
Nun; nor for a Nun to become a whore.
become Nuns. And with a rabble of such like stuff, is this house of Syon
much replenished, there being of them in all between 40. and 50. whereof
only five are strangers, and the rest all English. The names of so many of
them as I can at present remember, I have at the end of the Book set down,
for the satisfaction of such as desire to know them.

There are likewise three Friars, the Confessor and two more; and a simple
besotted fellow, who has the title of a familiar. And well may they call him
so: for he will be drunk familiarly four or five times every week; by reason
whereof he is not apparelled in any religious habit, but goes like an
ordinary secular man, to the end the House should be the less scandalized by
him: for now so many do not take notice of his drunkenness as would, if they
should see him in a religious habit.

And this is the whole company of the House at this time: but now if any man
demand, how and by what means they are brought thither; and by whom they are
maintained: let him know, that there lurketh in England an arch-Traytour, one
This Flood caused the Jesuits at Lisbon to spend a great deal of money upon
Powder, on a Festival day, a little before the Powder Treason in England
should have been effected, thereby to make experience of the force thereof. And
also persuaded one John How (a Merchant whom be had perverted) and diverse other
Catholics, to go over into England, and to expect their redemption there (as
be called it) awhile.
Henry Flood a Jesuit, who is the chief Agent for the transporting of Nuns,
both to In all these places there are English Nunneries, but none that has
continued ever since the suppression of Abbots in England, save only that at
Lisbon.
Bruxels, Greueling, Lisbon, or any other place; and whither he pleases to
send them, thither they must go. If they have no portion, and perhaps some
little honesty, they are not for the Jesuits tooth, Aquila non capit Muscas,
they must pack to Greueling, to the poor barefooted Clares. If they have a
small portion, that likes not the Iebusite neither: a pound of butter is
nothing amongst a cure of hungry Hounds; nec vacat exiguis rebus adesse loui:
then away they trudge to Lisbon, where they are allowed daily five crowns, and
their bread, and many a good alms beside is often bestowed upon them. But if
they have a good round sum for their dowry, ab Inferno nulla est redemptio,
there is no plucking them out of the Jesuits Jaws; they are stamped for
Bruxels, and thither must they go; where Fitz-herbert and his fellow-Iesuits
will quickly dispossess them of all worldly cares and vanities, and (like
subtle Alchymists) refine them out of their silver and golden dross, into a
more sublime estate and condition, and will cherish and nourish them, even in
their own bosoms: such a burning zeal have they toward them.

And this is the manner after which our Recusants daughters in England are
translated into other Countries, to take upon them the profession of a solitary
life, and to live in poverty, chastity, and obedience: which how well they
perform, I shall now (God willing) in part declare.

First therefore for their poverty, I mean of these Nuns of Syon, and they
profess themselves the poorest of any English, except them of Saint Clares
Order. It is well known, that they have ten thousand pounds at use in the
Towne-house of Antwerpe; a great part whereof has been given them by sundry
deceased Gentlemen in Flanders and Portugal; and beside their yearly pension.
Likewise when they remained in France, they had the custody of no small sum
of money, which was sent to them to keep for Doctor Lopez the Portugese, as
his reward for poisoning our late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, which
after that Traitor (having missed of his intent) was executed, was remitted
unto them as an alms, as the Register-booke of their house, (from whence I had
it) shameth not to make mention.

They have likewise of late years, through the politic plodding of their
Confessor, Sic figulus figulum, sic and fabrum faber odit.
given the Jesuits noses a wipe of two thousands pounds, being the portion of
the two daughters of Sir A. B. Viscount M. whom a Nun of the house (sometimes
a Chambermaid of their fathers) had enticed from the Jesuits. For which, and
some other like tricks about a Portugese Gentlewoman, the posterity of lame
Ignatius Loiola, a lame soldier, a Spaniard, the glorious Patron of the Popes
Ianizaries, the Jesuits
Ignatius could almost find in their hearts to reassume their Patrons first
profession, and vi and armis to take revenge upon that old hypocritical Friar,
which durst presume to be better studied in Nic. Machiauell then themselves:
yea they so threatened him once, that he durst not go abroad, lest they should
work him a mischief. Moreover, they have a daily pension of 5. crowns, and
wheat more then suffices for to spend in the House. They have Vineyards, Olive
fields, cornground and houses, to the value of four hundred Every mil-reis is
twelve shillings and six pence.
mil-reis by the year, which was the portion of the Portugese aforesaid, whom
(being sole heir to her father, a man of great wealth) they persuaded to
become a religious sister in their Covent. What should I speak of the sale of
their Masses. I mean the revenues in general of the Sacristia or Reuestrie?
where, though there be but three Priests of them, and therefore but three
Masses; and that never but upon Festival days, for the Confessor himself
will not say Mass upon a worke-day, yet they will take money of twenty men,
and tell every one they will say for him. Then have they their boxes sent
forth in the Indian and Brasilian ships, with S. Brigets image upon them; to
which, in a storm the poor blinded people will contribute liberally; and
seamen that go on such long voyages will take up a months pay or two
aforehand, and give it for Masses to be said for their good success. I have
known this in one year worth six hundred mil-reis unto them. Diverse other
means they have to get money: as by putting a good sum into the hands of a
couple of young Merchants, whom they have perverted to their Religion: and
these men deal for them under a color. So that I may boldly say, (for I have
heard Foster himself speak it, and I have partly seen it) that all charges
and expenses of the House being paid, they do yearly lay up And it is no
small sum of money that he sends to his kindred in Yorkshire, that are
Papists: but he will acknowledge none of them that are Protestants.
six hundredth pounds. For the silver that inshrineth their Relics, and for
their Church-plate, I know not how to value it; but it is without doubt both
plentiful and massy; for there be few of their rotten Relics but are set
in silver. They have two arms of Thomas of Canterbury, notwithstanding all his
bones were burned in England, when Popery was suppressed; so that they will make
of him a Briareus, or a centimanus Gygas, as doubtless he was in his life, a
very obstinate Prelate to his Prince. And for Saint Vrsula, she must needs be
a diua triformis, or a triceps Hecate; for they have one of her heads; and
there is another of them at Collen, and the third at Rome. Then have they the
bones of S. Briget and her daughter, and sundry Relics of Saint Augustine,
from whose rule theirs is derived. There is Believe it who list.
the milk of our Lady, the blood of Hales, which was held so precious in
England; and (sir reverence) there is a piece of old Although they cannot abide
the Jesuits, yet they love their Gallows, because thereby they get money.
Tyborne, which the Jesuits stole away out of England, because it had been
honored by so many of their brethren, which is had in little less esteem
then the holy Cross: for (say they) as the Master died on that, so his
Disciples died upon this. And these are all set in silver, and richly adorned.
Then have they a little child's leg, which I think they may truly call as
they do; for they say it is a leg of the Innocents; and doubtless so it is,
for I could (if I were in the house) go very near Saxa ipsa trabesque
loquentur.
a place in a wall, where I could fetch out both legs and arms of poor
innocent bastards, which might evidently prove, that there is knavery in
dawbing.

And having hereby given a sufficient instance of their poverty, I will now
proceed to speak a little of their chastity, which is as scarce and
penurious, as their poverty is plenteous. Neither can it be otherwise; for they
have Sodoms prouocations to sin, Pride, Fullness of bread, and abundance of
Idleness. As for their pride, though it be not outwardly in gorgeous and
curious attire, yet are they possessed with a vainglorious pride of
hypocrisy, and dissembled sanctity. For their fullness of bread, who knows
not that they (like the Caterpillars of Egypt) do eat up the fat and best
fruits of the Land? for what the purueyors of the Vice-rey have forsaken in the
Market, (as too dear) I have known the Cator of this house to buy at
unreasonable rates for their ghostly fathers Table, and for such of his
Chickens as he most affected: whose greatest (and indeed only) care is, to
prove skillful in the confection and dressing of such dainty cates as may best
please their wanton palats. And well do they manifest the abundance of
idleness that is in them, when at sundry times playing upon their instruments
for their fathers recreation, they sing him ribaldrous Songs and jigs, as that
of Bonny Nell, and such other obscene and scurrilous Ballads, as would make a
chaste ear to glow at the hearing of them, and which I would scarce have
believed would have proceeded out of their mouths, had I not heard them with
my own ears.

And now again for the House. Whereas all other Religious Houses are under the
Jurisdiction of Prouincials of their own Order mediate, and under the Bishop
of the Diocese immediate, yet this is not subjected to either: For as for a
Provincial they have none, in regard there are no more Houses of that Order;
neither would the Archbishop of Lisbon take them into his jurisdiction at
their first coming into Portugal, fearing lest that being stranger, and at
that time pretending want and poverty, he should afterward be driven to
sustain and relieve them; they being forbidden to beg by their rule. And so
he put them off with a non noui vos, telling them he never knew or heard that
At their first coming into Lisbon they were little set by. And every one
marvelled at their order, and living so together. But now their dissembling
has won them a little more credit.
frayles y freiras Friars and Nuns should keep and dwell together all, sub
eodem tecto, under the same roof. Whereupon they were constrained to
entertain that famous Arch-Iesuite Father Parsons to be their solicitor to
the Pope, who then took them into his protection, and appointed his nuncio
apostatico, resident in Lisbon to have the care and charge of them. And he
again being bribed and presented with gifts by Father Foster, and dwelling
far from the house, is satisfied with what he tells him, and never comes
to visit the Nuns, as he ought, and to inquire and demand their grieuances;
but permits him to play rex over them at his own pleasure. Whereupon it is
pitiful and miserable to behold the condition of these silly seduced women:
for they neither dare nor can complain to any body, being seldom permitted
to speak even to them that are of the house as well as themselves, but only
at such times when the Abbess is present: except it be she that keeps the
Grate, and some others that are in office amongst them: and these are all the
younger and more personable Women, being by this Fosters politic contriuing
so placed of purpose, that by and with them he may the more freely enjoy the
scope of his lascivious and sacrilegious desire. And these women having
predominance over the others whom want of beauty and favor has made
despicable in the eyes of this old Sinon, do (according to the passionatenesse
of their minds) more and more vex their poor fellow prisoners. For it is the
subtlety of this perfidious wretch, to set them at variance among themselves,
and to cause them to accuse one another, to the intent they should not dare to
trust one another with the complaint of their griefs; and so whilst they
remain in a jealousy of each others secrecy and aid, they should never be
able to contriue any means to free themselves from his thraldom.

At this slay does he keep them: and not so content, he will make them to
Article one against the other in writing. It was my chance one day to find a
paper of these Articles in a walk in the Friars Garden, which had unawares
fallen from him; being drawn by one Sister Anne, alias Iosepha Bingham,
against Sister Suzan Bacon: Wherein the said Sister If these silly oppressed
women were examined by men of authority, and were assured to be free from such
a tyrannous Confessor, they would tell of horrible abuses,
Susan stood accused, for blaming her ghostly Father, and the Abbess and
Prioresse of partiality to some of their children more then to others. Also
that she had vpbraided this sister Iosepha (being a dear darling of Father
Fosters) of too much familiarity with Father Garnet the Powder Traitor, This
Sister Iosepha is a stout defender of the miracle in the Wheat Straw, which
happened as was said at Garnets execution, although it be now proved a very
counterfeit and a falselye.
whose careful keeper she had of a long time been, when he lurked in England
at her Mrs house. Also that another of her ghostly Fathers minions had a
Bastard by a Priest in England (whose name because she is lately dead, I will
pass over in silence) and that if she had been a little more honest, and a
little less personable, she should not have been one of the upper Regiment.
With this and a great deal more of such like stuff was this paper farsed; and
with these and the like accusations one of another are these silly women daily
busied. So that I have generally observed in the superiors of this house, an
egregious neglect and contempt of their rule and vowed profession: and in the
rest, an extraordinary maligning and envying against one another. And so much
the better could I observe this and all other my Narrations, by how much I grew
to be a more near and daily attendant about the Confessor; for at length, what
with my long continuance in the house, and the small suspect they had of my
forsaking them, and what for want of one to serve him at all occasions, I
became to be oftentimes admitted even into his private house of iniquity,
where he uses to sit and hear the Confessions of the Nuns. In which house
being very dark, there is a grate of iron that looks into the Nuns
partition or side; and this grate (howsoever it seem substantial and firm)
may be, and is with a slight easily taken out, whereby the sisters have free
egresse and regresse into his chamber when they list, and he to them: for the
Abbess has her bed not far from this Grate, where there is also a chimny so
convenient that he may take the benefit of the fire into this his room, in
which he uses to dine and sup, having his meat served him by the Nuns
through a Wicket in the wall. And when he is merrily disposed (as that is not
seldom) then must his dearling Kate Knightley play him a merry fit, and sister
Mary Brook, or some other of his last-come Wags must sing him one bawdy song
or other to digest his meat. Then after supper it is usual for him to read a
little of Venus and Adonis, the jests of George Peele, or some such scurrilous
book: for there are few idle Pamphlets printed in England which he has not in
the house, being either brought over to his son Peter, the drunken Familiar
aforesaid, by Seamen: or else happening into the hands of Father Newman an
English Priest, who has an office in the Inquisition house to peruse all
English books that are brought into Lisbon. And he, I trust, shall have the
sight of this, wherein if he use a good conscience, he must needs testify
with me the truth of many things herein contained; for he is one that knows
more of these people then any but themselves, or some that have lived amongst
them.

If I should repeat all their unchaste practices, I should make the Christian
Reader blush at them: or if I should tell of all the obscene bawdry which I
have seen, I might recount as many irreligious prankes as would fill a great
Volume: but it shall suffice for the skillful by the length of their foot, to
judge of the proportion of their whole body.

And now for their Obedience, being the third and last part of their Vow; I
will not go about to use any Theological Definitions or proofs to tell what
Obedience is, and how it ought to be performed; for it is beyond my element,
and the Cobblers check shall be my warning, I will not go vltra crepidam: but
as I first determined, so I will proceed; that is, to declare in what sort they
perform their vow of obedience; referring it to the censure of the judicious,
whether they do well or no.

It is certain that these silly women thus muzzled in blindness, do live in
very servile obedience unto their Superiors; and, in such sort, that without
standing to discuss or examine the thing that is commanded them whether it be
lawful or no, they will readily perform it. For their ghostly father has
composed sundry Treatises for them of Obedience, wherein he pronounces no
less then damnation for the least scruple or hesitation in the performance of
their Superiors commands. And here let me tell the aforesaid It behooves
father Newman for his own credit to look to this. The like also has he done
with certain meditations upon the Passion, which he requested Father John
Kensington an English Jesuit at St Rocks in Lisbon to peruse and approve;
being gelded likewise as the other books of Obedience were.
Father Newman what a trick his old friend Foster has put upon him, which is
this: Having made these books of Obedience, he caused me to write them out
fair, omitting in many places a Leaf, and in some two or three together,
which contained any false doctrine and vnallowable persuasions to draw them to
obedience in unlawful things; and being finished in this sort, he brings
them to Father Newman to be signed with his approbation and testimony, that
there was nothing in them repugnant to the Catholic says; which being done,
he then interserreth and sows in the aforesaid omitted Leaves, and so
delivers them to his daughters to be practiced, who take the approbation at
the end of the book for a sufficient warrantie of all the doctrine therein
contained. And this is a principal furtherance to his sacrilegious lusts: for
I am verily persuaded that not one amongst them will (for fear of being
disobedient) refuse to come to his bed whensouer he commands them: and that
they do so, I have manifestly seen and known. For when I have been his
Chamberlain in the absence and times of drunkenness of the familiar aforesaid;
having a Key to the Chamber door, They forgate the old caveat, Caute si non
cast.
I have come sometimes unawares early in a morning, when one might have seen
as great a miracle as Scoggin spoke off when he took a Friar a bed with a
Whore, and called out to see a wonder, viz. a Friar with four legs. And now
I will a little digress to ask a question of my Ignatians, who are the chief
teachers and allowers of equivocation and mental evasion; whether these
kinde-hearted souls being professed Nuns, and having vowed never to come
over the threshold, did break their Vow or no, in coming through a grate? If
they say they did: why, their ghostly father will dispense with their Vow: but
if they say they did not; (as I think they will) what then? Marry I think
that when their black Synagogues at Rome, Valladolid and Civil do send forth
their Locusts into England, and they chance to bait by the way at Lisbon, as
they do oftentimes: they deserve to enter commons with old father Seth for
their legittimation of the action. And to the end that no man should doubt, but
a Jesuit has a carnal affection, as well as a spiritual, to any of his
ghostly children, it shall not be amiss to intersert a merry Tale for the
Readers recreation of one father Strange an English Jesuit, as it was reported
for Inter caenandum bilares este.
table-talke by a Nun of this house to her ghostly father; she having then
been a chambermaid in the place where it was done.

This Father Strange was a young man, and had been lately before professed and
priested among the Jesuits: and being come of good friends, and tenderly
brought up in England, he fell very sick shortly after his profession, perhaps
by reason of the vnwholesomnesse of the air which neither at Rome nor
Valladolid is very pleasant: whereupon he obtained license of the Rector to
go into England, where he hoped both to recover his health, and to employ his
talent of Priesthood, for the reducing of Heretics to the Catholic Church
of Rome. And being arrived, he took up this Nuns Ladies Chamber for one of
his places of rendezvous: where it so fell out, that as this sister Anne (for
that is her name) sat sowing with her back to her Ladies back and the
Jesuits, who were sitting by the fire, she chanced to look upon a great
Looking-glass which hung right before her, wherein she espied what pains the
late sick Jesuit took to shriue her Lady: neither had he ended his shrift,
before he also espied her looking in the Glass; and suspecting that she had
seen all, (as indeed she had) She might have known by this, what she should
trust to when she was a Nun: but it seems she was as good as her Mistress:
and I am sure that her Father Foster is a good as the Jesuit.
he took her aside in private, and told her that he was flesh and blood, and
could abstain no more then another man, although at his profession he had
vowed chastity: and using many persuasions to win her to be secret, he
promised her, that if she stood in need of a ghostly father to absolve her from
any of her sweet sins, (as he called these) he would be the man should do
it; neither should her penance be ouer-burthensome unto her.

By which may appear both the carnal affection of a Jesuit, and the chaste
and sober conversation of a professed Nun, and her ghostly father: of the
Jesuit in doing it; of her, in not shaming to tell it as a tale for recreation;
and of the old fornicator, in making himself merry at the hearing of it; yea,
and reporting it again in his jolly humors to my self, and one Father Viuian
a Friar of the house; among a great sort of such like inuectiues which he used
against the Jesuits, because, a little before I came away, they went about (if
it had been possible) to extrude the succession of any more Friars in the
House, and to bring it under their government; which I believe they will ere
long effect. For I was told by an English Jesuit at the Court of Spain, that
father Foster is bound unto the Jesuits, never to ordain any more Friars in
the house, that so for want of successors it may of force fall into their
hands; and upon this condition the Jesuits permit him to live quietly; which,
if he should not observe, they would quickly inform against him of sundry of
his prankes which they know well enough. And if this be so, (as like it is) the
Nuns have no knowledge thereof, for he feeds them with hope of making new
brothers, which they seem earnestly to wish for: The Nuns thought surely it
should be so, and if he did not mean so, yet I was loath to trust to it, in
regard of his daily earnestness with me concerning that matter.
and they would often tell me, they hoped ere long to see me a professed brother
of the Covent: but it pleased God to dispose better for me, and not to suffer
me to be any longer lulled in sin and superstition: for after I had been
two years and an half with them, I found a means to free my self from them,
before I had made any profession or vow of religion either to that or any other
Order: for I plainly saw, that these were led by a wrong guide, who was so
deep plunged, and had continued so long in all wickedness and dissembling,
that he was grown insensible of sin; according to that saying, Consuetudo
peccandi, tollit sensum peccati. For he shamed not, under pretext of Religion,
to persuade a young man, a Merchant in Lisbon (one How do you call him) to
defraud his These two brethren are both living in Lisbon at this present, and
well known to most Englishmen that use Portugal.
own elder brother of his estate; which matter was thus effected.

These two brethren were by profession Iewellers, and adventured their stock
jointly together: the younger brother (for that he was a Bachelor) being Factor
for it beyond the seas. At length having made many good returns, he took up
his abode in Lisbon, as a place most convenient for his Trade; and falling into
familiarity with this Father Foster, and Father Flood a Jesuit, who then lived
in Lisbon, they persuaded him to become a Roman Catholic, and so soon as he
could get his brothers Stock again into his hands, to profess himself such;
which he accordingly did: and so (being instructed by them, that it was
meritorious to coozen an Heretic, as they account all Protestants) defrauded
his brother, and would come to no accounts with him, relying upon the
supportation of these Hypocrites, on whom he bestowed liberal alms; giving
them many fair pictures for their Church, and a horse of twenty mil-reis
price, to fetch home their provisions to the House, besides diverse other
things: whilst in the mean time his brother was undone, and could get nothing
at his hands by Law, in regard he was a Protestant. Whereupon he was feign to
petition in England for redress many times, and yet could not prevail to
recover any thing: yea, he refused to come into his own Country, or to obey
the command of the Council, in giving satisfaction for what he had in his
hands. At length the Lord Rosse coming Ambassador into Spain, and staying by
the way at Lisbon, (where he landed) decided the matter betwixt them; and
articles of agreement were drawn by Father Newman, which my self afterward
wrote out fair for them: the tenor whereof was this in effect: That either of
the brothers should by a day prefixed, bring in a just account of all debts due
unto them, as likewise of all debts which either of them ought: also that they
should bring in all such moneys and goods as did any way as their own belong
unto them: and that they should both depose and swear, that they had truly
laid open their estates. And this being done, their debts which they ought,
were to be paid out of the whole sum, and the debts which were owing to
them, were to be added unto it; and so they to share equally betwixt them
whatsoever remained, that by this means their estates might be both alike. Now
a few days before this was to be put in effect, the younger brother knowing his
estate to be far better then the others, comes very pensiuely to his
ghostly Father old Foster for counsel; who instructed him to come to the
Abbess, and some other of the sisters at their Grate, where they use to talk
with strangers, and there to tell them that he was weary of the troubles and
vexations which attended a Merchants life, and therefore he would renounce the
world, and become a religious man: and seeing that God had bestowed sufficient
wealth upon him, he could not do better, then to impart it to them; being such
holy Saints as had preferred that kind of life in a strange country, before all
worldly contents in their own. And thereupon at his fained request, they sent
their horse to his house, and had him laden back with plate, jewels and money,
which my self helped to take from the horseback, and carry into Fosters
Cell. He had likewise at that time a great quantity of Cochenill in sundry
bags, being at least fourteen or fifteen hundred weight, amounting to no
small sum of money, which he had a little before bought of the Indian Fleet,
who that year, and about that time put into Lisbon; and this was brought into
the Nunnery by night out of the ships, to defraud the King of his right, and
was under a color, together with the other things, given to the Sisters of the
House. By which dealing he so imbezeled his estate, that when his brother and
he came to an account, there remained little or nothing for him to receive;
being by this means defrauded of all he should have had. When as presently
after this conclusion was made between them, Father Foster and the Abbess
send for their ghostly child, giving him thanks for the good will he had to
bestow his estate upon them: but they told him, (as was before determined) that
so much money and wealth was an hinderance to their devotion; and therefore
they requested him to have it away again: to which he soon condescended;
telling them, that now also his chiefest troubles were ouerpast, (meaning,
because he had done with his brother) and that he perceived it was not Gods
will to make him so happy, as (such another youth) Father Nicholas Price, who
awhile before, of a Merchant, became a Dominican Friar: and therefore he would
live as aforetimes; and when he died, he would bequeath all he had to the
Church: and thereupon took home all his estate again, after he had by these
aequiuocations and euasions, defrauded his brother.

And now lest this Treatise should rise to an ouer-bigge Volume, I will hasten
to an end, after I have in a few words set down the manner of my departure
from them, which was thus:

After I had continued with them for the space of two years and an half, and
had plainly perceived, that all their outward show of holiness was nothing but
dissimulation, hypocrisy and lustful sacrilege, I began to consider in what
a miserable estate I should be, if God should at that time call me out of the
world; for I could well say with the Poet, Video meliora, proboque, deterior a
sequor, I saw and allowed of the best way, yet followed the worst: at length
the fear of my souls health, and a natural affection to my kindred and
country so wrought with me, that I waxed resolute in my determination of
forsaking them: but not knowing how to effect my purpose without hazard of my
life, (for they would have poisoned me, if they had known I would have gone
from them, because I should not bewray their secrets) it came in my mind to
draw out certain Articles in manner of an information against them, which I
thought to exhibit to the chief Inquisitors of the City. And this might have
been very dangerous unto me, if they should not have proceeded according to
Equity; of which I was doubtful, fearing that Read Musgraue his Motives, for
forsaking the Carthusian Monks, and Romish Religion after he had bin 20.
years professed.
many great men of other Monasteries (being perhaps in the same predicament)
would have stopped the course of Justice, propter honorem Monastica vitae, for
the credit of a Monastical life, as is many times done: yet notwithstanding I
was resolved to undertake this course, and had provided my Articles, which were
these:

1. That Father Seth, alias Joseph Foster, the Confessor of the English Nuns
of Saint Brigets Order in Lisbon, did compel diverse youths his countrymen,
against their wills to remain with him in the house: who if they had any good
affection to the Romish Catholic faith before they came there, were soon
brought into dislike of it, by reason of the ill government which is used in
the house. And of this sort I could have instanced in twenty, who within a few
years have been recorded in their Register book, for Apostate runne-awayes.

2. He would daily without any companion go into the Nuns Cloister or Side,
and remain there half a day together, yea and sometime, sit and dine at their
Table with them: but every day in their sight, which is expressly against
their Rule. And this I could have proved by the testimony of diverse
Portugeses our neighbors, who frequenting the house, have oftentimes observed
and seen him going in, and coming forth; and have spoken of it to my self
and others. Also the Nuns themselves would have avouched it upon their
examinations.

3. He has in his Cell, where he hears their confession, a Grate, which I
can show how he uses to take down with a slight, through which the Nuns
pass to his bed by night. And for the further auouching of this, I would have
brought in the drunken familiar aforesaid, who will many times in his drink,
tell how he helped to make it firm, against a time when there was a Visitation
intended by the Popes Nuncio, and expected by them of the House, although it
was not performed.

4. That in many years past there never came any Visitor to the House, to
examine and understand their grieuances: neither have they any Confessor
extraordinary, as all other Religious have, to whom they might freely
complain of their Superiors oppressions. And this needed small proof, for it
would soon have been apparent enough of it self.

5. Through his politic plotting, he causes whom he list to be elected
Abbess, (for they hold their places but three years) and her to dispose of
the House as he thinks good. This also the Nuns themselves would quickly
complain of, if they had one to hear their complaint.

6. That my self (being diverse times called into the Nuns partition or side,
to help them to nail up boords, set up their Vines in the walks of their
Garden, and do such like things which women could not so well do) did chance
to make a hole in a hollow place in a wall, (which had been latelier dawbed up
then the rest) to set up a Sparre to underprop the Vines; out of which hole I
pulled sundry bones of some dead children, and left many more remaining behind.
And this the place it self would have testified to be true.

Having thus provided my Articles in a readiness, I absented my self from
helping the Priest at Mass that day, who being ready to go into the Church,
and missing me, was feign to take another Clerk, whilst I walked up and down
my chamber, with a resolute mind to depart the house. At length comes Father
Foster, (for he used every day to visit me at unawares, to see if he could
find me writing of any thing that disliked him) and espied upon my table
(which I had negligently forgot) a blotted Copy of my Articles, being the
first draught of them: which when I saw him take up, I proffered to snatch out
of his hand, but missed of my purpose; and thereupon went down the stairs,
and so took my way out at the gates: but he (having soon perceived to whom
they were intended) followed me amain, and quickly ouertooke me, yea, even
before I was past his own walls; and demanding of me what I meant by such
doings, I told him my intent; and bade him peruse the Articles at large, giving
him a fair copy of them out of my bosom, where I had three or four more.

But as soon as he had read them, he waxed pale as ashes, and was so
terrified, that he began earnestly to entreat me that I should not proceed with
my purpose, and told me that if I would be secret, I should have his good
will to depart; whereof being glad, I not only promised, but performed
secrecy, (although indeed I ought not to have done it) not bewraying any of
his prankes to my nearest acquaintance and friends; until such time as having
occasion a few months after to be at Lisbon again, he suspected me unjustly
of telling tales of his house; and meeting me one day in the street, he called
me to him, and told me, that if I did not presently depart the City, he would
have my throat cut. Upon which his devilish speech I could not refrain any
longer, but in the open street I told him of many of his ungodly actions, which
came to the hearing of diverse of our Nation, being men of good quality,
whereof some have testified in England to Honorable Personages in my behalf,
how ready and willing I was to avouch and maintain whatsoever is herein
contained, and much more: which (although it be here omitted) I am ready at all
times truly to declare and set forth for the satisfaction of all that desire
it: but especially for such as have either Daughters or Kinswomen in that
house, in whose behalf I am bound to entreat their friends to enter into a
further search of their miserable estate and condition; and (having found my
words true) to use means, if it be possible, to free them from such horrible
and sacrilegious rapine and spoil; themselves not being able to send any word
thereof, because all their Letters must be given to him to be sent into
England; which if they contain any thing contrary to his mind, shall never be
sent; for he will peruse them all. And likewise when their friends send to
them, the Letters must first come to his hands, wherein also if there be any
thing that he misliketh (for he will break them all up) they shall never know
of it. And here I will conclude, hoping that the friendly Christian Reader will
be no way scandalized with any thing herein contained. But as for the curious
and captious (especially Romanists) if they tax me for any thing I have
written, let them know I have done neither them not any of their sect any wrong
in publishing the truth. If any of them amongst these ensuing names find
either a Sister or Kinswoman, or Friend, let him sigh to think on their
misery, and use his best endeavors to free them. I have not set downe-all their
names, because I cannot well call them to remembrance; neither are many of
these christen names the same which they had in England, it being usual at the
Bishops confirmation to take what name they will: as also some of the sirnames
are not their true names indeed; for the Papists do many times change their
names: but there are few of these which are not right; and howsoever, they are
known to their friends by these.

The Friars of the House.
Seth, alias Joseph Foster, Confessor. John Viuian. Nicholas Barrowes. two
Priests. Peter Consul, a Familiar, that is, a Lay-Brother, but a drunken one,
God knows.
The Nuns of the House.
Barbara Wiseman, Abbess. Anne Wiseman Prioresse. Elizabeth Heart, Chantresse.
Anne Wharton, Treasuresse. Anne, alias, Iosepha Bingham, Portresse. Lucy
Johnson, Notaresse. Dorothy Fowler, Keeper of the Relics and Church stuff.
Briget Brown, Lucy Brown, Daughters of St Anth: Brown, Visc. Montacute.
Elizabeth Preston, sometime Abbess, but now in disgrace with old Foster. Anne
Martin. Anne Markenfield. Susan Bacon. Sisly Arundell. Margaret Smith, alias
Becket, and her Sister. Mandlyn Shelly, Katherine Dendy, Elizabeth Cole, three
of the Kitchen. Martha. Clara Dowman, indeed Anne Foster, the Confessors
Kinswoman. Kath: Knightly. Mary Brook. two merry singing wagges. Anne, A
Chambermaid of St Anth: Brown. Mary Barnes, a well-beloved friend of Fosters.
Mary Dimmock, a discontented young Nun. M. Blinksop, falsely reported by
Father Foster, to be allied to diverse of the Nobility. Agatha. Elianor and
Angela: two Dutchwomen. Briget Mandanha. Maria Suarez. Maria Rodriguez. three
Portugeses.
FINIS.

