Of Religious COMMUNION Private, and Public. With the silenceing of the
clamours raised by Mr Thomas Helvvisse against our reteyning the Baptism
received in Engl: and administering of Bapt: unto Infants. As also a Survey of
the confession of faith published in certain Conclusions by the remaynders of
Mr Smithes company.

The simple believes every word: but the prudent looks well to his goeing.

Prove. 14. 15. By JOHN ROBINSON.

Printed Anno 1614.

The Preface.
THere passed out, some while since, a defamatory libell under the names of
Charles Lawn, and three other his brethren in evil; but certainly penned by
some other persons, whose greater knowledge did arm their cruel hatred the more
to hurt: making them fathers of that generation, whose teeth are as swords,
and their iawteeth as knives to Prove. 30. 14*
devour the afflicted from of the earth, and the pore from among men. Against
whom, and whose friends durst I use the same liberty, in publishing to the
world their personal corruptions, which I know, and could soon learn by the
testimony of honester men, then these informers, they who have written of
others, what has pleased them, should read that which would not please them,
of their own, if not of themselves. But God forbid. My desire is rather to
pacify, then further to alienate affections: remembering Christ's instruction
unto his Disciples, to bless those Math. 44.
that curse them: to do good to those that harm them: and to pray for those
that persequute them. Besides, in following their course, I should for the
faults of a few corrupter persons, wrong the credits of many honest, and
innocent men: for whose sakes I would rayther cover the others faylings, then
for them, blemish the credit of the rest. But herein special respect is to be
had to the common truths of the Lord Jesus by them and us, acknowledged: upon
the honor whereof had they been but half so bent, as upon our disgrace, they
would not thus have gratifyed the common adversaryes thereof, even theirs, and
ours: and with them, the Atheists and Epicures in the land; by whom their book
is most affected: blessing themselves in their professed contempt of God, and
of all religion, by the faylings of those (whether truly, or falsely
suggested, they regard not) who profess his more special fear, and service:
and concludeing, that all others are as ill as themselves, though more
covertly. It is the spiders disposition, so she may entangle the silly flies in
her web, to weav out her own bowels.

This libell it has pleased diverse persons of note for learning, and Zeal, to
countenance with their wryteings of diverse kinds. Amongst the rest, Mr W:
Ames, fearing belike, lest either it should want credit, or I discredit by the
accusations in it against the persons of other men in other Churches (which
though they were all true, as I know some of them to be wholly false, and others
impudently published by such as were themselves chief agents in them, yet did
no more concern me, and the Church with me, then did the abuses in the Ch: of
Corinth, the Ch: at Rome; or those in some of the 7 Churches in Asia, the rest,
which were free from them) has published to the world, in the body of that
book, without my consent, privity, or least suspicion of such dealing, certain
private letters passing between him, and me, about private communion betwixt
the members of the true visible Ch: and others, though he take advantage, and
occasion by certain general words of mine to alter the state of the question.
The occasion of which passages if I should also publish, I am sure he would not
like it, nor had cause.

Now as I neither am, nor would he thought in sensible of this unchristian
enmity, and (...)
violent opposition by them against us in the practice of those things, which
themselves, as their wryteings testify, do so far approve; so think I it a
Preface very convenions for my present purpose, to communicate with others such
grounds, as upon which they seem to raise the same.

And first, all oppositions in religion are carried usually with violence, as
wherein men have special persuasion they please God, in that their special
work of Conscience and Zeal for him, and his truth. And as men are in danger
to mistake error for truth, so to prosequute the same with wrath, and
indignation, instead of true Zeal of God. And I do much entreat, and warn those
men in the fear of the Lord, to beware that in-stead of Zeal against our
supposed errors, they nourish not in their hearts, wrath, and hatred against
(...)
our persons. Which is a great iniquity where it is found, and most contrary
unto love, and so unto God who is love; and the breaking of the whole law,
which love fulfilleth.

But besides this general, they take more special occasion of offense at us,
and our separation, by which we carry our differences; as wherein we do not
only in word, but even really and indeed reprove their state, and standing, as
unlawful: and such, as we rayther choose all calamityes, by loss of country,
friends, riches, credit, liberty, yea and life is self, then by continuance
therein, to withould the truth of God in unrighteousness, and vphould the chayr
of Apostasy, and so to pull down wrath from heaven upon our heads. Which our
sequestration is yet the more offensive unto them, by how much the nearer we
were, and yet are, in many things, united: the contentions of brethren being as
the bars of a castle: as also for that their party for the reformation of
^ov. (...). 19.
their pretended national Judah is thereby weakened. And as any (accordeing to
the proverb) may easily find a staff, to beat a dog withal, so do men easily
take occasion to lay load upon us, who are for our fewnes in number, and
mean-nes of condition, so contemptible in their eyes: and against whom they
have all advantages for treading upon us (save the truth) which they can
desire. But the L: Jesus in teaching, that the way to life is narrow, which few
find: and that to the pore the gospel is preached, ^ath. 7. (...). (...). 11.
and 6.
and therevppon, that he is blessed who is not offended at him, does plainly
forewarn all his servants of this offense. Others there are also, who
whatsoever they boast of the Scriptures, have for the most part, a
traditionall faith, and religion: and as Naaman the Assirian would not beleev
that there could be any better waters then the rivers ^King. 12.
of Damascus, so neither do they think it possible, that there should be any
purer manner of worshipping God, then that, to which they have been always
used: unto which they are so superstitiously addicted, as they are ready to
think it an heretical way for any man to step out of the beaten trod of their
teachers traditionary religion.

There are also beside all these, that have their politic ends, and respects,
for which ^hey affect vpposition against us. Some, (of the Prelates faction) to
gratify their Lords. and Masters, at whose devotion they stand, and against
whom we principally witness: others, though they like not the Bishops, yet think
it a point of their wisdom to take, and ^ould up professed opposition against
us, that under it as a buckler they may cover their own irregularity, and make
their iealouse Masters beleev, that they cannot but ^e indifferently well
affected toward them, being so vehemently bent against us. Yea, others
perceaving that their own grounds do in the judgment of others wise, and
impartial, directly lead to the way, in which we walk, and yet seeing it not to
be for their purposes ^o have the world so to esteem of them, do undoubtedly,
streyn, and wring the neck of their Consciences, and courses, to look the
coutrary way, that they may not be thought to have their faces toward us.

Lastly, there are, who fearing belike to be overcome of the truth we profess,
if with ^uiet, and calm thoughts they come to consider of it, and not having
hearts to embrace it, do set themself against it tumultuously; like those
cowards, who fearing the force of their adversaries, do think by debaseing, and
revileing of them, to encourage their own faint, and feeble hearts against them.

But good had it been for the truth, if at it offenses had only been taken by
the adversaryes thereof, and not also given by them, who have professed it: and
those both so public, as they cannot be concealed, and so great, as they can
receav no sufficient excuse. Yet are there notwithstanding diverse things (and
those such as will seem, I doubt not, of weight, to the wise in heart) which
both justly may, and ne^essarily must be observed about those matters: whether
offensive contentions, or ^ther personal evilles, laid to our charge, and
published to the world against ^s.

First then, and in the general; the publishers of those accusations cannot be
unsuspected of any reasonable man: being such generally, as are both enemies to
our pro^ession, and have either for their unfaithful Apostasy, or other
scandalous sins, or ^oth, been cast out of the Church and excommunicated. Now
as, for the former, (...) is truly, and commonly said, that no person running
away from his Master, will easily speak well of him: So does experience
confirm it, for the latter, that scarce any condemned in any court (how justly
soever) but will complayn either of the malice of the evidence, or ignorance
of the Jury, or injustice of the Judge. Condemned persons must repayr their own,
by ruinateing the credits of their judges.

More specially: and first, of the contentions which have fallen out amongst the
professors of this way. As Paul complayneth, that sin taking occasion by the
law, Romans 7 8.
wrought in him all manner of concupiscence: so indeed has the malice of
Sa^han, and man's corruption taken occasion to work much evil of this kind, by
sundry good things specially found in the professors of this truth: as 1. by
their knowiudg, 2. Zeal, and 3. liberty of the Gospelly. 1. Cor. I^dg,^ 3. 1.
Chapter 1. 5. 7. 11. Chapter 3. 3.
Knowledge, says the Apostle, puffs up: and hence was it, that the same
Church to which he so wrytes, exceeding other Churches in knowledge, did also
pass them in contentions, and strifes: So the Churches this way (which I may
truly speak, and without boasting) goeing before other ordinary assemblyes in
knowledge, are the more in danger of contentions, without special^ modesty, and
watchfulnes. Ignorant persons, and peoples, are for the most part, easily
ruled, as being content to trust other men with their faith, and religion:
neither was there eve^ so great peace in the Christian world (as it is called)
as in the deepest darkness of popery. 2 dly, as the greatest Zeal for God is
rightly found amongst Gods people, so is peace, and agreement greatly
endaungered thereby, if it be not tempered with much wisdom, moderation, and
brotherly forbearance: and that they consider not aright, that both themselves
and others, are frayl men, and compassed about with much ignorance, and
infirmity otherwise: who are therefore to study not only how to have that
which they like, but also how to bear that in other men (if not intolerable)
which they like not: otherwise, whilst men think by their Zeal to warm the
house, they will burn in over their own, and other men's heads. 3ly, and
lastly, they only, who enjoy liberty, know how hard a thing it is to use it
aright. And when I see them in Engl: wondering at the dissentions in this way,
methinkes I see two prisoners (being themselves fast chayned and manicled
together by feet, and hands) wondering to see that other men (at liberty) walk
not closer together the^ they do. Their thraldom makes them unequal Censurers
of the abuse of our liberty. How many thousands are there, whose very hearts
are fretted with the chains of their spiritual bondage? Yea how many several
factions of ministers are there, whose differences, if by servile fear they
were not nipped in the bud, would bring forth no small both dissensions and
divisions: as at this day woeful experience teaches in the reformed Churches,
whose dissentions do infinitely exceed all that ever have been amongst is? As
ignorance begot, so tyranny mainteyned the greatest peace, and unity, when
pope: sh iniquity most prevayled.

Now for personal offenses; as we profess, and avow before all men, that, for
our selves, we neither receav, nor keep amongst us any persons not sanctified
in their measure ((...) our discerning:) so do we not think our selves any way
priveledged, either from the common infirmityes of Gods more worthy servants in
all ages, or from the malice of Sa than in thrusting upon us false brethren
unawares: whose hypocrisy, and prophan^ ^ude 4.
usurpation of the Lords Covenant, and holy things, unto which they have no
right, he often punishes with scandalous sins, and so leads them out amongst
the workers of iniquity. Which scandalles we could yet cover from the eyes of
the world in a great measure, if we durst (as others do) either let sin rest
upon our brethren: o^ Lev. 19. 7.
sm^ther in a Consistory such offenses, as are either public, of their own
nature, or (...) made by the offenders private impenitency: which because we
dare not do, nor but rebuke ^. Tim. ^. 20.
him openly, which so sins, and so judge both his sin, and person (in which
our pr^ce^dings, and dealings, new offenses are also added often times) we do
thereby lay open our own shame in the eyes of the world: and so walking in our
simplicity, because we dare not be wise against the Lord Jesus Christ his
order, and ordinances, we have in so great a measure our faults written in our
foreheads, and are a wonder, and offense unto others, who are far better
acquaynted with our faylings, then with their own.

But besides, if not above the rest, great offense has been taken by many at
our extreme streytnes in respect of the order wherein we walk: and more
specially for refuseing communion in the private, and personal exercises of
religion with the better sort in the assemblyes; as wherein we have not only
made a separation from the wicked, and from the godly also in things unlawful,
or unlawfully performed, but even in their lawful ^actions. This Mr Ames
calls the bitterness of separation: and for it, as it seems, thinks it lawful
to cast upon me the reproach of the sins of other Churches and persons,
whether truly, or falsely laid to their charg, he knows not; as also to
insinuate against ^e, that I despise the wryteings of Iunius, and so of other
learned men: as justly as Grot^^ agayn^ the Eng^^ Puritan^ as he calls the^.
others have laid to his charg the contempt of all ancient writers: wherein if
men deal unjustly with him, and his friends, let him see whether God deal not
justly, in rewardeing him as he has served others.

For the matter of his letters, if I would strive with him about the Arguments,
with whom I agree in the question, I could manifest (I doubt not) how he has
not dealt sufficicie^tly in it. Whither or no there were in the assemblyes
faithful, and godly persons, and the same so appearing unto men, I never
called into question, nor could without sinning greatly against mine own
Conscience: the thing I feared, was the violation, and See for this A
Iustific^^ Page 432. 433.
^reach of order in the communion between the members of the true visible
Church, and ^^hers out of that order, or in the contrary. Mine objection
hereabout Mr A: answers not, but only makes light account of it, as a
straung order, which is broken by saying Amen to a godly man's prayer. But all
men know, that to set light (...) an Argument is no sufficient answer unto it.
And many cases may be put in which ^rder may be sinfully broken in
communicateing even with a godly man's prayers; either ^rivately, as if he will
professedly offer up the prayers of an excommunicate, detected ^eretique, or
other ungodly person: or publicly if he perform the same, without a ^ue, or
by a false calling. Here was use of a distinction of religious actions, into
^ersonall, and Church actions: which if either Mr A: had observed unto me, or
See page 1.
my self then conceaved of, would have cleared the question to my conscience:
and with which I did wholly satisfy my self in this matter, when God gave me
once to observe it.

My judgment therein, and the reasons of it, I have set down in the first part
of the ^ook: unto which I bind no man further to assent, then he sees ground
from the Scrip^^es. In it I oppose no Article of our confession: neither was it
the Authors ^eaning, as it seems, further to conclude and profess
separation then from communion Art. 31
(...) the public worship, and administrations there: neither do I herein
oppose any ^t order of any Church this way, to my knowledge. I my self, and the
people with me ^enerally, did separate from the formal state of the parrish
assemblyes, in this perswsion, and so practiced all the while we abode in Engl:
as some there continuing, (...) done to this day: there having been also
sundry passages between Mr Smith, and me about it: with whom I also refused to
ioyn because I would use my liberty in this point: and for which I was by some
of the people with him excepted against, when I was chosen into office in this
Church. Indeed afterward fyndeing them of other Churches, with whom I was
most nearly joined, otherwise minded for the most part, I did thorough my
vehement desire of peace, and weakness withal, remit and loose of my former
resolutions and did (to speak as the truth is) forget some of my former
grounds; and so have passed out, upon occasion, some Arguments against this
practice. Which yet notwithstanding I have in the same place so set down, as
all may see I was therein far from that, certaynty of persuasion, which I had
and have of the common grounds of our separation: of which I think this no
part at all. But had my persuasion in it been fuller, then ever it was, I
profess my self always one of them, who still desire to learn further, or
better, what the good will of God is. And I beseech the Lord from mine heart,
that there may be in the men, (toward whom I desire in all things lawful to
enlarg my self) the like readiness of mind to forsake every evil way, and
faithfully to embrace and walk in the truth they do, or may see, as by the
mercy of God, there is in me; which as I trust it shall be mine, so do I wish it
may be their comfort also in the day of the Lord Jesus.

JOHN ROBINSON.

Of private Communion.
THE Apostle vvriteing to the Church at Colossus with much joy for their
stablenes in the grace of God received, reduces the whole matter of that his
Colos. 2. 5.
reioyceing to two general heads: Faith, and Order. Of which two, faith
(though set after in place) is before, both in nature, time, and dignity: as
making men in their persons severally fit for, and capable of that order,
wherein they are jointly to be united.

Now from these two spring heads (as it were) thus distinguished, do ^sue, and
arise two sorts of external religions actions, or exercises: which ^e may not
unfitly, for distinction sake, call, Personal, and Church Actions. By
personal actions I do understand such as arise from, and are performed
immediately by the personal faith, and other graces of God, in the hearts of
holy men. Of which sort are, private prayer, thanksegiveing, and singing of
Psalms, Profession of faith, and confession of sins, reading, or opening ^he
Scriptures, and hearing them so read, or opened, either in the family, or ^^s
where, without any Church Power, or ministry comeing between. Of ^he 2d: sort
are the receaving in, and casting out of members, the electing, (...) deposeing
of officers, the use of a public ministry, and all communion ^herewith. For
which works, howsoever Hebr. 1^ 6.
faith, and other personal graces ^e required that men in them may Please God,
yet are not these graces suffi^int for the doing of them, except withal there
concur, and come between, Ch: state, and order: in, and by which, they are to
be exercised, as by their most immediate, and proper cause: from which, by the
rule of reason, they ^re to have their denomination, and so to be called
Church-Actions.

And that the actions of the first kind, (and more particularly) private
^rayer (of which I am specially to speak) may, and ought to be performed ^y
godly persons (though out of the order of a true visible Church) both ^he Math.
(...) 8. 9. 10. and cap. 19 22. etc. Act. 10. ^ 23. 34. 35.
Scriptures, and common reason teach: and that not only by them se^erally, and
one by one, but jointly, and together also, as there is occasion: ^hey being
joint members of the mistical body of Christ by faith, and ioynt^y Romans 8. 26.
and cap 10 10 (...)
pertakers of the same Spirit of adoption, and prayer; from which common ^ayth,
and union of the spirit dwelling in them, this communion arises, they ^hereby
being priveledged jointly to say, Our Father: as was also Practiced 1. Cor.
(...). 7.
by Cornelius, and his holy family, though out of a true visible Church.
Neythe^ is it a matter worthy the proveing lawful for a godly housband, and
wife jointly to sanctify their meat, and drink by prayer, and thankesgiveing,
and so^ to beg together at Gods hands, or to give thanks for other good things
upon themselves, and theyrs, though they be out of the order of a tru^ Church.
Neither indeed do the members of the visible Church perfor^ private prayer, or
the like exercises, whether severally, and by one, and one or jointly; by
virtue of that their Church state, or with any referenc^ unto it, but merely as
a duty of the Christian person, or family: (which must be before the Christian
Church as the parts before the whole:) and which they were also as well, and as
much bound unto, though they were o^ no visible Ch: at all: no more then was
Cornelius, and his family, and friends which notwithstanding was his, and their
fault.

These things thus premised, I come to the thing I aim at in thi^ whole
discourse, which is, that we, who profess a separation from the Engl:
National, Provincial, Diocesan, and Parochial Church, and Churches, in the
wh^ formal state, and order thereof, may notwithstanding lawfully communicate
in private prayer, and other the like holy exercises (not performed in their
Church Communion, nor by their Church power and ministry) with the godly
amongst them (though remaining (of infirmity) members of the same Church, or
Churches) excep^ some other extraordinary bar come in the way, between them,
and us.

And since the subject, and ground of this Communion, is holy persons and the
same so discerned mutually, and on both sides, I think it needful for the
clearer passage of things, and better information of diverse both adversaryes,
and friends (having greatly misinterpreted our wryteings, and testimony) here
briefly to note down what our judgment has alwaye^ been of the sincere faith,
and holiness of many particular person in the asemblyes, notwithstanding our
testimony against the body of the same as semblyes, in their communion, order,
and ordinances.

And first, our witnessing against the Church of Engl: (so called) a Babylon,
in her degree, both in respect of the confusion, as of persons good and bad, of
all sorts. so of things Christian, and Antichristian, covering all^ as also of
that spiritual bondage, wherein the Lords people are kept vnde^ the spiritual
Lordship of the prelacy, there reigning, does witness for (...) against all men,
that we acknowledge the Lords people, and godly per sons there: K^v 15. 4.
out of which they are thefore called by the voice of the Lord from heaven, to
build up themselves 1. Pet. 2. 5.
as lively stones into a spiritual temple for the Lord to dwell in: as were
the Lors people of old called out of Babylon C^ vile, to build the material
temple in Jerusalem, although as then was, (...) Es^. 1. and cap. 7.
now is too slack obedience yealded to the Lords call herein. Neh. 2.


More particularly. Mr: H. Barrow in that his letter written a little before his
death, (and so the more advisedly, especially in that point, in which a snare
was laid for his life) to an honorable Lady yet liveing, as he ^cknowledgeth
her in her person, to have been educated, and exercised in the ^ayth, and fear
of God, so professes he further, that he gladly embraces, and ^eleeveth the
common faith received, and professed in the land as good, and sound: that he
had reverend estimation of sundry, and good hope of many hundred thou^ands in
the land, though he utterly disliked the present constitution of the Church,
etc.

Unto which his testimony as the Authors of Page 11 114.
the Apology do assent, ^o do they further profess their persuasion that of
many the Lords people ^n the Realm, belonging to the Lords election of grace,
and pertakers of his mercy to ^alvation in Christ, some are further called, and
some still remayn in defection: fur^her instanceing in sundry Priests, and
Friars, that have been Martyrs of jesus, witnessing the truth they saw against
the Romish Antichrist and yet reteyn^ng their Popish functions, and communion
with that Church, which stands subject (...) the wrath of God: Both Mt: Barrow,
and they accordingly in another ^lace, commending the faith of the Engl:
Martyrs, and deeming them saved, notwithstanding the false Offices and great
corruptions in the worship they exercised: and so professing the same judgment
of others in the realm, where the same precious ^ayth in sincerity, and
simplicity is found, (they neither neglecting to search out the truth, nor
despiseing it, when they see it) the mercy of God thorough their sincere ^ayth
to Jesus Christ, extending, and superabounding above all their sins seen, and
^nseen.

Lastly Mr: Penry a little before his exequution, acknowledges in ^is
Confession, that both of the teachers, and Professors of the assemblyes have
so ^mbraced the truth of doctrine in the land established, and professed, that
the Lord (...) his infinite goodness has granted them favor, to show out
wherein, in regard ^f Gods election, he judges them members of the body,
whereof the son of God jesus Christ is the head: only herein praying the
Lord to be merciful unto them, (...) as unto himself in regard of his sins)
that they are not ordered in that outward ^rder, which Christ Jesus left in his
Church, but instead thereof, etc.

All these, we see, as they rightly distinguish between faith and order,
(though even order also be a matter of Kom. 1. 23.
faith, if it be not a matter of sin, and without ^arrant from Gods word) so do
they planly acknowledge the personal ^ayth, and grace unto salvation in many
though remaining (of ignorance, and infirmity) members of that Church against
whose constitution, order, and ordinances, they witnessed, diverse of them, unto
death: and not only that such people were there, in the general, but also
that they did so ^steem, and judge of many of them in particular. And surely if
the Lords people be there, it is no difficult thing for the spiritual man,
conversein^ with them, to discern, and judge ordinarily, which they be. The
spirit of God in one of his people will own it self in another of them though
disfigure^ with many faylings, especially in outward orders, and ordinances:
and Iam. 2. 17. 18.
fayt^ (if it be not dead) may be seen by works, of him that has a sprituall
ey^ thorough many infirmityes. Luce 6. ^4.
The tree, says Christ, is known by the fruits: (...) may the good trees
truly planted by faith into Christ, and having in the^ the heavenly sap, and
juice of his spirit (though growing for the present out of the Lords walled
Orchard, the true visible Church, and in the wild^ wilderness of the profane
assemblyes) ordinarily be known by the good fruits of faith, and of the spirit
evidently appearing in their persons. who^ whilst the world can in all places
so far discern, as to hate, despise, and persequute them, as none of hers, it
were marvayl, if we should not discern them to be children of the same common
Father with us, and so know, and acknowledge one another (though 1. Ioh. 3. 1
the world which knows not him knew neither o^ both.) And passing this
judgment one upon another mutually, though not by the rule of certaynty, which
a man can have only of him self ordinarily, as only knowing his own heart,
yet more then in hope, which extends it self to the apparently profane, (for
we are to hope that they wh^ are not to day, may be to morrow) and even by that
goulden rule of love or 1. Cor. 13. 5. 7.
charity, which thinks not evil, nor is suspicious, but believes all things
and takes them in the best part: 1. Pet. 4. 8.
covering (especially under the graces o^ Gods spirit, where they appear,
though in never so small a measure) a multitude of sins; we shall walk in love,
after Christ's example, and fulfill the law of Christ Ephesians. 5. 2. Gal 6. 2. Mark.
4. 24.
by bearing one another burden: thereby also procureing the like merciful
measure to be meeted out to us again both by God, and men, in respect of our
infirmityes.

Lastly if men were to judge us (even whilst we abode in the assemblyes (...)
ignorance, or infirmity) men fearing God, and sanctified in our persons, b^ the
profession, and appearance which we made: then are we also in equit^ to make
the same estimate of the persons of others, though abydeing i^ the assemblyes,
as we did, making the same manifestation, and appearance^ (and it may be
greater then) the most of us have done. And as we our selve^ then having
received of God the grace of sanctification in our measure and making
manifestation thereof, accordeing to that, we had received; and being to be
judged by others accordeing to the manifestation we made did, and might justly
look, that they should deem us truly faithful, and sanctified, though never
so weakly: so are we to have again the like estimation of others accordeing to
their measure received, and manifested: rem^bring always that most equal rule
of Christ our Lord, that whatsoever (...) would men should do unto us, even so
to do to them, which is the Law, and the Prophets.

I will therefore conclude this point with a double exhortation: the former
respecting us our selves, who have (by the mercy of God) with the Mat. 7. 12.
faith of Christ, received his order, and ordinances: which is, that we please
not our selves therein too much, as if in them, piety, and religion did chiefly
consist: which was not the least calamity of the Lords people of old, for
which he also sharply reproved, and severely punished them: of which evil, and
overvaluation of these things (housoever great in themselves) we are in the
Psalm. 40 6. 7. 8.
more danger, considering our persequutions, and sufferings for them: but
^hatas we believ these things are necessarily to be done, so we consider Heb.
10. Psalm. (...) 16. 17. Ier. 7. 21. 22. Hos 6. Mic. 6. 7. 8.
that other things are not only not to be left undone, but to be done much
more. The grace of faith in Christ, and the fear of God, the continual
renueing of our repentance, with love, mercy, humility, and modesty, together
with fervent prayer, and hearty thanksgiveing unto God, for his vnspeakcable
goodness, are the things wherein especially we must serve God: nourishing them in
our own hearts, and so honoring them in others, wheresoever they appear to
dwell. And if God will be known, and honored in all his creatures, yea even in
the sillyest worm that crawleth upon the earth, how much more in the holy
graces of his spirit vouchsafed to his elect; notwithstanding their faylings of
infirmity, especially in outward ordinances. Which personal graces whilst too
many have undervalued in other men, and neglected in themselves, in comparison,
God has been provoked to suffer so many amongst us to fall, some into such
personal sins, and evilles (notwithstanding their advantage in the Lords
ordinances) as from which without these helps) many thousands of them have
been preserved: and others both from the conscience of Gods ordinances, and of
the personal ^leutyes of holiness, and honesty; as is generally to be seen in
such, as have made apostasy from their former profession with us.

The other exhortation I direct unto them about whom I deal: which is, that
they content not themselves with that faith, and grace in their persons, which
they have received, rejecting, or neglecting under any praetext, or excuse
whatsoever, the order, ordinances, and institutions of the L: Jesus: in, by ^he
use whereof, their faith should be nourished in it self, and manifested unto
others: much more, that they continue not their submission to the contrary,
which is of Antichrist: lest God (besides greater evilles) punish them with
yet greater confusion, and bondage therein: that, under which ^hey are being
such already, as (I suppose) I may truly affirm, that never Church in the
world, in which so many excellent truths were taught, stood ^n such confusion
both of persons, and things, and under such a bondage spiri^uall, as that of
Engl: does at this day.

Now before I come to prove the thing I aim at, I think it fit to satisfy the
principal objections, which I have taken knowledge of against the thing, I
entend.

And it will fust be demanded of me, considering my judgment of the parrish
OBI.
assemblyes, as Antichristian, and of sundry the practices there as
idolatrous, and withal, what judgments the Scriptures denounce against such
estates, and practices, how I can deem any the members of such assemblyes, and
so practiseing, as truly Christian? or how I can without pollution communicate
with them, who are by the touching of so many unclean both persons, and things,
themselves made unclean?

For answer. First, it is true, that upon the true Church the Scriptures ^NSW.
do pronunce most excellent blessings; as they do also denounce fearful curses
upon the false: as it is also true, that whatsoever is spoken of the whole
body, the one, or other, jointly, belongs to each member of either, severally:
provided, that in both, things be in their right state, and order: which is,
that there be none, but faithful, and holy persons in the true Church, and
none but unholy, and profane persons in the false: for none other should be,
in the one, or other. But if now it come to pass otherwise, and that thorough
the Churches want of Vigilance or Zeal, and the parties hypocrisy (which has
been always, and is too too common) there be in the true Church unfaithful,
and profane persons, shall we say, that those pretiouse promises made to the
true Church in which they wrongfully are, do apperteyn unto them, and unto
their persons? and that they are elect of God, saints by calling, and
sanctified in Christ, to the hope of life, etc.? So if, on the contrary it come
to pass, thorough her craft, and cruelty, and their own weakness (which is too
too common also) that godly, and faithful persons be in the false Church where
they should not be, shall we now lay upon their persons all the curses, and
condemnation, which the Scriptures denounce against the estate of the false
Church, and the superstitions thereof? were not this to justify the wicked,
because he is in the true Church: where he should not be? and to condemn the
righteouse because he is in the false Church, where he should not be neither?
Or are not all godly wis^ men in these, and the like disordered states of
things, to have use of Christian discretion for the putting of difference
between person, and person notwithstanding their common Church state, and
order, the wicked with the godly in the true Church, and under Christ's
ordinances, and the godly with the wicked in the false Church under the
forgeryes of Antichrist? Otherwise our judgment will be as confused, as is their
estate. Neither is it a more difficult thing for a spiritual, and impartial
ey to discern a godly man in a false Ch: where the falsenes arises not from
the falsity of faith, but (...) order, and ordinances, then to discern a wicked
man in a true Church.

And this consideration had, may serve for answer to the chief part of the
objection: which is also no more in effect, then has been answered by the
Authors of the Apology, before me, in their defense against Page 11
that unjust accusation laid upon them by their adversaryes, that they
affirmed the whole Realm to be drowned in confusion without assurance of
salvation.

Their answer is, that there is difference to be put between PERSONS
themselves, and between their ACTIONS or ESTATE otherwise. The person sometimes
is blessed, when the action, or standing in an other behalf, may be such as is
subject to curse: etc. As on the contrary also, sometimes the person is subject
to curse, Qwhenas yet the action, or standing may be blessed in another
respect. And both those parts of their distinction they prove by sundry
insta^ces from the Scriptures. Some whereof I will here note down, adding also
some others thereunto, for the confirmation of the first head of the
distinction, which more directly concerns the present question, which is about
godly persons performing of, or standing in some corrupt, and cursed actions,
or estate otherwise. Thus were Simeon, and Levi, Genesis 49. 7. 28.
both Blessed in their persons, and Cursed in their outrageous fact against the
Shechemites: thus was the Canaa^itish woman, and her daughter both dogs, or
whelps, in respect of their Mat. ^ 26. 27.^^
^ation, and people, and Children of Abraham in their persons: thus was* Peter
both a faithful, and beloved disciple, in his person, and yet in his counsayl
to Christ, Satan: thus were Mat. 16. 1^ 17. (...)
the Corinth: both vnlevened, and holy, in ^heyr persons, and levened, or
impute in the lump of their communion, with ^he incestuous man uncensured
amongst them: as also the same Corinth: 1. Cor. ^ 6. 7.
^oth spiritual (though but Cap. ^ 1. 3.
babes in Christ) and yet in respect of their strife, and divisions, not
spiritual but carnal. Where the Apostle also notes out the ^riginall cause
of these contraryetyes in, and about the same persons: and ^ow it comes to
pass, that one, and the same man does works so contrary ^ne to another, and so
is subject, in respect thereof, to two so contrary estimates, and Censures. The
reason then is, because every regenerate man, in ^his life, has in him two
men:^ the old man, not yet fully cast of; and the new ^an, though prevayling,
yet not perfitly put on, and renewed: and these two (else ^here called) Ephesians. 4.
22. 23. 24.
the flesh, and the spirit; contrary the one to the other, and lusting the one
^gaynst the other. And so forceible is this lusting sin, and flesh in the best,
as that Gal 5. 17.
^t not only keeps them from knoweing much truth which they should ^now, and
from doing much good which they would do, and from doing that good they do,
as they both should, and would; but also misleadeth them unto sundry
aberrations, and evils, (besides their falls, into greater mischeifs, at
times, out of which they are restored by particular repentance) and therein
continues them to their dying day. The Apostle professes of himself that he
1. Cor. 13. 12.
knows but in part: and how small a part of his knowledge, is ours? The
Prophet Psa. 19. 2.
David teaches, that no man can understand his errors, and (...) prays God
to cleanse him from his secret sins. And amongst, and above those (...) all
other kinds, the servants of God are still endaungered by the errors, and
evilles of the times: whose corrupt customs do often either dim they^ eyes, as
a mist: or carry them along as a strong stream: or otherwise op^presse them
with a thousand tyrannyes. Examples of this mischief we have too many in the
Scriptures. In Abraham's, Iakobs, David's, and many mo holy Patriarks, and
Prophets, taking at once more wives then one, contrary to the institution of
marriage, which was, that^ ^ two (and not more) should be (...) flesh. Likewise
in Asa, Amasiah, and Azariah their faylings, in not taking Gen 2. 4
away the high places, though the H: Ghost give testimony of the vprightnes of
their hearts, and works otherwise, in the sight of the Lord. Also in many of
the Matt. 19.
Ch: of Corinth: cotinueing their accustomed fellowship with their friends ^.
King. 5. 14. ^. King. 4. 3 4 8 15. 3. ^.
and kindred in their superstitious feastings in the Idol temples, in honor
o^ the Idols, to which they offered Lastly, we have a plain proof of this evil
in the Apostles themselves, whom the common error of the times that the
Messiah should be a great worldly prince, and exercise a temporary kingdom did
so possess, as that it could not be rooted out of them, by all that they had
heard of Christ, and seen touching him; but that it still abode with them
^erodot. ^ Clio. Cor. 8. ^0. and cap. 10 3. 14 20 1.
till the death of Christ, yea some while aster his resurrection. Which
consideration as it must work in all the servants of the Lord a godly yealousy
o^ the customs of the times, that they be not captived in their evilles: s^
must it also teach them, who by the mercy of God have escaped them, much
moderation toward such (being otherwise godly) as are still too much abused by
their craft, or vlolence. Cor. 6. 4. 15. 6 etc. lat 16. 2. and 20 1.


To apply this then to the present purpose. Considering the many excellent
truths taught in diverse of the assemblyes, and that with so great fruit i^ the
knowledge, Zeal, and other personal graces of many; the constant sufferings of
diverse Martirs for the truths there professed, against that Antichrist of
Rome; the knowledge we had of our selves in that estate; together Mark 9.
with the judgment of other Churches abroad touching the Ch: of Engl: ^ ^uke.
14. 1.
it is called (though indeed ignorant of her estate, save in such general^
heads of faith, wherein we also assent unto her) as also the manifould
afflictions Act. 1. 6.
upon, and great offenses (and those, many too just) at such as have made
separation, from that Church; it is no marvayl, that so many (thoug^ otherwise
learned and godly) by reason of the ignorance, and infirmity ye^ cleaving to
the best overmuch, are abused by the times for the succourin^ of Antichrist in
his declyneing age, for whose furtherance in his risein^ (thorough the
corruptions of times then) so many, howsoever otherwis^ learned, and godly have
(though unwittingly) put to their hands, as a^ men soundly minded, if but a
little exercised in their wryteings, and the ^oryes of the times, will confess.

Now for the 2d part of the objection touching the idolatrous practi^es of the
assemblyes, I do answer, that every idolatry makes not an idola^er any more
then every ignorance, or other sin of ignorance, an ignorant, ^r wicked person.
To make an idolater there is required an idolatrous disposition which we may
not lay to their charg, of whom we speak. Besy^es, by this ground we should
chaleng, the reformed Churches generally ^o be idolaters; for the most of them
use a stint form of prayer, less or ^ore, though they be not bound unto it;
and so consequently should ex^lude them from Gods kingdom: for no Idolater has
any inheritance in the Ephesians. 4.
kingdom of heaven. And if any further object, that the Scriptures teach
expressly, that they who Rev. 1^ 4. chapter 1^ 9. 10.
partake of the sins of Babylon, shall receiv of her plagues: and that every
man worshipping that beast, and his image, and receweing his mark in his
forehead or in his hand, shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, etc. I
answer ^s before, that that estate, and those practices are indeed under that
curse in themselves; and further also, that every person so walking (as I am
perswa^ed every member of the Church of Engl: does) is under that condem^ation
without repentance: which repentance, as it must be particular for^ns known, so
does the Lord, in mercy, accept of the general repentance of his servants, for
their sins unknown, and secret, and which they discern not to ^e such:
Otherwise no flesh could be saved. Lastly, as I cannot excuse them, Psalm. 1^ 12.
^or they themselves from great sin in joining themselves with the profane
parrish assemblyes, with which God has not joined them, and that ^n the
practice of their superstitions, especially in such a bondage spiritual under
the prelacy, as makes them cease to be the Lords free people, and de^rives them
of all power for the reformation of public evilles either of ^ersons, or
things; so these being (as I hope) but their sins of infirmity, ^ by them
unseen, though we discern them, (as it may be, they also di^cern some evilles
in us, which we see not in our selves) they no more dis^lv the bond of the
spirit between their, and our persons, then they de^roy the work of the same
spirit in themselves: neither can these their ^ns pollute me, if by the default
of my place, or person I leav no means ^awfull unused, for their reformation:
who if they either purposely ^eglect to search out the truth, or unfaithfully
with-hould it in vnrigh^eousnes, for any fleshly fear, or other corrupt
regard, shall not for our ^ore respective judgment of them, or practice
toward them, receav the ^ore easy judgment at the hands of the Lord in the day
of the revelation ^f the secrets of all hearts.

As he that has hold of one member of the body is not separated from the
body, OBI.
nor any part thereof, but has hold of the whole body by the natural
coherence of the parts: so he that communicates with one member of the Ch:
communicates, and ioyn^ with the whole, and every member thereof by answerable
coherence of the parts of that mystical body.

In communicateing with the godly there in private prayer, and the like NSW.
exercises, we do not communicate with them, as members of the Ch: but merely
as Christians: private prayer being (as has been showed) no Ch: action at all,
nor performed either by them, or us, by virtue of any Ch: state, or membership,
or with any respect thereunto: but merely as by persons, made pertakers (by the
grace of God) of the spirit of adoption, and prayer, mutually. ^^. 8. ^. 26. 27


If we may thus communicate, OBI.
with them in private, and they with us, why not also in public?

It follows not, that because I may partake with godly men in things lawful,
and lawfully done, therefore in things unlawful in themselves, a^ NSW.
are many things; or unlawfully done, as are all things in their public
communion. More particularly. In communicateing with the godly (...) public
(even in things good in themselves) I partake with all the profane parrish
also: the minister being the minister of the whole parrish, and (to speak as
the truth is) the parrish priest: and so in his public administration
offering up the souls, and bodies, and the prayers withal, of the parrish
Church, in the name of Christ; and therein, with a few clean, many unclean
beasts, upon the Lords altar: whereas the private communion I entend, is
restreyned to the godly only, though wicked persons be in the place. 2dly
whereas in private I commicate only with the persons, and personal graces of
holy men; in public, I communicate with their Ch: state, and order, as also
with the public Ministry, and in, and with it, with the prelacy, whenc^ it
is: of which more hereafter. Neither yet may we admit them into communion of
the public ordinances with us, till they be actually members of a true, and
lawful public body ecclesiastical, or visible Church. As they are private
Christian persons, so we may partake with them in private Christian duetyes;
but may not admit them to public Church communion (though never so holy
persons) till they have a true, and lawful Ch: state, and calling thereunto.
And here that general Rule has place, that whatsoeve^ is done by any person
(though both he, and it in themselves never so holy) without a (...) calling,
is sin unto him.

But with men uncircumcised, and which might not enter into the Temple, the
Iewe^ OBI. ^ct. 11. 2 and 21.
were forbidden all Communion by the law of God.

But they of whom we speak are not unbaptized but such as with the outward
baptism, (the same with our own) though both unlawfully administered, ANSW
have also received the inward baptism of the spirit: though they cannot have
in that their estate, all the right ends, and uses of baptism. 2dly, ^ find
not where the law of God so said: but rayther think it may be pro^ed, that the
Circumcised Israelites comeing out of Egypt, had communion ^n the wilderness,
(though not in all things) with the uncircumcised both Exodus 38.
^sraelites, and others. But admit the law so forebade. It must be considered,
Number. ^ 4.
that the matter of Peter's trouble was, his goeing in to men uncircumcised, and
^ating with them: and it will then appear, that there was a legal, and
ceremo^iall restreint, and bondage, under which the Jewish Church was, as a
child ^ his nonage, from which the Ch: now as a man of fuller age, is free.
And Gal. 4^ 2. 3. 4.
^y the Jews not communicateing privately, or not eating with any
vncir^umcised (if so by the law they were forbidden, and that it were not
rayther tradition, as Calvin thinks) and by their not admitting any such into
^he Temple, which is evident, we are taught, not to communicate with, nor ^o
receav into the Ch: any uncircumcised in heart, so by us discerned: but ^re not
forbidden all private religious communion with unbaptized persons (if appearing
holy) much less, to go in, and eat with them, no nor 1 Cor. 27.
^et to receav such neither into the now Temple, the Church of God: into which
indeed they must be received, before they can be baptized. And for ^he Instance
Act: 11. considering that Christ at his death had broken down ^e partition
wall, and in his flesh abolished the emnity of the law of commandments, Ephesians.
2. 15.
^anding in ordinances; and that Peter by his Apostolical Commission was to
Mat. 2 29.
^ach all natious; and how his opposites had heard that the Gentiles had
received ^e word, and there with the spirit, of God, it could be none but they
of the Cir^^mcision, that is such as being themselves Circumcised, did think
there could ^e no grace without it (with which mischief Satan labors
always to ossesse the hearts of such as enjoy Gods ordinances, as theyrs, on
the other^de, who enjoy them not, to vndervalew them) who would thus contend,
^r quarrel with the Apostle of Christ, and the same, (to speak as the truth
Act. 10 14.
^) manifesting himself to be too Iewishly affected, for that his practice. And
Gal. 2. ^ 12. 14.
^ethinks by the Lords charg unto Peter, not to call that profane which God
^ad purifyed Act: 10. 15. and with it, by Peter's testimony afterward v: 34 35.
that they that fear God, and work righteousness are accepted of God, whither
circum^sed, or not circumcised, baptized, or not baptized, so there be no
conempt of Gods ordinances, but only humayn fraylty hindering, as it was ^ith
Cornelius, in his not being Circumcised formerly; and so ought to be ^ccepted
of his people, so far as God accepts of them: and that by Christ's ^xample in
receaving the prayers of, and therein communic^^ting with the faithful
Centurion (though out of the visible Ch: and uncircumcised Math. 8 ^. etc.
personally, and privately, with whom he would not have communicated i^ the
temple, into which for order sake he might not have been admitted we also have
warrant for communicateing with godly persons privately with whom for their
disordered estate that way, we can have no lawful^ public communion.

But thus to acknowledge any in the assemblyes for our brethren, and pertakers
of the 5. OBI.
same common grace, and f^yth with us, unto life, is to confirm them in their
evil ways and as if we should tell them, that to do more, or otherwise, then
they do, were in vayn.

This exception is unworthy of any godly wise man, who has learn ANSW.
aright either to worship God, or to converse with men. Exception might as
justly have been made against the Apostles doctrine, and practice for Romans 14 ^.
receaving, and applying unto the weak in things lawful, for their
edification, and gayning, and the discharg of his own duty: and as justly
might men have tou^^ ^ Cor. 9. ^1.
him, that he had taken a course to continue, and harden them in their sin^ for
that their weakness was their sin. The equity of the Apostles doctrine and
practice is general, and directs all Gods people, at all times, toward all
that are weak in the faith any manner of way, as are those that fear God in the
assemblyes, (how strong soever otherwise) in respect of their Church state and
ordinances.

The same Apostle wryteing to the Corinth: whom he was in the body o^ his
Epistle to reprove for many evilles amongst them, does in the first plac^ give
them their due with the most, acknowledging them 1 Cor. 1 ^ 4. ^.
sanctified in Ch^^ Jesus, saints by calling, enriched with the grace of God by
Christ Jesus, in all utter and and in all knowledge. The same manner of
proceading also the Apostle John vset^ being directed by the same good spirit,
toward Rev. 2. 1 ^ 34. v. 12 13. 14. v. 18. 19. 20.
the Churches in Asia, upon the like occasion. And as their practices are (in
their common equity) o^ instructions, so does both the law of love, and rule of
reason direct us the same course. When me^ see us ready, to take knowledge, and
in acknowledging of the good things in them, they will much more willingly
listen to our in reproves of their evilles, as deeming us equally, and
loveingly affected toward them: which good things, if on the contrary, we
neglect, or vnde^ value any manner of way, they will, and that justly, be
prejudiced against us (...) unequal, and looking at the^ only with the left
ey. Besides, there are no A^^guments so forceible either for admonition, or
exhortation, to them the have any spark of grace in them, as those, which are
taken from Romans 12
the mercyes God, whereof they are made pertakers. Neither will any of Gods
children indeed, make that use, either of the knowledge, which themselves have,
or a^knowledgment which others make of the grace of God in them, to be en^
boldened thereby to go on in evil; (for this were to ^ude v. ^.
turn the grace of God i^ wantonness, which only the reprobates do) no more
the^ will a good child, when he knows by himself, or hears by others, that
his father has made sure his inheritance unto him, take thereby liberty to
despise his commandments, and no further to regard him: this were a bastardly
practice, and from which a child naturally disposed would abhor.

To conclude then; this our judgment, and answerable practice, touching ^he
better sort in the assemblyes, as faithful persons, and under the assurance
of salvation, is no hinderance to the further manifestation of their faith in
withdrawing their feet from every evil way, and the planting the^ in the Lords
house; but on the contrary, a real exhortation, and provocation of them to
keep safe that their precious 1. T^ 1. 19.
faith in a good conscience in all things, as the passenger in the ship: and in
the Mat^ 28. 19.
obedience of all Christ's commandments, to 2. Pe^ 10.
make ^heyr election more sure, to themselves, and so to 1. (...) 2 12.
work out their salvation with ^ear, and trembling: always provideing for
themselves the Prophets assurance, which was that he should not be ashamed,
when he had respect to all Gods commaundments. And this may serve not only for
an answer to the objection, 6 O^
but also for an argument for the thing intended.

But Christ has left an order for the reformation of every Math^ 18. 1^ 16. 17.
BROTHER falling unto SIN, which cannot be observed toward any of them; whom
we cannot therefore ^hus acknowledge, and communicate with accordeingly.

This indeed shows that they are without the order of Christ in his Ch^ ^n
which they ought to be; ANSW
but does not therefore conclude them not to be ^ur brethren, or Gods children,
or that there is no bond of faith, and the spirit between their, and our
persons. And by this ground we should not repute (...) godly person though
actually separated, our brother, nor keep private communion with him: nor any
at all with the reformed Ch:, or with any their members; with are too too much
wanting in this order. But as we may communicate with thousands in Engl: as
with holy persons, in private exhorta^ions, and admonitions, so may we also in
private prayer, though in neither ^he one, nor other publicly, as has
formerly been showed. And this I al^o conceav to have the force of another
argument for the practice.

The L: Jesus has promised so far to hear men's prayers, as they 7. O^ Math 18.
19.
AGREE TOGETHER in the things they ASK: which cannot be between them, and us,
seeing they ^re to pray for the prosperous estate of their Church Communion,
government, and Mi^istery, against which we both pray, and witness.

There are thousands in the assemblyes, who, (whatsoever thorough humayn ANSW
fraylty, their practice be) pray for little more, in effect, in the Ch: of
Engl: then we do And 2dly though there be between them, and us some diffe^ences
yet may the same be so carried by Christian discretion, and moderation mutual,
as that our prayers be not interrupted. And though we must agree in the
particulars, which we expressly pray for, yet if we may not ioyn in prayer with
them, with whom we have particular differences, how shall we pray with almost
any the members of the reformed Churches? yea what two Ch: or persons in the
same Ch: should not at one time, or other refuse^ prayer together? But diverse
inconveniences will (I doubt not) arise in thi^ practice, as there do many in
all our doeings: which we must therefore labor to prevent, or moderate by
godly wisdom, and not abandon for the^^ things otherwise lawful.

It this practice may be warranted with them, why not with sundry Papists also,
OBI.
and much more with many excommunicants out of the Church, for some particular
sin?

The faith of Rome, and so of Papists indeed, cannot by the word or God ANSW.
be proved true justifying faith, nor the spirit received by that faith, the
spirit of prayer, which God has promised to hear. But the faith published in
the name of the Ch: of Engl: and professed by many there personally, is to be
esteemed such by the word of God. Neither are we now come to a diverse faith,
but to a diverse order from that there prevayling: in submission whereunto we
think our selves bound to make further manifestation of our faith, then there
we did, or could do. And for excommunicates, there in this apparent difference,
that whereas we are to apply our selves to the other, not yet come so far, what
we may, for their further provocation, we are on the contrary to withdraw our
selves from them, what we may for Cor. 3. ^.
their humbling, both in spiritual communion, and civil familiarity: their
estate in the one, and other, putting a special bar between them, and us.

But this will endanger the bringing in of great confusion when one man will
th^^ OBI.
esteem of, and walk toward one, a 2 d another, and a 3 d will be otherwise
minded toward them both.

The very same might habe been objected against Paul's doctrine of application
ANSW.
to the weak: and it might have been said; one will judge this man but weak,
another that man, but a 3d neither of them, but both obstinate ^^m. 14.
what confusion will here be? So for our walking toward the members of the
Dutch, and French Churches. Have we not administered publicly t^ Cor. 9. ^.
some of either, which unto some others of them we would not do? The same
course we hold in our private walking. Yea do we not sundry tyme^ fall into
the same difficultyes in our public communion, being divers^^ minded in the
receaving in, and casting out of members? In all which cases we must have use
of Christian discretion in our selves, and moderation one toward another: and
must study not only how to effect that which our selves think best, but how to
bear the contrary, with the least offense, (...) it be not intolerable.

And thus much for the objections against this practice: the Reasons 1. ARG
(...) justify it, follow.

And. 1. (the former grounds being held, and more specially, that private
^rayer is no Ch: action, nor done by any Ch: power, or order, but merely
^ersonall) both Mr Bernards Argument, that we are taught by our Savior Matthew.
^ 6. Gal 3. 2^ 1. Ioh. 1.
christ, to ioyn in prayer, and to say OUR FATHER, with them whom we judge the
^hildren of God; as also Mr Amisses, that we may have visible communion with
^^em, whom we rightly discern to have communion with Christ, are of force, to
wit ^ccordeing to the limitations, and distinctions formerly made.

As all communion in actions presupposes an union of persons, so does 2. ARG
^^ery union of persons necessarily draw with it communion in works, as a
^^turall effect thereof. Which as it is true in Christ the head first, with
who^^ merits, Ioh. 15. ^ 5.
and grace no man can communicate, till by faith he be vinted to (...) person,
and with which all so vinted do necessarily partake: so is it in the Tit. 1. 3.
Philem. ^ Ephesians 4. ^
^embers mutually, who must first be knit together by that one faith, and ^^e
spirit, and so being vinted must preserv the unity, and walk in the commu^^^n
thereof. We are to walk in the common works of humanity with ^^ery man,
accordeing to that common bond: in the works of kindred, or ^^eindship, as with
a friend, or kinsman: of common Christianity, with a ^^ristian: and so in the
works of Ch: communion with the members of the (...) Church. As then God has
united us in our persons by faith, and the ^^^rit, under one head Christ, with
many in the assemblyes, so are we also to (...) our selves in the exercises of
those our personal graces, notwithstan^^^g the humayn infirmityes, especially
about outward ordinances, appea^^^g in us, or them.

There was between them in the assemblyes who feared God, and us, be^^^e our
separation a bond of the Spirit, and we might lawfully pray together 3. ARG
(...) lawful things, personally. And has our growth in the knowledge, and
^^edience of the will of God, dissolved that bond, they remaining the (...)
they were, and it may be growing further also therein? Surely such is the
(...), and so great the strength of this bond of the spirit, to them who duly
^^nsider it, with that reverence, which is meet, as that many, and great
in^^^mityes cannot break it. And by reason of it, and of many other so
excel^^^t things there to be found, it deeply concerns us to weigh with our
^^^ves, in what respect, and how far we make our separation: that as we make
(...) the good things there as snares to entangle our souls in the things
^^ich are evil, so that neither for the evilles (unavoidable in the public
^^^inances there) we throw away all at a venture, as some ill-advised do. (...)
if two godly persons of them may lawfully pray together privately for ^^^full
things, why not we with either, or both of them? Do we loose any lawful
liberty in a common Christian duty, by breaking of our unlawful course, and
standing? If not, then neither can this course be justly reproved, neither
should we debar our selves of our Christian liberty herein. (...). 5. 1.


As we are not for infirmityes, and corruptions to refuse the fellowship^ ^ ARG.
a true Christian Ch: in things lawful, but by all good means to endeavo^ her
reformation, whilst there is any hope: so neither are we to refuse the
fellowship of a true Christian person (so appearing)* in things lawful, (...)
his infirmityes and corruptions, especially till he appear unto us obstinate,
and irrecoverable therein.

Lastly, to repute them holy persons, and pertakers of the same pretiou^ ^ ARG.
faith with our selves, as I have showed before, we have always done
(not^withstanding their Ch: state) and yet not to ioyn with them in the person^
works of faith (no extraordinary bar comeing between) seems a de^niall of
that in deed, which in word is professed: and all one, (if not worse as if one
man should profess of another, that he held him his special friend but would
neither perform to him, nor receav from him any duty (...) special
freindship: or that he deemed him a very honest man, but ye^ would neither
trust him, nor have otherwise to deal with him for a far thing.

For conclusion then Phil. 3.
let us follow the counsayl of the Apostle, to pr^ceed by one rule, whereunto
we are come: under hope that God will further reve^^ the truth in those
particulars unto them, who are otherwise minded: as al^^ following his example,
in becomeing all to all in the things which are law^full. And above all things
let love abound in us, which will teach us (a^ many other good lessons so this
amongst the rest) not to cover the goo^ ^rov. 10. ^.
graces of God in men under their infirmityes, but contrariwise, their
i^^firmityes under the graces of Gods spirit in them. Pet. 4. 8


But lest this practice, and the grouds thereof be further streyned,
the^entend, or then it will reach, I think it here meet to ad a few things, for
the just, and lawful bounding of it.

Of public Communion.
AS we are then to ioyn our selves with them, wherein God has joined us; so
are we, wherein he severeth us, to sequester and sever our selves. And this I
verily beleiv he does in their, and our Church Communion, Service, Order of
Government, Ministry, and Ministrations. If the parrish assemblyes gathered by
compulsion, of all the parrishioners promiscuously: the Provincial, Diocesan,
and Lordly government: the Ministry thence derived, with ^e service book, and
administrations accordingly, be of God; then is our ^^lowship, only of persons
sanctified (at least outwardly) joining them^^ves by voluntary profession under
the government, and Ministry of an ^^ership; co^ceaving prayers and
thankesegivings, according to the Churches ^esent occasions) by the teachings
of the spirit, and so administering the ^^craments accordeing to the simplicity
of the gospel, not of God, nor ^m heaven. If on the contrary, ours be of God,
and of his Christ; then is ^^eyrs of Antichrist, Gods, and Christ's adversary.
Either the one or other (...) plantings, which God has not planted, and shall be
rooted up. We will briefly con^^^er of the particulars.

And first, the word, kahall, in Hebrew; in Greek Ecclesia, in English, Church;
^^^nifyeth a company of people called out; and that in respect both of the ^ce,
or will of the Caller, and obedience of the Called: and so, restreyned to
^^^gious use, signifies a company of people called, and come out of the ^^^e
of nature, into the state of grace; out of the world, into the kingdom (...)
Christ. Who are therefore entitled, 1. Cor. ^ 2. Ephesians 2. 19 20. 21. 1. Tim. 3.
15. Math. 13 24. and 2^ 43. Act. 1. 3.
Saints by calling, and sanctified, or se^^^ated, in Christ Jesus: the temple,
house, and household of God, and kingdom of hea^^^, and of God. And since the
Church is neither a natural, nor a civil, but ^^^pirituall state, it must not
be gathered, nor consist, of natural, or civil, ^^^other then spiritual
persons. And this will yet better appear, if we con^^er it (as the scriptures
direct us) as Ephesians. 1^ 22. 23. and 4 15. 16. Col. 1. 24 Ephesians 4. 16
the body of Christ, under him the head; to which therefore it must be
conformable in every part, by the indwelling of (...) spirit, effectually
workeing in the measure thereof.

2dly, unto the true Church Ro^. 9. 4. 1 Cor 3^ 21. 22.
apperteyn the Covenant, and promises, the ^^nistery, sacraments, and services
of God, with all the holy things of God of Christ: which must therefore be
gathered, and consist of such persons, unto which these things belong in
communion, and by common right. And both the Scriptures, and common reason
teach, that whomsoever the Lord does call, and use to, and in any special
work, and employment, he does in a special manner separate, and sanctify them
thereunto. And so the C^^ being to be employed in the special service of God,
to the glory of his ^^ciall love, and mercy in their happiness, and to show
forth his virtues, must be^ such persons, as by, and in whom, he will, and may
thus be worshipped glorified: and as are by him both in their persons, and
fellowship, sepa^^^^ted, and sanctified thereunto.

But here the Authors of a certain treatise published against Mr Ch^^^ charg A
shield ^f Defense etc. ^ag. 8^.
him with much falsehood, for affirming all true Churches from the beginning of
the world to have been established by this separation, which we (whom the^ call
Brownists, as the Church of Engl: calls them Puritans) do desire. A^ for this
they desire it may be showed, how the Church of God before the flood (...)
gathered by such a separation, to wit, of the godly, from the profane; (...)
this is the separation, we desire. And know they not that God in establishing
ANSW.
the first Church of the Gospel Genesis 3. ^5 and 4. 12. ^6. ^oh 8. 44.
put emnity (which is more then separation) between the seed of the woman,
Christ and the faithful in him: and the se^ of the Serpent, Satan, and the
wicked with him their father? Which separation also stood so firm, as the sons
of God, might not so much as take th^^ wives of the daughters of men. Or if
these men will have marriage (as by Genesis 6. 2. ^. 45.
their practice they make it) a Church action, then they see an express
separation for Ch: Communion before the flood.

And where they further alledg that the Dutch, and French Churches which we
acknowledge for true Ch: were not established by such a separation, as we make
they accuse them unjustly, to excuse themselves.

They were at the first established of a sanctified people by voluntar^
profession separateing themselves into particular Churches from the pro^phane
multitudes in the places, and parrishes where they lived, (and the with great
persequution:) and so do still continue a separated people^ though thorough
continuance of time, and peace, they (as all other Churches use to do) have
lost of their first purity, and Zeal. Were, or an^ any commpelled into them by
penal laws? Or do they consist of all^ the parrish inhabitants, as the Engl:
Parrishionall Churches were, and do^ Does not Mr Cluse, and we all, and these
men themselves know, that scar^ one of ten in the parrish, is of the Church in
the whole cuntry through out? How do they then reproach the Churches of God
(contrary t^ their own, and all men's knowledge) as not being a separated people
from the profane multitude? The thing is, they would by casting dirt, and
myr^^ in other men's faces, make their own seem the fayrer.

That the Dutch, and French Churches condemn our separation, as schism, is
ney^her to the purpose, nor true: neither can they name one Church that ever
^assed any such Censure upon us: neither has any one learned, and godly ^an
amongst them (to my knowledge) ever gone about to refute our pra^tise, or
confession (though published both in Dutch, and Latin unto them) which
notwithstanding they have done in their public wryteings ge^erally against
such Heretics, and Schismatiques, as have been amongst them. It is more both
pertinent, and true, that the Ch: of Engl: (for which ^hese men plead) condemns
them her proctours as Schismatiques, and excom^unicates, for their wicked
errors.

If Mc Johnson confess (as they tell us) the Ch: of Engl: a true Church, he
^ust be able to prove it established by separation, and a separated body, in
the ^onstitution. He with the rest have formerly defyned a true visible Ch: a
com^any of people called, and separated from the world by the word of God, etc:
and proved Apol. 3^ Posit. Confe^ of fay^ Art. 17.
^he same by many scriptures.

And to conceav of a Church (which is the body of Christ, and household of God)
not separated from the profane 1. Ioh. 19.
world, which lies in wickedness, is ^o confound heaven, and earth, and to
agree Christ, with Beliall: and in truth, the ^ost profane, and dangerous
error, which, this day, prevayles amongst them, that fear God: and by which
Christianity is more exposed to the con^empt of Turks and Jews then by any
other evil.

But here a defense by many made, and much set by, must be considered OBI.
^f; which is, that the wicked, and profane in the parrishes (though
frequenting the ^ame place with the rest) are not of the Church; but only they
who fear God, and make ^onscience of their ways.

It they said, no other should be of the Church: though comeing into ANSW
^he same place, it were true: but to argue from that which should be, to that
which is, when that is not, which should be, is unsound, and presump^uous: as
is that indeed of all other defenses, most frivolous. Thus might ^he Cor: have
answered Paul, that the incestuous man was none of the Ch: though 1. Cor. ^
^e frequented the same place with them. And if this defense were good, the
greatest part of the Ministers of the Church should not be of the Church: ^or
the greatest part from the Prelate to the Paritour, are (God knows)
irreligious, and unconscionable persons. For conclusion then: we all know, that
the Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, or Curats, are appointed, and so called ^he
Parrish Priests, and are accordeingly to Minister: Offering up the Parrish
Prayers, and Sacrifices: and of the Parrishes to receav tithes, and offerings,
^s their duetyes: to Marry, Church after Childe-byrth, Baptize, and bury ^ll
that are married delivered of Child, born, and do die in their parrishes: and so
to give the Lords supper to every one of them at sixteen years old. If it be
said, the Minister may suspend, and so procure (if they reform not the
excommunication of all unworthy persons: admit it; and even this proves, the
whole parrish yea the most wicked with the rest, to be the Church* For
otherwise what needed they be suspended, or how could they be ex^ communicated;
since the Ch: is not to judge them, which are without, but the^ which are within?

Let all them then who fear God, know, and consider, that when th^^ come to
worship in the parrish assemblyes, they ioyn themselves where C^ has not
joined them: and acknowledge that society for the true Ch: of God and communion
of Saints, which he has not sanctified for that purpose^ that, they offer
their solemn sacrifices out of the true temple, made of liv^stones: where alone
they should present them: that in ^. Pet 2. 5 Deuteronomy. 1^. 5. 6. 7. ^1. Cor. 10.
17.
eating of one brea^ they make themselves one body with them: and them members
of Christ, wh^ are (for the present) apparent lims of Satan: and that in
saying Our Fath^^ with them, they acknowledge them for the children of God, who
in the persuasion of their own consciences, are Ioh. 8. ^4.
of their father the devil, and do (...) lusts.

And (which is most of all to be observed, and wherein those parrish assemblyes
do differ from all true Churches in the world) this mischef is no^ casual, and
falling in by occasion, but of the very first frame, and constitution into
which, Gal. 2. 4 Jude. 4.
false brethren, and wickedmen have not crept privily, as into the Churches of
God of old, and of late also; but have been, and are, by bodily punishments
publicly, and openly, into them constreyned, and in the^ continued. Neither
in this confusion, did the wicked intrude, and thru^ themselves into the
fellowship of holy assemblyes, as in true Churches ^ too commonly to be seen:
but on the contrary, the godly (few as they were, and yet are in comparison)
did unite, and mingle themselves (after they^ dispersion in popery) in, and
into the profane parrishes, where their ou^^ward estates, and occasions lay.
And 2dly, whereas the true Math. ^8. 17. 1. Cor. 5. ^. 5. Heb. 12. ^5. Gal. 5.
11. 1 Thessalonians. 3 14.
Churches (...) Christ enjoy his presence, and power, for the purgeing out of
persons ap^pearing ungodly, and incorrigible; these parrishonall assemblyes
want no^ only all such power in them, or their Ministers (which the Prelates,
and their substitutes have seized into their hands, and for the stablishing
(...) whose state, and advantage of whose honor, and profit it is, to have
them n^ better) but even all possibility of reformation, except they cease to
be g^^thered by their parrish perambulation, as they are, instead of holy,
volu^tary, and personal profession of faith, and confession of sins as, they
should be.

Now touching their solemn, and set book-service, thus much. Since the Lord
has no where commanded, or required in his word (which is the only Rule for
his worship) any humayn, and apochripha wryteings to be ^sed in his Church to
worship him by, much less to be read, by stint, for prayer, it is unlawful
for any of Gods servants to Col. ^ 23.
submit unto any such voluntary religion, through humblenes of mind, or for
any other cause: or to partake in the holy things of God by it administered:
lest Math. ^ 9.
they worship in ^ayn, and God reprove them saying, who has required these
things at your ^ands?

But they tell us, that Christ has taught his disciples when they prayed, to
^y Our Father etc. True, but I deny it to be Christ's meaning to bind them OBI.
^o these very words: as the ministers are bound to say their Certain. For ANSW.
^eyther do the two Evangelists use the very same words: neither, if that were
Christ's meaning, were it lawful to use any other form of words.

For he says when you pray that is, whenever you pray, say: and he who Luke.
1^ 2.
^rayes not, as Christ there teaches, offers strange fire before the Lord. He
^hen there teaches to pray without hypocrisy, and vayn babbling, and with
faith, and perseverance: though I doubt not, but these words also, being
applied ^o present occasions, and without opinion of necessity, may be used.
But ad^it Christ's meaning were to ty his disciples to a form of words: will the
Bishops therefore presume to impose upon men, another form of words, (...) so
an other form, and manner of worship? which (if Christ tied his di^ciples to
worship him by a certain form of words, they appoynting an ^ther form of words
for his worship) they vndenyably do. Will they thus ^alk cheek by iowl with
Christ in his house, and set up their threshoulds by Gods, Ezech. 4. 8.
(...) appoint a new manner of worshipping God, and so a new will of God, as
^^deed they do?

Mr Cluses forenamed adversaryes demand touching a prayer of his in ^he end of
his book, whether any of his flock in reading of that his prayer, may lift A
sheil^ etc. page 38. 39.
^p their heart, and say Amen to his petition. If not, then (say they) it is a
sorry ^ayer etc: if they may, then according to our doctrine, he sets up a
goulden Calf, (...) erects an Idol, by setting down this form of prayer: and
they, which in the reading (...) it, lift up their hearts in prayer to desire
the same thing, commit Idolatry.

Nothing is absolutely, or in it self, an Idol: but in relation to, and re^ect
ANSW.
of the end, to which it is appointed, and used. And we do therefore re^ute the
service book an Idol, because it is, and is appointed to be read by the
Minister, for his, and the Churches prayers. But what proportionable to his
has Mr Cluses prayer? Is it appointed by him to this end, or by the ^h: with
him so used? It is published by him for the manifestation unto others of his
desire, that they by reading the same privately, might be admonished of, and
provoked unto their duty. It is his prayer, but their in^^ruction, and
provocation: and so by them to be read, and used. And for the inward listing up
of the heart, is nothing to the question in hand; which is about the outward
exercise, and manifestation of prayer. A man in reading or hearing read, Paul's
Epistles: or in singing, or hearing sung David's Psa^mes, or in opening, or
hearing opened those, or any other Scriptures i^ the Church may say Amen to any
truth, or desire in his heart that the good things in them contained may be
accomplished, and come to passe^ Are therefore these scriptures, and sermons
the prayers of the Church? (...) (which is the very point) is the reading,
singing, preaching, and hearing o^ them the Churches exercise of prayer, or
praying? we doubt not but it i^ lawful to read privately the prayers, or
sermons of any godly men the come to our hands for instruction, and provocation
in and unto any good du^ ^ty, and to have the heart therewith affected
accordeingly: but to conclude^ that therefore it is lawful to bring the some
into the Ch: and to read the^ publicly for that end, and (which is more) that
the so reading of them (...) the preaching, and praying which the Ministers of
Christ are to give themselv^^ Act. 6. 4. ^. Cor. 12 ^. 7. 8.
unto: and for their furnishing whereunto, he gives them the special gifis
(...) his spirit, is to make ropes of sand: both will hold alike, and are
indeed (...) like childeish. But let us a little further wey their words. They
call it Decluses prayer, because he penned it: acknowleding therein that their
Chur^^ Service is the prayers of the Bishop or Chaplin that penned them: and
the manifestation of the spirit given to him, that is dead, and rotten. Whereas
the Ministers of Christ have received their proper measure of the manifestation
of the spirit to profit withal: by which their infirmityes are helped, and
the^ (...)
taught to pray, as they ought, and as are the Ch: necessityes, and occasions.

They further call this the reading of Decluses prayer: and therein confes^^
Romans 8. ^8.
their Ch: praying to be reading. And is reading praying? or are not these two
distinct exercises, and for diverse ends? Do men read to God, (which if to read
be to pray) they must do? In praying, we power matter out (...) the heart: but
in reading we receav matter in: as common reason teach^eth. How ignorant then
or obstinate soever men are in their custome^ and traditions received from
their ancestors, their set service read f^^ prayer is but an humayn devise
for Gods worship (and that vnreasonab^^ also:) and so an Idol and against the
2d Commaundment; with which (...) fellowship is to be had. Which whilst these
men, and others will not lea^ of God, by us, whose persons they despise, but
will still plead for it, (...) they do; most justly do they provoke God to
punish them, and their f^^ lowes by it, as he does, It is just, that whilst one
kindles, and another blo^eth and a third offers this strange fire, they
should together be scorch^^ with the flame of it.

It now remayns I ad a few things touching the government Ecclesia^^ ^all, and
Ministry. But for that it becomes all honest, and modest men to be more
forward in defending their own, then in reproveing other men's ^oeings; and that
many loud clamours of Anabaptistry, and Popularity are ^aysed against our
government, I think it meet breisly to insert a few things ^ouching our
profession, and practice therein.

The government of the Church then, as it is taken most strictly for the
outward ordering, directing, and guidance of the same Ch: in her affairs (...)
for in a more general sense the whole administration of Christ's kingdom ^y
himself, or others, inwardly, or outwardly, publicly, or privately, ^ay be
comprehended under the government of the Church) we place in ^e Bishops, or
Elders thereof, called by Christ, and the Ch: to feed, that is to ^ach, Act 20.
17. 20. 1 Timothy 5 17.
and rule the same. Which their government, and the nature thereof, I ^ill
plainly lay down in such particulars, as wherein the peoples liberty is
^reatest: which are reduced to these three heads; 1. Exercise of prophesying:
^. Choice of Officers: and 3. Censureing of offenders.

And 1. for the Exercise of prophesying; wherein men though not in of^^ce) have
liberty to move, and propound their questions, and doubts for satis^^ction,
Luke 2. 46.
as also having received a gift, to administer the same, unto edification,
ex^rtation, Romans 12. ^
and comfort. As then Paul, 1. Pet. 4. 10.
and Barnabas comeing into the Synagogue of the ^^wes (where they were no
Officers) the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto ^^em after the lecture of the
law, 1. Cor. 1^ Act. 13. 14. 15.
if they had any word of exhortation to the people, to ^y on: (which order the
Jews also observe in their Synagogues at this day) (...) with us, the Officers
after their ordinary teaching, signify, and exhort unto ^e use of, the like
liberty, in that, and the other particulars formerly named: ^^so (as there is
occasion) open, and explayn things obscure, and doubtful: ^^prove things
unsound, and impertinent: and so order moderate, and derter^ine the whole
exercise by the word of God. And in this I suppose it ap^ears to all men, that
the Officers govern.

For the choice of Officers, we do take for our directions the practices of the
^ostles, and Apostolical Ch: Act. 1. and 6. and 14. grounded upon a
perpetual ^uity, that men should choose them under Christ, unto whose
faythfulnes, ^^der the same Christ, and by his appointment, they are to commit
themsel^^s, and their souls: and them, as Christ's, and their servants to
maynteyn: in ^y one of which examples the conscience of a godly man is better
esta^ished, then in all the Canons of Popes, or Prelates, or other devises of
Politic ^en whatsoever, departeing from the Apostolical simplicity. I will
instance (...) one example where this point is most largely, and clearly set
down; unto which therefore the rest must be referred, and by it other places
(handling the ^me matter more briefly) explaned, and opened. We do read. Act.
6. how the ^postles call together the multitude; show them the necessity of
Ch^esing Deacons, what their work is, and how they must be qualifyed, and how
many they would have chosen: whom, being chosen accordingly, by the multitude,
they ordey^^ sanctifying the whole action with prayer. Where it is evident,
that though the calling did chiefly depend upon the multitude, yet did the
government of the whole action ly upon the Officers. Conformable whereunto is
on^ practice, so near as we can, upon the like occasion.

Lastly, for our direction in the public use of the Censures, we propound to
our selves the Rule of Christ Math. 18. 17. touching sins privat^ in
themselves, but to be made public by the sinners refuseing to hear
admonition: and with it, the practice thereof, by the doctrine of his Apostle^
1. Cor. 5. about a sin of public nature. For the not Censureing where^^ he
sharply reproves the Church; vehemently exhorting them, that being come
together in the name of the Lord Jesus, they would by his power (for the use
whereof he shows his judgment, for his part severally, and promises hi^
joint assent in their public assembly) excommunicate the offendour. For
neither could the Apostle being but one, be the Church, or Congregation, which
consists of two or three that is a company (though never s^^ small) gathered
together in Christ's name, ^ath. 18 ^.
as he expounds himself: neither di^ he seize into his own hands the liberty of
the Corinth: for their neglecting it; as oppressors use to deal with their
tenants, and debtors, taking the advantages of forfaytures against them:
neither indeed could the Apostl^ with any equity, or justice proceed to any
Censure against the offender, (...) not being before sufficiently convinced of,
and rebuked for his sin, as he should have been. ^. Tim. 5. (...).


Answerable to the course by Christ and the Apostle there directed, and by the
Corinth: observed, as appears 2. Cor: 2. 6. we desire our practice may be. In
which, sins scandalous (if in themselves of public nature) a^ brought to the
Ch: by one of the Officers: or (if private, and to be mad^ public by the
sinners impenitency) by the brother offended, and his witnesses, at the
Officers appointment. Where, the sin (being manifested, (...) (for fact orderly
proved against the offender) is by the elders condemned, and rebuked by the
word of God, and the sinner exhorted to repentance accordeing to the quality of
the sin. In which conviction, and admonition lawfully, and sufficiently made,
the Ch: rests: the men manifesting they assent thereunto by some convement
word, or sign, and the women by ^^lence. And so the admonition which before
was Christ's, and the Officers becomes the Churches: following the other as
their governors, and no^ otherwise.

Upon which admonition if it please God to give the sinner repent (...) ^.
Tim. 2. (...).
answerable, and that he so manifest, God thereby receaveth glory, who wa^
^ishonoured by his sin, and men who were offended, satisfaction: and so all
^urther proceeding is stayed, and the person exhorted (and others by his
ex^mple) to sin no more lest a worse thing happen unto him. But if he remayn
ob^inate, and refuse to hear the Ch: and in it Christ, admonishing him, then
with ^orrow for the hardness of his heart, (all long sufferance, and patience in
the ^ean while used, accordeing to the nature, and circunstances of the
offense,) ^y the power of the L: Jesus (not given to his Ch: in vayn) the
impenitent ^nner is, for his humbling, to be cut of, and excommunicated from
the fel^owship of the Church: the Elders as governors goeing before in
decre^^g the sentence, and so one of them (upon the peoples assent, as in
admo^ition) pronounceing it in the name of Christ, and his Church.

But for that the Officers are frayl men, and those 1. Pet. 3.
nor Lords over Gods he^tage, as are Princes, and Magistrates over their
Subjects, but 1. Cor. ^. 1. and 2. cor. 4. 1
Ministers, (...) Servants of Christ the housband, and the Church the wife,
whom the thing ^oncerns in their places, as well as them) we think it lawful
for the bre^hren either doubtful of any thing in the Officers administrations,
to pro^ound their doubt for satisfaction; or seeing them failing in any
material thing, to admonish them of their duty and that they Col. 4. 17.
look to their Office, ^r (if need stand) to supply the same for the further
clearing of things. and this whole proceedings we make, and use ordinarily on
the Lords day, ^s being properly the L: work, a work of religion, directly
respecting the ^ul, and conscience: and of spiritual nature, as being an
administration of Christ's kingdom, which is not of this world. And this also
when the whole Ch: (...) gathered together, as which it concerns many ways.
Ioh 15. 36.
1. Because the Ch: which is offended by public sins, must be publicly
satisfied. 1. Cor. 4 4. 5.
2. A ^le leven, leveneth the whole lump (to wit of the Ch:) being unpurged
out. ^. 1 Timothy 5. 20.
They that sin must be rebuked openly, that the rest may fear. 4. The Elders,
or ^sh^ps are to feed the flock by government publicly, as well as by
doctri^e; and being by them, over whom they are, to be highly loved for their
work ^^ke, 1. Thy. ^ 12. 13.
their work of government must be seen by the Ch: which is for the ^^me so to
esteem them. And thus we beleiv, and practice accordingly, though (...) we
confess) with great weakness. By which our weakness it comes also ^o pass,
that this comely order is sometimes interrupted, and humayn frayl^es
intermingle themselves, either by the Officers fault in not govern^^g, or the
peoples in not obeying as they ought: so as we are at times ^vertaken with some
things both disorderly, and difficult to determine; as (...) also comes to
pass in all societyes, and governments of, and by men, what^oever. And as in
nature, the corruption of the best thing is the worst, so ^n the breach of the
most comely order, there is the greatest both vncome^nes, and disorder. But
things are not to be defined by their abuses (as the philosophers teach, and
all wise men know: (so neither must the L: ordinances be esteemed by the
disorders personal incident unto them, but as they are in their right state,
and lawful use.

The order of our government then being such, as I have described it, let every
indifferent Reader judge, whether or no, in respect of outward order, it be
popular, and wherein the people govern, as many please to reproach us, and it.
But if men will still shut their eyes against the things we plainly, and simply
lay down, and yet open their mouths against us for popularity, and
Anabaptistry, we can but (making this and the like our just defenses) commit
both our selves, and cause to God.

And thus much of our order of government. I will now go on where I left, to
show, that the L: people may not communicate with the Church of Engl: in regard
of the government Ecclesiastical, and Ministry thence derived.

1. Act 20. ^. 20. 14. 23 (...) 1. 1. Tim. 5. 7.
H: Ghost has appointed sundry, Overseers, or Bishops over one flock to feed,
that is, to teach, and govern it: of which it also stands in need. It is then
the unholy Ghost of Antichrist, which has devised one Bishop over many
flocks, which he cannot possibly feed, if he would. Only for his government
he has this help, that he is a Lord over them, and not a Minister, and servant
unto them, and so bears more sway over the profane multitude, ^^t. 1. 5.
whereof those Churches most what consist, by Lording it with his imperious
Canons, and purse penaltyes, then many true Bishops could do, by their
faithful ministry, and service, according to Christ's testament.

It is written Ephesians: 4. 8. 11. 12. 13. that Christ when he ascended on high, II.
gave gifts to men: some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and Teacher: for the work of the Ministry, etc. until all the
Saym^^ were met together unto a perfect man, etc. Where the Apostle teaches,
how^ Christ the king of his Ch: has set in it certain orders of officers
(answerably gifted extraordinarily, and ordinarily) and those also there to be,
(...) continue in their time, till the same Ch: and body of Christ were
complete, both for number of persons, and measure of graces. Now if the Byshop^
be Pastors, or sheepheards, and Teachers, (as some would make them) over their
Provinces, and Diocesses, how will they answer the Lord for not teaching them?
Or how has the Lord appointed such a Ministry (being an office of trust, and
wherein the personal ability, and faythfulnes o^ the Minister is required) as
which he that received it, cannot possibly fulfill if he would? Or if the
Bishops be of the order of Pastors, and Teachers, Col. 4. 17.
(which are he lowest Ministers) of what order are the parrishion^^ Ministers,
which are below them? And for the first three, Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, they were extraordinary, for the first Math. (...). 19. 1. Cor. 6.
planting, and wa^ering of the Churches. The Apostles, and Prophets laying the
foundation, by doctrine infallibly true: and the Evangelists employed by the
Apostles direction, here, and there, for the perfiting of their work, as there
was need. Neither were they, one, or other, tied to any particular flock,
Diocese, Ephesians. 2 ^ 1. Cor. 10 11. Math 19.
Province, or Nation; but were general men, and for all places; being
there^nto furnished with the knowledge, and use of all tongues, as there was
occasion. So that whilst our Engl: Bishops plead their Provincial, and
Diocesan Jurisdiction from the commission of the Apostles, and Evangelists,
Act. 16 23. Romans 1. 21. 1 cor. 10. 2. Cor. 6. 16. 2 and chapter ^ 28. 2. Tim. 5.
21. Tit. 1 5^ and 3. 1
they are found to be of their number, who Rev. 2
said they were Apostles, and were not. They then, in their order of ministry,
are not of the gifts, which Christ the king of his Ch: gave, when he ascended
on high, but of the gifts of Antichrist in his ascent to the throne of his
Apostasy: Of whose body also they are natural members, without which it cannot
consist: as may all other bodies, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical. And since
the Officers of the Ch: are. members of the body of Christ, as the eyes, mouth,
hand, etc. he who ads to, or takes from the Ch: an order of Ministry, or
Office, presumes to ad to, or take from Christ's body, a member: and so
abolishing a member of the body, he does also abolish a gift, and grace of the
spirit, working effectually accordeing to the measure, or proportion of every
part; or adding a member, he must be able to quicken, and furnish ^t with a
proportionable gift of that same spirit, who distributeth to every member, as
it pleases. v. 11. 1 Co^ 12. 1^ 27. 28.
And so where the Apostle says, v. 4. 5. that there are Diversityes of gifts,
but the same spirit: and diverstyes of ministeryes, but the same Lord: he
plainly teaches these two things. 1. That all lawful Ministeryes in the Ch:
are of Christ: 2dly, that none may appoint a Ministry ^n the Ch: but he who
can bestow an answerable gift of qualification: which is not in the power of
any man, or angel.

The Lord by his Apostle has ordered, that the Elders, or Bishops labor in
the word, and doctrine, should have double honor, specially, 1. Tim. 17. 1.
Tim. 1.
and above them that Rule, though well: and that upon a ground of perpetual
equity, that since the Bishops, or Elders office is a work, the chief work,
which preaching is, should have the chief honor. But this order of Christ, and
of nature it self is clean subverted by the order of the Prelacy, and Ministry
in Engl: where ten-fould honor is given to ruleing, though not well, above the
most paynfull laboring in the word, and doctrine. It well suites with the
spirit of Antichrist that imperious Lording over the souls, and consciences
of men should be advanced above the base, and burdensome work of Preaching Gods
word.

Lastly, the rights, and libertyes, wherewith Christ the Lord has in (...)
word endowed his Church (the Elders for their government, and the people (...)
for their liberty) for the calling of Officers, and Censureing of offenders
these oppressors spiritual have seized into their own hands, as their
peculiars: Cor. 5. Act. 1. and (...)
in, and upon which their usurpation (which is specially to be noted) their
very office, and order is founded. ^er. 22.
Woe be so him (says the Lord) that builds his house by vnrighteouses, and
his Chambers by wrong: how much more then unto them, who build their high
palaces by such spiritual injury against the Lord, his house, ministers, and
people, as they apparently do.

For conclusion; the tree is known by the fruits: and too evident it is by they
fruits, upon what root the Prelates tree grows. Their preferring ((...) that
in their most folemn Constitutions) the wearing of a surplice, or making a
Cross in a Babes forehead by the Minister, before the preaching of the
gospel: of bowing the knee by the people to, or at the Lords supper before the
most worthy receaving otherwise; the reading, and hearing o^ their (rayther
then Gods) service, by the one, and other, above the performance of any part of
Gods worship appointed in his word, by either o^ them, do declare them to be no
mean members of that man of sin, and adversary, who exalts himself above all
that is called God. ^ These. 2. ^4.


Their constreyning the Ministers to receav from them, and by their sol^^
authority, their order of preisthood, and institution to their cures, with
their licenses to preach: enforceing them to subscribe, and that from they
hearts, to their devised government, Service, and Ceremonies, and even (...)
swear Canonical obedience to them therein; and both them, and the people to
obey their Summons, and Citations, running, and rydeing to, and fro, (...) sue,
and serve in their Courts: to take the oath ex Officio, to accuse themselves,
and their friends, and that often for well-doeing: to submit to they Censures
of all sorts, and not so much as to dare to speak against their tyrannyes, and
superstitions, under Peyn of Excommunication, ipso facto, (...) proclaym unto
all men that have ears to hear, that they are in a great measure, spiritual
Babilonish Lords, causing all both small, and great, rich, and pore, (...)
receav their mark in their right hand, or forehead, and otherwise not suffering
them either to buy, or sell. ^ev. 13. ^. 17.


Their sale of Orders, and Institutions, and that most what unto person utterly
unworthy: (to the destruction of how many thousand souls for whom Christ dyed,
either by starving them thorough ignorance, or poysoneing them by profane
example?) of dispensations for pluralityes, (...) non-residencyes, of licenses
to preach up, and down the cuntry, and to man^ at times by their Canons
prohibited: of pardons, and absolutions, when ^en are excommunicated, and
sometimes when they are dead, before they ^an have Christian buryall: with
their extorted fees, and purse-penaltyes the very sinews of their kingdom) do
clearly pronounce against them, ^at they, and their subordinates are merchants
of that great City Babylon, traf^^ueing for all manner of ware, and for the
souls of men. Chapter 18. 1 11. 12. 1


Now touching the Parochial Ministers I have proved against Mr Ber^rd, that
neither their office, nor calling by which they administer it, is of christ. 1.
Ti^ 3. 1.
The office of the Bishop is a work: and this work stands in Act. 2^ 28.
feeding the ^^ck; and this feeding in preaching, and ruleing. Now as the
government of ^heyr flocks is not so much as permitted unto them, so neither
is preach^ng ^g any natural, or necessary part of their office: but an
accessory, and ca^all ornament: and which may be, or may not be, as the persons
can, or ^ill. And for their calling, whether to their preisthood at larg, by
the ^rch-Deacons presentation, and Bishops ordination; or to their special
^harges; either by the Patrons presentation, Bishops Institution, and
Arch-^eacons Induction, or by the Bishops sole license; the very nameing of ^e
means by which it is had, Luke 2 4.
sufficiently proves it not to be ^ from heaven, ^ut of man's, even the man of
sin his vayn devise. But I will for the present ^sist only upon this
consideration, that the parishionall Ministry is a ^ranch of the prelacy; and
so all communion with the one, as other, to be ^oyded, by Gods people.

And for the better discerning of things, it must be observed, that as the
^hole Nation is divided into two Provinces, under the two Arch-Byshops, (...)
the two Provinces into Sundry Diocesses, under the Bishops, and they in^^ their
several parrishes under the Ministers thereof; so do the Arch-By^hops, and
Bishops share out unto the parrish Preistes in their ordination a ^art of their
Charg, to wit, so much as concerns the ordinary service of the ^arrish: as they
do also unto their Chauncelours, Commissaryes, and ^rch-Deacons, an other part
for inferior government: reserving unto themselves the Lordship over both, for
the best adva^tage of their own ho^our, and profit. So that the Chauncelour in
the consistory, and the priest in ^he Pulpit or Desk, does administer by one,
and the same power: namely that of the Prelate; which, from, and by him, both
the one, and other does ^eceav. And as Christ told the twelv, when he sent
them to preach, that ^e who received them, Mat 10. 4^.
received him, and that he, who received him, received him ^^at sent him: so he
that receavs or communicates with the Minister in any ^arrish of the land,
receavs the Bishop, that sent him, and so indeed origi^ally, the Pope, that
sent him; and of whose sending the Pope is, they, and we ^ake no question. The
Prelacy then being to be rooted out, as a plant, which God has not planted,
and the ministry in the order, and office, (of which we speak) being a branch
of it, can the branch survive, if the root be plucked up? or shall any of Gods
people by their mayntenance of it, submission unto it, or communion with it,
give thereunto any life, or preservation?

But here sundry defenses are made by them, who in judgment, word, and
wryteing, and some practices, dislike the prelacy: as that they are not subject
to their government: that the Ministers do not stand by the ordination, and
power received from, and by them, but by the peoples acceptance: that these
things are but matters of outward order, and government, which though they may
something concern the Ministers themselves, yet are they little, or nothing to
private persons.

We will briefly consider of these defenses: and let them who make them,
consider, and beware, they be not of them, who will not be reformed, but seck
excuses aster their own heart.

And, first, they who thus disclaym in word the Bishops government, confess
themselves therein to be under no spiritual external government at all: and
so be lawles persons, and inordinate walkers, and such as have neither that
conscience, which is meet, of the Commandments of Christ, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Hebr. 13. 17.
by his Apostles, to give due honor to them who rule well: and to submit
themselves to these, who are over them in the Lord: nor of their own fraylty,
and in what need they stand of the Lords ordinances, and of this in special,
for their guidance, and conservation in his ways. 2dly, the daily practice of
these men (every one of them less or more) in the sight of the Sun, is a
sufficient conviction of their dishonest excuse. Their Obedience unto the
Summons, and Citations (unto their spiritual Courts) of the Prelates, and
their Deputyes; their sueing, or appearing there by themselves, or their
proctours; the submission of the Ministers to their suspensions, and
deprivations, and both of Ministers, and people to their excommunications, do
really plead their spiritual subjection to their Jurisdiction. Yea so far are
the people from freing the Ministers by their acceptance, from the Prelates
jurisdiction, as on the contrary, they enthrall them much more under the same:
not only by accepting them at the first under their mark of Institution, or
license, but even ever after, year, by year, by chuseing a Churchwarden, or
Side-man, (as they call him) to present both their own, and Ministers defaults
in and unto their Consistoryes, and Visitations: as does the Minister also
choose another for the same Purpose: for the performance of which presentations,
they are t^ bind themselves by oath, and so ordinarily do. So that, howsoever
many are ashamed of their Lords, and Masters; both Ministers, and people (n^
actually separated, from the parrish assemblyes) stand in spiritual subjection
to the Prelates, and receiv their mark, though some in their forehead, and more
professedly; and others as effectually, though more covertly, in their right
hand.

Now for the outward government, and ordering of the house of God, the Church;
and the outward calling of the Ministers thereof, they are not so sleighty
matters, as Politic men, out of their fleshly hearts would persuade
themselves and others. The Apostle unto Tim: treating at larg of these things
tells him, how the cause why he so wrytes is, that in his absence, 1 Timothy 3. v.
15. 16.
he might know how he ought to behave himself, in the house of God, which is
the Ch: of the liveing God, the pillar, and ground of truth. Where he adorneth
the Church with most honorable titles, for this very end, that he, and all
other Gods Ministers, and people might be admonished more carefully to preserv
vnviolated that sacred economy, and Ch: government there prescribed: Ch 5. 21
obetesting, and chargeing him before God, and the L: Jesus Christ, and the
elect Angels, to observe these things, impartially: as also wryteing unto the
Corinth: he propounds the matters of outward 1 Epist. 14 37.
order, unto them, as the Commaundments of the Lord Jesus: which are Math. 28.
20.
all to be observed by his Disciples in their places: in whose eyes Hebr. 3. 3.
etc.
he is worthy of more honor in his own house, and in the ordering of it, then
was Moses a servant in his Masters house: according to whose direction
notwithstanding, all things were to be ordered. I ad, that the same Apostle,
(whatsoever other men despiseing (it seems) his simplicity, think or say)
testifyeth of the Colossians, that they had received Christ, as well in their
order, as faith: Col. 2. 5. 6.
and rejoices as well in their continuance in the one, as other: as on the
contrary he sharply reproves the Corinthians, for the breach of order, and
neglect of Discipline, as well, as for any other evil. And see how unequal
these men are. 1. Cor. 5. and 14.
The Popes arrogateing to himself to be universal Bishop, is in it self but a
matter of order, and government: and yet they generally who are soundly minded,
deem him properly Antichrist therein: alleging that of Gregory against John
of Constantionople, for that purpose. And if the universal Bishop make
Antichrist in the head, surely the Bishops of Diocesses, and Arch-Byshops of
Provinces, and Metropolitans of Nations, may well chaleng the pars of arms, and
shoulders of that body.

Now touching the Ministers outward calling: of such force it is, that he is by
it alone (if at all) properly, and immediately, a true Church officer; as is
the Magistrate in the Common wealth, the Captayn in the army, the steward in
the family, by the outward calling of those, ^n whom that right is, a true and
lawful Magistrate, Captayn, or ^teward: and without, which, all, and every of
them, are mere usurpers, howsoever qualifyed in their persons, and serviceable
in their administr^tions. Noman (says the Apostle) takes unto himself this
honor, but he, the is called of God, as Aaron. And let them who think it a
small matter t^ vsurp, ^ob. 5. 4.
(or being usurped, to communicate with) a calling without order by Gods word,
consider what befell them, who usurped, (or communicated in the usurpation of)
the preistly honor not being thereunto called, as was Aaron. Numb. 11. 16. And
how it lies all the Ministers of Chri^ in hand to be able to justify their
outward calling to their offices, the Apostle teaches by his own example, and
specially in his Epistle to the Ch: (...) Galatia, where it was most called in
question: which they also that cannon do, are to be served, as where they, who
could not find the wryteing of they^ genealogy, ^al. 1. 1. etc.
and were therefore put from the preisthood. Neh. 7. 64.

And, as they know who have experience thereof, what confort it ministereth
against the manifould trials incident to the lawful Ministers of Christ, that
they are called by them thereunto, whom under the Lord i^ most concerns, as
over whose Souls they are to watch: so on the contrary, I verily suppose, it
comes to pass, that even the best Ministers in the assemblyes, do so easily,
and unworthily forsake their flocks, for their greater ease, profit, or
credit; and which not, for fear of a little persequution? because they want this
testimony, and comfort of good conscience, that they have been lawfully called
to minister unto them.

To conclude then this point also: the same Scriptures, and ground^ which prove
the order of prelacy, and so of preisthood, (being a branch o^ it) not to be
of God, do also prove it unlawful for the people of God t^ partake in the
administrations of the one, or other, and therein to submi^ themselves unto
them.

For 1. their very administrations by an unlawful calling are their sins

2dly, the ground of submission unto the Officers of the Ch: is, that they ar^
made Overseers of the stock by the H. Ghost, and are over it in the Lord: which
subjection Act. 10. 17. ^8 1 Thessalonians 5. 1^.
nor priests being appointed b^ their Ghosts, can chaleng, neither can the
people by faith yeald the sam^ unto them. The Apostle Romans 13. vrgeing
submission to all sorts of Magistrates does it upon this ground, that they are
of God, and his ordinances: s^ the ground of our submission to any office of
Ministry in the Ch: and stay o^ our faith, is this, that it is of Christ the
mediator of his Ch: and one of hi^ ordinances.

government of the Church: neither can the same be referred to any other of the
ten Commandments: whereupon I infer that every such government, and
ministry not commanded by God, and Christ, is as an Idol, there forbidden,
and all subjection unto it, as the bowing down unto an Idol.

4thly, they who judge the Prelacy not to be of Christ, but of Antichrist,

But here Mr Cluses forenamed Opposites step in, and plead for submission unto
unlawful Ministers, A shei^ of Defe^^ce etc. Page 24. 25.
1. that in Christ's time there were diverse Officers whose names had not been
heard of in the primative Ch: of the Jews, nor ever were instituted by any
example of former times, in that Church, as the names of Lewyers, Scribes of
the People, and Rulers of the Synagogues, or Archy-Synagogues. 2. if the godly
may lawfully submit unto the government, and guidance by private admonition of
such or vate brethr^n, who for their sects, factions, and superstitious
observations have had such names as were formerly unknown unto the Ch: of God;
who also in respect of their wekednes d^sirved to be cast out of the Church,
and are unjustly reteyn^d (as it was in the Communion of the godly with the
Scriubes, and Pharisees) then is it also lawful to stand under ^^^dance, and
government of unlawful officers.

In whose defense I observe, first, that they yield the Ministers of Eng^ to be
unlawful, and to have had their names of Primates, Metropolitans, (...)
Arch-Byshops L: Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chauncelours, Commissarye^
Preistes, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, given unto them for their sects, factions,
and s^ perstitious observations: and yet all of them make suit, take, pay for,
and answe^ to some or other of these names, with the orders to which they
appertey^ 2dly, I note how vayn a pretext it is that the persons, whose names
are pr^ fixed, are the authors of the book, as if John Fowler, and his
fellows dur^ take upon them to set down what names of Officers had been heard
o^ or not, in the Jewish Ch: from the first institution, till Christ's time. 3^
where in their former Reason they make the Scribes of the people Ch: Off^cers,
in the 2d Reason they make the Scribes and Pharisees, private breth^ 4thly,
they grant one private brother to be under the guidance, and government of an
other, and so establish a popular government, in a sense expressly and by just
consequence, as far as we intend, and do: howsoever they reproa^ us for
popularity. Now for their Arguments, First, I deny that, which the^ take for
granted, and upon which they build, to wit, that the names (...) Lawyers,
Scribes of the people, and Rulers of the Synagogues, were not in the Iewi^
Church, before Christ's time.

And 1. the Lawyers were such as were skillful in the law of God, and the
Scribes such as gave themselves either to expound, or write it, or both^ (being
also Levites for the most part) in which respects these their names as
honorable (and not for their factions) were most fitly given them: and no^
first in Christ's time, as is affirmed, but long before, as appears Ier: 8. ^
and Ezra 7. 6. 11. 12. where Ezra is called a scribe prompt in the law of Mo^
which Tremelius, ^egis pe^um.
and Iunius translate a Lawyer, or one skillful in the law^ as indeed these
Scribes, and Lawyers were the same, as is testified, Math. 22^ 35. (...)
compared with Mark 12. 28. and so the Hebrew word may indifferent^ly be turned
and is. And if there were nothing else, that which we read 1. M^ chab. 5. 42
reproves these men's peremptory affirmation, that the names (...) Scribes of the
people were not in the Ch: of the Jews, before Christ's time. But bo^ better,
and more ancient testimony may be brought against it: take the one (amongst
many) in the Greek Bible, Numb. 11. 16. where the LX^ Interpreters have it,
(...). So for the n^mes of Archi-Synagogues, or Rulers of the Synagogues
sproken of Mark 5 22 and^ the same Interpreters use the same words Exodus: 34.
31. Numb. 31. 1^ etc. which the Evangelistes do wryteing in Greek, and herein
without doub^ following them, as in other things. And there being Synagogues of
ou^ amongst the Jews, there must needs be Rulers (...)n and the same (...)
called.

Touching the 2d Argument: I deny the proportion upon which they build it. In
receaving an admonition from an unlawful brother, (as they speak) I do submit
only to that which is good in it self, and of God: but in submitting to an
unlawful Officer, Prelate or Priest, I submit to that which is evil in it
self and not of God, to wit, his very Office, or Order. The unlawful brother,
though in sin, yet does not perform the admonition by virtue of his sin, but
out of his personal knowledge, and Zeal (at least in appearance) against the
sin he reproves in particular, but the unlawful Officer does administer the
public doctrine, (as the Sacraments) by virtue, or rayther by vice, of his
very sin immediately, and properly: wherein I may not partake with him. These
men have refused to submit to Mr Iohnsons public Ministry, and so profess:
do they therefore think it Unlawful to receav any information, or admonition,
or reproof by the word of God for their sins, from him, or any the people with
him privately, and upon occasion? And by their larg grounds it should be
lawful to submit to the ministry of any heretical Minister: for from such a
one it is not unlawful to receav a private admonition for sin, upon occasion.
But how much better were it for these men, and their friends to advance by all
good means a lawful Ministry, then thus to supporte that which is unlawful,
by pleading for submission unto it. But if they needs will, (as they plead in
their book submit their souls to thieves, and robbers, and to such Ministers,
as were the Scribes, and Pharisees in Christ's time, (in whom they instance)
notorious Heretics denying both the nature, Offices, and Person of the
Messiah, teaching justification by the works of the law, and power in man to
keep it, let them rejoice in their Ministers, and let their Ministers also
rejoice in them, as Iotham said of the men of Schechem, and Abimelech: but for
us, we have learnt to give more honor to Gods ordinance, and to have more care
of Christ's precious purchase, our souls, then to commit the same to such
watchmens keeping.

Thus have I briefly noted down, and confirmed the principal grounds of our
separation from the Communion, and order of the Ch: assemblyes, notwithstanding
the admission of the personal communion before mentioned. And I have of
purpose taken in, and answered the chief Reasons brought by Mr Cluses accusers,
agayust our practice, that it may appear, both how they fayl of that they
promise in the Preface of their book; as also that it is a far more easy thing,
to reproach men's persons, then justly to evince their profession. And would the
king but give toleration, and with-hould from bodly violence against their
persons and estates, I doubt not, but we should have many thousands in the land
concurring with is, for substance of practice, as they do now in opinion: who
would speedily unite themselves in other spiritual societyes, then the
profane parrishes: leaving the service book, and Ceremonies, to the Prelates,
with their dumb prcists, and formal Clergy: withdrawing from their, and their
Chauncelours, and Officials spiritual jurisdiction, neither obeying their
Summons, nor regardeing their Censures: neither would the Ministers sue to them
for their Orders, and Licenses; not the people receav them of their making,
nor present them by their Ch: wardens to their Courts, nor keep them by their
leav, and under their correction: but both Ministers, and people would find
other, and better Rules of direction in Christ's testament, for their walking,
and worshipping of God, then the Bishops Canons, and Injunctions. Which so
being, Psalm. 72.
he, who indeed judges his people with justice, and his portaff^^^cted ones
with judgment, be judge between them, and us; and whither, we (submitting
ourselves, so near as we can discern, to all the Commaundments, and ordinances
of Christ in his gospel) reject them; or they us, who raythe^ choose the
vnhollowed Ch: state, order, and ordinances in, and under which they stand,
then that, and those by themselves esteemed more agreeable t^ the will of God,
with persequution: but specially whether we, for these things, do deserv that
cruel hatred, and those most hostile cariages, which many of them, who would
be thought to mourn for reformation, do bear, and use toward us: making it
their glory to cast shame vppons us, and the^ great matter of reioyceing to ad
to our afflictions, Isa. 51. ^3.
and who say to our souls (...) the day of our sorrow, bow down, that we may go
over.

There is yet another danger, into which men may easily fall by occasion of the
former doctrine: which is, in taking liberty to with-hould, or withdraw from
the Church of God, and Ministry thereof: satisfying themselves in that their
private fellowship with the better sort of people: wit^ whom by this means
they may converse with more comfort to themselves, and contentment to them. For
the preventing of which evil, I will here anner^ few Reasons to enforce the
necessity, and conscience of liveing, and walking wit^ the Ch: of God, and so
under the ministry thereunto given, if it can be had^

And 1. the Scriptures calling 1. Tim. ^. 15.
the Church, the house, Temple, and Tab^nacle of the liveing God, where he has
promised that most full presence of hi^ grace, ^. Cor. 6. ^6.
and to dwell with, and amongst men, and in the midst of them, as their Go^
do therein effectually admonish the people of God to beware, Rev. 2^. 3.
that by the^ own default they do not any way deprive themselves of the fruit
of thi^ Gods so gracious promise, Math. 18 ^0.
and presence, in the true visible Church, his house^ and temple: ^. Cor. 5. ^.
either by not adjoining themselves thereunto, as members or being members, by
withdrawing from her actual Communion: there in making themselves (to speak
as the truth is) but Idol members, and (...) eyes which see not, ears which
hear not, and feet, which walk not, at least, in respect of the body, whereof
they are. And if we look to the most worthy servants of God, for our examples,
we shall find them always to have had a most ardent desire unto, and vehement
delight in this visible presence of God in his Church, and ordinances: the
necessary use, and sweet fruit whereof they so sensibly found in their own
experience. Take we David for an instance: Whose love was such to Psalm. 4. and
2^
the mansion of Gods house, and place of the habitation of his glory, as that
it was the only thing he desired, in comparison, that he might dwell in the
Lords horse all the days of his life, and there behold his glory: Professing
in his absence from it, that Ps. 4^. 2.
the thirsty hynde did not more bray after the rivers of waters, then did his
soul for Gods presence, and that he might appear before his face in his
Tabernacle: deeming them most happy, who did always, bide in Gods house; and
himself in that his sequestration more miserable then Ps 84^ 2. etc.
the sparrewes, and swallows, which could nestle, and lay their young were
Gods Altars. And yet was he a most excellent Prophet himself, and so could
abundantly instr^ct both himself, and them with him. It is likewise testified
of Moses the servant of God, that he rayther chose to suffer affliction with
the people of God, Hebr. 1^ 25. ^6.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reb^ke of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. A plain, and loud testimony
against them who because they would not bear their part in the rebuke of
Christ, and afflictions of his people, do rayther withdraw or with-hould
themselves from Christ's Church, and ordinances; or (which is worse) defyle
themselves with the pleasures of sin in Egypt spiritual: Of whom without their
repentance, Luke 9^ 26.
Christ Jesus will be ashamed, before his father, and the holy Angels.

That which the wise man speaks more generally, Eccl. 9. 10. and^
we be to him that is alone, for he falls, and there is not a second to lift
him up; but if two be together, the other lifts up his fellow, when he
falls, is of special use, this way. And considering how subject even the
strongest are to fall, by occasion, 1. Cor. 12.
it is most necessary all so walk in the Communion of saints as that others
upon such occasion, may by the hand of their godly admonitions, and
exhortations reached out unto them, again restore them: or if need so require,
that they may have use of the stronger hand of the Church, and Ministry,
strengthened with Christ's power, for their recovery: thorough the want whereof,
how many fall, and perish: which by it, and the blessing of God therevppon,
might be restored, as we doubt not but we may truly affirm from experience?
And if any man think himself to have received that steength of grace, that he
stands in no great need of these helps, let him that thinks be stands, take
heed, lest he fall: and let him also in love consider, that the less need he
has of the Ch: by reason of his greater measure of grace, the more need the
Ch: has of him, and it, unto which, and whose service, they of due belong.

When the L: Jesus ascended on high, he gave gifts to men (to wit, his
Ministers for the edification of the body, and help of the joy of the
faithful, and furtherance of their salvation: unto whom they are bound
therefore to submit, and them in the Lord to obey, for their own so great good
From whom, ^ph. 4. 8 etc. Cor. 1.
and whose ministrations whilst men without just, and necessary cause, Tim 4.
withdraw themselves, they break Christ's Commaundment, loose this fruit of his
ascension, and fayl their own edification, ^br. 13 ^.
and salvation many ways.

This duty yet lies more specially upon them that have familyes, and
children about them: whom they shall hardly govern at home in private, (...)
17. 10.
they are

Lastly it is a great offense to all, who have known men formerly zealous
hearers of Gods word in the parrish assemblyes, to see them hear the same in no
assemblyes, or where no public ministry is in use: and this more specially
to the better sort of people, who will run, and ride to hear a sermon, if they
want at home, though they go but a borrowing of him, who has indeed no right
himself so to dispense it publicly, or any other holy thing of God, as he
does.

But it will here be objected, that the Ch: ministry, and ordinances, OBI.
are indeed to be desired, if men could enjoy the^ in their own cuntry, and
amongst their friends; otherwise it seems better to witness the truth, and
suffer persequution at home, though without them, then for the use of them to
fly into a strange Cuntry. ^NSW.


It must here be known that the truth of the Lord is witnessed two ways: first
when men walk in the obedience of it, and of all the ordinances thereof,
roundly, and holily: and 2dly, when men (being called thereunto) suffer
persequution for the same. ^ut. 28.
And of these two, the former is the more necessary, Math 28 ^0. etc. ^0. ^s.
119. ^. 6.
as being commanded of God, and by men to be desired, and prayed for: the
latter not so. For neither does God command persequution, neither are we to
desire it, or to pray for it, but to avoid it by all good means; and being laid
upon us by the Lord, with patience to be^ it. Yet they that desire to please
God, and to walk roundly in his appoyntments, shall not want persequution of
sundry kinds: neither if the world thought we did, would so many with-hould,
or withdraw from us, as do, some under one, and some under another pretext,
besides those who are persuaded indeed of the unlawfulness of flight.

Now touching our Cuntry, and friends, our answer is, that we deem the want of
them a greivons loss, which we would also redeem at a great rate. Yet for our
Cuntry, we do not forsake it, but are by it forsaken and expelled by most
extreme laws, and violent proscriptions contrived, and exequuted by the
Prelates, and on their behalf. And for private friends thus we judge: that the
wife is no way to leav her housband, but to give him, as the head, the honor
of chuseing probabely, the place of they cohabitation: nor Children, and
Servants their Parents, and Masters to their prejudice, without their consent,
or an apparent impossibility of doing them service: nor at all, where thorough
their absence, they shall want necessary help, and comfort. But for those, who
are either the governors of others, or free, we think they may use greater
liberty.

Of flight in persequution.
ANd here, being thereunto forced by the unreasonable provocations of Mr Thomas
Helwis, who in great confidence, and passion, In h^ book ^tituled A shor^
Declar^tion, and page 20. etc.
lays load of reproaches both upon our flight in persequution, and also
upon out persons for it, I will (God assisting me) by the Scriptures, approve
the same, as lawful, and so answer what he has written to the contrary.

For which purpose we will consider for our instruction, what the practice has
been of the holy Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles, with other godly men in
their times, in cases of danger for well-doeing, and what approbation therein
they have had from the Lord.

We will begin with the Patriark Jacob, whose two notable flights, for fear of
danger the Scriptures mention: the former from his profane brother Esau, Genesis
2^ 42 43. etc. 31. 20 etc^
the other from his Churlish uncle Laban. Touching whose flights these 3.
things are more specially to be observed. 1. that he fled from one Cuntry to
another. 2. that in his very flight, the Lord did abounda^tly communicate
himself with him, comforteing and blessing him. 3. that it was he which thus
fled, who had power and strength, to wrestle with God, and by wrestling to
prevayl.

Next unto him is Act. 7. 25. Ex. 2. 1^ 14. 15. Chapter 3. 4. 18.
Moses the servant of the Lord, who having entered upon the exequution of his
office in killing the Egiptian, and perceaving that the thing was known, fled
out of Egypt, for fear of Pharaoh into Midian (another country also) and there
dwelt, and took him a wife: dureing whose time of exile, and abode there, the
Lord also did marvaylously communicate himself with him, and called him to the
greatest dignity in the earth: which was to be the deliverer, and guide of his
peculiar people.

Descend we next unto David, whose flights (though he wanted no tr^ courage)
how many were they (and those also from the tabernacle, ^am. 17 31.
the only place of Gods special presence) by reason of Saul's persequution,
not only in his own cuntry, where he was driven to hyde himself in
wildernesses, ^m. 19 and 21. 10. and ^. 1. 3. ^s. 56. 8
and caves, and desert mountayns, but even into straung, and profane
countries: as to Gath of the Philistines, and to Mi^pah in Moab: all whose
wanderings God d^ count, putting his tears in his bottell: and directing him
graciously in his slights, and that of times, even for such meditations, as are
left for the instruction, and comfort of Gods people in their slights, and
other trials, ^er. 36.
to the worlds end.

We do also read of Jeremy, and Barach their hydeing themselves from danger: ^
King ^. 3. and ^. 10 and 3. 5. ^.
and of Eliah the Prophets hydeing himself, by the Lords appointment, from
Ahabs cruelly: and how the Lord did extraordinarily furnish him for his further
flight in the wilderness, by the ministry of his Angel.

Yea we have even ^ Christ our Lord himself (when Herod thought to ki^ him, in
his infancy) carried into Egypt by Joseph, with Mary his mother, Math. 2 14. 15
Phil. 3. ^.
whether they fled to keep the babe from being destroyed, and there abode, till
the danger was over: and therein, as our head, sanctifying flight in his
mothers arms, to all his members in their time: who are ^ patakers of the
fellowship of his afflictions, and of this amongst the rest. Mark 3. 7.
Which liberty he did also sundry times in his riper years use himself, (and so
ratify unto us) by avoiding the places of danger, where his enemies were, who
sought to destroy him: ^ke 4. ^. 30. ^h. 4. 1. and 7. 1. ^ 10. 39
and thereby escapeing out of their hands, till his hour were come, unto him
certainly, and infallibly known: directing his disciples also, that ^ when they
were persequuted i^ one City they should fly into another: and to beware of
men, and to look to themselves. Which liberty they also used time after time,
as appears in many particulars: Math. ^0. 23. Act. 8. 1 ^ 11. 19 ^0. 21 and 12.
3. 4. 7 and 4. ^. 5. 6. Act. 9. 23 4 25. ^. Cor. 11 ^
as first, in ^ all the Ch: at Ierusal: scattered abroad, and dispersed, (save
the Apostles) by means of persequution: with whom the L: also was, blessing
the^ wheresoever they came. So in ^ Peter being freed from Herod's tyranny,
getting him to another place. Likewise in Paul, and Barnabas flying from
Iconium t^ avoid violence, unto L^stra, as Paul had done before from Damascus:
where to avoid the laying-in-wayt of the Jews the was let down by night
thorough the wall of the City, by a rope in a basket. In which his base flight
he does also rejoice afterward, as being one of his infirmityes or sufferings
for Christ.

Ad we in the last place, that which is written of the servants of Go^ else
where, that they of whom the world was not worthy, did by faith wander up,
Hebr. 11. ^7. 38. ^9.
and down, in sheep skins, and goat skins, and that in wildernesses, and
mountayns, and den^ and caves of the earth.

And for not only flight, but even banishment also, we have John the se^ vant
of Christ in the ^le called Patmos for the word of God and for the witnessing
of Ies^ Christ: that is, banished, and confined to that I Will, Rev. 1. 9.
by the Romayn Emperor with which also that in Isaiah consorteth, where the
Lord requyres of Chap. 16. 4.
Moab, to let his banished dwell with her. Considering then how plainly, and
expressly the Scriptures speak in the point, it is marvayl, that any, making
them their direction, should abridg either themselves, or others ordinarily of
the liberty of flight in persequution. But we will come to Mr Helwise his
oppositions against it.

And as he has a better faculty in revyleing men's persons, then in refuteing
their judgments, so begins he his plea with a bitter accusation against false
hearted leaders, who (as he says) to be sure not to loose their lives for
Christ, M. Hel^
flee into straung cuntryes, and free states, and draw people after them, to
support their kingdom; etc. seeking the kingdom of heaven, as far they may with
their safety.

If we principally sought out earthly good, or safety, why did we not abide at
home, ANSW.
or why return we not thither, applying our selves to the times, as so many
thousands do? that I may not alledg, that by seeking such a kingdom of heaven,
or Church, as out of which we should throw our children, (as he has done)
which we might do safely enough, if without sin, we could procure to our selves
much more earthly help, and furtherance, in the cuntry where we live, as he
knew well. And for drawing over the people, I know none of the guides, but were
as much drawn over by them, as drawing them. The truth is, it was Mr Helwisse,
who above all either guides, or others, furthered this passage into straung
countries: and if any brought oars, he brought sails, as I could show in many
particulars, and as all that were acquaynted with the manner of our comeing
over, can witness with me. Neither is it likely, if he, and the people with him
at Amsterdam, could have gone on comfortably, as they desired, that the
unlawfulness of flight would ever have troubled him: but more then likely it is,
that having scattered the people, by his heady, and indiscreet courses, and
otherwise disabled himself, that natural confidence, which abounded in him,
took occasion, under an appearance of spiritual courage, to press him upon
those desperate courses, which he, of late, has run. By which he might also
think it his glory do dare, and chaleng king, and state to their faces, and not
to give way to them, no not a foot: as indeed it far better agrees with a bold
spirit, and haughty stomach, thus to do, then with the Apostle in the base
infirmity of Christ to be let down thorough a wall in a basket, and to run away.

But we will weigh his Reasons against our flight. And first, he accuses us,
that, for instifying of it we pervert Christ's saying Math. 10. 23. which is,
when they persequute you in one city, flee into another: and that Christ there
bids his disciples, when they are persequuted in one city, go to another, to
preach the gospel: because they should not go ever all the Cittyes of
Israel, till the son of man came.

The truth is, it is he that too bouldly both alters the words, and perve^^^
ANSW:
the meaning of Christ, in putting goeing to preach, for fleeing from
persequution (...) which liberty if he may lawfully use against the Scriptures,
there will the^^ be for us no lawful liberty of flight indeed. But as the word
is properly* and necessarily turned (...).
flee, so Christ, saying unto them, when they persequ^^^^^ you, flee, says
unto them, flee, to avoid their persequution, as they also after^wards did Yet
because he directs his speech immediately to the twel^^ Apostles designed, who
were by their office to preach, as to all the world^ (...) 1. 2. 6.
so first to the Jews, he charge them not to think themselves freed by their
persequution from preaching, nor so to fly as to forget, or neglect their
office of Apostleship, but that still in their flying they should remembe^
their special calling: telling them both for their provocation, and comfort^^
that before they could pass thorough all the Cittyes of Israel he would come,
to wi^^ by the more glorious work of his spirit for the advancement of his
kingdom. So that in the words of Christ to his Apostles, two things are
contained: the former a liberty of flight in persequution, and the same so
e^i^dently, as that an Angel from heaven teaching the contrary, were not t^ be
believed; the other, a charg so to fly, as that for any persequution, the^
ceased not to preach whethersoever they were driven. And so the answe^ is easy
to that which follows, namely, that we flee to Cittyes of a strange eu^^try to
whom we can not preach, etc. For 1. it is the fulfilling of our office (...) we
preach to the particular flocks over which we are set, not being Apostles, as
they were: though I could also alledg, that we have so preached t^ others in
these Cittyes, as that, by the blessing of God workeing with (...) we have
gained more to the Lord, then Mr Helw: his Ch: consists of An^ 2dly, I would
know, how he, and the people with him have preached to the City of London?
Surely not as the Apostles did, in the Synagogues, and public places: much
less do they f^y being persequuted, (or go, if so they wi^^ have it) from
City, to City, to preach, as did the Apostles.

Where he further obiecteth that our fleing is to save our selves from being
(...) M. Helw
sheep in the midst of wolves, and from being deliver^d up to counsels, etc:
and that (...) med not take thought what to speak, etc: I answer, that as these
trials did (...) nessarily follow upon the Apostles callings as being to be
employed (...) ANSW:
among unbelieving Jews, and Gentiles, in their ordinary ministration, so d^
they not in like manner, or measure of necessity, ly upon us, who are
ap^poynted to feed the particular flocks of believers, over which we are (...)
Act. 20. 17. 28.
Only they teach, that, if God so dispose of us, and that we cannot by goo^ 1.
Pet. 5. 1
means avoid the same, we then patiently, and in faith give witness to Christ
truth, and testament, by suffering these, and all other kind of evilles. The
Sc^^^ptures in many places exhort unto poverty, hunger, nakedness, loss (...)
goods, and lands for Christ's sake; must now the servants of God theref^^^
necessarily be pore, and destitute of outward necessaryes? Some indeed upon
these ground have vowed wilful poverty: as did this man upon the ^ike, vow
(it seems) wilful persequution.

Toching the practice of the Apostles, Act. 5. 19. 20. 40. 42. and 8. 1. I
answer that at other times those very Apostles did fly persequution; as did
also Paul, though of both as great courage, and zeal, as any other. But for
that present they were tied to that very place, and might not depart thence,
but were, Luke (...) 47.
at Jerusalem first soundly to publish and plant the gospel of Christ: as also
thence to send, or go to other places, as they were occasioned. And (excepting
the extraordinary occasion of the Apostles) the latter of the Act. 1. 8. and 5.
19. 20. and 8. 14 and 11. 22.
Scriptures he brings, is directly against him: where it is said that the whole
Ch: at Jerusalem was scattered abroad, and dispersed, by reason of
persequution. And for their preaching to their cuntrymen the Jews, where they
came; and as they had occasion, to the Gentiles, it is that we also do, and
desire to do, as we have occasion, and means: this being always remembered,
that we are distinct, and entyre congregations, in our selves, which they were
not.

Where in the next place he notes, for his purpose, the assault made against
Paul, and Barnabas in Icon^^^ Act. 14 5. he should also have noted, for the
truths sake, that v. 6. they being aware of it, fled to L^stra, and Derbe. And
for their returning again into the places where they had bee^ persequuted, v.
21. 22. first, their persequutio^s in those places had been but by the
tumultuouse multitude (by the provocation of the Jews) which like a tempest,
were soon over, and not by any stablished laws, or settled course of justice;
and 2dly, it was but the Apostles duetyes, as being universal men, and having
upon them the care of all the Churches, and not being tied to any certain
congregation, as we are. 2. Cor. 11 28.


The commendations given of the Churches of These. 2. These. 1. 4 and of
Pergamus M. Helw
Rev. 2. 13. for their patience in affliction, and that dwelling where Satan's
throne was, ^hey kept Christ's name, eve^ when Antipas was martyred, do not
reprove our practice at all: the like co^me^datio^s being else where give^ of
others, as I have showed, ANSW. Heb. 11. 1 2. 37 38.
for keeping the faith with holiness, in their wandering flight from one place,
and cuntry to another. The Apostle 1. Cor. 7. commends them, who keep
themselves single to avoid trouble in the flesh, and that they may be the more
free for the Lord: does he therefore condemn the^ that marry in the Lord to
avoid fornication? Or does he not commend both, as doing well? and either in
doing ^etter, in diverse regards? He that is in danger of uncleanness does
better to marry: and he that is without that danger, and ca^ more freely in a
single state, give himself to the Lord, does better in that respect, so to
abide. So is it in flight, which is allowed, nay required, against natural
fear, and many other ^oth inco^venie^^es, and eviles, ordinarily, in
persequutio^, as is marriage against fornication Besides, as those Ch: knew not;
happily, whether to go to be better, in those days, so neither was their
persequution such, but that they might enjoy their mutual fellowship and
ministers, and bring up their children and familyes in the information of the
Lord, and his truth (though with great persequution even of some particular men
unto death, at times, and by occasions) which in Engl: all men know, we could
not possibly do.

That which he ads of Christ's enioyning the man dispossessed of the devil, to
g^ home to his friends, and show them what great things the Lord had done for
him, makes M. Helw
as much against themselves as us. For why go not they home every one to his
friends, for that end, but abide in London where fewest of their freind^ ANSW.
are? It is then his ignorance to ty all by that special commandment. At
another time Christ would not fuffer one, so much as to go home, and (...) his
frenids farewell: nor another to bury his father, before they followed him; as
Luke 9. 59. 60. 61 62.
here on the contrary he would not suffer this man to follow him, but send^ him
back to his friends: but does not at all there-in for-bid him flight i^
persequution, as Mr Helw: gathers.

That we should not fear men, which can kill the body, but deny our selves,
etc* we do acknowledge, and by the grace of God, so practice. We have not
fear^men, that is, so feared them, as for their persequutions to deny any part
(...) the truth of Christ known unto us, or any way to sin against the same*
but do keep (as frayl men) a good conscience in the obedience of all the parts
thereof: having also (the glory be the Lords, who has showed (...) this
mercy, and enabled us thereunto) learnt to deny our selves, though with much
weakness, in our cuntry, friends, possessions, riches, credits, liberty* yea and
in our lives also in resolution, and will, for Christ's sake, and truth: and
withal to suffer those kinds of afflictions, for the avoiding of which* many
have withdrawn from the same truth, for which they have offered their lives to
the Magistrate, as resolvedly, as this man has his, for his errors.

Where he says further, that the Cittyes where we are, neither recea^^ us, nor
the word we bring, otherwise then they receav Turks, and Jews, (...) speaks
very untruly both of them, and us, as (were it of use) I could she^ evidently.
And lastly, to his demand, when we will shake of the dust of our (...) for a
witness against the City, or house, that will not receav us, and depart
thence, (...) the Apostles did? I answer, when we are Apostles, as they were:
and do agay^ ask, why did not he, ^ why do not his companions shake of the dust
o^ their feet against London, which recavs not them at all? And if the Churche^
of Christ be thus to shake of the dust of their feet against the Cittye^ which
receav not their doctrine, how could the Ch: of Pergamus be com^mended for
dwelling, and continueing in that City, which received not (...) truth, but
had on the contrary, Satan's throne established in it, and persequu^^^^ the
Martyrs of the truth unto death?

For flight then, thus much. As we read that Christ our Lord, the Prophets, and
Apostles, did at some times and ordinarily avoid and flee persequution, and at
other times, not: so are we to know, that there are times, and occasions
seasonable for both. Neither are the words of Christ, when they persequute you,
flee, an absolute commaundment, as he thinks, any more then those of the
Master to his servant Luke 17. 8. when thou have served me, eat thou, and
drink thou. They are a grant of liberty, and a direction, how to use it. As we
then shall perceav either our flying, or abydeing to be most for Gods glory,
and the good of men, especially of our family, and those nearest unto us, and
for our own furtherance in holiness; and as we have strength to wade thorough
the dangers of persequutions, so are we with good conscience to use the one,
or other. Which (our hope and comfort also is) we have done, in these our days
of sorrow: some of us comeing over by banishment, and others otherwise.

And thus have I answered whatsoever in his book has any color of reason
against our flight in persequution. His rash and ungodly Censures both upon
our practice, and persons, yea upon the very secret intents of our hearts, I
do of purpose pass by, as being the fruits of his stout stomach, and heart
fowred with his own leven; assureing my self, that no wise man, will for the
same, either think us the less, or him the more truly Zealous.

But for that diverse weak persons have been troubled and abused by some other
things in the same book: in which also he much insulteth, and that over my
self, amongst, and above others, I think it fit in this place to annex an
answer to that part of it, which is directed against us, whom he (with others)
miscalles Brownists, and against our (falsely called by him, false) profession.

The outvvard Baptism received in Engl: is lavvfully retained.
ANd to Prove our Profession of Christ false; and us the teachers, false
Prophets, M. Helw
he takes his first ground out of our Apology; where a true visible Church is
described, a company of people called, and separated from the world, by the
word of God, etc: and therevppon concludes peremptorily, that we all are mere
Page 12^ 124. Ioh. 7. 7 and 14. 17 and 16. 9 and 17 25 1. Ioh. 5. 1^.
Infidels, unbelievers, and without Christ: and taking it for our own grant,
that before our separation we were of the world, that is, of them that h^^e
Christ; and cannot receav the spirit of truth; and that beleev not in Christ,
but ly in wickedness: he goes about to prove, that if then we were of the world,
we are so still, because we have not been joined to Christ, by amending our
lives, and by being baptized, and so by putting on of Christ, by baptism. Act.
2. 38. Gal. 3. 27.

The effect then of all is, that, because we have not taken up a new outward
washing, or baptism (for that of amendment of life, he but ads for fashion) as
he has done, therefore we are, of the world, Infidels, haters of Christ, and
what not?

For answer then, first we grant that remaining in the assemblyes, we ANSW.
were not separated from the world, to wit, in our fellowship; but does it
follow therevppon, that till our separation we were of the world, namely in our
persons? which is, as if he should conclude, that because in a confused heap
(as are the assemblyes) the good stones are not severed from the rubbish,
therefore even they, as the rest, are rubbish also. Were such of the Corinth:
as thorough error, or evil custom, or other infirmity, continued communion
with the Idolaters in their idolatrous feastings in the ^ Cor 6.
Idol temples, (whom the Apostle therefore exhorts to separate themselves, and
to come from among them,) were they, I say infidels, and darkness? or does not
the same Apostle their expressly call them believers, light, righteousness,
notwithstanding that their great failing, and evil, of ignorance, or humayn
fraylty, out of which the Lord did call them? Or was Mr Helw: himself all the
while he was vnseparated, an Infidel, without Christ, and his spirit, and
hateing him? If so he were, (considering the great show he made of faith, and
love in, and to Christ, and the singular manifestations of the spirit) he was a
notorius hypocrite as the earth bore: but if on the contrary, he did not then
hate Christ, but had faith, and grace, (though in never so small a measure, his
proof is of no force, but he himself proved a vayn man, that would deny the
grace of God in himself, to advantage an error against other men: Which is a
kind of blasphemy against the H: Ghost, though not of malice, as was that of
the Pharisees, yet of preposterous, and pervers Zeal: of Ioh. 1. (...).
which I wish all the Lords people may beware.

2dly, it is not true he says, that none can come, and be joined to Christ's
without Romans 11 ^0.
Baptism. The Scriptures testify, that so many as beleiv in Christ, receav him:
are Gal. 2. ^0.
ingrafted into him: having him Ephesians. 3. ^7.
liveing in them, and dwelling in their hearts. Which faith is before Baptism
in some men a longer time, in some a shorter, and Mat. 28 ^9
in some also dying unbaptized. Math. 8. 10. and 15. 28. Act. 10. 4. 35. Luke
23. 40. etc. And according to this was the tenor of Christ's commission to his
Apostles by teaching to Act 11. ^6.
make disciples or Christians, and to bring men to beleiv, and after to baptize
them. And to baptize any of years, but being before joined to Christ by actual
faith, and so making manifestation, Mark. 16 ^6.
were to profane Gods ordinance. Neither is it Paul's meaning where he tells the
Galatians, that they which had been baptized into Christ, had put on Christ,
that they were not joined to Christ before their outward baptism, but to show,
that their baptism was a lively sign of their union with, and incorporation
into Christ, and participation of the washing of his blood, and spirit, as also
an effectual means more, and more, to apply the Rom: ^ 14.
same unto them: being all their life long to put on the L: Jesus Christ, and
the new man, as the same Apostle teaches. And for Act. 2. 35. it shows Ephesians. 4
24.
indeed, that they who believ, and repent, are to be baptized, to wit, being
unbaptized before as they then were, and as we now are not; God having also
added to the outward washing, or baptism, though in the false Ch:, the inward
washing of the spirit to repentance, and amendment of life.

To his inference, that if Engl: be Babylon, out of which the Lords people are
to M Hel^
come, Page 12^ 128.
and baptism the seal of the Covenant of grace, as we teach, then we reteyn the
baptism of Babylon thereby to be sealed unto the convenant of grace. I answer,
that we reteyn the seal of the Covenant of grace, though ministered in Babylon:
and ANSW
not the baptism of Babylon, but the baptism of the Lord in it self, and by the
Babilonians spiritual, usurped, and profaned: but by faith, and the spirit
now sanctified to our use. Which we therefore reteyn, as we do the same
gospel, or Covenant, by the same men, and means there taught, and administered
unto us: bringing both the one, and other thence, as were the holy vessels of
the Lords house, of old, brought out of Babylon civil, Dan. 5 ^. 2. 3. 4.
etc. with Es^ 17. 8 9 etc.
after their profanation there. And as well may the doctrines of faith there
ministered, and thence brought by us, be called the stolen bread of Babylon, as
he in wantonness of wit calls the Baptism, the stolen waters of Babylon.

So that it is neither true he says, that we were Infidels, and without
Christ, till our separation: nor that men are made Christians by Baptism: nor
that we reteyn the Baptism of Babylon. Neither yet, though we ought to receav a
new outward washing (which we neither think, nor he proves) it being but our
failing of ignorance in an outward ordinance, were we thereby debarred from
being true Christians, no nor from being a true visible Church.

And as I have else where proved against others (with whom these men consort,
and both of them herein, with the Papists, that the Ch: is not gathered,
Iustificat^ page 283* 384.
nor men thereinto admitted by Baptism, so will I here for the same purpose
further ad these Reasons.

And 1. the Ch: is not given to baptism, but bapt: on the contrary oracles. Rom
3. 3^ Psalm. 14^ 20.
And since bapt: is a public action, it cannot be performed but by public
authority in, and of the Church: which Church thefore must be presupposed; and
before it.

^^th. 3. 6.
a member of the Jewish Church. Math. 11. 11. Therefore the Ch: is not gathered
by baptism.

3dly, If men be received into the Ch: by baptism, them must they, as occasion
is, be cast out, by being unbaptized: and so if God again give them repentance,
they must be received in by a 2d baptism, and so by a 3d, or 4th, if occasion
be. The truth is, such men must renew their Covenant with God, and his Ch: by
which they were at the first received; but not their outward baptism, unto
which these, and other men's fancy leads.

4thly, to receav in, and so to cast out members, are dispensations of Christ's
kingly office; whereas bapt: is a work of his Prophesy: which is indeed to be
joined with men's admission into the Ch: and to follow upon it immediately, if
the persons be not before baptized.

Mr Helw: his Ch: appear to all men to be built upon the sand, considering the
bapt: it had, and has: which was, as I have heard from themselves, on this
manner. Mr Smith, Mr Helw: and the rest, having utterly dissolved, and
disclaymed their former Ch: state, and ministry, came together to erect a new
Ch: by baptism: unto which they also ascribed so great virtue, as that they
would not so much as pray together, before they had it. And after some
streyning of courtesy, who should begin, and that of John Baptist, Math: 3. 14.
misalledged, Mr Smith baptized first himself, and next Mr Helwis, and so the
rest, making their particular confessions. Now to let pass his not
sanctifying 1. Tim. ^ 4. 5.
a public action by public prayer: his taking unto himself that hono^^,
which was not given him, Heb. 5. 4.
either immediately from Christ, or by the Church: his baptizeing himself,
which was more then Christ himself did: I demand into what Ch: he entered by
baptism? or entering by baptism into Math. 3. ^4.
no Ch: how his baptism could be true, by their own doctrine? Or Mr Smithes
bapt: not being true, nor he by it entering into any Church, ho^ Mt Helw: his
baptism could be true, or into what Ch: he entered by it? These things thus
being, all wise men will think that he had small cause either to be so much
enamoured of his own baptism, or so highly to despis^ other men's, for the
unorderly, or otherwise unlawful administration of it.

The next clamor he rayseth is against our Prophets (whom he so bef^^^^seth,
as it by often, and much so calling them, he would make them such) (...) that to
draw people to separate, we call, and prove Engl: Babylon, Sodom, and Egypt,
(...) M. Helw
of which Gods people must come: but after, when we would persuade to the
retey^^^^ of the baptism there received, we call it rebellions, and apostate
Israel, whose circumcis^^ was not to be repeated, when upon their repentance,
they came unto the passover. For the reproof of which our doctrine, he
affirms some, and infers sundry other untruths. As 1. that we teach men
to reteyn the first, and chief badg or mark of Babylon which is their Baptism,
the seal of the Covenant of grace, as we say.

This Chaleng I answered even now; and shall further hereafter justify (the L:
assisting me) the reteyning our outward washing without repetition: ANSW*
as I have also disproved that his 2d affirmation, that there cannot be a Ch:
of unbaptized Christians.

Besides it is not true he says, that we have no other seal for our whole
Christianity, then the Baptism we received in England. We have (besides the
inward seal of the spirit, and faith) the promises of the gospel, and supper
of the Lord, with many experiments of the love of God, sealing, and confirming
unto us, that we are Christ's.

His peremptory affirmation the we might have cried long enough, Come from
Israel, and separate your selves from Israel, before any fearing God, or
having understanding of his truth, would have followed us, is but his wild
guess, without warrant. And the fear of God being the same, in the hearts of
his people now, and of old, yea greater conscience of sin being required now,
according to the greater measure of revelation, why should not the conscience
of the like estate of Engl: as well persuade men to separate themselves from
the apostasy thereof to the true Ch: and ordinances; as it did such of all the
tribes of Israel, as set their hearts to seek the L: God of Israel, to
separate 2. Chr. ^ 13 16.
themselves, with the Priests, and Levites, from Ieroboams apostasy, to Judah
and Jerusalem?

Of like truth with the former is his after-affirmation, that if we were M. Helw
true Israelites before our separation, then all we left behind us are true
Israelites: for so all the ten tribes under Jeroboam were true Israelites: and
all we in the assemblyes before our separation were in one estate, etc.

It is true that the ten tribes in their apostasy, were true Israelites,
naturally, ANSW
and so were the Ismaelites, and Edomites Abraham's true natural seed. But what
is this to our question, which is not about men's natural estate, but about
their religious, and Church State? The Ch: is not a natural estate, neither
was Abraham and Israel Gods peculiar people, and Church, by nature (for they
were Ephesians. 2. ^ Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 7. 5. Rev 20. 26.
by nature children of wrath, as well as others) but by grace, and because God
loved them above other people, and separated them into Covenant with himself.
Our question then being about religion, and men's religious estate. and as they
are worshippers of God, Christ our Lord teaches us in Ioh. 1. 4^
Nathanaels person, who are true Israelites; namely they in whom there is no
guile. And Paul tells us, that he is not a Jew, who is a Jew outward, nor
that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh, but that he is a Jew, who is
(...) within, and that Circumcision, which is of the heart, etc. But for the
ten tribes, or other Abraham's nat^^rall seed, in their rebellion against the
Lord they were of true plants, dege^^^, rate, and changed into the plants of a
strange, or false vine. They were true Israelites, Ier. 8 1.
as a theif is a true man, to wit, naturally: but not he morally: much less^
they spiritually, or in the consideration of religion, of which we speak.

And for us: it follows not, that because we came from the parrish
assemblyes, therefore all that we left behind us were true Israelites, as we.
For then the mayn cause of our separation had been taken away. We did even
there (by the great mercy of God) receav grace to be in our measure Nathanaels,
(...) without guile: and so to serve God, and walk with men, though we were
ignorant of many of Christ's ordinances, (as was Nathanaell without guile, when
he was ignorant of his person) which to say of all in the assemblyes, and th^^
they are Nathanaels, were false, and foolish. Neither could Mr Helw. without
being reproved by his own heart, say, that, when he was a Professor i^ Engl:
there was no difference between him, and the Atheists, and Epicures i^ the
parrishes, though in that confused state of things they, and he were o^ one,
and the same visible Church.

Lastly (to pass by his mis-putting the words, and misinterpreting the meaning
of them that wrote the Apology, by taking that as meant of the members of the
assemblyes, which was spoken of such as were separated; (...) also his bitter
vpbrayding them with ignorant dissimulation, and flattery, through his own rash
ignorance,) that which he affirms of Iudahs never deny^^^ Israel to be her
sister, is his saying without proof, or explanation.

What Judah thought of her, appears by the speech of Abijah the king 2. Chr.
13. 4. 5. 6. 7. etc: and what the Lord thought of her, we shall she^^
hereafter; howsoever they are called Exe. 13. ^. 3. 4
sisters sometimes in respect of they^ joint estate before the division, (and
so Numb. ^0 14. Obed. 10. 12. Ezech. ^6.
Edom also was called Isreal's brother, in respect of their first fathers:)
sometimes in respect of their concurrence in iniquity, and so Sodom also is
called a third sister with them. And (...) were not their estates alike, no not
the two likest of them, though bot^ evil. For there is, besides good, and
evil, (as was Judah in her integrity, ^ Israel in her apostasy,) evil, and
worse, both in persons, and things (thoug^ both evil) compared together. And
so as the evilles in Engl: are of dive^ degrees, and kinds, we do
proportionably, by way of resemblance, term i^ Apostate Israel, Babylon,
Sodom, and Egypt, spiritually so called. In respect of the Spiritual external
government there, not in the hands of the son of (...) ^. Chr. 23. 8.
Christ, the king of Saints, but of his usurping adversary, the Prelacy, and of
the apostate preisthood thence derived: of the will worship, though of the tr^^
God; of the forged holidays, and other the like defections, we call it
Apost^^^ Israel; in regard of the great, and monstrous confusion there both of
person^ and things, with the spiritual bondage of the Lords people to the
Prelacy, ^^^ilon: in regard of the same bondage, together with the Egiptian
darkness spiritual, with other the spiritual botches, and plagues, upon the
souls of the body of that Church, Egypt: and lastly Sodom, in respect of
Ezech. 1449. See Mr Perk: Exposit upon Jude page 147. Apol. page 11^
the iniquity of Sodom abounding there, as Pride, fulness of bread, idleness, and
want of mercy toward the pore: with contempt of heavenly admonition. Gen: 19.
9. 14.

The next thing he reproves is our distinction of Churches, and so of
Sacraments into true, false, and none. And having in the first place liberally
reproached us, he inveighs greatly against our distinctio^s in general, and
the several respects we put of things: bewraying plainly therein his
tumultuons ignorance, by which he would confound, and blunder all things
together: whereas there is nothing more necessary for the just knowledge of
things, and ending of co^troversyes, then distinctions, and respects, rightly,
and seasonably put: which are in disputations, like that distributive justice
in many suits of law. For whereas both parties would have all, for some right,
which either has to a part, a just distinction gives unto either his several
right, and satisfyeth both.

And having spent his breath in reproaching our distinctions of true, false
and none, he for our conviction begins with a distinction of worldly things: in
which he graunts a difference between false and none: as that there is a false
hower-glasse, Page 134
and no hower-glasse, a false looking-glass, and no looking-glass, etc.
whereas, in the ^rdinances of God (says he) as the Church, and Baptism, there
is no such difference; and in so saying he does indeed offer to the veiw of all
^ wisemen, who have their Eccle. (...) 24.
eyes in their heads, a looking-glass, wherein both the il-favoured face of
his own distinction, and the vanity of his exception may appear.

The use of ^ a looking-glass is to show what manner the native face of a man
is. Iam. 1. 23. 24.
And the reason why we call such a one false, is, because it does not that in
truth, which it makes show of, but deceaves him that looks in it, for the
fashion, and portrature of his countenance. So the use of an hower-glasse is to
show when the hour is just come about: which we therefore call false, when it
does not so indeed, but deceavs him that looks unto it, either by running
short, or over. Hence common sense teaches, that if there may be a Ch: or
assembly, of people making a profession, and show of Christ, and Christian
baptism, and religion, but not being, and having that indeed, which in show,
and appearance it seems to be, and have, and so but deceaving him that regards
it, then may there also be, and so rightly be called, a false Ch:. If reply be
made, that this false Ch: is no Ch:, it may as truly be answered, that that
false hower-glasse is no hower-glasse: as in truth, and indeed, it is not an
hower-glasse, but a three, or five-quarters-glasse, or over, or under. It is
evident by the same common Reason of both, that there may be as well a false
Church, which is not no Church, as a false looking, or hower-glasse, which are
not none: and other conviction needs he not, then by his own instance.

The Scriptures he brings for his purpose, which are, They said they (...)
Apostles, and were not, and Jews, and were not. Rev. 2. 2. 9. and 3. 9. he
corrupts very audaciously, though, (I hope) much of ignorance: instead of
not, putting none: whereas between these there is great difference. For (...)
only denies that which they said they were; whereas none, extends further,
as he also intends it, and denies them to be Apostles, or Jews at all, or of
any sort. They said they were Apostles, that is true Apostles, sent, and set a
work by Christ immediately; but they were not, that is not these, or such, as
they pretended themselves to be. They were false Apostles, setting themselves
^. Cor. 1. 13.
a work, and deceiptfull workers, (not no workers) as else where the Apostle
calls them. They said they were Jews, and were not, that is not Iew^^
within, nor the Circumcision of the heart, as Paul expounds the phrase of
speech ^om. 2. ^8. 29.
more at larg. For Jews, (without doubt) they were, and circumcised in the
flesh; for which circumcision, with other Jewish ceremonies, they contended. It
is usual with the Scriptures to speak of things in religion, as if they were
not at all, when they are not, as they should be; and the reason is, because
God does not accept of them, nor they themselves receav the right fruit
thereof. Thus it is said of the inhabitants of Samaria that they feart not the
Lord, though it besayd immediately before, they feared the Lord: thu^ ^. King.
^7. 34. ^2. 33.
Paul says that he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, nor that circumcision
which is outward in the flesh: as he also tells the Corinth: that they cannot
dri^^ the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils. They did drink of both
outwardly, but ^ Romans 2. ^8.
unlawfully, and of the better without fruit: as he also tells the same Corinth^
^ 1. Cor. (...). 21.
chapter 11. 17. 18. 20. 21. that by reason of their contentions, and other abuses,
their eating the Lords supper, was not to eat the L: supper, that is, as he
expounds himself, not with profit, or for the better, but for the worse. Even
so these were not Apostles, that is sent of Christ, and whom the Churches ought
so to receav; nor Jews, that is such as whom God would praise. Romans 2. ^29.


The same I answer to Ephesians. 4 4. 5. which is after objected, of one body, (...)
Church, one faith, one baptism: that is one true faith, Church, and baptism.
And to hold that besides that one true justifying, and saveing faith, there
are not other false faythes, is it self a special point of a false faith, and
persuasion. The Apostle 1. Tim. 1. 5. speaks of faith unfeigned, from which love
springs: showing therein, that there is a feyned, or false faith, which James
calls a dead faith, for the want of this love, and the fruits thereof, the
works (...) mercy. Yea the Devils themselves beleiv, and have a kind of faith,
as have Chapter 2. 17. ^0.
also some wicked men such a faith, ^. 19.
as by which they cast out Devils, ^ Mat. 7. ^2^. 23.
and (...) many miracles in Christ's name. And both the Scriptures, and
experience teach that wicked men have a faith, or persuasion of Gods favor,
and salvation which is no true faith, and therefore a false faith, or
persuasion, and so right^ called. The same may be said of the Church, and
Sacraments, and much more. The consideration of one God, and one Christ, is
something different, but directly against these men: for there may be, and are
assemblyes of false worshippers, of this one God, and one Christ: and therefore
false Churches, and so their Sacraments accordingly false Sacraments.

And thus much to show how vayn his distinction is between Gods ordinances, and
wordly things (though even they be also Gods ordinances) as he applies it: and
to prove, that false may as well, and by the same reason be applied to the
outward ordinances of the Church, as unto worldly things: as also to answer the
Scriptures he brings to disprove that part of our distinction, touching a false
Church. It now remayns I prove by the Scriptures, and good Reasons grounded
therevppon, that there are false Churches, and false Ch: ordinances: and that
such a Church the ten tribes were in their defection, and division from Judah.

And first, since false is nothing but that which deceaveth under a show, Mr
Helw:) and that such Churches, or assemblyes there are too many, which under a
profession of the name, and sundry truths, and ordinances of Christ, do
deceav; it follows necessarily, that there maybe, and are, false Churches.
And thus much in effect he graunts else where, viz that a false Church are they,
that say, and make show, they are a true Ch: and are not. Only he labors
upon his ordinary disease in misinterpreting these words, and are not, as if
they were and are none; whereas they only deny the thing affirmed, which is, a
true Church, and no more.

2dly, in his entrance against us, and every where, he condemns our
profession, a false profession, and us as false Prophets, (as he does also the
profession and Prophets of the Prelates, and Puritans, as he calls them:) and
therein yealdeth necessarily, that the Churches making this false profession,
under these false Prophets, (by him so deemed) are false Churches. Neither can
he turn of the matter, as his custom is, by saying we are no Churches, and no
Prophets; for he knows the Prophets, or teachers teach, and the people with
them, profess the mayn truths in the gospel: which he therefore cannot say
to be no Prophets, or to make no profession.

3 dly, the Apostle 2. Cor. 11. 26. complayns of his perils amongst false
brethen, and Gal 2. 4. that false brethren were crept into the Church. Now if
there may be (as the Apostle expressly teaches) false brethren, and the same
also baptized outwardly, then is a Ch: consisting of such in the body thereof,
a false Church, and their baptism answerably, false Baptism.

The Scriptures, and common sense teach, that there are false worshippers,
feared the Lord, and worshipped the God of Iakob, after a manner, and had a
temple in mount Geriz^, that they worshipped they knew not what: opposeing them
to true worshippers, King. ^ 32.
and therein calling them false worshippers, ^ 4. 12.
and their assembly a false Church. And when a Papist prays unto God in an
unknown tongue, or in the name, ^ ^2. ^ 3.
or merits of the virgin Mary; ^at. 15 ^.
or when any other man draws nigh unto God with his mouth, ^rov. ^. 8.
and honors him with his lips, but heaveing his heart far from him: or
teaches for doctrines, men's commandments; he worshippeth, though in vayn,
and his prayers are Prayers, and Sacrifices, though abominable. He is not then
no worshipper, but a false worshipper; and so by consequence, a company, or
congregation of such, so combyneing, and continueing, are falsely called no
Chnrch, or Congregation, but most truly, a false Church, Congregat: or
assembly, which are all one.

Lastly, that Israel in Ieroboams apostasy, was a false Church, (though others
Ains.
have done it sufficiently) I will plainly prove, (God assisting me) against
mine adversary; answering, in the first place, what he obiecteth to the
contrary. ^ Helw
Which is, that the ten tribes then apostate, were the true seed of Abraham,
separated from the world, under the Covenant of God, which was the Covenant of
Circumcision. Genesis 17. 7. 15. as well as Judah in Hezechiahs time, when they
came to the passover.

If the Ch: of God had been in those days a natural state, and the Covenant
^NSW:
a natural Covenant, and Circumcision a natural sign, or seal, then had the
ten tribes indeed been within that Covenant, and of the true Ch: into what
apostasy, idolatry, or other wicknednes soever they did, or could fall: and
with them the Ismaelites, and Edomites also, for they all were alike Abraham's
natural seed: yea with the one, and other, the whole world; for there is one
common state of nature, and the Jews by it, children of wrath, as well, as
others. But since the Lords Covenant with Abraham, and his seed, was no
natural, or universal Covenant, ^h. 2. 3. Genesis 17. ^7.
but a Covenant of Gods special love, and promise with his peculiar people: in
which he bo^nd himself to be their God, that is, all happiness, unto them: and
them to perfect, or upright walking before him; having Circumcision annexed,
^sal. ^4. 15. (...). 4. ^.
as a seal of the righteousness of faith, it is ignorance too gross thus to
measure then by natural respects: or to think that any had a part in that
Covenant by nature, or natural generation: by which, as before has been
proved, and shall be hereafter, more at larg, all are under Gods curse, and
children of wrath. Neither is it true, that the ten tribes (in their apostasy)
were separated from the world under the Covenant of God, which was the Covenant
of Circumcision. ^1. Ioh. 5 ^.
They were by, ^ph. 2. 2. ^
and in their apostasy separated from God, his Church, ordinances, and worship.
2 Chr. ^. 15.
2. Chr. 15. 3. And since the world lies in wickedness, having the Devil for
the prince thereof, how were they separated from the world, who served Devils
in all idolatry, and wickedness? Neither is the consequence of any force,
because faithful, and obedient Abraham, with his seed in his time, and so
successively continueing in his faith, and obedience, were in that the Lords
Covenant, and had right to all the gracious promises thereof, that therefore
unfaithful, and rebellious Israel, (the fathers with the children) so
remaining incorrigible, were in, and under the same Covenant, and promises of
grace; of which more hereafter.

But (says he) if they had been the false seed of Abraham, then had their
Circumcision M. He^
been false, and they a false Church. I answer, that, comeing of Abraham
naturally, and pretending the same faith, and religion with him, and so the
same ANS^^
right to the gracious Covenant of God, and seal thereof, but being indeed
without either the one or other; both believing, and worshipping after a false,
and feyned manner; they were (though his true seed in respect of nature) yet in
refped of faith, religion, the Covenant, and worship of God, his false, and
adulterous the children of whoredoms, as the Prophet speaks, Hos. 2. ^ 2.
Chr. ^ 11. 15. ^
yea the children of the Devil, doing his works, and serving him, and so by
his own confession, and undeniable truth, a false Church, to the deceaving of
themselves, and others.

2dly, every true Ch: is truly, and rightly gathered, and constituted (for
Israel considered in her apostasy, and separation from Judah, and as we now
speak of her, was not truly, nor rightly gathered, but by most sinful schism,
and rebellion both against God, and man: and therefore was no true visible
Church.

The Lord expressly testifyeth by his Prophets, that he had for her wickedness,
and rebellions, wherein she was incorrigible, Ier. 3. ^
given her a bill of divorce, and put her away: that Hos. 1. ^ and 2. 2.
she was not his people, nor wife, nor he her housband: in which respect also
it is, Eze. 23.
that he called Samaria, Ahola, that is, her own tabernacle: as on the
othersyde, he calls Jerusalem Aholiba, which is my tabernacle in her.

There was at that time but one only true visible Ch:: one temple, one Deuteronomy.
1^ 5. t. etc. 1. King. ^ 2 Chr. 1 ^. 6. etc. 2. Chr 1 4.
also by a special hand of the Lords providence, for the punishment of both,
could not be the true visible Ch: of God, nor any part of it, whatsoever good
either person priveldg, or thing, it still retained above other peoples.

Lastly, the Covenant with Araham on Gods part was, that he would be his God,
and the God of his seed, Genesis 17. 7. and thereof their Circumcision was a
sign: v. 8. 9. 10* Now we read 2. Chr. 13. 5. that Israel had been a long
time without the true God. By which it appears, that Israel, was without the
Lords Covenant: and that unto them Circumcision could not possibly be a sign,
that God was their God. It was by them merely usurped, and in that their
usurpation, a false, and lying sign, and like a seal set to a blank, y^^ like
the kings broad seal treacherously usurped, against his express will.

Wicked men, and such as Psalm. 50 ^. 17.
hated to be reformed, and cast Gods word behind them, had naught to do with
Gods Covenant, nor with Circumcision the seal thereof: nor with any other of
Gods ordinances. Their sacrificeing of a lamb, ^s. 66. 3.
was as if they had cut of a dogs neck: and so consequently their circumciseing
their children, as if they had cut the foreskin of their dogs: notwithstanding
they were true Israelites, yea true Jews, naturally. They were expressly
forbidden by the Lord to meddle with his Covenant; and in that their abuse of
it, it was a lying sign in the ends, and uses thereof, and no way affoarding
that, which it pretended: neither could they so vseing it, be by it, at all
confirmed, that God was their God. And yet was not the outward cutting
afterward to be repeated, if God gave repentance: neither is the outward
washing in the name of the trinity now, though merely usurped by them, who are
forbidden to meddle with it. Neither matters it, whether such persons be in true
Church, or false, which Mr Helw: calls none. Both profane, and vsurp it, and
have the bare outward lying sign, as it is said of Ephraim, or Israel, that
she compassed about the Lord with lies, and deceit: whereas Judah ruled with
God, and was faithful with the most Holy. Hos 11. 2.


But for conclusion of this point. If any of the heathen joined themselves unto
Israel in her Apostasy, and so were Circumcised, they being neither Abraham's
true seed, by nature, nor by faith, but merely false, and counterfayt, their
Circumcision must be false Circumcision by Mr Helw: his own grant: which
notwithstanding was not afterward to be repeated, if God gave them repentance,
and to come to Judah to eat the passover. There was one law for the eating of
the passover, to him that was home-born, and to him that Exodus 12. ^9.
was a stranger, or soiourner. And here appears a direct warrant for our
reteyning the outward Baptism, received, and usurped, in the like apostate
estate, and assemblyes, wherein they, and their familyes, and synagogues were.

I ad, that either the outward baptism received out of a true Ch: must be
retained, or else all other Churches must be able certainly to discern, what
day, and hour a true Ch: falling by degrees, into notorious heresy, idolatry,
or other impiety, (and still baptizeing notwithstanding) becomes a false Ch:
(as we hold) or (as Mr Helw: will have it) no Church. For except other
Churches can certainly know, and discern this, they cannot with faith receav
such members, as unto whom God may give grace, to leav th^^ apostate synagogue,
and to come unto them. Such of them, as were baptized, whilst it remained a
true Ch: they must not rebaptize: but such (...) were baptized after it ceased
to be a true Ch: must (say our adversaryes, (...) be received in by baptism.
But it being impossible for other Church^^ thus to discern of the day, and hour
of the removeing of a Churches Candlestick, especially for such as are far of,
and have had little, or no meddling with her, it follows necessarily, that the
outward baptism administered in a Ch: or assembly degenerated from a true Ch:
into a false, (which they call no) Church, must be retained upon the parties
repentance, without reiteration.

For conclusion then of this point also, I demand, whether a man cast out of
the true Ch: for some notorious sin, and for impenitency therein, have true
baptism, or no? They will not, neither can they, say, he has, wryteing of it,
as they do: neither indeed has he true Bapt: in the ends, and uses thereof. He
must then either have a false baptism, or none. Not none, for then upon his
repentance, and readmission into the Ch: he must be rebaptized: he has
therefore upon him a false baptism. There is then (contrary to their doctrine)
false Baptism, which is not none, and the same also to be retained, and by the
persons repentance becomeing true Baptism. Neither matters it, that such a man
was baptized in a true Ch: at the first, since by his Rom ^ 25.
transgression his Circumcision is made uncircumcision. In his obstinate
iniquity he cannot enjoy the fruit, or benefit of his baptism: which serves
only to make him the more inexcusable, and a more profane Covenantbreaker
with God. He has only remaining the outward washing, and that much more
without right, then many thousands in Engl: have, or in Rome either.

And thus much for the justifying of the difference in the Apology, between a
true, false, and no Church, and Sacraments; as also for the applying of the
same distinction to our present occasion.

The particulars following in his book do more specially concern my self, and
wryteings: against whom, and which, (thorough high persuasion of his own
knowledge, and most vnmortifyed affections, together with that Zeal of God*
which I bear him record he had, though not accordeing unto knowledge) he lets
loose his tongue into most intemperate rage

And first he reproacheth me for the use of that, for the want whereof I have
just cause to blame my self: which is my Logic, and Philosophy as being Page
13^
none of the gif^s, wherewith Christ endued his Apostles: wherein he verifyeth
the old saving, that, k^owledg has no enemy but ignorance. Logic is nothing
but the right use of reason: as is Philosophy the love of wisdom divine, and
humayn. And did the Apostles want these? Or does M^ Helw. envy unto me my small
pittance in them? Would he have me a new Nebuchad-nezzar, with an ^x^s heart in
a man's body? Indeed this his judgment against those arts of wisdom, and reason,
well agrees with his ignorant, and bruteish dealing against me, and the truth.
And for my terms of art, (which he also blames) they are neither many, nor
without cause: nor yet so dark, but that an ordinary Reader may, as they are
explaned by me, understand them.

But I come to the points themselves, against which he deals: the first
whereof is a double consideration I put of Baptism: the one taking it, in
(...) self, and as I speak, n^k^dly, and in the essential causes, or parts, to
wit w^shing with water in the name of the Father, Son, and H. Ghost: the other
in respect of the manner of administering it: namely, the Minister by, and the
person upon whom, and the communion wherein it is administered. In the former
respect I affim the Baptism true, both in Engl: and Rome: but not so in the
latter, but on the contrary false, and idolatrous, as being against the 2d
Commaundment, which forbids nothing but idolatry, and false worship.

Against the former of these respects Mr Helw: speaks angerly, as himself
confesses, and ignorantly, as I shall manifest, God assisting me. Yea I did so
manifest in the same place of my book, by the holy vessels of the temple,
carried (...) Babylon: and yet still remaining such in their nature, and right,
though in their use, ^ ^. Chr. 36. 7. Ezra 1. 7 D^n 53. Genesis 34. 25. 22.
rather abuse, they became Belshazzars quaffing bowls. Likewise the
Circumcision of the Schechemites was in it self, true Circumcision, and they
circumcised in the f^^sh, ^ Iakob, and his sons were circumcised. But to call
this true circumcision in the right ends, and administration, were to call
darkness, light; and profane hypocrisy, the true worship of God. So is there
also a true outward baptism, or washing with water in the name of the Father,
Son and H. Ghost, both in Engl: and Rome also, notwithstanding the unworthy
profanation of th^^ ordinance, in the one, or other place.

The things he obiecteth, for substance, are these. That, Baptism i^ ^ M. Helw
spiritual ordinance; which water, w^shing, and words are not: That, they that
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal: 3. 27. That, there is one
Baptism of Christ, Ephesians: 4. 5. That, the baptism of Christ is the bapt: of
amendment of life, for the remission of sins. Mark. 1. 4. That, except a man be
born of water, and the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: Ioh: 3.
5. Hebr: 10. 22. That, ^ ought to have our hearts pure from an evil
conscience, and to be washed in ^ bodies with pure water: and that, here is the
true matter wherewith men must be washed, which is, water, and the H. Ghost:
and that, we cannot devide the water, and the spirit in this baptism, being
joined together by Christ: and that, he that deny^ washing, or is not washed
with the spirit, is not baptized: and that, he that denies wash ing, or is not
washed with water, is not baptized.

That which must be first, and chiefly considered for answer, and as tw^ ground
of the rest, is, that, that one Baptism mentioned Ephesians: 4. has in it t^ ANSW:
parts: the sign, and the thing signified: either of which is also in the
Scriptures called Baptism: the one, the baptism with water, wherewith John
baptize^ Math. 3. ^1.
and wherewith all Ministers do baptize; which is the outward baptism, Mark 1. ^
sign of the inward: the other the Baptism with the H. Ghost, wherewith only
Christ, and God do baptize: as there is in like manner, an outward teaching by
the word, and an inward teaching by the spirit: an outward eating of the Lords
supper in the use of the signs, and an inward eating of the thing, by faith in
the heart. And even this outward washing with water in the name of the Trinity,
(which he calls water, washing, and words) is in it self a spiritual
ordinance (though he take the contrary for granted) as being properly
subordinate to man's spiritual estate, and appointed of God to signify, and
confirm the inward washing of the soul by the blood, and spirit of Christ.

And this ground laid, I grant, first, that the outward, and inward baptism
are joined together by Christ, and so ought not by men to be separated, but
joined together in their time, and order: but deny, that therefore where the
inward baptism by the spirit is not actually manifested, as in the Infants of
believers, there the outward is not to be ministered: or that being administered
unlawfully in apostate Churches, it is no outward Baptism at all, nor
spiritual in it self, (though carnally used) nor to be held upon repentance,
without repetition.

The outward Circumcision of the flesh, and the inward Circumcision in the
heart, which it signified, and whereof it did admonish the Circumcised, were
Deuteronomy. 10. 16.
joined together of God, and so were to be by men, and might not be severed
Ier. 4. 4.
without great iniquity: were the Infants therefore of the true Church debarred
it? Or being profanely administered amongst the idolatrous, and apostate
Israelites, or to the idolatrous Proselites amongst them, did their abuse
chaung the nature of it in it self? Or was it no Circumcision at all, and so to
be repeated, when the Lord vouchsafed to ad the Circumcision of the heart?

Romans 7. 14.
The law of God, (and these words, thou shall not lust, and so all the rest)
is spiritual in it self, though received, and used never so carnally: so is
Chapter 1. 16
the gospel withal the ordinances thereof much more: and the power of God, in
it self to salvation, whatsoever use men make of it, or them. The Apostle
teaches us, that all the Israelites comeing out of Egypt were Baptized in the
1. Cor 10 1. 2 3. 4. 5
cloud, and in the sea, under Moses, that is under his ministry, and that they
all ate of that spiritual meat, namely Man^a: and all drank of that spiritual
drink, namely the rock, or water flowing out of it, which was Christ. And yet
with many of them God was not pleased: neither were they baptized with the H.
Ghost, or effectually made partakers of Christ. Where also these two things are
plainly manifested. The one, that the outward ordinance, or sign, may be
Spiritual, to wit, in it self, though the inward power, and thing signified be
wating. 2dly, that there is sometimes an outward baptism, and the same so to be
reputed, where there is not the inward baptism by the H. Ghost: as there is
also sometimes an outward ^Ch. 11* ^. 27. 9.
eating of the Lords supper unworthily, that is without discerning the L: body,
or any inward participation thereof, or profit thereby. The same Apostle, as I
have formerly noted, complayns else where of false brethren creeping into the
Church: who (being unbaptized before) were also ^al. 2. 4.
baptized at this their entry. Take Act 8. ^3. 23.
Simon Magus for one: who being convinced of the truth of the gospel, and
believing after a sort, did deceav Phillip, thorough hypocrisy, and was by him
baptized: remaining notwithstanding in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, all the while, as Peter afterward perceaved. And I would know of
these double-washers, whether if a man professing the same faith with them in
holiness outwardly, but in hypocrisy, should be baptized by them: and that
afterward his heart should strike him, and God give him true repentance, (let
it be the person they know of, that fled from us under admonition for sin, and
joining to, and being baptized by them, was presently after by themselves found
in the same sin, and so Censured) whether, I say, they would repeat their
outward washing formerly made, as none, because there was not joined with it
the inward washing of the Spirit? Or if they think it none, and so the fore
mentioned person not indeed received in by baptism, as they speak, wherefore
did they then excommunicate the same person?

I conclude therefore, that there is an outward baptism by water, and an inward
baptism by the spirit: which though they ought not to be severed, in their
time, by Gods appointment, yet many times are by men's default: that, the
outward baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, administered in
an apostate Church, is false baptism in the administration, and yet in it self,
and own nature, a Spiritual ordinance, though abused: and whose spiritual
uses cannot be had without repentance: by which repentance, and the after
baptism of the spirit it is sanctified, and not to be repeated.

The 2d part of the distinction follows, which respects the manner of
administering the outward ordinance of Baptism: and namely the person ^y whom,
the subject upon which, and the communion wherein it is to be dispensed. I^
which respects I approve it not as true, either in Rome, or Engl: And here M^
Helw: falls into one of his hot fits of raveing against me after an
outrageous M. Helw
manner, for justifying such a Baptism: where also to make it worse, he ads as
m^ words, these of his own, that the spirit of God is not there.

I answer, that there is a great difference between the justifying of the ANSW.
manner of doing a thing (good in it self:) and the houlding the thing done
(though unlawfully) not to be nothing. Zipporahs wrathful circumciseing Ex 4
25. ^ 0 16 I^ai 1. 11 (...). 13. etc.
of her son, and the Israelites profane circumciseing of their children
having naught to do to meddle with the L: Covenant, could not be justified; and
ye^ they were not no circumcision, nor to be reiterated upon them. (...) Magus
his receaving baptism, being in the gall of bitterness, and the Corinth:
receaving the L: Supper, one hungry, and another dru^ken, could not be
justified, and yet the Baptism of the one, and L: Supper of the other, was not
no Bapt: and no L: Supper: nor such as whereof there could be no right use
upon the repentance of the persons having so profanely usurped them. The
Apostles Peter, and Paul teach no such thing, but exhort the one, and other to
repentance, that so they might have the sanctified use of those very holy
things by them formely abused so vnholily. These our adversaryes do not justify
their marriages in the assemblyes, celebrated by the parish priest, as a part
of the solemn worship of God: and in that respect against the 2d Commandment,
and idolatrous: neither yet account they them no maryages at all, nor cast them
away as Idols of Babylon: though they can esteem them no other, in the
administration there.

But says he, if this ground were true, then a Turk baptizeing a Tu^k with
water, M. Hel^
and these words, in any assembly whatsoever, it is the true baptism of Christ.

It is true outward baptism profaned, and abused, as is also that of midwives,
and children. Also touching stageplayers, of which he speaks in the next ANSW
leaf, I affirm, that if any parts of the Scriptures, or there particulars
agreeable thereunto, or any forms of prayers contained therein, be by them
uttered upon the stage, they still remayn in themselves, and own nature, the
truths of God, and forms of prayers conceaved by holy men, yea their prayers,
notwithstanding that sinful profanation of them: although that uttering of
them be nothing less, then true preaching or true praying. So may there be,
and is too commonly, true outward baptism, that is, the very outward thing for
substance done, where there is no true baptizeing, that is, no true, and
lawful manner of administering it. And if the w^shing with water in the name
of the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, of a fit person, by a lawful Minister, in a
lawful Communion, and manner, be true baptism truly, and lawfully
administered; then is w^shing with water in the name of the Father, Son, and H.
Ghost, by an unlawful Minister, of an unfit subject, and in an vnsanctifyed
communion, and manner, true baptism unlawfully, and falsely administered. The
thing done is the same in both: the difference is only in the manner of doing
it.

But between the baptism of a Turk upon a Turk, and of a midwife, I put this
difference: that whereas that of a Turk is not done as a religious action, but
merely in mockery, (as is that of a Child, in sport) the latter by a midwife
is performed as a religious action upon a member of an apostate Church: of
which there is therefore another consideration to be had, then of that which is
done in sport, and mockery, which common sense teaches to be as nothing: as
we may see in an oath, which being taken in jest byndeth not at all, but if
taken in earnest, and for a thing lawful, (though profanely) byndeth him that
took it.

For the shutting up then of this point, let the Reader observe, that the
Baptism which we repeat not, is that, which has been ministered upon the
members, and accordeing to the order (how corrupt soever) of such a Church, as
wherein the Lord has his people, and for their sakes, many his truths, and
ordinances, which he so far blesses unto his elect, as by them
(notwithstanding all the confusion there,) he does communicate, and confirm his
saveing grace unto them. Of the number of which his elect, we have also (by his
grace) testified our selves to be, as otherwise, so in particular, by comeing
as his people out of Babylon, or confusion, at his call. And we rayther think
it our duty to acknowledge the great goodness of God toward us, in passing by
the sins of our ignorance, and in blessing unto us, what was of himself, and
his own there: then unthankfully to disclaym the least either inward work of
his grace, or outward means by which he wrought it.

In the next place Mr Helw: rayseth himself upon his tiptoes, and in vayn
confidence of his mighty strength, threatens teribly to strike me with a rod
of iron, and to break me in pieces like a potters vessel. And because he
chooses as his ground of best advantage, a point of our profession, viz: that
Baptism comes in the stead of Circumcision, which yet neither he, nor they with
him, will in an other case acknowledge, I will therefore in the first place
prove that ground, by the Scriptures, and reasons unto them agreeable, and so
come to ward his so sore threatened stroke.

And, first, the Apostle disswadeing the Colossians from Jewish Ceremonies,
^^h. 2. v. 8 10. 11.
and in special from Circumcision, teaches them, that in Christ's person
dwells all fulness: and that in him as the head thereof, the Church has all
perfection: who by his Circumcision has abolished the former, as the shadow by
the substance: by whom also, and whose circumcision the faithful have their
hearts circumcised. But whereas it might be objected, that faithful Abraham
had his heart circumcised, and yet he had withal the outward sign, and seal
annexed; the Apostle answers v. 12. That they are baptized into Christ: (the
effects of which bapt: he also notes down in the same place) and therefore
needed not circumcision, as the false Apostles bore them in hand: therein
directly teaching, that our Bapt: is instead of their circumcision: as is also
our L: Supper instead of their passover: which supper no unbaptized person may
eat of, as could no man uncircumcised eat of the passover. Their circumcision
was not to be repeated, nor our baptism now, though our eating the L: Supper
be, as their passover also was Likewise the Israelites in the wilderness wanting
the ordinary Sacraments of Circumcis: and the passover, and having instead of
them the extraordinary Sacraments of baptism in the sea and cloud, and of
Manna, and the rock; 1. Cor. 1. 2. 3. etc.
and that baptism signifying our baptism now, and that Manna, and water of the
rock, the the Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ now: it is evident
that our baptism comes instead of their circumcision. Besides Circumcision was
their first, and solemn ordinance of initiation, or entera^ce, by which (say
our adversaryes) they were received into the Ch: So is Bapt: our first, and
solemn ordinance of initiation, by which also (say they) men are received into
the Ch: now. How then do not they succeed one another, as does the Ch: now the
Ch: then?

Lastly their Circumcision then was a sign or seal of the Covenant of God; so
is our Baptism now of the same Covenant, as shall be proved hereafter: their
circumcis: admonisheing them of that original corruption of all that came
naturally of Adam, not to be purged but with the shedding of the blood of the
promised seed: as does also our baptism admonish us of our original spiritual
filthiness, not to be washed away but by the blood of Christ powered upon us:
the same outward circumcis: yet further signifying the inward circumcis: of the
heart, as does our bapt: with water the inward baptism of the spirit; which
circumcision was also unto them a note or badg of distinction from the world,
as is also bapt: now; though by many usurped, as that also then was.

This ground then being cleared, I come to that which must strike this stroke
so terribly threatened: which is, that in my graunteing, and proveing in my M.
Hel^*
book, that Rome, and England were never in the Covenant of God, as Judah was,
I do therefore debar my self from bringing my baptism from apostate Israel;
and therefore must prove, that Circumcision, (and so Baptism) received in a
Babilonish assembly, by a Babilonian, upon a Babilonian, might be retained:
and a man so circumcised, eat the passover* to disprove this he quotes Ezra 10.
3. and Nehem: 13. 23. 24. 25. for the putting away of children (though
circumcised) born of the strange wives in Babylon.

I profess, as before, that neither the Catholic (so called) Church of ANSW.
Rome, consisting of many cuntryes, and nations, nor the national Ch: of Engl:
was ever within the Covenant of the gospel, or new Testament, (as was Judah,
and with her Israel before the division) notwithstanding either the particular
holy persons that are, or particular Churches which happily have been there
Neither of both therefore says Mr Helw: can be apostate Israel, which was
before her apostasy the true Ch: or of it, by our grant. I deny the
consequence; and his ignorance it is to think, that only they can be apostate
Israel; who were formerly of Judah. For then such of the heathen, as joined to
Israel in her apostasy, were not of apostate Israel, because they or their
parents were never of Judah. And by his ground neither the national English,
nor Catholic Romish Church should be Antichristian, for neither of both were
ever the temple of God, in which Antichrist at first raised himself. But as
they are Apostolic Churches, which have received These 2
and do keep the faith, and order delivered by the Apostles, though the
Apostles did not gather them personally: so are they answerably Apostaticall
Churches, which have taken up, and received an Apostaticall state, and
condition from others, though they were never true in themselves: the rule of
nature here having place, which is that the accessory follows the nature of
the principal. We do likewise most properly, and immediately call that a
schismatic Church, which was once either of, or a true Church, and has
causelessly made a division: but yet if any other assembly (though having never
been of, or a true Church) do take up a schismatic profession, and walking,
even it is also, though secondarily, a schismatic Ch: and so to be reputed.
So that, though Engl: never was either in the whole Nation, or several
parrishes, a true visible Church, or Churches, yet having taken up the
Apostate Communion, worship, government, Ministry and order of Rome, with the
doctrines which defend them; and Rome of that particular Church, which was once
planted there, having degenerated by degrees from the primative constitution,
it is truly called by us Apostate Israel, for the purpose in hand: and that
outward baptism there received, rightly by us retained, as was the outward
Circumcision in Apostate Israel of old.

The Scriptures he brings, which are Ezra 10. 3. Nehem. 13. 23. 24. 25. make
much against him in the general cause, and nothing for him in the particular.

For to let pass other oversights. 1. They prove, that to be of Abraham's seed
carnally was not enough to make one a member of the Church, and within the L:
Covenant of Circumcision. For these very children thus put away (as having no
part therein) were, and so are by Mr Helw: acknowledged, the males of the
Israelites. 2. If any of them thus put away, had afterward chosen the L: God
of Israel to be their God, should they have been recircumcised? Or is there in
the Scriptures any sillabe tending that way? 3. He is utterly deceaved in
saying those children were born in Babylon: upon which notwithstanding he
lays all the weight of his Argument. They were born in Canaan, and of the
wives of the peoples nere adjoining, as in the same places is expressed: and so
their Circumcision nothing at all to the Circumcision ministered in Babylon: and
yet is he more peremptory in this his error, then a wise man would be in the
truth. And thus all may see how his rod of iron is proved a broken reed, whose
shivers have peirced his own hands

The next thing he comes to, is, that other ground of ours (for with his
by-bablings, and revyleings I will neither trouble my self, nor the Reader)
thus by him related, that Baptism is the vessel of the Lords house; and as
when the house of the Lord was destroyed, and the vessels thereof together with
the people carried into Babylon, they remained still the vessels of the Lords
house, in nature, and right, though profaned by Baltezar, and being brought
again out of Babylon to the house of the Lord, were not to be new cast, but
(being purifyed) might again be used to holy use: so this holy vessel of Bapt:
though profaned, in Babylon, being brought again to the house of the Lord,
remaynes still the holy vessel of the L: house.

Against this he alleges. 1. That our baptism (seeing it was administered M.
Helw*
upon us all in the assemblyes) was formed, molded, and made, in Babylon.
2dly, That the true doctrine, or ordinance of Baptism either carried to Rome, or
Engl: was by way of comparison the vessel of the L: house, and so to be
brought back, and used.

The administering of Bapt: is not the frameing, or moulding of it, but ANSW*
the applying, and vseing of it being formerly molded, and made: and this
common sense teaches: otherwise there should be a new vessel made and
molded, or a new ordinance brought into the Church every time that bapt: is
administered. The outward washing then with water in the name of the Father,
Son, and H. Ghost, was first framed and molded in the true Churches, by John
Baptist, Christ and the Apostles, and there at the first rightly applied, and
administered: and was afterward usurped, and misapplyed by, and in the Apostate
Churches, and so is in Engl: amongst the rest: whence we also by the grace of
God, have brought it into the L: house built of liveing stones, orderly laid
together, for a spiritual building unto him: and there have the rightful 1.
Pet. 2. ^
use of it being purifyed by repentance.

More particularly. If the true doctrine of Bapt: be the vessel of the Lords
house, then cannot this vessel of the Lords house be brought out of the mother
Babylon, which Rome is: because the doctrine of Bapt: there is most false in it
self: as that, Bapt: does by the very work done, confer grace, and wholly
abolish original sin: that it imprinteth in the soul of the baptized a
character, or mark indelible, by which even the damned in hell, which have been
baptized, are differenced from the unbaptized: that it is of absolute necessity
to salvation: that such infants are to be baptized as neither of whose parents
are sanctified, or faithful: and that it is only to be administered by the
popes anointed ones, save in case of necessity, and that then the midwife may
do it, with the like. How then can the vessel of the doctrine of true baptism
be brought from Babylon, where it is not? And so far as the doctrine is true,
so far the baptism is true also, being administered accordeing unto it.

The truth then is, that as there were in the material temple both the
vessels, and doctrine, teaching their use, so is there by proportion in the Ch:
now, the vessel of baptism, or thing ordained, (which is most properly called
the Lev. 3* 17.
ordinance) and the doctrine ordeyning, and teaching it: which Romans 13* 1. 2.
are two several things in all men's eyes which have sight in them. And since
baptism administered, besides the doctrine which teaches it, is appointed of
God, as a means, to signify, and apply the blood, and spirit of Christ thereby
signified, it is very absurd to deny it to be a vessel for the service of the
Lords house, and of the holy things therein: rightly used in the temple:
usurped in Babylon, or else where.

Lastly, Mr Smith, and Mr Helw: with him in their Character, confess, Page 58.
that if the Anti-Christians had baptized persons, confessing their sins, and
their faith into the name of the son of God, and the trinity, it had been
true baptism, though in the hands of the Anti-Christians, as the vessels of the
L: house in the hands of the Chaldeant, and therefore needed not repetition, as
the vessels needed no new casting: therein acknowledging, not the doctrine, but
the outward washing in the name of the trinity to be the vessel of the L:
house in Babylon: as also that there might be baptism so far true without
either lawful communion, minister, or subject, (for all are Antichristian) as
that it might be retained without repetition: which is also justly proved from
Circumcision, administered in a profane usurping family (though naturally
Israelitish) either in Babylon, or Canaan, or else where, it matters not, and
not to be repeated upon repentance.

In the things following, being partly more general, and partly already
handled, I will be the breefer.

He first tells us, that if we be Judah, and come from Israel, then we must not
w^ M. Helw ^. King. ^2. 24.
against her as against Babylon, since she is the ten tribes our brethren,
which were not false Israelites, but the true seed of Abraham.

Edom also was Isreal's brother, and the true seed of Abraham naturally, ANSW.
Number 29. 14. 21. Deuteronomy. 2. 4. 5. etc.
against whom he was forbidden to war, as against Canaan: was Edom therefore
the true Church or interessed in the L: Covenant, as well as Israel then? And
though Judah was at that one time by special restreint, to forbear fighting
against the ten tribes, (as there was a time also, when she might not fight
against Babylon) yet not so at other times; but she was contrariwise 2. Chr.
^3 3. 14. 15. 16. 17.
helped of the Lord, to make a very great slaughter amongst them. But for our
fighting against Engl: it is only by the spiritual weapons of our testimony,
the word of God, our practice of Christ's ordinances, and sufferings against
the confusion, clergy* and superstitions there: and thus we must war against
all iniquity, whether o^ apostate Israel, or Babylon, it matters not.

His Reasons to prove Judah as well as Israel a false Church, are of no^
weight. And 1. it is not true he says that the Calves set up at Dan, and
Bethell did no more make them a false Church (for in speaking of false
Israelites, as he does, he bewrays too great ignorance) then the setting up
(...) the Calf in Horeb. For that Calf was forthwith taken down again, burnt in
the fire, and beaten to powder, the chief authors of the idolatry destroyed,
Number 32* and 33.
and the rest brought to repentance, by which the wrath of the Lord was
pacifyed: whereas the ten tribes continued their idolatry, and with and for it,
their schism from the true Church Judah, and Jerusalem: and so were for their
obstinacy, and irrepentance joined with their sin, cast out of Gods favor.

Alike frivolous is his 2d Argum: from Salomons following Ash^aroh, Milcam, and
other Idols: of which he also repented, as appears by his wryteing the book of
the preacher, besides other arguments, and whom Judah is no where said to have
followed in his idolatry, as did the ten tribes Jeroboam, in his. And not only
so, but they went on also from evil to worse: adding to the false worship of
the true God the worship of false 1 King. 16. 25. 3^*
Gods, Baal and others.

3dly, though Jerusalem was at a time (in the body) called by the Prophet, an
harlot, and her sins said to be greater then either Samarias, or Sodoms, to
wit, considering her estate, and means of bettering (for otherwise her sins in
themselves were not comparable to theirs) yet were there many in her abydeing
faithful in the Lords Covenant, and the other brought again into the bond
thereof, by repentance, after the rod of the L: correction had passed over
them, and that he had taken the chief rebels from Ezech. (...)* 37. 38.
amongst them; and in those the true Church consisted; the rest not being true
members thereof: but Ier. 2. ^*
a false seed, the plants of a straung vine, by right to have been cut of from
the L: people: whereas the ten tribes went on in their sin, without repentance,
or return out of their captivity, into the land of Canaan, the proper seat of
the Church. But of these things I have spoken before at larg, as also of the
outward baptism received in Engl: which he here calls the mark of the beast,
and us for it, what he pleases; whereas (though he, that receavs any doctrine,
or ordinance of God ministered by the power of Antichrist, may therein be said
to receav the mark of the beast, yet) that doctrine, or ordinance is not in it
self, the mark of the beast, but an holy thing of God, how unlawfully soever
administered.

His mistakeing the speech in the Apology of the 7000 in Israel, I have
formerly manifested. The peremptory doom which here he passes upon all in
Engl: and us with them, as out of the state of gra^e, and salvation, is a fruit
of his rashness. Well is it for us, that he is not our judge: and better much had
it been for him, if he had judged himself more severely, and others more
charitably.

Touching Gal: 5. 1. and 2. Cor: 3. 17. teaching, that, where the spirit of
Christ is, there is liberty: and that we must stand fast in the liberty,
wherewith Christ has freed us, I do answer, that as for our selves, we stand
for, and enjoy the liberty of Christ in all things, to our knowledge, and power:
so doubt I not but there are thousands in Engl: truly partakers of the liberty
of Christ, both from the guilt, and tyranny of sin in their measure,
notwithstanding that spiritual external bondage in their Ch: order, and
ordinances, thorough humayn fraylty. Wherein if they, or any of them, either
affect ignorance, or pretend it, being condemned of their own hearts, because
they would avoid the cross of Christ, or for any other carnal respects, God
which is greater then ^. Ioh. 3. ^.
their hearts, and searches, and knows them, will condemn them much more,
though we thorough love be persuaded better things of them.

It is true he adds, that all who come not out of Babylon, or receav the
least mark, or print of the beast, that is yeald the least submission unto
Antichrist, are threatened with her plagues, and under the L: curse. Which
shows how greatly the Lord abhors, and how all his people ought to abhor
from those sins, and also unto what wrath they stand subject without
repentance. But withal it must be remembered, that as God requires particular
repentance for sins known, so does he pardon the unknown sins of his servans
upon their general repentance aryseing from true faith in Christ, and having
joined with it, an honest, and earnest desire, to know, and do the whole will
of God: otherwise no flesh could be saved: for noman knows how often he
offends. ^ 19. 1^
And he who believes not, that as other men may, so God does know much evil by
him even against all the Commaundmens which he knows not by himself, (of which
he can only repent in general) neither has learnt to know God aright, nor
other men, nor himself, how much soever he presume of his knowledge, which,
alas, was too too much this vayn man's malady.

His other two affirmations, that, if the faith of the Ch: of Engl: be true M.
Helw
then the Ch: is a true Church; and that, if the Ch: be not a true Church, then
is it a company of Infidels, have alike truth in both, and indeed none in
either. Cornelius, ANSW: ^ct. 10.
and his family show the falsity of both: who had true faith, and therefore
were not a company of Infidels, and yet were not a true visible Church, of
which we speak. True faith makes a true Christian person: but the Covenanting,
and combyneing of a company of such into Christian order does immediately make
the Church.

And for John 15. 19. and Math. 12. 30. I do answer, that a man may truly in
his person be chosen out of the world, and for Christ, in his measure, though
he be not of a true visible Church. There must be true faith, and holiness
before the true Church; for of faithful persons the Ch: must be gathered: and
in reason, the the parts must be before the whole to be made of them, and the
stones, and timber before the house.

But he ads, that since all in the Ch: of Engl: drink of one Cup, 1. Cor. 11.
M. Helw
they are all one body, and so no double respect to be had, nor putting of
difference of persons.

It is true, they are all one body, and there should be no such contrary
spirits: but all the members of one body should be lead by one spirit in a
measure: ANSW
for there is (to wit, in right) Ephesians. 4. ^*
one body, and one spirit: but who having in him any light of the spirit sees
not the contrary; and that in that one body of the national, and parishonall
Church, and Churches, two contrary spirits rule? By right there is none but led
by the spirit of Christ in the true Ch: and body of Christ: nor any led by that
spirit out of it, or in any other society. But that good, whether in persons,
or things, which Satan has not had power to destroy, he has labored to
confound, and mingle with evil, what he possibly could, both by thrusting
false brethren into the true Ch: and by keeping godly persons out of it. So
that the servants of God stand in great need as first of spiritual discerning
to know good, and evil, so after of true Zeal on the one side, that they be
not for the goods sake, entangled with any evil: as also of godly moderation,
and sobriety, on the other side, no way to wrong that which is good for the
evilles sake, mingled with it: as this man has done in the frowardnes of his
heart, in stead of Zeal: making no difference between himself, and others so
walking, in his, and their best profession, in Engl: and the most desperate
crew of Atheists, and Epicures in their professed contempt of God.

His plea which follows that the Pope, and Papists are not true believers, we
do receav: and profess withal, that no infants of such, or of any Genesis 17. 7.
other parents, the one whereof is not faithful, is to be baptized: and
practice accordeingly, as he knew well. And his accusation that we hold all
infants, 1. Cor. 7^* 14.
whether of beleeveing, or vnbeleeveing parents to be baptized, and so
practice, is unjust, and but a mere presumption inferred upon our not
rebaptizeing the baptized formerly in the assemblyes. Which our practice, I
hope, is sufficiently justified, against his loud, and licentious clamours,
(although by them he have affrighted two, or three simple people, from that
their baptism so received,) as also, that his peremptory position, that
whatsoever is not done aright, is to be accounted as not done at all, and is to
be cast away, notwithstanding any after-repentance, is but a short cut of his
haste, and fruit of his ignorance: which two being coupled together, cannot but
gender many monsters.

Of the Baptism of Infants.
HE proceeds to the baptism of Infants; a point of great both difference
between us, and weight in it self: and which concerns all Churches, at all
times, whereas the former respects only such Churches as come out of a state
of Apostasy.

And to prove Infants incapable of baptism, he begins with the Covenant of the
gospel, or new Testament, which he rightly makes one, as indeed they are in
substance, (though the new Testament may be taken in a stricter sense, for the
gospel more clearly dispensed since Christ come in the flesh:) touching which
Covenant he speaks thus.

This is the Covenant, ( says the Lord) that I will make with the house of M.
Helw
Israel, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people Ier: 31. 33. Hebr: 8.
10. And our Savior Christ declares this more fully, Mark 16. 16. where he
says, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel: he that shall beleiv
and ^e baptized, shall be saved. And here ( says he) is the new Covenant set
down both on Gods behalf, and theyrs with whom it is made. On Gods that he
would write his law in men's hearts, by the power of his spirit in the preaching
of the gospel, and will be their God, and save them: and ^ the peoples behalf,
to beleiv the gospel, and to be baptized. And herevppon he infers, and
concludes, that children are not within the Covenant of the new Testament, or
gospel, and therefore not to be baptized.

Let the Reader in the first place observe, ANSW:
that the word Covenant in the Hebrew, (...).
as Jeremy has it, signifies any compact, or agreement upon a difference,
between two, or more. Which the LXX in the Greek Bible, and so the Apostle
after them, turn by a word signifying a will or Testament properly. So that he
who aright understands, and well weighs the very word, will plainly see, how Mr
Helw: erreth in making the wryteing of Gods law in men's heart, the Covenant
on Gods behalf: or baptism any part of it on man's behalf. The Covenant is the
very agreement and promise by mutual accord, for the things to be done, and
not the doing of the things, which is the keeping of the Covenant, or promise
made. And so all that can be concluded hence is, that God receaveth none into
his Church but such as i^ whose hearts he promises to write his law: Which he
promised to do to the infants of the faithful, in promiseing Abraham to be the
God of his s^ed: and more particularly in promiseing to circumcise (which is
all one with wryteing his law in) the hearts of the seed of his people. By
which it Deuteronomy. 30. ^6.
is also evidently proved, that the infants of faithful parents are together
with them, within in the L: Covenant.

But to answer more fully: the intent of the prophet (and so of the Apostle
Exodus 3^* 18. 1. Cor. 3* 3.
following him) is to oppose the old Covenant, or Testament of works written
with ink in ^^^les of stone and the new Testament, or Covenant of grace written
in the hearts of men by the finger of Gods spirit. Now the persons with whom
the Lord made these Covenants primarily, and expressly both the one, and other
Ezech. 3^* 26. 27
were men of years; but in whom their infants were included, and so within
these the L: Covenants, though secondarily, and as was agreeable to their estate.

These men profess every where, and truly (although not upon good grounds)
that the Israelitish infants were within the old Covenant, or Testament: and
yet when God either proclaimed it upon mount Sina, or writ it in the tables of
stone, they knew not what it meant, neither could they have the same use of it
with their parents, and others of discretion, as may appear in the particulars
contained in the Scriptures Exodus: 19. 10. 11. 15. 21. 25. and Chapter 20 1. 2. 8.
12. 18. 19. amongst others, where it is set down: does it therefore follow that
those infants were not within the compass of the old Testament, or law? So
neither follows it, because the infants of the faithful now cannot for the
present, observe the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, or reap all the fruits
thereof, and particularly, to have the law written in their hearts by the
ministry of the gospel, and work of the H. Ghost, that therefore they are
excluded from the Covenant of Grace, or Testament of Christ, Children may with
far better reason be denied, to have been within the Covenant of the old
Testament, or law, upon which Gal. 3. (...)*
the curse follows, then to be shut out of the new Covenant of grace, and
mercy. And upon this ground Infants should not be within either the natural
Covenant or bond with their parents, or the civil Covenant with their
Magistrates, because they cannot for the present Honor Father, and Mother,
which is the condition of these Covenants on their behalf. His exception then
that infants cannot by the preaching of the gospel, have Gods law written in
their heart, this being but a condition of the Covenant, which respects men of
riper years, is of no force.

When the Lord says to Israel, I am thy God, his meaning is not to exclude
their infants, though he spoke not unto them, but to exclude other peoples, and
nations: so where he makes this new Covenant with those in whose hearts he
writes his laws, he does not debar their children, but wicked men destitute of
the spirit of God, and from under his promise. So for Mark 16. 15. 16. which he
also alleges, where Christ sends his Apostles into the world to preach the
gospel, and ads that he who believes and is baptized, shall be saved, he no
more entends to exclude the infants of the faithful from baptism, because they
beleev not, then from salvation because they beleev not: which is yet more
plain in the words following, but he that believes not shall be damned. Shall
children now be damned because they believ not? There is hence more color for
that, then that they shall not be baptized because they beleev not: for Christ
says not, he that believes not, shall not be baptized, but shall be damned. The
thing then is: Christ neither excludes the children of believers from baptism,
nor from salvation, for want of faith, but unbelievers, and such as refuse the
gospel from both. So that the stone upon which these men stumble, is the
ignorance of the opposition in the Scriptures they bring; which is not between
believers, or sanctified persons, and their children, but between them, and
vnbeleeveing and profane persons: who are shut from the Lords Covneant,
Baptism, and Salvation. But where in shareing this Covenant on man's behalf
into faith, and baptism, he makes the one part thereof, his being baptized, he
speaks he knows not what, and yet wonders that all men beleiv him not. For as
Bapt: is indeed no part of the Covenant, but a sign, and seal of further
confirmation, so is it principally, and in the mayn end performed, not on man's
behalf toward God, but on Gods behalf toward man; (God by the outward
washing of the body with water, signifying, confirming, and applying the inward
washing of the soul, by the blood, and spirit of Christ:) and for the further
testification of the admission of the party baptized into the family of God,
the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, into whose name he is baptized: whereas in a 2d,
and inferior respect it is a work of man unto God, for the profession, and
exercise of faith, repentance, and thankfulness in them who received the former
covenant, and promise with the confirmation thereof, on Gods part, toward
them, and theirs: as it is also thirdly a sign of union between the members of
the Church: and in the 4th, and last place, a badg of Christianity, and sign
of distinction between the true Church, and all false Churches. The same
confiderations are to be had of the L: Supper. And they who know not these
things, Hebr. 6. 1
had need have the foundation of the doctrine of baptism, and other principles
of Christian religion laid again: and yet the want of the knowledge of this and
in special, that the Sacraments are in their first, and mayn end works of God
to men, by which he can both declare, and effect his goodness toward infants,
though for the present, they neither know it, nor can do any thing again to the
Lord in answer thereunto, is a mayn ground of that offense, which these men
take at our receaving, and baptizeing of Infants. And if the new Covenant or
Testament consist so much in baptism, as these men think, then could not Adam,
and Abraham, and other the holy Patriarchs, and Prophets unbaptized, have been
within the compass of the Covenant, and promise of grace, or have had their
parts in the Testament of Christ, the promised seed. Also if baptism were
(especially so great) a part of the Covenant, so often as any either person, or
Ch: renewed their Covenant, especially after any greater sin, they should so often
renew their baptism also.

These things thus laid down by way of answer, it remaynes I prove by the
Scriptures, and further Arguments, that the infants of the faithful are within
the compass of the new Covenant here spoken of.

And since all children comeing naturally of Adam, Ps. 51. 5*
are conceaved, and born in sin, Ephesians. 2. ^*
and by nature the children of wrath; if these men beleev (as they do of all)
that their children so dying shall be saved by Christ, then must they have a
part in his Testament, or in this new Covenant, which are all one. There are
not two new Covenants, or Testaments established in the blood of Christ but
one. And since Christ is propounded unto us as the savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.
2*
which is his Church it is more then strange, that these men will have all
infants saved by Christ, Col. 1. 1*
and yet none of them to be of his body, or Church.

It pleased God in his special love to send his son to take upon him our
nature, and so our childehood, that as the head thereof, he might sanctify even
that estate for his body the Church: with which he did also in the days of his
flesh, visibly communicate his grace, consecrateing unto his Father, as their
true high priest, the infants of the Jewish Church, by laying his hands on
them, Mark. 10. 13. 1*
and blessing them.

I ad, if any, either children, or men of years, be to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, they must be born again: and this new birth must be by the spirit of
God workeing in either, accordeing to their kind, and writeing Gods law in
their hearts: in those of years distinctly, and by the preaching of the
gospel, in infa^ts otherwise, accordeing to the efficacy of the power, and
grace of God.

Lastly it is evident that the children of the faithful are within this
Covenant of the Gospel or new Testament by that Covenant which God made with
faithful Abraham, Gen 17.
and his seed, adding the seal of circumcision to ratify it. But that this was
the Covenant of the Gospel, or new Testament Mr Helw: denies, and opposes, I
will therefore answer what he obiecteth, and then prove mine exposition, and
affirmation by the Scriptures.

And first, he lays down this Covenant Genesis 17. on the L: behalf, thus. I will
establish my Covenant between me, M. Helw
and thee, and thy seed after thee, and their generations for an everlasting
Covenant to be God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, v. 7. and on Abraham's
behalf, and his seeds, in these words, This is the Covenant that thou, and thy
seed after thee shall keep,. Let every manchilde among you be circumcised: you
shall circumcise the foreskin as well of him that is born in the house, as of
him that is bought with money: adding for exposition, that thus the L: declares
in every particular his Covenant with his people, as well what he will do for
them, as what he requyres them to do in obedience to him.

A great untruth, and full of ignorance. Is the land of Canaan all that ANSW:
the L: Covenants and promises to give unto Abraham and his seed? What is this
but to make the L: people an heard of oxen which are promised to be brought
into a fat pasture, there to feed at ease? And is circumcision of their males
all in particular which God requyres of his people by Covenant, which any
profane Schechemite might do, and did as well, and as diligently as they? Ps.
1. 11. ^2. etc. ^ebr. 11.
and which being done without faith, and repentance, does no way please but
offend God.

The L: promised to be a God (even all-sufficient, as v: 1.) unto Abraham, and
his seed v: 7. Ps. 144. and ^5.
that is, to be all happiness, and bless unto them: for blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God. And except we will say they had only bodies,
and no souls, God in promiseing to be their God, promises not only to be the
God of their bellyes, and backs, but of their souls most; as the soul of a
man is most the man. And so Christ himself teaches against the Saducees, Exodus
3. 6 ^. 18.
that God in calling himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iakob, and so of
their seed the Hebrews, means, that he is the God of their souls (and that
most specially) which lived when their bodies were dead. Mat. 22. ^2.


The Apostle Paul, who well understood the Lords meaning, does interpret the
promises of this Covenant with Abraham, as meant of better things then Canaan,
and indeed as comprehending in them (though more darkely, accordeing to the
dispensation of those times) Christ himself, and in him all spiritual
blessings. And so speaking of this Covenant, or Promise, with, or to Abraham,
Gal. 3. 15. ^6.
and his seed, avoucheth, that by his seed is meant Christ, viz as the head
with his body, the Church of the Jews, and Gentiles also in their time made
one in him. Ephesians: 3. 6. as he also proves Rom: 4. 3. 18. and Gal: 3. 6. that
Abraham's believing the Promise of God for the multiplying of his seed Gen: 15.
5. 6. and 17. 4. was imputed to him for righteousness to justification: therein
teaching evidently, that in this Promise was comprehended Christ, and
spiritual things: otherwise, how could Abraham be justified by believing it?
And how carnally soever these men are conceyted of this Covenant, and Promise,
Ioh. 8. ^6.
Abraham in it saw Christ's day, and seeing it, rejoiced.

And for the land of Canaan, albeit in it self, and naturally, but like other
lands, yet was it by the Lord sanctified to spiritual ends, and uses: as, to
be the peculiar inheritance of Gods peculiar people, unto which it was allotted
from the first Deuteronomy ^. 2. 8.
division of the Sons of Adam, and distribution of their possession by the most
high whether Exodus 15. 17.
he would bring his people, and there plant them in the mountayn of his
inheritance, in the sanctuary, which his hands had established: where he would
have his tabernacle piched, and temple built, for his most solemn presence, and
worship: out of which land when the ten tribes were carried captive, he is said
to have 2. King. 17. 18.
put them out of his sight: the very land being ^ignrateively holy, Heb 3. 1^
and a Sacrament of Gods presence, and the resting of Gods people there a sign
of their eternal rest in heaven: Ch 4. 5. ^
into which not Mose^, but Joshua or Jesus, the type of our and their true
Jesus, was to bring them. Neither did the L: indeed promise either entrance
into, or continuance in that land, Hebr. 3* 17. 1^. 1^* with 4 ^ Live 20. ^ 2
etc and 26 39. Deut^. 1^ 12 13. with 11* 1. 8. 9 2^* 23 24. 1 Cor. 1^ 5. 6 7
but upon the conditions of eternal life: true faith in the gospel, with the
love, and fear of God, and faithful obedience of hes commundements: godliness
having then as it has now, and always, the premise of good things for this
life, and the life to come: of earthly things then, more distinctly, and fully,
but of heavenly things more generally, and spareingly: where now on the
contrary, there is a more clear, and full revelation of heavenly things, but
the promise of things earthly more general, and spareing. It is therefore an
ill collection he makes, that because God promised earthly Canaan, therefore
not heavenly things: the promise of them was contained in the other, which all
amongst them but hypocrites understood, and tasted of.

The like folly with the former shows he, in affirming that the circumcision
of their males, 1. Tim* 8. 9. Romans 4. 11.
was all the obedience, which God required of Abraham, and his seed, for the
k^eping of the Covenant on their part toward him. For 1. Circumcision (which
must well be considered) was not appointed of God principally for a work of
their obedience toward him, but for a sign or seal of confirmation, on his
part, toward them, of the righteousness of faith imputed to Abraham, the root,
Genesis 1^* 3. 6 7. and ch 13* 14 15. 1^ and 15 1^ 4. 5. 18.
in the promised seed. 2dly, it is evident that this Covenant unto which the
land of Canaan was an appurtenance, was contracted, and made, with Abraham,
many years before circumcision was once mentioned. Which Covenant God also
renewed with the Israelites his seed in the wilderness, the most of them being
uncircumcised. By which it is evident, that Circumcision was so far from being
the substance of the Covenant, as that it was not so much as any substantial
part of it, Deuteronomy. 29* and 30. compared with Ios. 5. 2. ^*4 5. 6.
but only a sign of ratification, and that specially on Gods part, as was
Canaan an accessory unto it. 3dly, the Apostle Romans 4. proveing at larg,
justification by faith, without works, and so specially without circumcision,
of which as of a special work the Jews made account, takes Abraham for an
instance, and shows, that he was first justified by believing Gods free
promise touching his seed, Christ, and so the Ch: in him, as well of
uncircumcised Gentiles in their time, as of circumcised Jews: and ads that
after this, he received the seal of circumcision, for the confirmation of this
bond of promise, on Gods part, having the promise it self before. Which
Circumcision therefore whosoever presumed to use (whether upon himself, or his
infant) not having before the promise of Christ, and faith for justification,
with Abraham, he did treacherously vsurp the great seal of the king of heaven,
and earth. The lawful vseing then of circumcision did presuppose both Gods
promise and his faith, who was to use it, either upon himself, or his child.
And since without faith no man either can, ^^. 4. 4. ^ith Heb. 1. 4. 5.
or ever could please God, especially, in the matters of his worship, whereof
circumcision was one; and that God appointed his people so to worship him in
it, and all other things, as they might please him therein, ^ath. 3. ^.
it follows necessarily, that he required true faith in all, whom he
enjoined, or rayther priveledged to circumcise their infants. Cor. 10 ^.
Neither indeed do the Scriptures of those times, more plenteously testify any
one thing, then that the Israelites did most heynously ^eb. 3. 17 Ps. 24. 5. ^.
11. 10 ^os. 8. 1.
transgress, and break Gods Covenant with Abraham, and them, when they did
use, and observe circumcision very diligently: which had the Covenant on their
part stood in circumcision, they had not done. And (for conclusion) that the
L: God should separate a people, as his own peculiar, above all the peoples in
the earth, into Covenant with himself, to worship him, and to enjoy his
special presence, and yet should require no more of them for the keeping of
this Covenant, then the cutting of their foreskins, is a mere mockery,
unworthily blemishing Gods great majesty, and from the imagination whereof all
godly wise men do abhor.

Now though this which I have spoken, be more then enough, yet will I for more
clearnes, annex a few other Reasons to prove this Covenant with Abraham, and
his seed, the Covenant of the Gospel, and the same with ours now for
substance; and established in Christ to come, as ours in Christ come in the
flesh.

And 1. the Apostle to the Galat: expressly teaches, that the Gospel was
preached unto Abraham, ^^b. 3. 8.
IN THEE SHALL ALL THE GENTILES BE BLESSED, and v: 17. that the Covenant with,
and in ABRAHAM'S SEED, was confirmed of God in respect of Christ, and that 400,
and 30 years before the law, or old Testament was given. And here also the
Apostle answers M^ Helw: M. Helw
his objection, and removes that great stone of offense, which he, and others
cast in their own way; which is, that the old Testament, or Covenant with the
ordinances thereof is disanulled Hebr: 7. 18. and that, we ought not to frame
the new Covenant like the old, as we do, in the baptizeing of infants, because
infants then were circumcised. The Apostle answers directly (to let pass
other things) that the Covenant with Abraham was confirmed in respect of
Christ: and that it was not the law or old Testament, which was added 400, and
30 years after for transgression, and so is abolished indeed, but could not
disanull the former Covenant of the Gospel.

And because these men (whose recovery I do from mine heart desire of the Lord)
do especially stumble at this, that the Covenant made with Abraham, and his
seed, was the Covenant of the law, or old Testament, I will (and that briefly
as I can) show the clear, and evident difference between these two Testaments.
Which had such of our later Calvin. ^ucer. ^ucanus
writers as have been most followed, Ph. M^^ lanct; Chemnitius. Sohniu^
Arminius etc^
observed, and put distinctly, as others have done, much light had been given
for the preventing of this error.

And 1. this difference appears notoriously, in the time. For this old, and
canceled Covenant was made with the people of Israel in the day, when the Lord
took them by the hand, and brought them out of Egypt. Ier: 31. 32. which was
400, and 30 years after the Covenant made with Abraham, as the Scriptures

The law, or old Testament was given in mount Sina Exodus: 19. whereas the
Covenant with Abraham was first drawn in Vr of the Caldeans, Gen 11. and 12.
and 15. and 1^
and afterward confirmed, and renewed in Canaan.

The law was given with great terror of burning, fire and smook, and blacknes,
and tempest on the mount, Ex. 19. 1^* 18. Hebr. 12* 18.
with the loud sound of the trumpet, as became the glory of Gods justice: but
the Covenant with Abraham was free from all terror, and replenished with all
sweetness of love, and mercy, and comfort against sin.

The old Testament had Moses for the mediator: whereas Abraham himself Exodus
19 14. 19.


The Exodus 24. 6. 7. etc. Hebr. 7. 11.
law was dedicated in the blood of beats, Gal. 3 19*
and established unto the people under the preisthood of the Levites: where the
Covenant with Abraham was established Gal. 3. 16.
seed Christ, and in his blood: himself being both priest, and sacrifice.

Lastly the Covenant of the law, or old Testament had indeed the promise of
good things heavenly, and earthly, but under the condition of perfect obedience
to all the Commandments: and under the threatening of the contrary curse to
the least breach of any of them. Whereupon (respecting man's corruption, and
inability to keep it, Act. 13. 38. and 15. 10. Romans 8. 3. weak, Lev. 18. ^* Gal
3. 12 Deuteronomy. 27 26. Gal. 3 (...)
and unprofitable, yea generateing to bondage Gal. 4. 24. and the power of sin
1. Cor. 15. 56. causing wrath, and death Romans 4. 15. and 7. 5. the letter which
kills, and administration, of death, and condemnation 2. Cor. 3. 6. 7. But of
the Covenant, and promise which God made with, and to Abraham, the Scriptures
do not so speak, neither can any man having wisdom, and grace. It was
profitable every manner of way, and the means both to beget, and nourish faith
in him, and his.

The confounding then of the Covenant given to Abraham with that given by Moses
is in it self a great error, and the ground of this amongst other evilles,
that it curses where God blesses. For where God promised unto Abraham, and
his seed a blessing in that Covenant, this other of the law brings all flesh,
as unable to keep it, under Gods curse: being given principally for
transgression, that is, to discover men's trangressions, and sins, that
despayring in themselves they might fly to the gracious promise made to
Abraham, and in it, unto Christ to come, and so find mercy with God thorough
repentance. Which Covenant therefore the Lord upon their repentance, so often
renewed with the seed of Abraham: whereas the Covenant of the law admits of no
repentance for mercy by it, but stands peremptory in, and upon Do this, and
live: and Cursed be he that abides not in all things written in the book of
the law to do them. And this so often renovation of the Covenant ^ark 1.
but of the Gospel, whose two general virtues are, faith in Christ, and
repentance.

But it will be demanded how the Covenant made with Abraham could be called the
new Covenant, DEI:
and that by Moses 400 years after, the old Covenant, or Testament.

First, ANSW:
in respect of the object, upon which the law works properly, which is the
old man, or part unregenerate: which it convinces, suppresseth, condemns,
and kills: whereas the gospel, or gracious promise, (as was that to Abraham)
respects properly the new man, which it begets, and nourishes.

2dly, even the same law in substance with that given to Moses in tables of
stone (unto which the Ceremonial, and Judicial laws considered aparte from
Christ, were Subordinate, the one for explanation of the first table, the other
of the latter, and so as accessoryes following the nature of the principal)
was in substance before the Covenant of the Gospel, and as old, as Adam: in
the table of whose heart it was engraven by creation: as being that image of
God in which he was made: Coloss. 3. ^0. ^ph. 4. ^4 ^om. 2. ^4. 15.
and which is renewed in us by the spirits wryteing the same law in our hearts,
in wisdom, righteousness, and holiness: which is yet more evident in the remnants
of the same law vnblotted out in all Adams natural posterity: which Covenant
of the law was therefore before the Covenant of the Gospel with Abraham, yea
or with Adam either.

3dly, and lastly, the whole body of the Scriptures may be divided into two
parts: the law or old Testament, and the Gospel or new. Now of the old
Testament Moses is propounded unto us as the minister, and mediator: as is
Christ for the minister, and mediator of the new. For the law was given by
Moses, and grace, and truth by Christ Jesus. Not as though Moses preached not
the gospel, ^oh. 5. 46. Heb. 4. 2.
( for he wrote of Christ: and preached the gospel to the Israelites in the
wilderness:) nor as if, on the contrary, Christ taught not the law, (for we may
see the contrary, as else where, so especially Math: 5. where he both opens,
and inforceth it against the corrupt glosses of the pharisees) but because the
ministry of Moses was chiefly legal, and the ministry of Christ chiefly
Evangelicall, or of the Gospel. In which respect also it is, that we (though
the Scriptures never so speak) use to call the wryteings of Moses, and the
Prophets the old Testament, and those of the Evangelists, and Apostles, the
new Testament. Now unto those two generalles, 1. the law most fully, and
solemnly published by Moses: and 2. the gospel by Christ, all the particulars
of what kind soever dispersed throughout the whole Bible must be referred
immediately: and so the Covenant made with Abraham being referred to that
clear, and full revelation of Christ come in the flesh, as a part to the head,
is after the law given to, and by Moses: whom the Scriptures do every where in
that respect oppose unto Christ, but never Abraham. I proceed.

The Virgin Mary speaking of the fruit of her womb, Christ, testifyeth, God
therein remembered his mercy, Luke 1. 4^* 42. 54. 5^* Chapter 2 67 72. 73.
as he spoke to Abraham, and his seed for ever: and Zachary in the same
consideration, that he performed his mercy promised to their forefathers, and
remembered his holy Covenant, and the oath he swear to their father Abraham.
Mary, and Zachary filled with the H. Ghost do teach that God in his Covenant
with Abraham, and his seed promised Christ: and in giveing him remembered the
same Covenant; M. Helw
with what ghost then do others affirm that in that Covenant he promised
nothing but the land of Canaan? or how can godly men put out this clear light
of the Scriptures shineing in their hearts?

The Apostle Rom: 4. 11. calls Circumcision, which was the sign of that
Covenant, the seal of the righteousness of the faith in, or of that of the
uncircumcision, that is, of the faith which he being uncircumcised had, that in
his seed Christ should be justification for believing uncircumcised Gentiles,
as well as circumcised Jews. Whereupon it follows, (if the Covenant, and
seal agree in one) that the Covenant it self was of the righteousness of faith,
which the gospel brings: opposed to the righteousness of the law, which Moses
describes, where he says, The man that does these things, shall live in them.
Rom: 10. 5. 6. In which place the Apostle plainly teaches, that the Covenant
renewed with Israel Deuteronomy: 29. and 30. was the Covenant of the Gospel, and
righteousness of faith in Abraham's promised seed.

Lastly, the Sriptures do most plainly, and plentififully teach, that the
Covenant

We are taught by Christ Math: 21. 41. that the vyneyard, which the Jews had,
should be taken from them, and let out to other housbandmen: and more plainly
v: 43. that the kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to a
nation, which should bring forth the fruits thereof. Here is the very same
kingdom of God, or Ch: whereof they were, and we are subjects: as they else
where are called Christ's Luke 19 14
Citizens, and he their Zach. 9. 9. Math. 2^ ^.
king. Likewise Paul teaches, that the Gentiles, which before, were wild
olives, are by faith grafted into the same root, from which the Jews, the
natural branches, Romans 11. ^9. 18. etc. ^. 23.
thorough unbelief, were broken of: and into which, they should, if they abode
not in unbelief, be grafted in again: making the Church of Jews, and Gentiles
one tree growing upon the same root Abraham, Isak, and Jacob. The same Apostle
also compareing the Ephesians before their calling, with the Jews, Ephesians. 2. 11
12. ^. 17.
says, they were in times past without Christ, having no hope, and without
God in the word: therein showing that the Jews in their right estate, and
calling, had all these: as they also were near before, the Ephesians being of
far of, Ch 3. 4 5^.
made near by the blood of Christ: unto which ad that the Gentiles were to be
made by the preaching of the gospel, coheyres, and one body, with the Jews,
who were before Hebr. 6. ^7.
the heyrs of promise: and having all been baptized, and all eaten of the same
spiritual meat, and drunken of the same spiritual drink, Christ.

And such is the clearnes of those places to prove the Covenant, and Church
with, and of Abraham, and his seed, the same in nature with ours, and so the
Covenant, and Church of the Gospel, as that he who goes about to darken their
light, would cover the sun with a ragged clout. And as every by-way, and false
profession (notwithstanding any other likely things in it) has some or other
such notorious error, as that all having spiritual eyes (not dazzled too much
some way, or other) may discover it: so would the Lord mark out this profession
of Anabaptistry, as not from heaven, by this error, that the Covenant with
Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, is the Covenant of the law,
and not of the gospel. Upon which notwithstanding does depend the rejecting
of Infants from the Ch: and baptism: as also the repeating of the bapt:
received in false Churches, as may appear to him, who well observes their
pleading for apostate Israel, as a true Ch: because it was Abraham's carnal
seed, and so had circumcision as a seal of a carnal Covenant.

And here I think it a fit place to lay down such Scriptures, and grounds, as
upon which we admit the Infants of the faithful into the Church and to the
baptism thereof: and so after to answer what is objected, intermingling also
amongst mine answers other proofs, as occasion is.

Now 1. these men grant, that accordeing to the Covenant mentioned

If the Covenant made with Abraham, and his seed, whereof Circumcision have
formely proved, then stands it good to all the faithful, and their seed to
the worlds end, notwithstanding the different ordinances accordeing to the
considerations of Christ's being to come, and being come in the flesh. And so
these men denying our seed this Covenant, and priveledg of entrance, do deny
the Gospel, and new Testament. And if the kingdom of God, Math. 2^ 43. Ephesians. 3.
6.
or Churchstate of the Jews (which did comprehend infants with their parents)
be given to us, and we made one body with them, then must the Ch: now
comprehend infants also with their parents: otherwise we are not the same body,
and kingdom with them And if with the unbelieving Jews their infants were
broken of, Romans 10. 17.
(who are otherwise unbroken of at this day) then must our infants be planted
in with us, whom God has given to beleev: otherwise we are not planted in
their place. And if the Jews shall be grafted in again (which again shows it to
be of them who had been grafted in before) if they continue not in belief, v.
23.
then must the infants be grafted in with their parents at the first, and so
our seed with us.

That God did out of his special love separate from the world the infants Genesis
17. 7* Lev. 20. 24. 26. Deuteronomy: 29. 10. 11. etc.
before Christ's comeing, the Scriptures expressly teach, and every one will
grant. Except these men can show where God has cast the infants of those
beloved parents out of the Church into the world, and taken that his love from
them, they must remayn in the Ch: to the worlds end. For what God has once
established. God only can repeal: and that this Covenant with Abraham was not
the old canceled Covenant, or Testament, I have proved before. They bid us
prove that children are of the Ch: and to be baptized: but we require of them
proof how they are cast out of the Church, and baptism thereof: and how the
grace of God is so shortened by Christ's comeing in the flesh, as to cast out of
the Ch: the greatest part of the Ch: before, the infants of believers?

The L: Jesus sent out his Apostles Math: 28. 19. to teach, or make disciples
all nations, and to baptize them: opposeing all nations to that one nation of
the Jews: as if he should have said thus. I have formerly declared my will to
that one nation, and circumcised it: go you now, and teach all nations, and
baptize them. Now if Christ's meaning had been, that they should not with the
parents (being made disciples, and baptized) baptize the children, as before
they had with the parents (being made disciples, and circumcised) circumcised
the children, it had been needful he had given them a caveat to leav the
children of the faithful out in the world, though they had formerly been in
the Church. If it be objected, that they who were taught, and believed, were to
be baptized, therefore not Infants, I deny the consequence: which should be, if
it were true, and therefore not Infidels, and such as refuse the Gospel. And
this is the opposition which the Scriptures make, setting impenitent, and
unbelieving persons, against the penitent, and believers, and not children
against their parents, which is childeish to imagine.

The Apostle Peter Act: 2. 38. 39. exhorts the Jews to repent, and to be the
promise was made to them, and their children, and to all afar of as many as the
Lord should call. As if he should say, God has promised unto Abraham, that he
would be his God, and the God of his seed, Iuke 1. (...).
in that blessed seed Christ. He has now remembered his holy Covenant, or
promise, and Christ is come to you his own. Do not by your unbelief, and
impenitency deprive your selves, Ioh. 1. 13.
and your children of the fruit of this gracious promise: but that it may be
profitable to you, and them; repent, and so be baptized for your confirmation:
and let the seal be set to the Covenant in which you, and your children are.

To elude this place alleged in my former book, Mr Helw: M. Helw
comments upon it in these words. The Apostle says to and of all the
unbelieving Jews, and Gentiles, the promise is made to you, and to your
children, even as many as the L. shall call: and so taking his own imagination
both for text, and exposition, he bids me prove that by children there are
meant Infants.

1. These words, ANSW:
to them that are afar of, (which he leaves out in his accustomed bouldnes with
the Scriptures) with the words following, are not meant of the Gentiles at all,
but of the Jews far of in time, as the original greek bears it. For neither
was Peter himself yet so well informed of the calling of the Gentiles, neither
(had he so been) was it then a fit time to speak of it to the weak Jews. He
speaks then indefinitely of the Jews as the seed of Abraham, and within the
Lords Covenant, or Promise: whom therefore Ch: 3. 25. he calls the Sons of
the Covenant: and to the Jews alone, as is evident, where v. 14. 16. 22. 29.
he quotes the Prophesyes of Ioell, and David: which to unbelieving Gentiles had
been in vayn. Yea that of the Promise he directs distinctly to such Jews
only, as had the work of grace begun in them: being pricked in their hearts
for the crucifying of Christ, and earnestly set to know, and do the will of
God. v. 37. 39.

That by children here are meant Infants, I have by the drift of the place, and
conference of other Scriptures proved; and that the H. Ghost speaks of the
Covenant with Abraham, neither was there otherwise cause of nameing their
children.

Where he further bids me prove that the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven
goes by succession of generation, as the land of Canaan did, he begets
bastardly errors of his own, and the^ would have me nourish them. For neither
did the land of Canaan come by succession of generation, but by Gods promise
made upon condition of faith, and holiness, as I have formerly proved: much
less does the kingdom of heaven: but by Gods gracious promise, and gift, both
to young and old. These men think the kingdom of heaven comes to all Infants
so dying; and does it therefore come by carnal generation? If it come
otherwise to all, and by the free grace of God in Christ, as they suppose, can
they see no other way, but it must needs come to the Infants of the faithful,
by carnal generation? as if their estate were worse then the estate of all the
rest?

Ad to this Scripture that which we read Act: 16. 14. 15. that God having
opened the heart of Lydia, to attend to, and beleev the word of Paul: She was
baptized, and her family. She believed, and the fruits, and effect thereof
was, she, and her family were baptized. With these things does agree Christ
our Lords his taking the little children Mark 10. 14. 16.
(to wit of the Jewish Church) in his arms, his blessing them, that is his
communicateing his grace with them, and pronouncing that of such is the kingdom
of heaven: as also his commanding the bringing of such unto him. In blessing
them visibly, he shows them to be lawful members of his visible Church or
body; and more plainly in pronounceing the kingdom of heaven (which is his
Church upon earth) to be of such. In commanding such to be brought unto him,
he commands them by consequence, to be baptized; since they cannot be brought
unto him personally, as then, nor otherwise outwardly, or by men, save by
baptism. And if Infants be to partake of Christ's blood, and spirit, there must
be some ordinary means to apply them, God workeing ordinarily by ordinary
means, and the same none but Tit. 3. 5. VI.
baptism, that lavacher of the new birth, as the Apostle calls it.

Lastly Paul testifyeth 1. Cor. 7. 14. that if one of the parents be a
believer, the children are holy, viz: with the holiness of the Covenant (secret
things being left to God) who otherwise, are unholy. Neither is it truly
answered, that they are only holy to their parents use, as is the unbelieving
wife to the use of her housband. For 1. they must either be holy in their
persons, or they cannot be saved. 2. he says the vnbeleeveing wife is
sanctified in, or to her beleeveing housband: but he says not that children
are sanctified to their parents, but simply that they are sanctified, or holy.
3. It is not true that children are sanctified to the parents there spoken of:
the one of them being Tit. 2. 1^.
unbelieving to whom nothing is sanctified. Lastly, the very drift of the place
proves, that the Apostle has reference to the Covenant of Abraham, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed. The thing he intends, is, to prove it lawful for
a beleeveing housband, or wife to abide with an unbelieving wife, or housband.
This he proves by the Covenant made with Abraham, and with every faithful
son, and daughter of Abraham, that he will be the God of his, or her seed: and
so endow them with the holiness of the Covenant: and that therefore they should
not make scruple of liveing with their (though vnbeleeveing, if otherwise
lawful) wives, and house bands. And in this interpretation is force of
Argument, both for the Apostles meaning, and Corinth: satisfaction. And so the
seed of the faithful being holy with the holiness of the Covenant are
necessarily within the same Covenant which halloweth them.

Now whereas some marvayl, why the H. Ghost speaks not more plainly, and
expressly of the admission of infants into the Ch: and bapt: thereof; they must
remember, 1. That none must presume to teach the L: how to speak, but that all
are with reverence to search out his meaning. 2. That they may with as much
reason marvayl, why there is no express mention made of the casting out of the
Jewish infants with their vnbeleeveing parents. In the very same places the H.
Ghost speaks of the taking the kingdom of God from them, for not bringing
forth fruit; and of giveing it to the Gentiles: who would bring forth fruit: of
breaking of the natural branches for unbelief; and of planting in the Gentiles
by faith. Now here is no mention of the infants of either. Both the one, and
other are comprehended for those outward prerogatives, and dispensations in
their parents, as the branches in the root: The infants of the godly, in their
godly parents, accordeing to the tenor of Gods mercy: the infants of the
ungodly in their ungodly parents, in the tenor of his justice, of which more
hereafter.

And here, for the better clearing of things following thereabout, it is of
Special use to observe the diverse considerations, and respects, in which the
Scriptures speak of the Jewish Ch: and ordinances: which are in number three.

First considering the Israelites in their just constitution, and calling of
God, they were Rom 11 26. Lev. 24. 25. 26. Deuteronomy. 7. 6 7. 8. Number 23. 25. Rom 9.
4 Is. 63. 16 Exo 4 22 Gal. 4. 1. Heb. 6. 17 Ier 31. 20 Ro^ 11. 21 Gal 2. 15 Ioh
1. 11. Ephesians. 2. 12 Act. 26. 6. 7.
the first fruits, and root, with the mass, and branches, holy: Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, faithful persons, and their posterity an holy people unto
the Lord their God: separated unto him from all other peoples: beloved of him,
and out of his love chosen to be a precious people unto himself; above all the
peoples on the earth: in whom God saw none iniquity, nor transgression: to whom
belonged the adoption, glory, Covenants, constitution of the law, worship, and
promises: Gods children having him their Father: being the heyr, and heirs of
promise: his dearest son, (...) the child of his delight: natural branches,
and in the same regard, Jews by n^^ture, and not sinners of the Gentiles:
Christ's own: in Christ: without whom the Gentiles were: and the twelv tribes
worshipping God instantly, day, and might, in hope of the promised Christ. So
for their ordinances in their institution, and right use their Ro^ 4 Heb. 4
Lev. 4 31. 3^ Numb 24. 25.
Circumcision was a seal, or sign of the righteousness of faith: their
offerings asw^^^ favor unto the Lord, for the forgivenes of sins, as leading
to Christ by faith: their washings applying the blood of Christ, which they
figured: unto which David had respect, when he prayed, that for the forgivenes
of his adultery, and murder, God would w^sh him thoroughly from his
iniquityes, and purg him with hyssop. Psalm. 51. v. 4. 9. with Lev. 14. 4 etc:
that he might be clean. Thus were the Act. ^ 38: Romans 7 12. 14 1. Cor 3 4. Gal.
4 2. 4.
Oracles given lively, the law spiritual: the manna, and rock Spiritual, and
Sacramentally Christ.

Secondly, the Scriptures sometimes speak of that Church, and ordinances by way
of comparison with the Ch: and ordinances after Christ's death, and ascension.
And in that respect the Apostle, compareing not person with person, but Ch:
with Church, calls it (though the heyr, yet) a child, in the nonage: and the
ordinances tutours, and governors, under which it was: but the Church now a
man of full age, and so freed from them unto greater liberty. The person is the
same both a child, and a man grown: though not to be trained up after the same
manner: even such is the difference between them, and us. They as a child, had
a harder hand held over them, and were stinted sundry ways, where we are free.
They were taught by signs, and hand-wryteings, and poyntings with the finger,
as it were: where our institution is more manlike, and simple. They had earthly
things more distinctly, and fully; we heavenly. In which respect, the Ch: since
Christ's ascension, and possession of heavenly glory, is called more specially
Mat^^ 11. 11
the kingdom of heaven, which he dispenses, with more then kingly bounty in
the largess of his spirit. They had the Gospel by the Prophets shineing as a
light in a dark place: we by Christ, and the Apostles, as the dawning of the
day, and morning star. 2 Pet 19. Heb. 10 1 Cor. 24.
They had the Prophetyes, and Shadows of good things to come: we the stories,
and remembrances of the same good things come, even Christ exhibited accordeing
to the promise of the Father. In which respect it is also said Gal. 3. 34 35.
that faith was not come to them: but that they were shut up into the faith to
be revealed: Hebr. ^34.
and that they dyed, and received not the promise, to wit, Christ come in the
flesh. And in this consideration, and comparison, neither Abraham, nor David
received the promise, or had faith come unto them, or were made p^rfit, v. 4^.
as the Apostle speaks.

3dly, the Scriptures do often speak of the Jewish Church, and ordinances, in
respect of the degenerate estate of the one, and corrupt abuse of the other, in
that estate. Which (as at other times, so) were the one, and other very notable
in the days of Christ, and his Apostles: the leven of Pharisaicall hypocrisy
(besides the worse error of the Saducees) having so far infected, Rom 1^
as that the greatest part of the Israelites being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and goeing about to stablish their own righteousness did
not submit themselves to the righteousness of God, in receaveing Christ. They
did not consider the law as given for transgression, ^ 3. 19 ^. 7.
and to kill them, as revealing the will of God in the rigor of justice, and
his eternal, and unchangeable judgment against sin: unto which also the
sacrifices, and ceremonies served in their legal, and literal use, that so
despayreing in them selves, they might fly to the free promise of grace in that
promised seed of Abraham now come; but taking the law, and ordinances thereof,
to be for outward disciplyne only, they imagined they might by outward
obedience satisfy it, and therein be justified before God: and so did glory in
the outward works, and ceremonies thereof: (...)
especially in their circumcision in the flesh. And as the most of them
conceaving carnally or fleshlily of the Lords Covenant did glory in the flesh,
(...) 3. 3.
and that they were Abraham's seed, and Circumcised, and so despised the free
promise of grace in Christ, so others of them receaving him in part, did
mingle with the righteousness of faith the righteousness of the law: sowering
also with that leven many of the Gentiles especially in the Churches of
Galatia. Whereupon it was, that the Apostle wrote to the Hebrews, and
Galations as he did, both of the persons, and things we speak of.

The persons, whether Jews, or Iudaizeing Christians glorying in the works of
the law, especially in their circumcision in the flesh, he calls ^^il. 3. 3
^l. 3. 3. ^. 1. 3.
Abraham's seed accordeing to the flesh; carnal, and under the yoke of
Ismaelitish bondage: of whom ^^n. 16. ^. 34. 21. 9. ^. ^l. 4 22 ^ 29. ^. 31. ^.
^1.
Ismaell was a figure: who being the son of the bondwoman, and born after the
flesh, or ordinary course of nature, mocked at him, who was born after the
promise, and was therefore cast out of Abraham's house: and so is propounded as
a figure of all them, Jews, or Gentiles, who in the confidence of works,
reject the promise of grace, and persequute them that embrace it: bringing
themselves also therein under the bondage of the whole law. And thus all
whether Jews, or Gentiles, then or now, despiseing the free promise of grace,
and looking to works for justification, were and are rank Ismaelites, and of
Abraham's seed accordeing to the flesh, as the Apostle expressly taxes the
Galatians, desyreing to be under the law, though not discending naturally of
Abraham.

Now (that I may apply these things to the present purpose) what is all this of
Abraham's seed accordeing to the flesh in the Apostles meaning to the infants of
the faithful, whether of the Jews formerly, or Gentiles now? Did, or do they,
as Ismaell, glory in the flesh, and mock at Gods promise, or any way reject
Christ? Did, or do they establish the righteousness of the law, and of works, or
persequute him that is born after the spirit, as all they who are born after
the flesh, in the Apostles meaning, did, and always do? Only they, who thus
Ismael-like, glory in works, and persequute the true believers, are by the
Apostle called Abraham's seed, according to the flesh, and of Ismaell. So for
the ordinances, and works of the law thus abused, and perverted for
justification, they were base, and beggarly, unprofitable, unholy, unhallowing,
yea dross and dung: yea pernicious, and hurtefull, curseing, and killing them,
who so wrought, or deemed them. And thus considered, the Apostle to the
Galatians, Phillipians, and Hebrews speaks of them; (giveing them as Luther
used to say, ignominious names) having to do with those, who either did, or
were in special danger, thus to pervert them.

And these grounds thus laid, unto that his objection, that Page 1^ etc.
the Covenant made with Abraham was a carnal Covenant, because it had a
worldly sanctuary, and preisthood, and carnal rites purifying the flesh, but
not purgeing the spirit, I do answer, that those ordinances were no part of
the Covenant made with Abraham, but accessoryes unto the law given 430 years
after: though there might be a spiritual use of them, and was, by faith, as of
any ordinances now and as of the moral law it self, to them that beleev, and
repent: but in, and accordeing unto this lawful use of them the Apostle
speaks not, but in respect of their abuse, as either severed from Christ, as
their end; or joined with him for justification.

His assertion, so often repeated, that God in his Covenant with Abraham,
promised but worldly things, and so required only carnal obedience, I have
formerly refuted, as a notorious ground of Judaism and Pharisaism. Neither was
it the more a carnal Covenant, because the sign was set in the flesh, then is
ours now, because baptism is administered upon the flesh, or bodies of the
persons baptized.

But where he ads, that the judgment for the breaking of the Covenant of
Circumcision was a worldly judgment, and that no judgment of condemnation us
pronounced against any, though presumptuously breaking the ordinances, and law
of Moses, but bodily death, quoteing for that purpose Gen: 17. 14. Numbr. 15.
30. Hebr: 10. 28. he proceeds on indeed from Pharisaism which made the
promises, and Messiah carnal, to plain Sadusaism, which denied a
resurrecction, especially unto the Jews, which (as it is written of them) has
been the persuasion of diverse Anabaptists in former times. For if eternal
death were not threatened the Jews for breaking the law, and commaundments
given by Moses, though presumptuously, and blasphemously, of which he speaks
Numb: 15. 30. nor for the worshipping of false Gods, of which sin Paul speaks
Hebr. 10. 28. compared with Deuteronomy. 17. 2. 3. 6. then for no sin whatsoever, and
so there is no judgment to come, nor needs be no Christ to save from it.

The Scriptures quoted speak indeed of bodily death, but includeing in it
spiritual death, without repentance, as did their bodily blessings promised
include spiritual. The Apostle Paul speaking of the last judgment, Rom: 2. 12.
says that the Jews sinning, in, or under the law, should be condemned 12. 16
(to wit eternally) by the law. It is true he adds, that they who so sinned,
might thorough repentance be saved: (and so may they that sin against the
Gospel now, except their sin be against the H: Ghost, which was then
unpardonable, as now) and in so saying, he graunts, though he observe it not,
that the sin then was in it self, and without repentance, damnable.

He ads, that by our ground we must baptize all our household, and infants,
both born in the house, and bought with money. ^. Helw
I answer 1. That it follows not, that if we succed the Jews in the Covenant
of the Lord; and our bapt: ANSW:
and L: Supper, their Circumcision, and passover, therefore there must be an
agreement in all the particulars about them. The substance of the L: Covenant
with Abraham, was, that he would be his God, and the God of his seed: and this
about his bond servants was an accessory unto it. And of it there was a more
special reason for them, then for us: because they were to be separated even
Civilly in a more special manner from uncircumcised persons, then we now from
persons unbaptized, as appears Ezra 10. 3. 11. etc. Neh: 9. 2. and 13. 3. 23.
23. 25. 30. Dan. 1. 8. Act. 10. 9. 10. 11. and 11. 3. etc. 2dly, even the
familyes, and houshoulds of the faithful now, if they be in the estate of
Abraham's family, are to be baptized also.

And for this purpose, ^en 18. (...). and 23 ^. 3. 12. ^6. 27 etc Genesis 12 ^. ch
17. ^3. chapter 35 ^.
it shall be useful to consider, what the Scriptures both promise, and testify
of familyes, and houshouldes. The L: promised Abraham the Father of the
faithful, that in him ^s. 24 15 ^sal. 111 ^. 7. Luke 19. 9 ^.
all the familyes of the earth should be blessed: bids him circumcise all the
males of his family, which he knew before he would command to keep the way of
the Lord. Genesis 18. 19. As Jacob also purged his household from idolatry, and
all vnclean-nes, that he might sacrifice unto God with them. Thus Joshua
professes for himself, and his household, that they will serve the Lord: and
David, that he who walked in a perfie way should serve him: and that none
workeing deceit, should dwell in his house. Accordeingly the L: told Zacheus,
when he became a son of Abraham, that that day salvation was come into his
house. We read likewise of Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and one that
Act. 10 2 Ch 16. 32 33. 34, ^er 31. 31 Heb 8. 8.
feared God with all his household: as was the layer also converted, and
baptized, with all his family. And lastly in the places brought by Mr Helw: for
the gathering of the Ch: under Christ, the L: promises to make his Covenant
with the house, or family of Israel, and with the family of Judah. In all
which with other Scriptures, we see how the tenor of the L: promise, and
blessing runs upon godly governors, and their familyes. Not but that it comes
often to pass otherwise, and that faithful governors have unbelievers in their
houshoulds: but that this is the ordinary, and orderly state of things: and
where it falls out otherwise in the family, it is at the least the governors
Cross, if not their sin. Now in this, as in all other particulars, we must
consider of the dispensation of the L: ordinances, accordeing to the orderly
state of things. But to conceav, that Abraham would circumcise any unbelieving,
or unholy person, so appearing, or seed of such, on both sides, is to accuse
the father of the faithful of unfaithful dealing with the seal of the L:
Covenant, in setting it upon them, who had no part in it, nor promise of God
to be their God: though I doubt not but they under godly government in the
family, may be admitted into the Ch: upon the manifestation of a very small
measure of grace, with promise of submission unto all good means of growth,
public, and private; as might they yet with a lesser measure have been
admitted into the Israelitish Church, having a far less measure of revelation
of grace, then we now.

He adds, M. Helw
that Bapt: is by John taught to be the baptism of amendment of life, and
remission of sins, Mark 1. 4. the burying into the death of Christ, that men
might walk in newnes of life. Rom: 6. 4. and the putting on of Christ by faith,
Gal: 3. 26. 27.

I answer that these are preparations unto, ANSW:
and ends, and uses of baptism for men of years: and should not be alleged to
the prejudice of infants: no more then their want of faith, by which men of
years are justified, or of works, by which they are to be judged, to the
prejudice of the salvation of infants, which have them not. Christ our Lord had
the same outward Circumcision with the Jews, Luke 2. 21. Math. 3. 16.
and the same Baptism with us, and yet neither the same preparation unto, nor
ends, or uses of the one or other, with them, or us.

Besides, Romans 4. 3 11.
upon this ground, any might have excepted against the circumcision of infants
of old. Abraham believed before he was circumcised: so the ends, and uses of
circumcision were, to be a seal of the righteousness of faith, and to confirm,
that God was the God of the person circumcised: as also to teach, Genesis 17.
that Job. 14. 4.
nothing clean could come of the unclean seed of man: to admonish of Deuteronomy. 10.
16.
the circumcision of the heart: to confirm faith in the time of danger
especially against the uncircumcised: and to be a sign of distinction, and
separation from the same Judge. 14. 3 Act. 11. 3.
uncircumcised Gentiles. These were the ends, and uses of circumcision, Ier 4.
4. 1. Sam. 14. 6. and 17. 36.
which notwithstanding infants could not possibly propound, or have. Were they
therefore to be kept from it? So reasons this man against the baptism of
infants: which follows in the room of the other, as I have formerly proved.
It is sufficient, that the infants of believers are capable of the
manifestation of Gods goodness toward them, in being baptized, as of old they
were circumcised, accordeing to the Covenant. The other particular ends were,
and are to follow, and to be atteyned in their times. Where let it also be
noted, that whereas, in the L: Supper there are required for the act of
partakeing* sundry works implying understanding and knowledge in the partaker;
as his being put in mind, that it is Christian body, and blood given for him
that, he take, eat, and drink it in remembrance of Christ's death: there is no
such thing in the act of the administering of Bapt: but only the person
baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and H Ghost. The same difference may
be also observed to have been of old, between Circumcision, and the eating of
the passover, inhibited them who were not capable of the meaning of the
mystery. Exodus: 12. 26. 27.

That we hold, M. Helw
and profess that Christians bege^ Christians, and that only we (whom he
calls Brownistes, because we are not Anabaptists) beget infants that are heyrs
of salvation, and under the Covenant of grace, is but his rash, and dishonest
accusation of us.

All men know we hold the reformed Churches in all places, ANSW:
the true Churches of Christ, and so within the Lords Covenant, the faithful
parents with their seed. The like also we think of such in Engl: in their
persons, (and seed with them) as are made partakers of the faith of Abraham.
2dly, we hold, that our (as Ephesians. 2. 3
all other men's) children are by natural generation the children of wrath: and
that it is by the grace of God, that we, and they with us, are within this the
L: Covenant, as was Abraham and his seed.

Against our doctrine, that Baptism is a seal of the Covenant of the Gospel, he
obiecteth, that then washing with water is a seal in the flesh, and makes a
pr^^, or impression. I answer (noteing in the first place, how he calls the
very outward washing with water, baptism) that even that washing by Gods
appointment, is an outward seal, or sign of confirmation, of the new Testament
in the blood of Christ: for that we mean by a seal: and to require a print, or
impression, is but to quarrel about the word, or letter: when even
circumcision it self (to speak properly) was no print. Where Christ teaches.
Ioh: 6. 27. that the Father sealed him, does he mean that he set any print
upon his soul or body, Is. 8. 16.
or more then this, that he designed him to the office of the mediator? Where
the L: bids the Prophet seal up the law among his disciples, would he have a
print set in their flesh, or more, then that he should more fully declare, and
comfirm the law unto them? When Paul tells the Corinth: that they are the seal
of his Apostleship, does he mean any more then that their conversion from
Paganism both by doctrine, and signs, and w^^ders of an Apostle amongst them,
1. Cor. 9. 2. 2. Cor. 3. 5. 10. 2 Cor. 12 ^3.
was a comfirmation there of? So, sin^ Baptism is, by Gods appointment, a
declaration, and confirmation of the inward, and effectual washing by that
blood and spirit of Christ, from the guilt, and contagion of sin, it is
rightly, and truly called a seal, or sign o^ confirmation of Christ's
Testament established in his blood; as is also the L: Supper, of the breaking
of his body, and shedding of his blood for our sins. And for this sealing, and
confirming of Christ's Testament in his blood those ordinances especially serve,
and are by his servants to be used.

He tells us, that in the new Testament there is no seal, but the seal of the
spirit: and quotes Ephesians: 1. 17. and other Scriptures speaking of that inward
seal, and proveing it indeed: but not disproveing the outward seals, but
plainly establishing them. For if Gods teaching of, and testifying unto us
inwardly by his spirit, that we are his in Christ, be an inward seal, then is
his teaching of, and testifying unto us, the same thing outwardly, by the
Gospel, and Sacraments, an outward seal, or seals, and so rightly called. And
not only Ioh. 5. 8
the spirit, which is inward, but water, and blood, which are outward, do bear
record of Christ, or confirm, and seal up his death unto us. In respect of
which water, and blood issueing out of his side, our Sacraments are said to
have flowen thence. Lastly, Abraham, our Father, when he believed, was Ioh. 19.
34.
also sealed by the Spirit of Promise: and yet this hindered not, but that both
he, and his seed had the outward seal of circumcision added; even so our good
God, knowing how frayl, and feeble in faith we are, has to his gracious
Covenant, and Promise in word, and wryteing, annexed (besides the inward seal
of the spirit) the outward seals, which we call Sacraments, for the
confirmation thereof, not in it self, but unto us: which we are therefore
accordeingly to use, with reverence, and thankfulness.

His assertion, that Infants are not in the Covenant of the new Testament, and
therefore not under the seal, I have formerly disproved. If they be under the
Promise of salvation, they have a part, or legacy in the will, or Testament of
Christ, or new Covenant, which are both one: and so in this seal of initiation,
or entrance, baptism.

To his affirmation that parents cannot set the seal upon their infants now,
as they could the seal of circumcision of old, upon theyrs, I do answer, that
they cannot indeed set the inward seal, no more could they then: but the
outward they can now, as then they could: unto which God also sets the
inward ^^n due time, as he has promised, if they make not themselves unworthy
^hereof.

He objects in the last place against a ground in my book; Page 282. 283.
the former part whereof is this. The Scriptures every where teach, that
parents by their faith, bring their children into the Covenant of the Church,
and entile them to the promises. This (...) proved from Gen: 17. 7. Act: 2. 37.
which proofs I have also confirmed against his unjust exceptions. He here
objects further, M. Helw
that I bring in a meritorious fath, where my faith is little enough to bring
myself under the Covenant of God, were it not for his merciful acceptance in
Christ.

A vain, and ignorant collection: and by which the Apostle teaching
justification ^NSW:
by faith, might as truly have been accused for bringing in a meruorious
faith, etc: I do not then make faith a meritorious cause to deserv, but an
isntrumental means, or hand, as it were, to receav Gods gracious promises in
Christ to the faithful, and their seed: as Abraham when God promised him to be
his God, and the God of his seed, did by faith, lay hold of, and receav this
promise, and so interessed himself and his in it, and the seal thereof: which
promise had he not believed, he had visibly, or before men, deprived himself
and his of all interest in it. The same I judge of all other faithful parents,
leaving merit to freewillers, who hold particular election to arise from faith
forseen: and (as this man affirmed unto me, and others) that if God showed to
him any more favor, or mercy, then to the prophanest man in the world, it were
partiallity in him.

He ads that Abraham's faith and earnest prayer could not bring Ismaell his
child of 13 years old, nor his other children by Keturah under the Covenant
v: 18. 21. M. Helw
Where meaning, as he must, the Covenant of Circumcision, he overthrowes ANSW:
one error, as he that enterfeers, strikes down one ill leg, by another. For
1. since Ismaell, and the children by Keturah were circumcised, and yet had no
promise of the land of Canaan, his mayn foundation, which is, that God in the
Covenant of Circumcision, promised nothing on his part, but the land of Canaan
is raised, and so all falls, which he buildes upon it. 2dly, since the
Covenant there spoken of was the Covenant of Circumcision, and that Ismaell
with the rest were circumcised, how says he, that he, and they were not in the
Covenant, to wit outwardly? Besides the L: tells Abraham v: 20. that he had
heard his prayer touching Ismaell: though he meant to stablish his Covenant
with Isak, as the root; of which both the Church, and promised seed should
come, and unto whom Ismaell (with the rest) should have submitted, and adjoined
himself; whom because he despised, and in him, Christ, he was cut of from the
Ch: and Covenant afterward. Which things till they were revealed made no
difference between Isak, and Ismaell: neither can the like difference in Gods
secret knowledge, or purpose, till the time of revelation, exclude one of the
children of the faithful now, more then another.

Of Act: 2. 39. I have spoken formerly, and therefore come to the latter part
of the ground, which he puts down thus. God takes occasion by the sins of
parents to exequute his justice to condemnation, upon the children. Where
(says he) I double my sin, in that as before I made the parents faith the
cause of blessing to salvation, so here, their infidelity a cause of Gods
judgment to condemnation, to their children. Where the truth is, he both
doubleth, and trebleth injury upon me, and just blame upon himself. For
first, I neither mention, no^ meddle with either the salvation, or condemnation
of infants, though he falsify my words, as if I did: our question being only
about the outward, or visible Covenant of the Church, and Priveledges thereof:
secret things being left to God, as I there expressly speak, alleging Deutr.
29. 29. for that purpose. 2dly, as I make not the faith of parents a cause
meritorious, as he imagines, of that good unto their children, but only a
means of embraceing Gods gracious offer, and promise: so neither do I write, as
he chalengeth me, that the Fathers infidelity is a cause of the childrens
damnation, but an occasion, which God uses for the exequution of his justice,
upon the children, being by nature the children of wrath. That then, which I
have written, and do avouch, is, that God ordinarily includes in the parents,
the infants, as branches in the root, either for blessings, or judgments
visibly, or in respect of men, reserving to himself the secret dispensation of
things, accordeing to the tenor either of his mercy, or justice. That the
children of the faithful are with their parents in the visible Covenant of
Gods love, I have at larg proved by the Scriptures, and might alledg for that
purpose many more: and those not figurative, and shadowish, but containing in
them promises of eternal Deuteronomy. ^ 37.
truth: howsoever these men can have no more comfort in those promises for
their children, then if they were the children of Turks, and Pagans. Psalm 37
35. 26.


The other part touching the administration of Gods justice I proved in my
Page 282 283
book by sundry Scriptures: which because he passes by, as unseen, I will here
insert, as there I wrote, word for word. Genesis ^ 16. and 6. Hos. 2. ^
Cain goeing out from the presence of the Lord, carried his posterity with him:
so did Ismaell, and Es^^ theyrs, the Ismaelites and Edomites. And if the Lord
disclaym the mother for an harlot, not reputeing her his wife, he accounts the
children no better then bastards, on whom he will have no pity. And if the
children of the Jews be not broken of with their parents, for their unbelief,
they are successively within the L: Covenant every one of them to this day. To
the same purpose we may consider how in the drowing of the old world: the
burning of Sodom, and Gomorra: the plagueing of Egypt, Genesis 6 7 etc. 1. Pet 3
20. 21. Gen 19. 24 25. 2 Pet. 2. ^ Exo. 11. ^ and 12. 2^ Numb. 16 27 3^ I^sh 7.
24 25.
especially in the death of the first born: the swallowing up of Dathan, and
Ab^ram: the stoneing of Achan: the destruction of the Canaanites, and
Amalikites: the re^^ing out of Elys, Ieroboams, and Baashans familyes, how I
say in all these, and many mo, though most grievous, yet most just judgments of
God, the children were enwrapped in their fathers judgments: drowned, burned,
swallowed up by the earth, and otherwise destroyed with them. With which
examples ioyn the testimony of Job ch: 5. 3. 4. The habitation of the fool is
cursed: his children are far from safety: they are crushed in the gates, and
there is no rescue: and that of David Ps: 21. 10. The Lord will destroy the
fruit of his enemies from the earth, and their seed from among the children of
men: and again, Ps: 37. 28. The seed of the wicked shall be cut of. Yea what need
we seel further for this dispensation, then David himself, though a godly man,
because of whose sin, the child born in adultery, dyed the death. What reason
then this man had in his blind Zeal thus to ^am. ^. 14. 18
revile this doctrine, as a doctrine of devils, and me for it as a false
Prophet, let all wise men judge.

But says he, I propound this doctrine for a general rule. I do, for the
ordinary course of Gods justice of which we speak. Which notwithstanding
hinders not, but that his extraordinary mercy may, and does often, and much,
rejoice against his judgment. But let us see, what he obiecteth. 1. that Abyah
the son of wicked leroboam, though young, yet was not cursed for his fathers
sin 1. King^ 4. First, I speak no where of any such curseing, as he casts out.
2. Abija, was not so young but he disliked his fathers courses: and had good
found in him toward the Lord. 3. It is evident v: 10. that the L: punished his
v. 13.
fathers sin, in his death v: 11. That in Ezech: 18. 14. 17. is impertinent,
being spoken of a son forsakeing his fathers sin, and doing the contrary; with
whom the Lord does not deal in the course of his justice, but of his mercy. So
for Josiah, at 8 years old, he forsook the wicked ways of his father Ammon,
and sought after the God of his father David. And yet even for him, it 2. Cor.
^ 1. 2. 3
appears in the Scriptures, that the L: in giveing him into the hands of the
King of Egypt, had respect to the sins of Judah, and so of his father, amongst,
and above the rest. In his last example, he affirms untruly, that the Lord
did not punish the people of Isreal's children for their great transgression
Numb: 14. 26. 27. etc. It is expressly affirmed v: 33. that their children
should wander in the wilderness 40 years, and bear their whoredoms: though
respecting their forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and his Promise to
them, he brought the most of them into the land of Canaan, at the last: which
Mr Helw: graunts to have been Gods mercy, and therein, that in his justice he
might have taken them away also. And so v: 12. the L: plainly shows, that his
justice moved him to the destroying of them altogether, save that his singular
mercy did rejoice against judgment. And so this instance is clear against
himself.

Where he further confesses with me, that all are by nature, children of
wrath, conceaved, and born in sin; and then demands whether I hold not all
children alike ^. Helw
children of wrath: or that some parents confer grace by generation, more then
others: or if not, which he assures himself we will confess, how I can prove,
that God should exequute his justice to condemnation upon some children, for
the sins of their parents, and show mercy upon others, for the faith of their
parents, seeing God has said, that every one shall receav salvation, or
condemnation, accordeing to that, which he has done in the flesh, and not
accordeing to that his parents have done, I answer sundry things.

And 1. as before, that I do not say, that infants are saved, or condemned for
the faith, or sins of their parents, as he most untruly accuses me. The
infants saved are saved by the grace of God in Christ: Which their faithful
parents also beleev, accordeing to Gods Promise, I will be thy God, and the God
of thy seed. Those that perish, (though I desire, if such were the will of God,
and so could gladly beleev, if the Scriptures taught it, that all were saved)
do perish for that original guilt, and corruption, wherein they are conceaved,
and born, being the children of wrath by nature, and therein liable to Gods
curse, every way. But for that parents are in a sort in their children, and so
punished in their punishments, their sins also may, and do concur, as
concauses, or causes with other, of Gods judgments: both the Scriptures, and
reason teaching, that many causes may meet together in one effect. Yet must it
be here, and always remembered, that our question is not about the peremptory
salvation, or condemnation of any, but about their admission, or not admission
into the visible Church. And straung it is for this man to make it all one, to
be saved, and to be of the visible Church; and to be condemned, and to be out
of it, specially for children; since he will have them all saved, and yet none
of them at all to be of the Church. 2. if he were assured, as he says, that we
would confess, that no parents do confer grace by generation more then others,
I am assured he showed the less grace, in accuseing us in another place
against his conscience, to hold that Christians beget Christians by
generation. Page 172
3. Since all are by nature alike children of wrath, I would know of these
free-willers, how some become the children of God, and believers, and some
abide under the wrath of God? To make the things, or persons, which are
altogether alike in themselves, vnalike, there must come something from else
where, and that not alike, unto them both. For either let them alone which are
alike, or ad alike unto them both, and they will remayn alike still It must not
then be any universal grace alike common to all, which makes them who are
alike, to become vnalike one to another.

Mr Helw: else where, and rightly, disclaymes all freewill, or power in a man's
self to work out his salvation, but teaches, that this grace, which is his
mercy in Christ, God has given to all, though all receav it not: for which he
quotes Phil: 1. 10. 11 Act: 13. 46. Act: 7. 51. Where first he lays a
notoriouse error, for his foundation, in making all, and every person in the
world partakers of the grace of God in Christ. For they to whom God gives grace
in Christ, must themselves be in Christ: and so all the unbelievers, and wicked
in the world should be in Christ, which is expressly contrary to the Romans 8. ^
Gal 5. 24 Ephesians 2. 1^ Ioh 3. 3. ^
Scriptures So that wicked, and unregenerate men have neither power in
themselves, nor in Christ, (in whom they are not) to work out their salvation.
They indeed, who are in Christ by faith, and have received his spirit, are
thereby enabled to work out their salvation: which Phil: 1. 10. 11. proves: as
the rest also are able and have power to despise, and reject the grace of God
offered to condemnation, and this the other two Scriptures Act: 13. 46. and 7.
51. do prove. Which yet a great part of the wicked in the world do not: as not
having so much, as heard of Christ, at least in any competent measure for
salvation by him: but shall be judged accordeing to the law of nature written in
the creatures, and in their natural consciences. Again he ^^. 1. 8.
speaks contradictoryes in saying, that all have this grace, or power in
Christ, and that God gives it to all, and yet confessing, that all receav it
not. For though there may be a purpose, will, and offer to give, yet there can
be no giveing, so as the person have the thing, especially that thing, which
none can have against his will, (as none can have grace) except there be also a
receaving. Since then all men are not in Christ, and so not partakers of the
grace of God in him: nor yet, if they were, could a common, universal, and
equal grace make them unequal, who were formerly equal, it follows that
there is a special, and peculiar grace, which God in Christ gives unto some,
and not to others: by which they are enabled to understand, and beleev the
Gospel, and to repent: and so by consequence, a special, and particular
election of those persons before the world: since Gods works are known unto
him of old: neither Act. 15. 8
does he any thing in time, which he did not purpose to do before time.

Lastly since all children are by nature children of, or subject to wrath, and
which God might in justice destroy, why should it seem harsh unto these men,
that he should exequute his justice upon some, and show mercy upon others,
and save them? If he might in justice have condemned all, (which they must
needs grant, if they beleev that all are by nature children of wrath, and that
God gave his son in his mercy, and that it had been no injustice, if he had
given him for none, no more then he did for the angels that sinned) will they
sue God at the law because he has not given him effectually for all, or saved
all by him? Will they have him give them account why he takes some into the arm
of his mercy, when he might have left all to the hand of his justice? If he
condemn any, they have their due: those whom he saves, he does it of free
mercy, unto which he is not bound. And is any man's ey evil, because his is
good? or because men know no reason, why God should rayther choose, and save
some, then others, all deserving condemnation, will they yeald him to be no
more wise, and no more holy then they? The depth of the riches both of the
wisdom, and knowledge of God, and the vnsearchablenes of his judgments appears
in this, if in any other thing: as does also man's intolerable presumption, who
will yeald him no more, then he sees reason for.

Now though I have done it fully before, yet will I further clear by the
Scriptures, that, though all children are by nature alike, yet in respect of
the grace of adoption, they are not alike, especially unto us, and in that
judgment, which we are to pass upon them, leaving unto the L: his secrets.

And 1. who will say, that Isaak, being separated from the infants of the
heathen into the Covenant of Gods love, and so signed, as one of the L:
peculiar people; and those infants of the world, from whom he was separated,
(for example, the infants of the Sodomites, about his time, who were in Gods
feirce wrath destoyed with fire, and brimstone from heaven) were alike in Gods
acceptance? We have Isaak set forth as a an example of Gods mercy, and love;
and them, with their parents, of his justice, and vengance. Jude 7. And who
will say that the Israeliteish children received into solemn Covenant by, and
with the Lord, Neh: 10. 28. 29. and the children of the heathenish women,
which were shut out with their mothers, and separated, before the other could
enter it, were to be accounted alike acceptable? The Chap. 9. ^
Prophet Malachy testifyeth for the Lord, that he loved Iakob, and hated Esau,
(to wit in the decree of his love, and hatred, by just means to be applied)
before they were born: and this the Apostle Rom: 9. applies to the question of
election, and reprobation, touching the two parties, primarily, and distinctly;
and their posterity, secondarily, and indefinitely, both for persons, and
things And lest any should say, that God thus decreed, in respect of any thing,
which he forsaw they would do, or prove, the Apostle prevents this shift, and
shows that this was not in respect of works, but that the purpose of God might
stand, accordeing to election, v: 11. Besides had this been primarily in
respect of faith, or works forseen, and for that the one would receav the
grace of God, and not the other, the Apostle needed not to have broken out as
he did, speaking of the reason of this his love, or hatred, But what art thou o
man, who pleadest with God, etc. The answer had been easy for a child to v 20.
have given, namely that the reason why God purposed to love Iakob was because
he forsaw he would receav of himself the grace to be offered, and beleev: and
so to hate Esau for his sin in not receaving the same grace to be offered as
effectually on Gods part, as unto his brother.

It is also noted of John Baptist, that he was filled with the H. Ghost even
Luke 1. 15. Mat 19^ 13. 14. 1^ Chap. 15 22. etc.
from his mothers womb: which to affirm of all children were a vanity not
worthy the refuteing. Lastly, Christ our Savior blessed the infants of the
Israelites, being of the Church, when they were brought unto him: but with the
little daughter of the Canaanitish woman he refused to communicate his grace.
accounting her as a dog, or whelp, till her mother by her faithful, and
zealous confession, had obtained for her, interest in the childrens bread. And
thus it appears (besides the things formerly laid down) that though all
children be alike in nature, yet are they not all alike in respect of Gods
adoption, especially outwardly manifested, of which we speak.

He ads, that every one shall receav salvation, or condemnation accordeing to
that, which he has done in the flesh, etc. And for answer, I would know of
him, how any infants (so dying) who have done neither good, nor evil, shall
either be saved, or damned? He must answer, that the Scriptures he brings
concern not infants at all, but men of years; and therefore are by him
misapplyed to them, whom they nothing concern.

And here note, that as the Ch: in heaven, or of glory, and this in earth, or
of grace, is one in substance; this, the beginning of that, and that the
consummation of this, so they, who come into the Ch: here, must enter by the
profession, which themselves make: and they that come into the Church there, by
the profession, which Christ shall make of, and for them, accordeing to their
works. Math: 24. But as it were absurd to say, that infants cannot enter into
the Ch: and state of glory, because Christ cannot profess of them, that they
have fed the hungry, etc: so is it as absurd to exclude them from the Ch: or
state of grace, because they cannot themselves make profession of faith, and
repentance. This man by one, and the same error, which is the perverting, and
misapplying of the Scriptures to infants, which are peculiar to men of years,
debars them of both.

These things considered, I hope it will appear to the godly, and wise reader,
that the things for which he chalengeth me in this (as in other points) are
only false, wherein they are by him falsified. Yea and if there were noting
else, two of the three last Scriptnres, which he brings against me, do
vndenyably prove as much as (yea more then) I speak: which is, that wicked
parents do enwrap their children in the same evilles visibly, (for so I speak)
with themselves, adding in the same place, that this is not so, as though the
children were without fault, but as being by Adams transgression, and their
natural, and original corruption children of wrath, and liable to all Gods
curses, which he also takes occasion by the sins of the parents to exequute
upon the children, in whose punishments he also punishes the parents
themselves after a sort. The former Scripture is Rom: 5. 14. which proves by
his own exposition, that all infants are by the sin of their common father
Adam, under the reign or tyranny of death: the guilt, and contagion of which
sin is by their next parents immediately conveyed unto them, by natural
generation. And that God has usually punished the sins even of the next
parents both in the death of their children and otherwise, is so evident in the
Scriptures, as that no modest man will gaynsay it. Yea even for them of years,
that other Scripture which he brings Exodus: 20. 5. teaches plainly, that the
Lord visits not only their own sins, who hate him, upon them, but the sins of
their fathers also. That in Ezech: 18. 14. 17. as before I have answered, is
not of an infant, but of a child of years, forsakeing his fathers sins, and
doing the contrary: with whom therefore the L: deals not in the course of his
justice, but of his mercy: and so is not pertinent to the question in hand:
which is about infants, and those such, as with whom the L: deals in the
course, and tenor of his justice.

And thus have I answered all the particulars in his book, which either respect
mine own wryteings, or our special cause, and practice. My purpose also was to
have showed, how whilst he pretends the discovery of the mystery of iniquity,
himself is deep plunged in many points of Popish iniquity. But for that I have
drawn out the thread of mine Answer further then I intended; and that most of
the particulars will come, for substance, under consideration, in the Survey of
Mr Smithes confession, I will here conclude for the matter of his wryteing:
adding especially for the manner thereof, only thus much; that in him, and
some others I have had great cause to observe, and bewayl in a special regard,
man's misery, in lying open to this amongst other of Satan's dangerous
practices: which is, when men have escaped his snares of gross ignorance, and
prophanes, and are come to some measure of knowledge, and conscience of
godliness, and have suffered something for the truth, then to bring them into
love with themselves, and their own knowledge Zeal, and other graces: and
withal into the contempt of the knowledge, judgment, Zeal, and graces of all
other men: that, so soaring aloft upon the wings of vayn presumption, and
behoulding all others afar of, and as scarce creeping upon the earth, whilst
they mount on high, they might fall, by riseing, and that their fall might be
great. But let all Gods people be exhorted, and admonished to serve him in
modesty of mind, and meeknes of wisdom, with reverence, Iam. 3. 13. Heb. 1^
28. Col. 8.
and fear: avoiding, as the sands of humble hypocrisy, in pinning their faith,
and obedience upon the sleeves of others, so much more the rock of proud
presumption: which is so much the worse then the other, as it is more
dangerous for any to overvalve himself, then an other man.

A Survey of the Confession of faith published in certain Conclusions by the
remaynders if Mr Smithes Company after his death.
IN honor of the truth, and love of them who unfeignedly seek it, and more
specially of the persons, under whose names this Confession passes out, I have
thought my self even called to examine, and censure by the word of God, such
errors, as by the light thereof, I do discern in it, as also in the other
writing annexed unto it: purposing herein to pass by (as approving it) what I
find agreeable to the Scriptures, albeit not set down in so convenient terms:
to explane, and clear what may seem doubtful, and so to evince by the same
Scriptures, what I deem contrary to the wholesome doctrine of godliness and
form thereof. In all with I desire my endeavors may so far be blessed of God,
and accepted of men, as they contayn in them his simple truth, and proceed
from him, who entyrely loves all that seek the same truth in holiness.

And first the 7th Conclusion with is. That to understand and conceive of God
in the mind is not the saving knowledge of God, but to be like to God in his
effects and propertyes, to be made conformable to his divine and heavenly
attributes: this is the true saveing knowledge of God. 2. Cor: 3. 18. Math: 5.
48. 2. Pet: 1. 4. whereunto we ought to geve all diligence, stands need of
explanation. For taking the former part of the sentence either exclusively,
that salvation stands not in these things alone, or comparatively, that it
stands not therein principally, according to that form of speech Rom: 1. 19.
1. Co: 1. 17. it is true, and the Scriptures brought do prove it: but not so,
if the words be taken negatively, as though it stood not in these things at
all. For without faith (with is wrought in the mind, and understanding) no man
can Heb. 11.
please God: nor come unto him. And this (says Christ) is eternal life to
know Ioh. 17.
God the father, etc. and every where the Scriptures teach, that by faith
Christ is received, and salvation obtained: as is also that renewing of Gods
Image in us, ^h. 1. 12 ^om. 3. ^ ^oll. 3. 10
first in the understanding, in which we are first joined to God by true
knowledge; and 2dly, in our heart by sincere love: and so after in the other
affections, and parts of soul and body.

The 9th Position where it is said that God before the foundation of the world
did foresee, and determyne the issue and event of all his works. Act. 15. 18
comes Con^usion.
much short of the truth though there be no untruth in it. For God has not
only foreseen, and determined the issues, and events of his works, but has
also decreed and purposed the works themselves before the foundation of the
world. And so much the place in the acts proves: where James teaching that all
the works of God are known unto him from eternity, purposes to prove that
the calling of the Gentiles, of with work he speaks, is not a thing newly
come into the thoughts of God, but that with he has promised, and purposed
before. Which the other place also after alleged plainly proves: where it is
said, that God works all things according to the counsel Ephesians. 1. ^
of his will. And to conceive that God does any thing in time, with he did not
from eternity purpose to do, as he does it, is derogatory to his infinite
wisdom and power: and indeed to deny him to be God, and to make him finite: in
whom there is a chaung wrought, and a beginning, and grouth of counsayls. And
this I note for two purposes. First that we may know that the condemnation of
wicked men by God, for sin by their freewill to be wrought, was purposed of God
before the world: it being a good work of God, and effected by his infinite
power for the holiness, and glory of his justice: 2dly, that since every good
geveing, and every perfect gift is from above aescending Iam. 1. 1
from the father of lights, and that, to know God, to beleve in him, to love,
and obey him, to receive Christ, and the Gospel of salvation offered, are the
good gifts of God, we may also know, that God not only foresees, that those
graces will be in men, but also fore purposes from eternity himself to work,
and effect them: that if any should tell us (as many do) that God has indeed
predestined such men unto salvation, as he foresaw would beleve in Christ,
and receive the grace in him offered, we may answer them, that God foresees
indeed those graces in those men, but it is because he fore purposes to work
them. He works them in time, because of his free grace he purposed to work
them before time was: without which his purpose, he could not have foreseen
them. And as the Lord in the beginning saw that the things he had made were all
good when he had made them such: so did he foresee all other good graces in
men, because he forepurposed so to work and effect them.

The beginning and end of the 10th Position: viz: That God is not the Author,
10 Co^^clusion
or worker of sin: and that he geves no influence, instinct, motion, or
inclinatten to the least sin, I embrace: But the middle part thereof, viz:
That God only did foresee, and determyne what evil the free will of men, and
Angels would do, I except against, as derogatory to the infinitenes of Gods
power, and wisdom: neither indeed is it senseible to say, that God determined,
what the will of others would do.

But what the forethoughtes and purposes of God have been from eternity about
sin (so far as the knowledge thereof concerns us) will best appear, if we
consider, what the work of his providence is, in, and about it in time, and
when it is wrought by men, or Angels.

And first since sin is the work of men and Angels, it follows that sin is
from them, who are themselves from God: though the si^ be not, but of
themselves: yea not only the natures, and persons, but even the natural
powers, faculties, and instruments together with their natural motions, and
actions, in, and by which sin is wrought, are of God also: by him sustained,
and vpheld, and acted by his almighty power, which is the cause of every
creature, Act 17. ^1.
and vpholdeth all things, and so of every action, as an action: Sin not being
created of God, not any part or power of man, or Angel, nor any motion, Romans
11. ^6.
or action, but only the depravation, corruption, crooked and inordinate abuse
and application of the same created part, power, or motion. Colle. 1. 7.
For example: the very power, and use of seeing the forbidden fruit, ^ob. 1. 3.
the natural desire of it, as a pleasant thing, the power and ability of
taking, as also of eating it, were of God in themselves: But the sin stood in
the inordinatenes, and abuse of the sense, appetite, and power upon that,
which was forbidden by God. And this will yet appear more plainly, if we
consider that the very same sense, appetite, and work both of body, and mind
set upon an other fruit not forbidden by God, had been no sin at all.

very pleasant to the eyes, and of the Serpent, subtle, (...). 3.
and fit to be used by Satan for temptation. Thus even the law of God is the
occasion ^om. 7. 8.
of all lust, and sin, the gospel of fire, and sword, and all variance, and
debate. Mat. 15. ^. 8 34. ^ c.
Thus Gods commuandement to Pharaoh to let his people go, the Miracles which
Moses did in his sight, his conviction of Conscience, and remorse of heart,
Exodus 5. ^ c.
which by them the Lord wrought in him, were occasions of sin unto him, by his
own rebellion, and Gods judgment: and did harden his heart, and God by them, not
as by causes, but occasions, which are also used of God, as all other the like
occasions, to all men, for the trial, discovery, and conviction of his
creature, and to make way for his own further work of mercy, or justice.

of manifestation of that one in it self, and simple will of God: neither is it
wrought, he absolutely nilling it. For be being in heaven does whatsoever he
pleases. His counsel shall stand, and he will do whatsoever he will, Psalm.
115 3.
says the Prophet. This sin he does also suffer, not (as men often suffer Isa
46^ 10,
things to come to pass) without care, or consideration of it, but of purpose
and with infinite wisdom, as knowing how to bring light out of darkness, and by
the creatures sin, to effect his most holy work, according to his unsearchable
counsel: the depth whereof may swallow up the mind, but can not be sounded by
it, and in the meditation whereof, the best bound, and bottom is for man to
consider, and confess, that God is both more wise, and more holy then he.

And so in the 4th place, God does most wisely, and most powerfully Romans 1* 18.
29.
geving them over to reprobate minds, for wuhholding his truth in
unrighteousness: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
sending upon them the efficacy of delusion to beleve lies, that they might be
damned, who have not received the Love of the truth, that they might be saved:
Searing with an hot iron their Consciences, who have spoken lies in
hypocrisy, and punishing the neglect of former conviction, with want of
feeling, and numnes of heart afterward: and sometimes the sin of one man by
the sin of another: and thus he punished David's adultery, and 2. Sam. 11 and
12 15. and 1^ and 18.
murder, by Absoloms treason and incest: and the Israelits idolatries, and
other iniquities, by the pride, and cruelty of the Assirians, and Babilonians.
Sometimes also he uses (or rather abuses) the sins of wicked Angels 2. King.
17. and 24 and 25.
and men for the trial of the faith, and patience of his servants, as we see
in the story of Job: and sometimes to make way for his own most excellent
works: as the Redemption of mankind by the death of his son, for which he
used the envy of the Pharisees, the malice of Satan, the treason of Judas, and
the iujustice of Pontius Pilate. And in this ordination of evil, God geveth us
to see, that nothing is absolutely, and infinitely evil, as he is absolutely,
and infinitely good: who also in these ordinations triumphs over sin and
iniquity: which he surely would never suffer, save as he is able to serve his
most holy purpose of it, and of them that work it: and in this respect
especially God is said to do these things, which indeed are done by wicked
Angels, and men, and by him ordered, and determined to his most ^oly purposes.

And lastly God does either mercyfully pardon, and so abolish in Christ, or
punish in the course of justice, sin, and sinners, as the Scriptures every
where teach.

And by these the works of God in and about sin, it appears what the
purposes of God were touching it from eternity: for whatsoever God does in
time, whether about sin, or otherwise, that he purposed to do before time, ere
the world was: and so for the contrary.

The 16th Conclusion: That Adam dyed the same day that he sinned: Gen: 6 Cor.
^usion.
2. 17. for that the reward of sin is death. Rom: 6. 13. and that his death was
loss of innocence, peace of Conscience, and of the comfortable presence of of
God. Gen: 3. 7. 11. must be further opened and better cleared then (I suppose)
the Author intends it.

For by Death threatened Gen: 2. 17. is not only meant spiritual Death standing
in loss of innocence, peace of Conscience, and Gods comfortable presence, but
withal eternal death, whereof the other is but the beginning: as one of the
noted Scriputres proves. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life in Chr: Jesus our Lord. Where the Apostle opposes unto Death,
eternal ^om. 6. ^
life, and therefore intends eternal Death of soul and body. In which Death
threatened was included bodily death also, with all the means, and miseries,
which lead unto it. And this appears in the last Scripture alleged. Which is
Gen: 3. where, God, after many bodily calamities both upon the woman ^n 3. 16
^ 18. 19
man and man for that sin, denounces as their end, and consummation, death,
and dissolution of body into the Earth from which they were taken.

It is true, that the body being made of corruptible creatures, was subject in
it self to corruption, and mortality: yet must it be remembered, that even the
heavens themselves were made of one and the same first common matter, that rude
lump and unformed Chaos, and so are also in themselves (...). 1. 1.
subject to dissolutio^. Yea whatsoever has a beginning, and is a creature, is
subject to come to an end naturally: as with which is communicated but a finite
power and virtue; and so the very souls of men, and the Angels are in
themselves subject to death, and mortality, save as they are by the continual
influence of the Divine power and providence, sustained, and preserved. But God
now having enobled the whole man soul and body with his Image and joined them
together in one person: the soul to inform, and quicken the body, and the body
to be quickened, and used by it, as an active, and lively instrument for her
operations, and works: the separation of these two (with death is) being a
dissolution of so great a work of God, and of the habitation of his own Image,
could not come, but by sin. Not that I think Adam should allwaies have
continued in that his natural estate, in tilling, and kepeing the garden of
Eden, in eating, drinkeing, procreating of children, governing the family, and
the like: or should always have had an earthly, heavy, gross, and dark body,
but that in the Lords appointed time, there should have been a change of all
those earthly imperfections, as, there shall be in the bodies of all the
faithful, who shall be alive at Christ's second comeing: but 1. Cor. 1^ 51.
the same without all grief, and pain: much more without all separation of 1.
These. (...) 17.
soul, and body: most of all without the bodies corrupting, and rotting in the
grave: which are the proper fruits of sin. And therefore as God gave him a
living sonle, so he gave him the tree of life in the garden, as an effectual
Sacrament of life: he made all things good in themselves, and for him: subject
unto him, and serviceable to his use. So that though his body were in it self
capable of violence by fire, water, and otherwise, yet should the providence of
God, the ministry of Angels, and his own perfect wisdom so have directed, and
ordered both them, and himself, as that no hurt, but good every way should have
come unto him, by them.

Wherefore (says the Prophet) does the liveing man complayn? he answers, man
complayneth for his sins? So that all the sorrows of this life, Lam. 3. 39.
all the grevous pangs and passions of the mind: all the turmoylings of the
body, by hunger, thirst, wearysomnes, sickness, diseases, and so death unto
which they lead, and which is the extremity of them all, are for sin,
inflicted by God, and by man borne: which the Scriptures every where testify,
and that in examples so well known, as in vayn it were to trouble the Reader
with noteing them down.

To conclude: the Apostle Rom: 5. 12. 14. speaking of bodily death, affirms
expressly that for sin it reigned even before the law was given by Moses, and
that over them who had not sinned as Adam, that is actually: and more plainly,
1. Cor: 15. where speaking of the bodily resurrection, after bodily death, he
teaches, that by man and in Adam, all die: and that even this bodily death is
one of Christ's enemies to be destroyed at the last: which these men themselves
verse. 22. v. 25.
do also confess, (though they observe it not) Conclus: 34. and that death and
the grave are vanquished by Christ upon the cross. And since Christ suffered
nothing but for our sins, if bodily death had not been a punishment of sin, why
should Christ have suffered it, as he did, and that for our sins, according
to the Scriptures? But it will here be demanded, if God threatened 1. Cor 3.
bodily death upon Adam, the day, he sinned, why he did not accordingly
exequute it? I answer that the threatening was legal, and according to the
course of justice, and therefore did not hinder but God in mercy might find a
remedy, as he also did: and so the L: meaning was no more, but that in the day
wherein Adam ate, he should be subject to, and guilty of death, and the curse
of God. In the very same form of speech, Solomon threatens Shimei, that the
day he went out of Jerusalem any whether, he should surely 1. Kng 37.
die: that is beguilty of death: for neither did (neither almost possibly could)
he actually kill him that very day. The truth then is, that God threatened not
only spiritual, and eternal death (which is the consummation of the former)
but bodily also, and with it, all bodily, and temporary calamityes leading unto
it. And of this it is most needful the servantes of God should be firmly
persuaded, and continually myndefull, that in their sorrows both of life, and
death, they might be lead to the remembrance of their sins, 1. Kin. 17 28.
and for them be humbled under the hand of God, of which fruit of their
afflictions these men's doctrine bereaveth them. 1 Cor. 11 29. 30. 17 Conclusion.


The 17th Conclusion: that Adam being fallen did not loose any natural power, or
faculty, which God created in his soul, because the work of the Devil, which
is sinn^, cannot abolish Gods works, and Creatures: and therefore being fallen
he still retained fredom of will. Gen: 3. 23. 24. is in part doubtfully set
down, and in part, untrue.

That Adam had as well freedom of will after, as before his fall, is, as true,
as that he was a man after, as before. For take away will from a man, and he
cease to be a man: and take away freedom from the will, in that which it
wills, and it cease to be will. But here is the difference, that the same
natural power of freewill, which before, was rightly ordered, and disposed
only to good actually, (though changeably) was afterward corrupted,
disordered and clean co^trarily disposed, till by supernatural grace it was
rectifyed, and renewed. It is true then, that sin destroys not the natural
powers, or parts of soul, or body, but only corrupts, infecteth, and
disordereth them: whence also arises in the mind, ignorance, error,
doubtinges, and unbelief; and in the will, and affections, perverseness, and
disorder, with manifold lusts, to the fullfilling and execution whereof, the
bodily instruments are disposed. But the reason brought, that sin can not
abolish Gods work, or Creatures, is frivolous: For God suffering sin to enter,
suffers therein an abolition of his own work and creature. It is confessed,
Propos: 11. That Adam sinning, dyed the death, and lost innocence, peace of
Conscience, and the comfortable presence of God. Now was not this spiritual
death which Adam dyed, an abolition, and destruction of his spiritual life,
innocence, etc: works of God, and his creatures? the same may be said of the
whole Image of God. What were these but works of God, creatures, and created
graces, and endowments, wrought in him, and bestowed on him by the hand of the
Creator, which sin abolished both in him, and in his posterity by natural
propagation? as will appear in the refutation of the 18th Conclusions: which is,

That Original sin is an idle term, and that there is no such thing as men
intend by ^ 8 Conclusion.
the word. Eze: 18. 20. Because God threatened Death only to Adam. Gen: 2. 17.
not to his posterity, and because God created the soul. Heb: 12. 9.

That Original sin is an hereditary evil, I shall prove hereafter, (God
assisting) and do answer to the Scriptures; and frist to that in Ezech: The
soul that sins shall die, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father. The Prophet speaks of such children as forsake sin, and repent, as the
whole context shows, which was to reprove the hypocrisy of the Jews, who
complained of injustice from God in punishing them, who were holy, for their
fathers sins. Besides, all Adams natural posterity were souls sinning in him:
whom in that his sin, we must not consider as a private person, but as the
common father of mankind, communicateing with the nature, the sin (which was
not merely personal, but natural) with his natural posterity: both which
are also their own, as on the contrary, the second Adam Christ, and his
righteousness is so communicated with the members of his body, as every
faithful person may truly say, that both he, and it are his. And hence was
it, that in the punishment of this sin, the earth was cursed; not to him alone,
but to his ensueing posterity: neither was Eve alone to suffer the sorrows of
conception, and childbirth, but all her daughtes after her: neither were the
Cherubims set to keep them two alone, but all their after posterity out of the
garden of Eden: and so is it for death it self, and all the passages which lead
unto it: according to that of the Apostle, as by one man sin entered into the
world and death by sin, even so death went over all men, in whom all have
sinned. Rom 5. 12.
Where they further allege, that because God created the soul, that is does
immediately create the soul of every particular person: Hebr: 12. 9. there, is
therefore no ^riginall sin they take too much liberty both for the exposition
of the Scripture, and their inference upon it, showing no reason for the one,
or other.

First then by (...).
flesh. Heb: 12. 9. (for so it should be turned, and not bodies) is not meant
the bodies of men without souls, which the parents do not correct, that is
(...).
correct with instruction, as the word signifies: nor by spirits, souls
without bodies, since God is the father of the bodies of me^, and of all
creatures, Job: 38. 28. Luke 3. 35. but as by flesh is often in the Scriptures
meant earthly things (for which our natural parents trayn us up, and correct
us) and as God is our spiritual Master, and guide, to the meaning may well
be, that if for the convenience of this life, we submit to the chasticeme^t of
our earthly father, much more ought we to humble our selves to the discipline
of our heave^ly father, for spiritual things. 2dly since they generally who
think the soul to be created immediately, and infused, do not only hold
Original sin, but also show how they conceiv it to be propogated, it is but
presumption in these men ( without answering what others so ordinary bring to
the contrary) thus to conclude, that because the soul is thus immediately
created, therefore there ^s no original sin. But as I see small reason to
persuade me, that the dead ^ody, before the soul be united with it, can be the
proper subject of sin, or means to traduce it, or indeed any way sinful, more
then after it be separated from the soul: and less reason, that the same body
can infect the soul, being of spiritual nature, with any contagion of sin,
though it might hinder, or fayl it, in some outward exequution; so seems it
to me much more agreeable unto truth, that the blessing of God to increase, and
multiply did as well geve virtue, and power unto mankind, as unto other
kinds, to beget, Genesis 1. ^2. 28.
and generate their like: and not only a dead carkas, and livelesse body,
inferior to the issue of bruit beasts, which do procreate their kind, both
body and soul, or life. Neither see I how Adam could be said to have begotten
a son after his own Image, Gen: 5. 3. opposed to Gods Image v: 1. that is,
sinful, and corrupt, if he only had begotten the body, and not the soul also:
which I think he did, even the whole, the whole; after a manner convenyent to
either nature. And if these two Positions can not stand together, that God
creates the soul immediately: and that there is original sin: where these men
conclude, that there is therefore no original sin, I conclude contrary wise,
that therefore the soul is not immediately created, nor the place to the Heb:
so to be expounded; since the proufes for original sin are so certain, and
evident.

And that it is no idle term, (as is imagined) but a miserable calamity
possessing all the posterity of Adam by natural generation, and ever by them
to be bewailed, and purged out, I hope plainly to prove, and with all, that by
reason of it they are naturally unable to choose, or will any thing spiritually
good, or truly pleasing God.

And for this, (remembering what I have formerly noted from Rom: 4. 12. about
all men's sining in that one and first man) observe we, that these men confess
every where, and truly, that Ioh. 3. ^3. 5.
a man must be regenerate, or borne anew, before he can enter the kingdom of
God. whereupon it follows necessarily, that by the first birth, and
generation all men are excluded from the kingdom of God. And if by the first
birth men be not corrupt, then is not the second birth simply necessary: but
all are rather to endeavor to preserve the purity of the former. And this mine
argument is further confirmed, where Christ our Lord teaches, that, that which
is borne of the flesh, ^ flesh, that is sinful, which he therefore opposes to
the spirit: and so the second, Ioh. 3. 6.
or new birth by the Spirit, required for that entering the kingdom of heaven,
to the first, or old birth, by which all men are naturally excluded. And the
Rom 3. 23.
same it is which we read, Ioh: 1. v: 12. 13. that the sons of God are borne
(...) of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man. In which
respect also (...) treating of man borne of a woman, says, that no man can
bring a clean thing (...) Ioh. 14. 4.
of filthiness. Hence also was it, that David bewayling his sins of adultery
(...) murder in particular, and leading both himself, and others from the
stream to the fountayn, does confess that he was born in iniquity, and
conceived in sin. Psalm.
Ioyn with all these that, which the testifyeth both of Jews, and Gentiles,
that they were by nature children of wrath, that is born such, as the word
nature imports. Hence is it that Jude speaking of such deceavers, as had
crept into Ephesians.
the Church, and taken upon them the profession of Christ, and after turned
that grace of God into wantonness calls them corrupt and rotten trees, and
twice dead, v: 4. 12. who had they not been first dead in Adam in trespasses,
and sins. Ephesians: 2. 1. how could they have been twice dead? Ad we unto these the
consideration of the Circumcision of the Lords people of old, livelily
teaching, that nothing comeing of man's unclean seed naturally, could be clean,
as Job says, which was also further declared in the uncleanness, and so in the
purification of every woman after Child birth, by burnt offeringes, and sin
offerings.

Lastly even common sense, and experience, which teaches the most simple,
confirms this doctrine of original sin. Who sees not in children even from
their cradels, the fruit of this bitter root? crying (as Austin confesses of
himself) to be avenged of their nurses, being naturally prone to lying, for
complaints, or excuses, though so brought up, as they hear no ly told: also
prydeing themselves in any gay, or gorgeous thing, and despiseing others which
want the like: and so evident is this to sense, and experience, as that the
fire is warm, and a stone heavy.

Now the same Scriptures which prove this natural, and original sin, serve
also to disprove all original, and natural freedom of will or other power to
any good thing truly spiritual, or pleasing God. I will apply some of the
forenamed Scriptures, and ad some others to that purpose.

And first, since all must be regenerate, or begot, and borne anew, before they
can enter, or see, the kingdom of heaven, Io^^ ^
this wholly difarmeth the natural man of all power unto spiritual things,
without a supernatural regeneration, (...)
or new birth by that incorruptible seed of the word of God (...)
and spirit of life: which must also be of the whole, and of all the parts, as
is the first generation. Agreeable whereunto is that Ephesians: 2. 1. where all are
said to be dead in tr^spasses, and sins. These me^ grant it of Adam, by his
offense: and that Scripture, with others, teach the same of all men by nature,
and through that his one offense. And as no motion, or action of natural life,
can possibly be made, or performed, (...)
by a man naturally dead; so neither any spiritual motion, or action, by any
dead spiritually, till God breath into him anew that his quickening spirit, the
spirit of life. And as of things unknown there is no desire, or will, so is it
not possible that the natural or animal man (for that title is geven him of
his more noble part the soul) which knows not, (...) 8. 5.
nor is capable of the things of the spirit, being discerned spiritually,
should will, or desire them. Yea being offered by the preaching of the Gospel,
they are foolishnes unto him, and things which he savoreth not: the very
wisdom, or myndeing of the flesh being enmity against God, with is not subject
to the law of God, nor indeed can be. If it be asked why does God then require
it should be, or punish men where it is not? it is easily answered, that this
inability comes by man's own defalt. God made all men in Adam able to keep the
law: and the obedience thereof is due debt unto God: now the inability of the
debtour, and his heyrs (especially by their own default) is no sufficient
discharge of the debt unto the Creditour who lent it: so neither does man's
inability prejudice the Lords right, but that he may in the course of justice,
require that obedience to his holy law, unto which by creation he enabled
mankind. And for faith in Christ, and repentance, (which are the sum of the
Gospel) God does not require them, as due from the creature, to a Creator, by
order of justice, but as conditions convenient unto man, dead in sin and
misery, if he will be made partakers of that Life and light come into the 19.
world; and offered by Christ: which whilst men despise, loueinge darkness more
then light because their works are evil: their condemnation follows upon
their impenitency, and unbelief, as does the death of a wounded man upon his
wilful contempt of the sovereign salve offered for his healing.

To conclude then, they of whom God requires this faith, repentance, and
obedience, either yeald it him answerably, or not? If not; as they can not, so
their own hearts and consciences will witness against them, that they will not;
but do on the contrary willingly withstand, and with draw from the Lords
commandments: who are therefore inexcusable, and have no cause to complayn,
save upon themselves. And for them who yeald submission by the effectual work
of Gods spirit writing faith and the law in their hearts, much less have they
cause of complaining against God, but only of thankesgeveing for the grace
received, ^. 10. ^ 3.
by which he has even created them anew as his workmanship: not being fit of
themselves, as of themselves, so much as to think a good thought, but having
God workeing in them both the will, and deed, according to his good pleasure.

It is added, ^on^on.
that if Original sin might have passed from Adam to his posterity yet is the
issue thereof stayed by Christ's death, which was effectual, and he the lamb of
God slain from the beginning of the world. Apoc: 13. 8.

I answer that he was indeed from eternity that lamb of God, v. 29
in time to be slain: but to take away the sins of the world, as John witnessed
of him: and so his death was effectual. It is confessed, and truly, Conclus:
30. That Christ is become the Mediator of the new Testament, and Priest of the
Church. This new Testament, is established in his blood: and he a Priest for
us, as he offered, and gave him self a Sacrifice, and Ransom for us: and this
bloodshed was for the washing away of sins: this Sacrifice for procureing
Pardon: and this Ransom for the freing of them, that are taken captive by sin,
and Satan. This stopping then of the issue of sin, as it is intended, is but a
fiction.

That Infants are (as is further affirmed) conceived, and born in innocence
without sin is contrary to the Scriptures: 20 C^clusi^
as, that they are all undoubtedly saved, is a peremptory affirmation, but
without ground. Unto the Scriptures brought to prove it, which are Gen: 5. 2.
and 1. 27. compared with 1. Cor: 15. 49. I answer that by the Image of the
earthly Adam, in the last Scripture is not meant the Image of God, in wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness, according Col. 3 Ephesians. 4
to which Adam was said to be created in the former places: but that
corruptible, and ignoble state of the body in death, from with at the
resurrection of the just it shall be freed: which therefore verse. 50. is called
flesh and blood, which cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven: and corruption,
which cannot inherit incorruption. It should rayther be minded, that Moses
speaking of Adams estate in innocence, says he was created after Gods image
and likeness: Genesis 1 27 and Genesis ^
but speaking of him after his fall, and of his estate then, says that he
begat a son in and after his own likeness and image, that is sinful and
miserable. It is further objected, from Romans 4. 15. that Where there is no law
there is no transgression, or sin. and again from Rom: 5. 13. Math: 13. 9. Neh:
8. 3. that the law was not given to Infants, but to them that could understand.
I answer, that the law is either given vocally, and in the letter spoken, and
written, and so it is not given to Infants, no nor to thousands of men, and
women in their persons: or written in the heart by creation with the finger of
God: and so all Infants have it given, as both experience, and also the
Scriptures testify, where they teach that the very Gentiles, to whom it was
never vocally preached, Romans ^ 15.
show the effects of it written in their hearts: Unto the fullfilling of which
law all Infants by nature corrupted are averse, and disposed to all
disobedience, even as the whelps, and cubs of foxes, and wolves, are disposed
to pray, and raven from the first, though they cannot actually so practice.
Besides in Adam the common father of mankind all his posterity (being in his
loins) received, as the Image of God, and Lordship over the creatures, so the
law of God; as Levi, long before he was Heb. 7
born, did in Abraham his father ( in whose loins he was) pay tithes to
Melchizedek.

That all actual sinners bear the Image of the first Adam in his innocency,
fall and restitution 21 Co^^clusion
in the offer of grace. 1 Cor: 15. 49. and so pass under this threfold estate,
is unsound sundry ways. The great misinterpreting of the Scripture, I have
showed in the last Conclusion: as also Concl: 18. that neither all, nor any of
his naturally conceived posterity bear the Image of his innocence: neither yet
all of them in the offer of grace; though the offer of grace not received, is a
very naked Image of restitution. How many thousands never had the Gospel (the
only means of their restitution) offered them? but sinning against the law of
nature written in their hearts, and in the creatures, and withholding that truth
of God in unrighteousness, have been given over of God to reprobate minds, and
so perished in their sins, as the Apostle teaches; Rom: 1. and 2.

That Adam being fallen, God did not hate him, but loved him still, and sought
his Consion.
good, Gen: 3. 8. 15. Neither does he hate any man, that falls with Adam, but
that he loves mankind, and from his love sent his only begotten son into
the world, to save that which was lost, Ioh: 3. 16. And that God never
forsakes the creature till there be no remedy, neither does cast away his
innocent creature from all Consion.
eternity but casts away men irrecoverable in sin. Esa: 5. 4. Ezech: 18. 23.
32. and 33. 11. Luk: 13. 6. 9. And that as there is in all creatures an
inclination to their young to do them good, so in the Lord toward man
infinitely: who therefore does 25 ^nclu^.
not create, or predestinate any to destruction, no more then a father begets
his child to the gallows. Ezech: 33. 11. Gen: 1. 21. 15. 49. Gen: 5. 3. must
be received with sundry limitations.

For first it is true, that God hates nothing that he has made, so far as it
is his work: but as sin comeing in has destroyed the work of God, though not
in respect of the nature, or being, yet of the integrity, and holy being of the
creature; so God, through his unchangeable holiness, hateing sin, does also most
fervently hate, and abhor from the sinful creature, in whom it reigns, in
respect of it, as the Scriptures do expressly, and plentifully ^al. 2. 3 ^l 5.
6.
teach. And God loveing himself, and his own holiness in the first place, and
most, and the creature, and his good, but in the second place, the love of the
creature must give way to the love of himself, and so he necessarily (...) 16.
5 ^. 1. 16.
hate the obstinate sinner. And this it is most needful for all men firmly to
beleve, and continually to bear in mind, that they may always bewail their
sins, and nourish in themselves the hatred of that, which God so hates, and
for it, the creature; and for which he punishes it with most horrible curses,
and punishments for ever.

And yet even in the very exequution of his most fearful vengeance upon the
reprobate, men, and Angels, he retayneth the general love of a Creator; and
out of it preserves the being of the creature, which in it self, and in
respect of the universal is better then not to be, though not so in the sense
of the person: and also moderateth the extremity of that torment, which he both
could, and might in justice inflict.

Secondly though God do love all men even sinning, as he did Adam sinning, yet
not with the same degree of love wherewith he loved him: neither does he seek
their good, as he did his. When he had sinned, and so fled from God, as his
enemy, he notwithstanding followed after him, and for his Gen 3.
recovery, preached unto him the Gospel of salvation in the seed of the woman:
and not only so, but gave him also an heart to beleve his promise; and
repentance, to turn unto him: whereas many thousands in the world (even the
body of the Gentiles to speak of, before Christ, and how many now?) never had
the Gospel so much as once published unto them, nor Christ named amongst them,
but had, and have only the sound, and preaching Psalm 14^ 19 20. Isa. 52. ^
Romans 19 20. 21.
of the creatures, and of their natural consciences (too much corrupt) by
which they were, and are taught, that there is a God, and he the maker and
governor of the world, and Judge of all persons, and things: and to be
honored, and inquired after, that his will being known, he might be
worshipped Act. 14. 16.
accordingly: for the neglect whereof, and the withholding of that truth
offered, in unrighteousness, they were (and are) given over of God to reprobate
minds, Psalm. 19. 5.
and to all vile affections, and filthy lusts of their own hearts, that so
sinning without the law (to wit which the Jews had, much more without that
clearer revelation Romans 1^ 10 and chw 1. 1^ 19. 20. etc. chap 12. 14. ^ 16.
of Christ vouchsafed to many others) they might perish by Gods judgment: much
less does God seek after all for their recovery, as he did after Adam, by
giveing them his spirit in their hearts, and by it faith, and repentance, to
beleve, and to be saved, as he did him. And for the love of God in sending his
son into the world to save that which was lost. Ioh: 3. 16. it is determined
in the same place, to those that beleve on him. But for those that beleve not,
but Mat. 1. 25. and 1^ 11.
continue in unbelief, God did not love them unto salvation, so as to give his
son effectually to redeem them from their sins, of which more heareafter.
Ioh. 3. ^ 1. Cor. ^ 10. 11. etc.


Secondly it is also true that God does not cast away his innocent creature nor
has created or predestined any man to destruction, to wit either remaining
as he created him, or because he would destroy him: and this, some of the
Scriptures, Conclus: 25 do prove, the rest being impertinent: but that God Phy
1. ^ 2 Timothy 2 25.
has from eternity decreed the condemnation of some for sin, forepurposed by
him to be suffered, and so foreseen to be wrought by man, is evident, both by
the word of God, as Jude testifyeth of of certain worked men that they were
ordained of old to condemnation: and God is said to have hated Esau, before he
was borne: that is to have purposed the hatred of him for his sin, foreseen,
Jude 3. 4. Mala. 1. 3 Rom 9. 11 13.
and forepurposed to be suffered: and also by the work of God, in that he does
in time, cast away, and condemn impenitent sinners: for Act. 15. 18.
all Gods works are known unto him from the beginning of the world: and Gods
very doing a thing in time, is an unanswerable proof that he purposed the same
thing before time, and from eternity.

And for Gods forsakeing, or leaving a man unto himself; as he usually does it,
for a punishment of former sins, so did he thus leave Adam without out any such
respect. He could (if he would) either have kept him from being tempted, or
have delivered him out of his temptation, by his almighty power, and grace, and
the irresistible efficacy of his spirit: but God, for the trial of the will of
man, and to manifest how weak the most excellent creatures are not dependeing
wholly upon the Creator, and not seeking their good and happynes, by cleaving
unto him, the chief, and unchangeable good: as also to make way to the further
declaration of his mercy, and justice, did suspend, and withhold from Adam in
his temptation, that efficacy of grace, by which he could (if he would) have
established him vntesistably unto perseverance.

So also could God by his alsufficient power (if such his good will were)
recover thousands, that perish in, and by their sins: otherwise he were not
almighty: not that true, which is said of him in the Psalm, He does whatsoever
Ps. 115. 3
pleases him. Besides, it should else sollow, that sin, and Satan were
stronger then he: and which he could not possibly defeat, and withstand: which
is, as impossible, as that God should not be God. He is able by his almighty
Luke 3. 8.
power, if such his good pleasure be to raise of the very stones children unto
Abraham: and by taking away the stony heart, to geve an heart of fi^sh, tender
Ezech. 11 19.
and sensible, and to write in it, his will, and law.

And what the Lords power is, in remedying, and recovering of most desperate
sinners, may be seen in some particulars. In the recovery of Manasseh 2 King 21
12. 16.
an hortible, and apostate Idolatour, a vile sorcerer, and witch, and most
cruel murderer, filling the streets with innocent blood: of Mary Magdelen
possessed which 2 Chro 33. 12 13 etc. 1 Timothy ^. 13.
with 7 Devils: and of Saul, a persequuter, blasphemer, and oppressor, and
that when the fire of most violent persequution burned hottest in his breast:
causing him to breath out of his mouth threatenings, and slaughter, as smoke,
Act. 9 1. And since all men are by nature children of wrath, and dead in sins,
so that they who are the Lords, have new life put into them, yea are borne, yea
which Ephesians 2. 2.
is more, created anew, it shows, that the whole being, and life of the
spiritual man, with all the motions, and inclinations thereof, are of Gods
special and supernatural grace; as also that though men in themselves be
utterly remediless, and irrecoverable, yet are they by Gods grace, and power
recoverable, if such his good will be.

The Scriptures Isa: 5. 4. Ezech: 18. 23. and 33. Luk: 13. 6. 9. speak of the
Lords dealing with his Church in the outward ministry of the word, and other
common motives to repentance: as is also further manifest Math: 21. 33. 34.
etc. and so are neither to be understood (as here they are) of the Lords
dealing with all men, nor at all of the uttermost efficacy of his spirit, when
he pleases to work by it what he can for the recovery of sinners.

Lastly touching the similitude brought from a natural father, I must use two
limitations: the former that a natural father would not suffer his son to
come to the gallows, or desert thereof, if he could possibly in his utmost
power hinder it: he would rather wish not to beget him at all, or that he might
never be born: but so is it notwith God, who both willingly produces, and
preserves the creature, whom he purposes to destroy for sin, which he
foreseeth the creature will work, and suffers him to fall into, though he
could (would he use the utmost of his power,) hinder both the sin, and
punishment. And 2dly, the hanging of the child is no way to the honor of his
natural father, but to his grief, and shame every way: Prove. 10. 20.
but on the contrary, the destruction of the wicked for their sins is to the
great glory of the justice of the Creator, which then it should not be
magnifyed, better all men and Angels perish.

Touching this Conclusion, God has not only determined before the 26 Conclus.
world, that the way of salvation shall be by Christ: and foreseen who would
follow it, (as they teach) but has also determined in particular, whom he
would effectually call to the participation of that grace: which being his own
work in time, he has therefore purposed before time. It is he that Math. 11.
26.
reveals this way unto man from heaven: which flesh and blood cannot do: who
also must Ephesians. 1^ 5^ 9. 1^ Rom 9. 11. 15.
drew them, who come unto it. And this he does first by sending his Gospel of
Salvation to such, as are his (in his decre) Act: 13. 47. 48. and Ch: 18. 9.
10. then by opening the heart (as of Ldia) to listen unto it. Act: 16. 4. and
so workeing in their hearts by his spirit to beleev and obey it, he perfecteth
their happynes in glory. Rom: 8. 30. 31. So that God foreseeth that such, and
such will beleve, and choose the way of life, because he forepurposeth to give
them this grace, knowledge, will, and power to beleve, and to choose the good
way: and all this of his good and gracious pleasure toward them, on whom he
will show mercy. And this the places brought by those men. Ephesians: 1. 4. 5. 2.
Tim: 1. 9. do most directly prove: so also does Jude, 4. expressly teach, not
that God foresaw who would follow the way of infidelity and impenitency, for
which they alleadg it: but whom God has foreordeyned to condemnation for their
wickedness. The Scriptures, then do no where prove any such idle foresight in
God, as is imagined by these men, and others: as if God were in truth, but a
prognosticator, and reader of men's destinyes: who could only fortell, what
should be done by, and become of these, and these men.

Touching 27th Conclus: That as God created all men according to his Image, so
has he redeemed, all that fall by actual sin, to the same end: and that God in
his redemption Concl. 27, 28,
has not swarved from his mercy, which he manifested in his creation: and that
part of Concl: 28. where it is said, that God in his love to his enemies gave
Christ to die, and so bought them that deny him; sundry things are to be
observed.

And first, that God did not manifest any mercy, but only goodness, in ANS.
the creation: for mercy presupposes misery in him toward whom it is showed.
Secondly it is no swarving at all of Gods goodness, if he extend not the grace
of redemption to as many as he did the grace of creation: for then Christ
should have redeemed the Angels, (who were partakers of a greater grace of
creation:) which he in no sort did. And if God, did in Heb. 2. 16.
justice paste by the Angels that sinned: might he not in the same justice have
passed by men also? And if he might in justice have passed by all, (where he
could not in justice, nor possibly create one man unjust) as no man will deny
but our redemption by Christ, was a work of Gods mercy, and not of his
justice) is it injustice in him to pass by some, who also on their part take
pleasure in vntighteousnes, and to continue in their estate of impenitency, and
unbelief, loveing darkness more then light, because then works are evil?

Of the Scriptures brought: first, that of Ioh: 1. 3. shows that by Christ, to
wit, as God, all things were made, or created, which is nothing to the present
matter. And where verse: 16. he says, of his fulness we all have received, and
grace, for grace, he speaks not of all men, but only of all those, who receive
Christ, and beleve in his name, as verse: 12. and are borne of God. verse: 13. So
2. Cor: 5. 19. by the world which God reconciled to himself in Christ, are not
meant all that actually sin, but such as by the word of reconciliation preached
unto them, and believed by them, have their sins forgeven them.

By all men 1. Tim: 2. 6. is meant all sorts of men, as well Kings, and
Magistrates, whom, because they were for the present, persequutours of the
Saints, it seems some thought they were not to pray for, as for others, verse.
1. he exhorts to pray for all men: and verse: 2. he shows his meaning to be for
all sorts, as Kings, and them in authority under them, whom verse: 4. he says
God would have saved as well as others: as for whom Christ dyed, and so
redeemed them, as well as others. Of Ezech: 33. I have spoken formerly, as also
of Ioh: 16.

By the enemies spoken of Rom: 5. 10. are meant only such, as are in time
actually reconciled to God, and saved: as appears plainly, if the place be well
considered; whom God is said to love, and that not which the common love of a
Creator toward the creature, but with the love of a Redemer, in respect of
his decre of love, (and not of the actual application of it) as he is said to
have loved Jacob, and hated Esau, before they were borne: Actually he did not
hate, or love the one, or other, neither does or can God love actually wicked
men so remaining Psalm: 5. 5. 6. Lastly Christ is said. 2. Pet: 2. 2. to have
bought those deceaveers, in respect of the former profession of holiness, which
they made: by which in the judgment of Charity, they were so esteemed: as
appears evidently in Jude, who speaking of the same persons says verse: 3. they
were ungodly men crept into the Church.

Now for Christ's Redemption, it must be known, that the word (...) Redemption,
used in the Scriptures, is borrowed from the custom of freeing prisoners,
taken in war, from death, or bondage, by paying a just price, or ransom for
them. And so to affirm that Christ has reaeemed all that fall by actual sin,
is to affirm, that he has paid a price to the justice of God, for all such,
and freed them from the guilt, and bondage of sin, and Satan: and so
consequently, that all who have sinned actually, have faith, and repentance:
without which they cannot have forgivenes of sins, nor freedom from the
bondage, and guilt thereof. It is confessed (and truly) Conclus: 35. That the
efficacy of Christ's death is only derived to the^ which mortify their sins,
etc. Ioh. 3. Act. 10 43. 2. Cor. 17.
and therein directly granted that Christ's death is not effectual for all
me^: and that it is in it self sufficient for all, (being the death of him that
was God, Act: 20. 28.) we acknowledge: as also that no particular person (not
having sinned against the holy Ghost) can be excluded either by himself, or
us, from the number of them, for whom Christ dyed. It were against faith to
pray that God would save all the men, that are, and shall be in the world to the
end thereof: but love teaches me to pray for any person particularly, upon
occasion.

Now for that these men alledg Rom: 5. to prove that Christ redeemed all who
sin actually: and Mr Helw: and others much insist upon the same place, to
prove that he redeemed all, who sin in Adam: and so would have a frewill
though not by nature, which they dislike, but by grace given to all: as if
Turks, and Pagans, and all the wicked world were in Christ, and so free from
condemnation Rom: 8. 1. and they who had crucified the flesh and the lusts
thereof: Gal: 4. 24. which they must be, before they can be partakers of the
grace of God through Christ, or of any frewill through him: Ioh: 15. 5. I will
plainly, and briefly prove (the Lord assisting me) that the Apostle intends
neither the one, nor the other, but the contrary.

The Apostles meaning there is to show the privileges of the faithful: that
notwithstanding all their afflictions, They have peace with God: access verse.
2. 3^
unto his grace and hope of glory. having by faith assurance of the love of
God shed into their hearts by the holy Ghost. This love of God he confirms
unto them, by the work of their redemption: and proves that since out of the
love of God, Christ dyed for them when they were sinners, and instifyed them by
his verse. 1. ^
blood, much more should they be saved from wrath through him, and that if when
verse. 10
they were enemies, they were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much
more being reconciled they should be saved by his life: and again, That they
who had received verse. 17
that abundance of grace, and gift of righteouses, should reign in lyse by
Jesus Christ: and in the last place, that, that Grace should reign through
righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. Which grace he also
amplyfieth, and confirms by comparing Christ as the 2d Adam, with the first
Adam: teaching that both the one, and the other did, and do propagate to all
theirs, what theirs was: the first Adam, sin, and death to all comeing of him
naturally: the 2d Adam Christ, righteousness, and eternal life to all that are
in him spiritually, and for whom he died. The meaning the^ of the Apostle seems
unto me plainly to be this: that for whomsoever Christ did indeed and
effectually die, they should certainly be saved: and that whomsoever God did
reconcile by his death, he will much more save by his life, notwithstanding
their afflictions and all other the enemies of their salvation: and so to be
the same in effect with that which the same Apostle has Rom: 8. 28. that all
things shall work together for the best unto them that love God even unto them
who are called of purpose: and that those who are predestmate are also called,
and justified, and glorified: and verse: 32. 39. that to them, for whom God has
not spared to give his son, he will give all things with him: and so victory
over sin, and Satan, and their own flesh, with all temptations, so as nothing
shall separate them from the love of God.

From Rom: 5 then, may be more truly (and I am persuaded undeniably.)
concluded, these two things. 1. that Christ did not effectually die for, or
reconcile by his death all men in particular: for then all should be saved by
his life: and 2dly, that whomsoever he so died for, and effectually reconciled,
they shall be kept by the power of God, and of his grace, unto eternal life:
yea He that beleveth in the son, says John Baptist, has eternal life: and
drinkeing ^. 3. 36. ^. 4. 14
once of the water which Christ gives, he shall never thrist again, but it
shall be in him a well of water, springing up to eternal life. A wellspring
(we know) is never wholly dry, though a ditch be: as it is also one thing to
drink of this water of life: and another thing only to taste of it: which they
that do, may fall ^eb. 6. 4. 6.
away, as never having had their thirst indeed quenched in them, nor having
drunk in the rayn of grace, as verse: 7. And it is well to be observed by us,
how carefully the Holy Ghost in this, and in other places, preventeth both the
offense at, and error about men's falling away from their holy profession.

We read of some in the parable of the sower who receiv the seed of the word
with joy, and in whom it has also got some kyndeof growth, and yet they Math.
13 ^5. 7. and ^. 21. 22 ^. 23.
come to nothing: but we find in the same place, that the soil of those men's
hearts, was never indeed good: but at the best, as stony and thorny ground: But
the seed sown in the good ground indeed, decays not, but grows up, and is
fruitful to the harvest.

So Paul 2. Tim. 2. shows that some there are, who have their faith verse. 1.
19. 20
destroyed by heresies, and evil life: but he geves us to understand in the
same place, that these men were never indeed under the seal of Gods election,
nor known of him, nor vessels of honor, of silver, and of gould.

The Apostle Peter likewise speaks of some, who denied the Lord 2. Pet.
that bought them, to wit, being judged by their former profession, but in the
same place he shows that the same persons were but indeed dogs and swine, at
the best, though outwardly washed, and disburdened of such sins, verse. ^
as clogged their Consciences, as is the dog by vomiting of his surchargure.
And Jude verse. 4. speaking of those very men expressly charge them, but to
have crept in, at the first, etc.

Lastly John speakeing of many Antichrists who went out from the true 1. Ioh.
18. 19.
Church and Christians, says plainly that they were not of them, that is not
of the number of Gods truly anointed ones: and that by their not continueing
with them it appeared, they were never of them. For they that are borne of God
cannot commit sin, because the seed of Gods word abides in them, as it
follows in same Epistle: Chap: 3. 9. and thus much in effect these men
confess, when they teach (as the truth is and Scripture proves) Concl: 47.
That the regenerate man shall be a pillar in the house of God, and shall go no
Rev. 3.
more out. And if men truly justified, and sanctified should wholly fall away,
they could not possiby be recovered, but were as trees twice dead, and so Jude
1^
to be plucked up by the roots: neither can there be two new birthes, any more
then two first birthes: and if there might, then must there be also an
answerable repeating of Baptism, which is the lavacher of the new Tit. 3.
birth.

To conclude this point ^ they who either hold that Christ effectually
redeemed all from their natural corruption, or that any truly justified, and
sanctified, may wholly fall away and perish, do devide Christ from himself, and
make him a party Savior: and a Priest for some to redeem them by his death, to
whom he is not a King to save them by his life: and a Savior in part to the
very damned at the last day: freeing all of them from the guilt of their
original sin: and many of them, even from one part of their actual sins,
namely, so much as they wrought, before the time of their falling away, but not
from the rest. Which how vayn a thing it is to imagine, and how derogatorie to
the excellency, and perfection of Christ's sacrifice, and mediation, needs not
be showed. All who have any part in Christ, are in Christ, and so free from
condemnation: and unto whomsoever he Romans 8
shall appear a Savior they are his people and he shall save them from all
their sins, and not from some part of them only.

That the sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood offered unto God his father
upon the cross, though a sacrifice of sweet savor, and that God be well
pleased in him, does not reconcile God unto us, who did never hate us, nor was
our enemy, but reconcileth us unto God, 2. Cor. 5. 19. and slays the enmity,
and hatred, which is in us against God, Ephesians. 2. 14. 16. Romans 1. 30. is most
untrue, and indeed a very pernicious doctrine, destroying the mayn fruit of
Christ's sacrifice, and death.

As one of the Scriptures quoted, which is Romans 1. 30. speaks of wicked men's
hateing of God, so are the rest meant of Gods hatred toward wicked men: which
they also fully prove. And if the sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood upon
the cross were a sweet smelling savor unto his father, is it not evident that
we did formerly stinck in Gods nostrils by reason of our sins? Where he gave
himself a sacrifice for us, was it not to appease the fathers wrath toward us?
In which respect he is said to be our propitiation, Ioh. 2. ^2.
and advocate if we sin: being as our eternal high priest (sprinkled with the
blood of his cross) entered the most holy place, the heavens, and there
appearing continually to pacify the wrath of his father, and to procure for us
all grace. Who also to redeem us from the curse of the law under which we, with
all ^ll. 3 10 Cor. 6. ^.
flesh, were, was made a curse for us: paying a price for us to satisfy the
justice of his father. And if God be well pleased in him, does it not follow
that he is displeased without him? So by the reconciliation of the world unto
God through Christ. 2. Cor. 5. 19. is not meant our laying aside of hatred, and
enemitie ^ath. 3. ^.
against God (though that follow upon the other) but the taking away of his
hatred and enmity toward us, as is evident in that the Apostle in the former
verse places this reconciliation in Gods not imputing our sins unto us: the
end of his exhortation verse: 20. being to provoke us to the growth of faith for
the applying of the same. Neither speaks he Ephesians: 2 of the slaying of the
enemitie and hatred in us against God, as is said: but first of the slaying of
the hatred betwee^ Jews, and Gentiles, by breaking down the partition wall of
Ceremonies: and 2dly, and more principally, of slaying the hatred wherewith God
hated both, for sin, being the one, and other by nature children of wrath verse:
3. that is under the wrath of God, as their deserved inheritance. So that the
chief, and first work of our redemption by Christ is the freeing of us from the
guilt of sin, and most fearful wrath of God, by paying the price of his
precious blood for a ransom to the justice of his father, thereby procuring him
of a most severe, and fearful Judge to become unto us a gracious father, and
to love us unto life: which love of his being shed into our hearts by the holy
Ghost, and we being thereof persuaded, does effectually allure us to love him
again, who has so loved us in his son.

Now whereas in Conclus: 57. and so foreward many things concerning 56. 57.
Conclusion.
faith, repentance, the regenerate man, and new creature: are set down both
unsoundly and unorderly. I think it best briefly to note down in the first
place, the truth, and order of those things: and so to compare therewith the
particulars in the confession.

This work of grace then in the general God begins ordinarily by the
Ministry of his word, and first of the law: which (through man's inabilitie to
keep it) convinces, and condemns him, and so leaves him under Rom 8. 3. and
Chap. 7. 7. Gal. 3. 1^
Gods curse: from whence also aryseth in the mind a servile fear of God, and
his judgments, with grief and sorrow in respect thereof, which is commonly
called legal repentance, or (better) penitency, and so a dispayting of all
remedy in a man's self. Then comes the Gospel of glad tydinges, offering
gace, and mercy unto those who being weary and heavy laden do come unto Math
1. 28. Act 13. 48. 2 Cor 3 2. Cor. 2. 10. 11. 1^ etc.
Christ for ease, and rest, by beleveing in him; which so many do as are
ordained of God to eternal life: God with and by the same Gospel Ministering,
and conveying the graces of his spirit into the heart, (by which a man becomes
of a natural man, a spiritual man) and of these graces first, and principally
faith, by which Christ is received. Ioh: 1. 12. and the life of grace begun, as
Paul testifyeth. Gal: 2. 20. that he lyved by faith in the son of God. From
which faith, and assurance of the forgivenes of sins, and so great love of God
shed into the heart of a miserable sinner, arises, by reflection, as it were, a
love again toward God, and from this love, a godly sorrow for sin wrought Luk
^ 4 2. Cor. ^ 10.
against so good a God: and from this sorrow, true repentance, and the turning
of the heart from evil to good, with an hatred, fear, and earnest endeavor to
avoid sin in respect of Gods mercy: as on the contrary a love, desire, and
constant endeavor of and unto whatsoever pleases him. Now all Ps 103. 4^ and
130. ^ 1 Cor. 1^ 4.
these, and all other truly spiritual graces, howsoever wrought by that one
Spirit, and at one time, yet are in the order of nature, and manifestation, one
before another, and so faith the cause of the rest.

Where then it is said Conclus: 56. that the new creature follows repentance,
it is not so in truth (nor the Scripture brought which is Luk: 3. 6. any thing
pertinent) though to our sense, and manifestation, it seem so to be. For this
repentance is a work of man immediately (though formerly wrought in him of God:
2. Tim: 2. 25.) and so follows the work 2. Cor. 7^ 10.
of our regeneration, or recreation, which is Gods work. Repentance arises
Math. 7. 18.
from a godly sorrow which can only be in a godly man, as a fruit of a good
tree: and this godly man (all being ungodly by nature) must be a new creature,
or regenerate of God: though for the perfiting of our new creature, and till
the old man be wholly crucified, repentance be required, as a cause, or means
thereof. So neither does repentance go before faith, as 58 Conclus. Heb. 11. ^
Act. 15. ^
it is put Conclus: 58. but follows it as a fruit thereof: without which no
man can please God; and so not repent aright: our repentance arising from a
sorrow for the offending of God, this sorrow from the knowledge of his love
toward us, which is faith: which faith purifieth the heart, and is the
beginning Act. 15. 9.
of all spiritual life in us, as I have formerly proved.

That man (viz. natural) has power to reject the motions of Gods spirit, (as
is affirmed) I acknowledge, and the two Scriptures Math: 23. 37. Act: 7. 51.
besides woeful experience, prove it: but deny, that he has power to receav
these motions, till God by the supernatural gift of grace open his eyes, and
change his will thereunto, as has formerly been proved in the 18. Conclus: The
3d Scripture which is Acts 6. 10. speaks of no such thing, but only shows
how mightily Steven confuted his adversaries in disputation.

The last place which is Rom: 10. 14. shows that none can beleve without
preaching: and verse: 18. that the Gentiles had God preached unto them from the
beginning, by the sound of the creatures, as Psalm: 19. 5. neither can more be
thence proved. Lastly in the 58th Conclusion, the new creature is ill, and
daungerously made a part of our justification before God, Rom 3. ^4. 25. ^8.
which the Scriptures do ascribe only to faith: and the free grace of God,
through that redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Our redemption then, or
instification properly taken, is in Christ, and not in our selves, as it should
be, if it stood in our sanctification, or the new creature, which is affirmed.
Our sanctification, or renovation is an inseparable work of that faith by which
we are justified, Act: 15. 9. but does not answer the rigor of Gods justice,
nor can present us innocent, before his judgment seat, being imperfect in this
world, by reason of the root of sin yet abiding in us, which we can not pluck
up out of our hearts, as is confessed Proposition 67. though else where denied.
That only the righteousness of Christ can do, being imputed by grace, and by
faith received: Who was made sin for us, ^. Cor. 5. ^1.
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Now as Christ became sin
for us, not by having our sin dwelling in him, but imputed unto him, so we
become the righteousness of God (that is perfectly righteouse before God) by his
righteousness imputed to us, and not by that which dwells in us: which was
also livelily figured in, and is effectually proved by the sacrifices under the
law, by the offering whereof, as the unclean person, or he that had sinned, was
legally cleansed, and purifyed, and his sin forgeven: so by the merit, and
purity of that one oblation of Levit. 5. 10. 13. 16 18.
Christ offered once for all, and applied by faith, are we cleansed from the
guilt of sin, and reconciled to God for ever. Ch^p. 12. ^.


That God does not in our regeneration use the help of any creature, nor does
it by the doctrine of faith and repentance, but immediately in the soul, is an
old 59. Conclusion.
error of the Anabaptists condemned expressly by the Scriptures brought to
justify it. The first whereof is Iam: 1. 15. where God is said to have begotten
us by the word of truth: which word therefore we are to be swift to hear. verse:
19. which is else where called good seed, and the word of life. which word even
that which was preached by the Apostles. verse: 25. is also Math. 13 3.
called 1. Pet: 1. 23. the immortal seed, which falling in good ground never
Ph. 2. 15 Mat. 13^ 8. 23.
perishes, but brings forth fruit to eternal life.

Not to trouble the Reader with many Scriptures for the proof of that which
every regenerate man's experience does confirm, the Apostle calling him self the
father of the Corinthians, who had in Jesus Christ begot them by the 1. Cor. 4.
15.
gospel, and them his children in the same respect verse: 14. and Onesimus his
son, whom he begot in his bonds: and Titus his natural son, according to
the Phil. 10. Tit. 1. 3.
Common faith, expressly teaches the use of man's ministry for the
regeneration of the elect, and ministration of the spirit of life. 2. Cor: 3. 6.

Alike, if not more deceiptfull, and dangerous is that other Proposition.

That the new Creature, which is begotten of God, needs not the outward
scriptures, creatures, or ordinances of the Church to support him, but is above
60 61 62 63 Concl.
them. 1. Cor: 13. 10. 1. Ioh: 2. 27. seeing he has in him self 3. witnesses,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, which are better then all scriptures,
or creatures, though such as have not atteyned the new Creature need them, for
instruction, comfort; and to stir them up, etc. 2. Pet: 1. 19. 1. Cor: 11. 26.
Ephesians: 4. 12. 13.

Let the Scriptures brought be judge, and they will plead their own dignity
against them, by whom they are thus vilely debased. In 2. Pet: 1. 19. The
Apostle does not compare the inward spirit with the outward Scriptures, but the
Scriptures with themselves, the writings of the Prophets, which he compares to
a light shineing in a dark place, unto the writings, and preachinges of the
Apostles, which revealing Christ come in the flesh, he compares to the dawning
day, and morning star. Besides even they whom Peter exhorts to attend upon the
Scriptures, had obtained the new Creature: as having obtained the same
precious faith with Peter, and all things b^^nging to life, and godlynes by the
divyne power: who are 2. Pet. 1. ^ 3.
also expressly said to be regenerate unto a lovely hope. 1 Epis: 1. 3. and
verse: 23. to be borne anew, by the immortal seed, the word of God. So were the
Corinthians also borne anew, in that they were (though but) Babes in Christ, 1.
Cor. 3. 1.
and having much flesh yet abiding in them: who were to use the Lords Supper,
to show forth his death till he came, that is till his general comeing Phil 1.
6. 1 Thessalonians. 5 2.
to judgment, or special, at their death. 1. Cor: 11. 26. which is the 2 d
Scripture. Act. 1. 11 Revel. ^. 15.


So for the 3d Scripture: Ephesians. 4. 12. 13. the Apostles meaning is not that the
godly should have no further need of the Ministry for their edification, when
they were come to a perfect man, as there he speaks, that is when they ceased
to be as children, wavering minded, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, but that they should so use it, as thereby to bring them to that
perfect, and manly estate, and therein to establish them. Neither does the
particle Until importe a ceasing of the use of the Ministry when men become
perfect, and grown past that childish waveringnes there reproved, but a not
ceasing before then: as it is also used sundry times in the Scriptures, as, 1.
Tim. 4. 13. Revel, 2. 25. and else where.

In 1. Cor. 13. 10. 12. the Apostle does not speak of the estate of perfection
^ers. 8. 9. ^0. 11.
in this life, but in that to come, when the measure of our knowledge shall be
perfect, which is now but in part, and but as a childs in comparison of a
man's: as it shall also be immediate, and we see God face to face: when there
shallbe no use of the glass of the word, and ordinances, when prophesying and
tounges shall cease, yea when even faith, and hope shall cease: (the things
believed and hoped for being fully attained) and only love shall abide, which
is therefore called the greatest of the three verse. 13.

The Apostles meaning also 1. Ioh. 2. 27. is greatly mistaken: which is not
that the anointing, or spirit which they had received, set them above the
Scriptures, and all outward teachings: but that he needed not teach them, as
ignorant of these things, which by that anointing, or spirit, were sealed up
unto their Consciences: as where Paul tells the Thessal: that he needs not write
unto them of brotherly love, because they were taught of God one to love
another, ^. These. 4. 9.
his meaning only is, that they were not without that grace, but did practice
it: yet does he in the very same place verse: 10. exhort them to increase more
and more. So does John also write that his Epistle to teach and admonish those
anointed ones to beware of false Prophets and Antichrists of whom they were in
danger, as of other evilles.

Two other Scriptures are intended, but so misput, as I can not find which
they are, and therefore pass them by; being also assured they can geve no
confirmation to this vayn presumption deceaving under a show of Angelical
perfection.

The reason to prove the Scriptures unnecessary from the inward witness of the
Father, Word, and Spirit, is very deceitful: since the inward grace does not
abolish but establish the outward means, by which it is wrought, and
increased. David had this witness in his heart (being a man after Gods heart)
and was regenerate, and yet he desires God to teach him the way of his Psalm.
119. 33. verse. 18. ^ 16.
statutes: and that he would open his eyes that he might see the marvayles of
his law: which he professes he will not forget. And being driven from the
Tabernacle, and visible ordinances of God: how did he bewayl his want, and
misery? Far was he from this imagined spirituality. The Apostle calls the
Gospel the power of God to salvation: and exhorts Timothy to continue in it,
to the Romans 1. 17.
saveing of himself and others: by the Ministry whereof, he also labored to
present the Corinthians a pure Virgin unto Christ. All which places prove the
necessary 1. Tim 16.
use of it till death, even for the most perfect. 2. Cor 2.


And see whether these things lead. The natural, unregenerate, and
vnsanctifyed man, can have no right use of the Gospel, and holy things: and
1. Cor. 14.
the spiritual, regenerate, and new creature, needs them not. To whom then
are they geven: or by whom can they be rightly used? And behold Tit. 1. 1^
here, the malice, and craft of the Devil, who assayling Gods people
continually with his temptations: from which, Peter, and Paul were not free, no
Luke 2 31.
nor Christ himself, who was tempted in all points, like as we are, but without
sin, would yet persuade them, they had no need of their spiritual armor, in
special, 2. Cor. 7.
of the sword of the spirit, the word of God: whereof eve^ Christ himself also
in his temptations had use, yea need, to drive away Satan, as he had need of
Heb. 4. Ephesians 6 Matthew 1. 4. 7. 1. Ioh. 4.
meat and drink to drive away hunger, and thrist: though he could by his divyne
power have resisted both, without means. Our victory says John is our faith:
and the foundation of our faith, are the writings of the Apostles, and
Prophets: and is the foundation of no use for the standing of the building? or
will not the enemy of our salvation easily overthrow the building, when Ephesians. 2
he has undermined the foundation?

Ad to these things, that the Scriptures, the law and gospel shall be the Judge
of all, to whom they come. And is any man above his judge? or if this be Rom ^
12. 16. 2. These 2. 4. 1. Pet. 18.
not, what is it for man to exalt himself above all that is called God?

Lastly the regenerate are continually to grow in grace, and for that end to
desire the sincere milk of the word to grow thereby. 1. Pet. 2. 2.

But lo here another mischief: the persuasion of perfection in holiness; which
these men would also have us think Mr Smith had attained, a little before his
death. And it made well for the credit of the doctrine, that he did not
survive: for then the imperfections of his life, would have discovered the
error of the doctrine. Yea verily if this were his faith here published, it is
too evident how far he was from perfection. And for the help of those who are
in danger of this great, and deep seduction, I will here insert a few things
touching perfection.

And first we acknowledge all the faithful perfect, and that perfitly, by
Christ's perfect obedience, and righteousness imputed unto them for their
justification: for by one oblation he has perfited or consecrated for ever
them that are sanctified. 2dly, we acknowledge in them an inherent perfection of
Heb. 1^ 14.
righteousness, and holiness, which is their sincerity, integrity, and
vprightnes of heart in all things before God: usually called the perfection of
parts: as a child, though new born is a perfect man in all the parts: and thus
James says that, he who sins not in word, is a perfect man, that is, he is able
to bridle all the body. And this commendation the Scriptures give of men,
notwithstanding (...). 2. 3.
their frayltyes, that are not hypocrites, and hollow hearted: the King. ^. 14.
^. 1.
whole man being sanctified, though not wholly. 3dly, we acknowledge also in some
men a perfection in degree, not absolute, but in comparison of others, though
godly: and that, whereas some are but as children, and babes in grace, others
are as grown, and perfect men in comparison, both for knowledge, stablenes of
faith, and all grace. Which two sorts of men are usually opposed as strong, and
weak, in the Scriptures: unto which perfection all ^eb. 5. 12 3. 14. ^^h 4. 1^
^ 13. ^hil. 3. 15 ^ 15. 1
must strive to attayn, and not continue always children, and babes, which is
both shameful and dangerous.

But for any such perfection in this world, as wherein a man stands not need
continually to renew his repentance, and to purg him self of the remnants of
sin, casting of the old man, and putting on the new man, and to grow in the
knowledge, and grace of God by the use of the Scriptures, and other Gods
ordinances leading thereunto, it is none other but a most dangerous delusion
of that Prince of darkness transforming himself into an Angel of light.

And to let pass the common infirmities, yea (by occasion) the greater falls
(noted in the Scriptures) of those holy men, of whose perfection the same
Scriptures testify: as also the daily, monthly, and yearly sacrifices
ordinarily to be offered of old, for all and every one of the congregation, as
evidences of their guilt, Solomon teaches. 1. King. 8. 46. that there is us
man, that sins not; according to which is that in the preacher. Ch: 7. 20.
There is not a wise man upon earth that does good, and sins not. And who
can say rev. 20.
(says the wise man) I have made my heart clean, I am clean from my sin? And
if any man do say that he has no sin, be deceaveth himself, and there is no
truth in ^Ioh. 1. 8 ^^h. 3 6. verse. 4. 8.
him. For though he who is born of God sins not, that is commits not, or
works not sin, making it his course, and trade, as it were, which only he
does, who is of the Devil, yet puts John himself in the number of them, who
can not say without lying, that they sin not. Thus David acknowledges in
general, ^sal. 19. 3.
that no man can know his errors, and so does pray to be freed from secret
saultes: and so does the Apostle profess of himself in particular that he is
not perfect: but only follows after, and presses hard toward the mark: and
how ever in that ^hil 3. ^. 13. ^eb. 12. 1 ^om. 7.
his race, he was so cu^bred with that his clogging, and pressing sin, as that
like a law it forced him both from the good which he would have done, and to
the evil which he would not have done, and that when he would have done well,
evil was present with him: though in his inward man, that is, so far as he was
regenerate (which was far beyond any now) he delighted in the law of God, and
served it.

Lastly, if any in this life come to the perfection of leaveing sinning, they
must also leav praying, and so leav being Christ's Disciples; for he has taught
all his Disciples every Day to ask the forgivenes of their trespasses: yea
they must be past being Godly: for, for this (because God is merciful in
forgeving sins) Matt. ^. 12.
Every godly man shall pray unto him in an acceptable time. And lastly they
must be past hope of Christ's comeing in glory: for every one that has this
hope in Psalm. 32
him, purges himself, as he is pure. So long therefore as we are absent from
1. Ioh. 3.
Christ, and till our glory in him appear, we must still be purging our
selves: which if the filth of sin were not still in us, less, or more, we need
not be: as we must also grow in grace, and edify our selves in our most holy
faith, being (as we are from the truth) so far from the vain presumption of
any such perfection, as is by these men intended.

That the outward, or visible Church consists of penitent persons, and
believing only (opposing them to impenitent and unbelievers) and that such
only 64 71 Concl.
are to be baptized, I acknowledge, and the Scriptures brought confirm: but deny
it, opposing believers to their infants, which are neither unbelievers and
impenitent, nor innocent, as is affirmed. The Vineyard, and Kingdom which was
taken from the Jews, is let out, and geven to us, Mat. 2^ 43.
in which though no briars, nor brambles, nor fruitless trees might grow, yet
young plants, and impes, not yet bringing forth fruit actually, both might, and
may: as children might and may be in Gods Kingdom, though no rebels.

In Conclusion 65 the visible Church, is unfitly called, a figure of the
invisible; 65 Conclus.
as is the invisible untruly said to consist only of the spirits of just, and
perfect men. He who has in him true faith, and holiness, is a member of the
invisible Church, and the same person making holy profession thereof
outwardly, in the order left by Christ, a member of the visible Church: and the
whole man of both, (and not the soul of the one, and body of the other:)
though of the invisible in respect of the inward faith seen of God: and of the
visible in respect of the outward manifestation before men, ariseing from the
former. The Scriptures brought which are Revel: 1. 10. with Chap. 21. 2. 13.
27. speak of the visible Church only, and so are impertinent.

The particulars which I deem amiss Conclus: 68. I have noted in the 68
Conclus.
56. Proposition: and refer the reader thither.

That the Sacraments have the same use that the word has, and teach to the ey
of them that understand, as the word teaches the ears of them, that have 74
Conclus.
ears to hear, Prove: 2. 12. and that therefore they perteyn no more to
Infants, then the word does; is neither true in all points, nor well applied in
any.

For 1. the word serves to convert men Psalm: 19. 7. and is to be ministered to
unconverted, and profane persons: which use the Sacraments have not, nor must
be administered to such. 2dly, if this (applied to Infants) were true, then
should not circumcision have been administered to the Israelitish Infants, who
had not ears to hear. Yet is the ground good being rightly laid (unto which
that also Conclus: 73. is agreeable, though the Scriptures be brought hand over
head to confirm it.) For as God by promising Abraham that he would be his God,
and the God of his seed, preached to his ear, so by giveing him, and his seed
circumcision, he preached to his ey, for the ratification of the same promise.
And so is it now with us, who have received grace to be of the faith of
Abraham, having the same covenant, promise, or Gospel preached by doctrine to
our ear, and confirmed by baptism to our ey, for ourselves, and our seed.

To the 82. Conclus: that there is no succession in that outward Church but
that all the succession is from heaven, and that the new Creature only has
the 2 Conclus.
thing signified, and substance, whereof the outward Church, and ordinances are
shadows, Col: 2. 16. 17. I answer, 1. That the Apostle Colos: 2. speaks only
of the Jewish ordinances, which are abolished, and not of the Church ordinances
now. 2dly, If it be meant that all succession is from heaven immediately, it is
a fantasy: if mediately, then must the outward succession (to wit of
Ministry) be in the outward Church, whereof it is an ordinance. And whereas
the Church, and new creature are opposed, it is amiss, since the Church is to
consist only of such men as are in their measure renewed by the Holy Ghost,
and sanctified: and if by the new creature they mean any other thing, it is a
new creature of their own making.

In Conclus: 83. Where the office of the magistrate, is called a permissive
ordinance ^3 Conclusion.
of God, is both a contradiction, and evil speakeing of them in authority.
Where it is called an ordinance of God, it is confessed good, for every
creature of God is good, and all his ordinances are his creatures; and so, many
things are ascribed to the office of Magistrates in this, and the other
Conclus: about it, which prove it to be good, and lawful in it self: but where
it is made permissive, it is condemned as evil: since only evil is
permitted, or suffered of God.

And where it is objected Prop: 85. that Christ's Disciples must love their
enemies, and not kill them: pray for them, and not punish them, etc. I answer,
that the godly Magistrate may do both. Does not God punish with temporary death
those that he loves? and why may not Gods deputyes, the Gods Psalm. 82. ^. 6.
upon earth, be minded as God herein? When the godly Kings, and governors in
Israel were commanded to exequute judgment and justice upon the people for
their transgressions, were they commanded not to love them, and not to pray
for them? When Mr Smith in his sickness, tells his children (as it is in the end
of the book) that if he live, he must correct, and be at them, not because he
hates them, but because he loves them, as God did him, does he not answer the
objection, and show the those two may well stand together, as in the private
father, so in the public father, the Magistrate? Where again it is said that
Christ's Disciples must with him be persequuted, afflicted, murdered etc: and
that by the authority of the Magistrate. I do answer; that those things are not
simply necessary for all persons, but as God calls men unto them. And 2. both
the Scriptures, and other Stories do testify that godly Magistrates themselves,
have suffered these things for the Lord and his truth, and for well doing:
sometimes the inferior Magistrates, by the Superior, and sometimes the
Governors by the people under them. Instances Ex. 3. 1^. 12. 15. with Act. 7.
25 and 1 2. 3
we have hereof in Moses, David, Gedeliah, Daniel, Shadrach, Mishael, and Abed
nego, with Nicodemus, and others many mo. And much it is that these men should
acknowledge that Magistrates are to be prayed for, and geven thanks for, as the
Scriptures teach. 1. Tim: 2. 1. 3. and that their ordinance is of God, and for
the good of mankind, Rom: 13. in the works Number. 1^ 2. 10. and 16. 1. 2. etc.
whereof they may please God. 2. King: 10. 30. and in all these that it is a
good and lawful thing, (for no unlawful thing is of God, nor pleases him,
nor is to be prayed, or geven thanks for) and yet for it should exclude them
from the Church, as not being Christ's Disciples. Does any good 1. Sam. 18. 8.
9. 12.
and lawful thing hinder a man from being Christ's Disciple, unto whom all
creatures, and ordinances are sanctified, and pure? or are men to be kept out
Dan. 6. ^ 2. 3. and 3 12.
of the Church for weldoeing? Surely even as lawfully as to be received in for
evil doing. They ad that the Magistrate is not to meddle with religion, or
matters of conscience, nor to compel men to this, or that form of religion,
because Ioh. 7. 82 Tit. 1. 5
Christ is the King, and lawgiver of the Church and conscience. Iam: 4. 12. I
answer that this indeed proves that he may alter, devise, or establish nothing
in religion otherwise then Christ has appointed, but proves not, that he may
not use his lawful power lawfully for the furtherance of Christ's Kingdom and
laws. The Prophet Isaias speakeing of the Church of Christ, foretells that
Kings shall be her noursing fathers, and Queens her noursing mothers: which if
they meddle not with her, how can they be? And where these men make this the
Isa. 49. 23.
Magistrates only work, that justice, and civility may be preserved amongst
men, the Apostle teaches an other end, which is, that we may lead a peaceable
life under them in all godlynes. It is true they have no power against the
laws, doctrine, 1. Tim. ^ ^.
and religion of Christ: but for the same (if their power be of God) they may
use it lawfully, and against the contrary And so it was in special foretold by
John, that the kings of the earth should make the where absolate, and naked,
and (...) her flesh, and burn her with fire. (...)


This Mr Helwisse frivolously interprets of their spiritual weapons: which are
no other then the spiritual weapons of all other Christians: besides that it
is contrary to the clear meaning of the H Ghost, which is, that these kings
should first use their civil power for the beast, and whore, and after against
them to their destruction.

To conclude this point then: both these men, and Mr Helw: especially, in his
whole discourse about this matter labors of the common disease of all ignorant
me^ in pleading against the use of the ordinance by the abuse: which stands
either in prohibiting any thing which God has commanded, or in commanding any
thing which he has forbidden: as indeed he has whatsoever he has not
commanded, either expressly, or by consequence, in his religion, and worship.

Lastly it is not truly affirmed that Christians must judge all their causes of
difference amongst themselves, and may not go to law before Magistrates, nor
use an oath. For the first head is alleged 1. Cor: 6. 1. 7.

I answer that Paul does not there simply forbid the Saints goeing to law, but
goeing to law under Infidels: and that wronging, and oppressing one another,
when they should rather have suffered wrong: or at least have appointed some
able men for arbitratours, to have ended things. Which course when doubtful
differences of weight do arise, the members of the Church ought to take, and so
to rest in their equal determinations. But what if none of the Chuch can
sufficiently judge of the things: or setle them in peace for after posterity?
(as it may well come to pass in cases of inheritance especially) the matter
may and ought quietly, and peaceably to be referred to the Magistrates
determination. His office being of God, Gods people may have the sanctified use
of any lawful work thereof.

Touching an oath. It is not the meaning of our Savior. Math: 5. 34. 37. nor
of his Apostle Iam: 5. 12. absolutely to forbid the use of it: and to restreyn
all speech to yea and nay: for then Christ had broken his own rule in his so
usual asseverations of verily, verily: or amen, which are more then bare, yea,
and nay.

The meaning of Christ was to free the law from the corrupt gloss of the
pharisees, who taught, that ^it was no byndeing oath, in which the name of God
was not expressly mentioned, but the creatures only: as it was both his, and
his Apostles meaning to reprove needles swearing in ordinary communication.
Christ our Lord professes of himself, that he came not to destroy Matthew. 5. 7.
the law, or ten words, but to fulfill it: and having taken away the curse
thereof by his Death, to write the same in our hearts, that we might also
observe it, and so use Gods name holily, as a part thereof. We read how God
himself (...) 31. 32
swore sundry times for man's confirmation and assurance. And is (...) man
either more holy, or better to be trusted then he, that an oath should be
either unholy or grievous to him? We have also for our warrant the examples of
the holy Patriarks and Prophets, Abraham, Isack, Jacob, and the rest, sometimes
giveing unto others, and sometimes taking oaths of them, Iere. 1. ^ Isa 45.
23.
which being done religiously, was also a part of, and sundry times put for the
whole solemn worship of God; and the same not ceremonial, and shadowish; Iere.
12. 16.
wish; but moral and eternal. And since strifes will always be amongst men,
and those many times such, as in which no sufficient testimony by men, Psalm. 6*
10.
or other proof can be had, an oath (wherein God is called to witness the
truth, and to avenge the contrary) is always of use: which the Apostle
directly teaches Heb: 6. 10. An oath for confirmation is unto men an end of
all doubts. The lawfulnes whereof the same Apos^le does plainly confirm, by his
own practice, taking God for his witness. Rom: 1. 9. and again. 2. Cor: 1. 13.
taking God for a record upon his soul (that is to be revenged upon him
therein) that he lied not unto them.

And thus much for this Conclusion, wherewith I will also conclude the book:
entreating of God through Christ, that all who seek his truth in sincerity,
that in the knowledge, and obedience thereof, they may please him, may both
find the same, and with myself, mercy and forgivenes in all our errors, and
faylinges of this life, which how many they are no man knows, nor can know,
whilst he knows but in part, as all men but do, whilst they live in this
world, and are absent from the Lord.

THE END.

