Vox Ducis: OR, AN ALARM FROM THE TRVMpet of God, to every Soldier in Jesus
Christ. Calling them to Fight the good fight of Faith. In a Sermon at Paul's
Cross, Sept. 11. 1631.

By John Robinson Preacher of the Word

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY ELIZABETH COVENTRY, The most virtuous Consort
of the thrice renowned THOMAS, Lord COVENTRY, Baron of Ailsborough, Lord Keeper
of the great Seal of England.
IT is a received Maxim in war, that if the enemy be once gone forth, as the
Philistines Judge. 16.
were sometimes to destroy, it is not then wisdom any longer for the adverse
part to hide his strength wholly in the Garrison; As Christians, we have all
some common enemies to fight against; and who then among us is not engaged in
the quarrel?

For me, I am the weakest of all Gods Worthies, yet in this common cause have I
been emboldned to adventure my self and my forces into the field of Christ's
Church. Give but the Word of your gracious entertainment, they are all
mustered up to wait upon your Honor, and to fight for you against the Dragon
and his adherents. Indeed Job says, that when he went out of the gate, the
young Job 29. 8.
men hid themselves. And if the old Captains be abroad, the freshwater Downham
his spiritual warfare. Gouge in 6. ad Ephesians.
soldiers will not dare to show their faces: But yet if we hear the Trumpet
of God sounding out of Sion, if the faith of Christ, as here, calling aloud
unto us, then if I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my Psalm. 137. 5
right hand forget her cunning, and let him that has a hand, go Exodus 17. 9
up and strike Amalecke. For the Turks say well, that all cannot be Knolls in
Hist. Turc.
Ianisaries, well experienced men at Arms, but there is also some good use of
their Asapi, of their rude and inexpert rabble, if it be for nothing else but,
with their numbers, to blunt the sword of the Adversary. So the Locusts, we
know, are a people not strong, besides Pro. 30. 27
this, without a General, yet as Agur observed of them long since, do they go
forth by Companies.

How much more then if the Lord has spoken, as in Amos, Who Amos 3. 8.
can but prophecy? So if our General bids us charge, who can but show his
courage? Then will every woman prove a Deborah, an Amazon, and forgetting her
own weakness, arm her self with a masculine valor. In this case, every
Mephibosheth, every lame soldier, as he is not well able to fight, so, though
he could, yet will not he be willing to fly.

In hope then that your Honor will be pleased to be, as Job says of him
self, Even feet unto the lame, I do here most humbly commend Job 29. 15.
him to the safe Banner of your protection, and craving pardon for my
entrenching thus far upon your Noble favor, because I am a Stranger to your
knowledge, yet as a perpetual honourer of your virtues, I shall ever desire to
rest,

Your Honors pressed servant, JOHN ROBINSON.

Vox Ducis. 1. TIMOTHY 6. 12. Fight the good fight of faith.
AS are the times warlicke and martial, agreeing right with our Saviors Mat.
24 6
prophecy, concerning the latter days, That there shall be wars, and
rumors of wars: The father, he shall rise against the son; and the son
against the father: So also is my Text. Only here is the difference, that
whereas the first is corporal, this second is spiritual. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, Ephesians 6 12.
says Paul, but against principalities and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses: That whereas the fight of the world is of one man against
another: this of a Christian is of one and the same man against himself. Et

Mayor qui se quam qui caetera vincit Impetus: and they are ever the most
dangerous enemies, says our Savior, that are of our own Mat. 10. 36
household. So that my Text, you see, is nothing else, but Vox Ducis, The
Captains voice, whose voice, when he speaks, is dreadful; and whose tongue
is like a sharp sword whetted to the combat; or else it may be called, if you
please, Tuba Militis, the soldiers Trumpet; but not like that Trumpet that
Paul makes mention 1. Cor. 14.
of, which gives a doubtful and uncertain sound, for who shall then prepare
himself for the combat? But rather like the trumpet of Gideon, that gives
certain Judge. 7.
instructions when we shall begin the fight; and that is, when it is for the
Lord and for Gideon.

1. When it is for the Lord, when it is Profide, for the faith, 1. Cor. 4. 13.
Vnus enim Dominus, vna fides, said the Apostle in another case.

2. When it is for Gideon also, I mean for the good of every true Gideon, of
every faithful Christian, and then Pugnemus strenui, it behoues us presently
to stretch forth our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. Fight the good
fight of faith.


In the words you may please to observe these three parts.

1. A martial act, in this word fight.

2. The ground, or cause of this act, which Lipsius calls well, Caput Polit.
li. 5.
bonae spei, quae ducit ad triumphales illas terras: The Cape of good Hope,
that leads us to those fortunate Islands of victory: and this is, the faith of
Christ, we must Dimicare profide, strive for the Iud 3.
faith. Nullum enim bellum sascipitur a civitate optima, says Tully, nisi aut
profide, aut pro salute. We must not fight, as the Logician De Rep. l. 3.
disputes, Pro and Con, De omni themate, upon any cause, upon any occasion; but
the ground of it, that must always be the faith of Christ: it must be,
Certamen fidei, the fight of faith.

3. The spur to prick us on to this combat, and this is our own good and
welfare, which sits in the Text like a King in his Throne; or as the heart in
the midst of the body, that so every part may receive an equal influence:
for it is Bonum certamen, A good fight. Fight the good fight of faith.


First then for the first part, which is the warlicke act, in this word Fight.

Which though it be but a single word, and this word also but a single
syllable, yet Multum habet in se ponderis: that as the wise Wis^. 4. 16
man says of Enoch, how he did fulfill much in a little time: so may we say
of this word, that it does fulfill a great deal of matter in a little room.
Parvum quidem lectu, sed magnum intellectu: for being a term of art belonging
properly to the camp of Mars, it does easily hold out unto us that of Job,
That Militia est vita hominis super terram: That the life of a Christian is a
warfare upon earth. And if you would see Job 7. 1.
the Metaphor further explained, look into the 1. Corinthians. 15. 13. where we
have an exhortation of the same Apostle wholly consisting of military terms,
Watch ye, says the Apostle, stand fast in the faith, quit your selves like
men, and be strong.

It is the saying of Eliphas, that Job 5. 7.
we are all borne to labor: and as we are borne to labor, so also to fight,
In id nati vt militomus: for these two, me thinks, are like Jacob and Esau,
that hold one another Genes. 25 26.
by the heel.

And therefore you may read of the Jews at their building of the material
temple, that as they Nehe. 4. 17
held a trowell in one hand, so also a sword in the other; the one being the
instrument of a labourer, the other of a soldier. And thus you may think it
also in the building of the spiritual temple. For think not, says Christ,
that I am come to send peace on the Mat. 10 34
earth, but rather a sword. The confirmation of which truth, we have from the
blessed Virgin, who had no sooner bore Christ, Luke 2. 35.
but presently old Simeon tells her that a sword must pass through her soul.
And so it is with every gracious Christian, in whom Christ is no sooner formed
anew by faith, but presently Audita est vox clamantis: A Herald at arms calls
unto him after this manner: (...), Come, let us run on to the conflict Heb.
12. 1.
that is set before us: for lo, says David, how the enemies make a tumult,
and consult among Psalm. 83. 2.
themselves, saying, Come and let us cut them off from being a holy Nation,
neither let the name of Israel be had any longer in remembrance. Gebal, and
Ammon, and Amalecke, the Philistines with those of Tire, Ashur also is joined
to them, and has helped the children of Lot. Thus when Israel went down to
sinful Egypt, we hear then of nothing but peace and whist; but when they
begin once to leave Egypt, and go to Canaan, to heaven and happiness, then,

In se turbaruunt luxuriosa, then seven several nations, I mean seven deadly
sins, are marching forwards to encounter them: for a remembrance whereof
perhaps it was, that the Lord commanded them afterward to keep their feast of
Trumpets, because the Leuit. 23
Trumpet, we know, Nil nisi bella sonat, sounds nothing else but sad war and
destruction; and this has made that part of Christ's Church, yet remaining on
earth, to be well called, Ecclesia militans, the fighting Church; because it
must fight the good fight of Paul in my text. Fight the good fight of faith.


But for the better explaining of this Metaphor, two things I suppose are
necessary to be premised.

1. Who is our General, to fight under. 2. Who our enemies to fight against.
The first of these alluring us to fight, in hope of reward.

The second enforcing, for fear of danger.

The first giving us entertainment.

The second putting us upon employment.

For the first.

Our General or Captain, is the Lord Jesus Christ, for so he is called in
Saint Matthew. (...): Mat. 2. 6.
For out of thee shall come a Captain, etc. The author Heb. 12. 2.
and the finisher of our faith, says the Author to the Hebrews.

Deus exercituum, The Lord of hosts, says the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1. 9.
whose title is written upon his thigh, says Saint John. Rex Regum, Revel: 19.
16.
and Dominus dominantium: He that slew mighty kings, says David, Sehon king
of the Amorites, Psalm. 136. 16.
and Og the king of Basan. In a word, he that sung that triumphant Paean upon
the cross, over death, hell, and Satan; O death, where is thy sting; O grave
where 1. Cor. 15. 55.
is thy victory? And this is the Captain under whom we must fight: The Lord
is this man of war, sings Moses, The Lord is his Exodus 15. 3
mame.

For the second.

Now for our enemies, we present them marching in two ranks.

Either Traitors to us, or else Inuaders of us.

Either Canaanites that dwell among us, or else Arabians that dwell without us.

The one in the valleys.

The other upon the mountains.

Take them either single or combined, every way shall you find them very
dangerous: Saul may slay his thousands, and David his 1. Sam. 18. 17.
ten thousands, as the damosells sung: But he that slayes one of these, does
more then they both; the fight of them being only against carnal, but this
against spiritual enemies: Their enemies threatening only death to the body,
but these death both to body and soul for ever. That as David has it, How a
thousand years Psalm. 90. 4.
with God are but as one day: so man we say, That a thousand of thos^ enemies
are not so much regarde^ of God, as the killing of one o^ these; and one day in
this combat, is better then a thousand in the other.

Of the first rank is our own^ sinful and depraved nature; an^ 1 Enemy.
enemy doubtless that is much to be feared, because he is De propri^ lare, of
our own house and family, and they are ever the most dangerous enemies, says
our Savior: not only (...), Mat. 10. 36.
the sin that besets us round about, as the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 12.
1.
calls him; but farther, (...), The sin that Romans 7. 17.
dwells in us. For had an open enemy done this, says David, then Psalm. 55. 12
peradventure I could have hid my self from him, but for the son of our own
womb, our Ioab, our Absolon, our own flesh to be(...)me our enemy; whither O
God (...)all we flee from this, Cum (...)emit nos eadem causa quae ex(...)lit.
Lypsi. de Constable.


Vna adest in vnis aedibus, vna Terent.
(...)bit, vna comedit, vna dormit: (...)his rises with us in the morning,
(...) keeps us company all the day, (...)d lies down also with us in the
(...)ening. And tell me then if this (...)e not a dangerous enemy.

2. But though the Traitor be (...)iefly to be regarded, yet is not ^^erefore
the forrainer altogether (...) be slighted: for if Absolon be (...)e only
care of David's thoughts, ^he issue of Saul will get thereby (...)o small
advantage.

Now our foreign enemies are ^hiefly these two; The world, and ^he devil.

And first for the world.

And if this be not a fearful adversary, then let all our sens^ be called
in here to speak, a^ which are so many friends vnt^ him in this outward house
of o(...) bodies. It was Bernards speec^ Mundus obsidet me vtrinque, (...)
Medil. 14.
per quinque portas, quinque scilic^ corporis sensus, sagittis suis me vu(...)
nerat: The eye that looks upon it, and beholds nothing but van^tie; the care
that listens to it, an^ hears nothing but folly; the tongue that speaks of
it, an^ speaks of leasing; the taste the relishes it, and delights in luxury^
the sense that lays hold of it, a^^ Ecclus. 33.
gives a touch at lust and conc^piscence. So that it is a very ha^ thing, with
our Savior, to be (...) the world, and yet not of it; (...) Ioh. 1 10. and 8.
23.
touch this pitch, and yet not to b^ defiled. And therefore we read^ of our
Savior, that when he pra^ed for his very enemies, yet he ^rayes not for the
world, but excludes Ioh. 17 11.
that by name. Non pro (...)undo rogo, I pray not for the ^orld: and if it were
such a dangerous enemy to Christ, then must ^t needs be so also to us, because
^he servant is not above his master. Matthew. 10. 24.
What the Christians then were ^landerously reported of, to be Act. 17. 6.
^roublers of the world, sure I am, ^s true in this sense of the world ^owards
them; Mundus enim to^us in maligno positus, says Saint ^ohn; and therefore can
be no little 1. Ioh. 5. 19
adversary.

Now the last, but not least, enemy of a Christian, is Satan, (...), The
enemy as he is called, Matt. 13. 25.
by way of eminency, as if there were no other enemies but he, or at least as
if he did only hold all those former wheels in motion; like the primum mobile
that carries about the other spheres, Sine me nil potestis facere; They being
able to do nothing without him. And therefore is the flesh called Nuntius
Satanae: The devils Nuncio; and the devil himself, Princeps 2 Cor. 12 7 Ioh.
12. 31.
mundi. But is this, think you, all his attendants? who thinks it? For these
two are only his chief Minions, and great Favorites. But as for his more
remote and common attendants, they are innumerable; For if Iehu do but cry,
Eoquis mecum, Is there any of my 2. King 9. 32.
side: as Leah then said of Gad, Behold Genesis 30 11
a company.

The time would be too short to tell you of all his hangbies, of Ismael, and
of Cain, of Judas, and of Demas, of Himeneus and Philetus, of Epicurus and
Nouatus, with the rabble, all which have bound themselves with an oath, as they
did, neither to eat nor drink until they have killed Paul. Act. 23.


And is the life of a Christian then, think you, a life of race, a life of
pleasure? This, I know, is Vox populi, but is it not also Vox stultorum? It is
doubtless. For, Heu miseri qui bella gerunt, said Lucan.
the Poet truly; but alas, it is far otherwise: for no man knows so well the
misery that a soldier endures, but himself only; Every battle, as the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 9. 5.
being with confused noise, and with garments tumbled in blood. The soldier
being always, as Paul said of himself, In labors more abundant then any man,
in 2 Cor. 11. 23.
weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings and fastings, in cold and
nakedness. Believe me, brethren, Non est in terris mollis ad astra via: The
way to heaven, it is not strewed with rushes; there go up thither no Carpet
Knights, no knights of the post, but only the worthies of Israel, for we are
all soldiers here. Et multa tulit miles, sudauit and alget: And the soldier
he has endured many a bitter brunt amidst the press of his enemies, consumed
sometimes like Jacob, with heat in the day, and with frost in the night; to
be sure, either always fighting, or else always ready to undertake it; that
so at last his enemies may be defeated, and himself crowned with a triumphant
Crown of Genes. 31. 40.
glory.

But is it enough, think you, to tell you that you are soldiers, and
therefore must use your hands to war, and your fingers to fight, unless I
teach you also how to fight, that so you may overthrow your enemies? No surely:
Ideo enim bellum suscipitur, vt in pace vivatur: for therefore is war
undertaken, that you may overthrow your enemies, and live in peace.

Give me leave then, that as David 2 Samuel 1. 18.
caused the men of Judah to be trained up in the art of shooting, so now also
to train you up in this art of fighting, lest else you fight as him that beats
the air, as the Apostle speaks: That as 1 Cor. 9. 26.
Saint Paul teaches his Corinthians, so to run that they may obtain the
prize: so may I teach 1. Cor. 9. 24.
you, so to fight that ye may obtain the victory:

Now for the effecting hereof:

Quaedam removenda.
Quaedam admovenda.
The obstacles to be removed, are either general or special.

The general, are all manner of sins whatsoever; the whole body of sin,
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 6. 6
which like Amasa's dead body, is an hindrance to us in the pursuit of our
victory.

And therefore the Lord charges the Israelites, that when their 2. Sam: (...)
12.
host goes forth to battle, they should abstain from every wicked Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
thing. And this, it may be, was the reason why David he Psalm. 49. 5.
calls it, The wickedness of our heels, making sin like a clogge of dirt
hanging at our heels in the depth of Winter, which does tardare gressus,
hinder us in our march to heaven. And therefore as we are to pray, according
to our Saviors direction, That our flight be not in the winter; so may Mat.
24. 20.
we here also, that our fight be not at that time neither, when our feet must
needs stick fast in the mire, and cannot move; the Irish bog, and the deep
way being both of them enemies as well to fighting as to flying.

But more especially, be sure that thou remove thy Dalilahs, thy darling
sin, that Primogen^tum Diaboli, as Saint John the Evangelist said of Marc^on
the Heretic, the head of this body, even thy Primum vivens, thy sweetheart
sin, which bears rule and dominion over this body, like a King. And
therefore it was a good policy of the King of Assyria to his Captains, Fight,
says he, neither against great nor small, 1 King (...) 31.
but only against the king of Israel: Not but that he would have them fight
against the whole army, but chiefly and principally against the King. So
though we ought to set our selves against all that is called sin, yet chiefly
and principally against our master-sinnes. And surely the king being once
caught, the rest will easily be subdued; and he that can shake off the
principal, will a great deal more easily shake off his dependants and
followers. If Holofernes be once slain in his tent, though it be by the hands
of a woman, his whole army then, be it never so numerous, will soon be
Judith 13.
brought to nothing. And the shepherd being once struck, the Mat. 26 31
sheep will soon be scattered. Thus we read of the Israelites, that above
all their other sins, they insisted chiefly in the mention of this great
wickedness, for so it is called, namely, In asking 1. Sam. 12. 17. ver. 19.
of a King. And as many, beloved, as are true Israelites, will do the like. But
as for the hypocrite and counterfeit, his only care is to slay some common
soldier, as, murder, adultery, and the like, and then he thinks he has done
God good service; But as for the king and ruling sin, that sits in the throne
of his heart, this he is resolved to fight for, even to the death.

Oh that Ismael might live, says he, in thy sight: Vivat Rex, Let Genesis 17. 18
the King live, and all is well. For, Rege incolumi men's omnibus vna est;
Amisso rupere fidem: For if the Virg.
king be well, and the ruling sin, then will all other sins bind
themselves by an unanimous oath of allegiance unto him; but as Jacob said, so
he,

Joseph is gone, and Simeon, and will ye take Benjamin too: so, what? Ge. 42.
36.
have ye forbidden me to nourish other sins, and will ye take away also my
Dalilah, my darling sin, the son of my strength, of my desires? ye shall
then bring my gray hayres with sorrow to the grave; for, is not the lean
cattle good enough, says Cain, to be sacrificed with the knife of
mortification, but God must have Ge. 17. 18.
the fattest of the flock too? Or is Gen 4. 1
it not great pity, says Saul, that such a goodly Weather as Agag Reg. 22
must be slain? But there is a foolish pity, says the proverb, that
destroys a kingdom; and if God cry, Vade and percute Amaleck, yea, though he
be the first of the Ex 17. 9.
Nations, and the chiefest in the dwellings of Ham, yet then, cursed Nu. 24. 20.
is he, says the Prophet, that Ier. 48. 10
holds his sword from blood. Let Naaman be never such a goodly 2 Reg. 5. 2.
man, yet if he be a Leper, he must then be shut out of the host; Number 5. 2.
Act. 10 34. Isa. 30 33.
for as God is no respecter of persons, so neither must we. Tophet is prepared
of old, says God, even for the king, even for our great and presumptuous
transgressions, and therefore this must also be removed. And so much for the
hindrances that must be taken away.

The furtherances follow.

And these may be considered, either in respect of our Captain, or in respect
of our selves, as soldiers under him.

In respect of our Captain there be two things required.

1 Obedience to him. 2 Imitation of him.
1 Obedience to his word. 2 Imitation of his practice.
And first for the first.

As the word of a General is a sufficient warrant to a soldier for the
undertaking of any warlike design; And therefore Curtius, Curt. l. 4.
speaking of Alexanders soldiers, says, That they were Intenti ad Ducis
verbum, immo and ad nutum. So must also the word of Christ our Captain be to
us: To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20.
says the Scripture. The Law of God that must be a sufficient testimony to us
for our obedience unto Christ's; for as Marcus Curio said concerning a
disobedient Val. Max.
soldier, whom he had put to death, Non opus est Reipublicae eo cive qui
parere nescit: so may we, Non opus est Christo eo milite, That Christ has no
need of such a soldier, that knows not how to obey him; since obedience is
better then sacrifice. The soldier he 1 Sa. 15. 22
must be to his Captain, as the shadow is to the body, or as that servant in
the Comedy was to his master, Ait, aio; Negat, nego. And therefore the
Centurion might Teren.
well think himself happy in his servants, when he said to one of them, Go,
and he goes; to a second, come, and he comes; to a third, do Mat. 8. 9.
this, and he does it.

And yet there be Vndercaptains too, that must be obeyed as well as Christ.

And these be either Moses or Aaron.

The Prince or Priest.

The Magistrate or Minister.

The one Gods deputy in rebus temporalibus; the other in spiritualibus.

And therefore Christ gives the Jews this charge concerning the Scribes and
Pharisees, That whatsoever they bad them do, they Mat. 23. 1.
should do. But yet take this caution by the way, only so far as Christ and
they are unum agens, do command one and the same thing, but no further; for
else, whether it be better, says Paul, to obey God or man, judge ye: and Act.
4. 19.
by this rule, says our Savior, We cannot serve God and Mammon.

And so much for the first requisite, in regard of our Captain, which is
obedience, in regard of his word.

The second follows, and this is imitation of him, in regard of our practice.

As Gideon said to his soldiers, Whatsoever ye see me do, do ye: Judge. 7. 17
The same does Christ to every one of us; and it is the duty of a good
soldier, always to follow the steps of his Captain: in which respect, S. John
tells us concerning Ioh. 13. 15.
Christ, that dedit nobis exemplum, that Christ left us an example, that so we
might tread in his steps.

But it is demanded here, Quousque? Q.
how far the example of Christ our General must lead us, and whether in all
things, or no?

For answer to which, we must R.
know,

That there be some things wherein we cannot follow after Christ.

Others, wherein we may.

Of the first sort are his miraculous works, as namely, his fasting forty
days; his walking upon the sea, and others of like nature: Mat. 4. Matthew. 14.
and he that essaies now to do these after Christ, is very like to starve for
hunger, or else to be drowned in the depths, as the Egyptians were, who
because they saw the Israelites go through the red sea with a miracle
accompaniing them, they would therefore needs follow them also, presuming on
the like success: Impij autem non sic, says David; for Psalm. 1.
the text tells us, that when they assayed to do it after them, the sea then
closed up her mouth again, and shut up their lives in destruction. Ex. 14. 28.


It is then in our imitation of Christ our General, as the Apostle speaks in
another case of alms, Not according to that a man has not, but according to
2. Co. 8. 12
that a man has.

And these be either natural or moral.

The natural are such as serve to the preserving of our natural subsistence
and being, as to eat, drink, sleep, etc. Now in these we cannot but follow
after him, because, in themselves considered, they are neither good nor evil.

Only moral duties then are they that we propound here unto our selves from
Christ, by way of pattern and imitation.

But there are Vndercaptains here also that must not be despised.

And these be the glorious company of all the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints
of God, that have been since the world began. And therefore Paul wishes Phil.
3. 17.
the Philipians to be followers of him, and to look upon all those that walk
so as they have him for an example.

But though our General, and Vndercaptains must both be followed, yet not
both after one and the same manner.

The one as an absolute and perfect pattern.

The other only with a quatenus, so far as they follow Christ and no further.

For as man is compounded of a two fold moral principle, either flesh or
spirit: So also are his moral actions that flow from him, sauouring
accordingly, and so become either good or evil.

In the one we regard no man's credit whatsoever, but only in the other. The
credit of Job was good in his patience at one time, Job 1. 21.
but not so in his impatience and cursing of his birth at another; Job 3. 3.
therein, dixit insipiens, he spoke Job. 2. 10.
as his wife did, very foolishly. The practice of David was imitable in 1. Sam.
13. 14.
many things, for it was after Gods own heart: But in the matter of Vriah,
there we think him to be a man after his own heart, and not after Gods, and
therefore dare not follow him. So was Hezekiah 1. King. 15 5.
a good man in many things, howbeit in the business to the Ambassadors of the
King of Babylon, therein, says the Text, 2. Chron. 3^. 31.
did the Lord leave him to himself; and so do we also. So was Lot also a
righteous man, save in Genesis 19 34
the matter of his drunkenness, and he that follows him in this, follows but
a staggering guide; and a thousand to one if he ever hit the right way to
heaven. So that here that rule of Seneca is good, Quicquid ab illis been factum
est, nostrum ad imitationem; Quicquid male, nostrum ad consolationem. And now,
as Vriah said, What, shall my Lord Ioab, and the 2. Sam. 11. 11.
Ark of God lie in the field, and shall I go home to lie with my wife? I will
never do it. Or else as Moses spoke to the children of Gad and Ruben, so say I
to you, What Numb. 32 6.
shall our brethren go forth to war, and will ye, like idle drones, sit still
in Gilead, because it is a place fit for pastorage? Apage hanc amentiam! For
hear what our Savior says of such, Quid statis hic toto die otiosi? For
what? Mat. 20. 6
have ye not yet received your hire, your penny, your presse-money? O thou evil
and slothful servant! Neither say within your Mat. 25. 25
selves, that no man has hired you, for hear how the Spirit and Reu. vl^. 17
the Bride say, Come: yea how the faith of Christ, and our own welfare also
says it in the Text; come then and let us all go up together, as one man, to
fulfill my Text, even to fight this good fight of faith: Fight the good fight
of faith.

Our Adversaries then, me thinks, do very ill to discarde these Captains
out of their places, and to set a rabble of lame and blind soldiers in their
rooms.

Among the first rank we place Ignatius Loiola, the father of their Jesuits;
they that speak the best (...) G(...) in Flanders.
of him, say that he was but a lam^ soldier, and it may be he caugh^ his
lamenesse, as Mephib^sheth did his, by falling from his Nurse: 2. Sam 4. 4


Among the second, we plac^ Saint Dominicke, Saint Francis and many other of
their more easy Saints, who if they had strength for execution, yet wanted
they sight for direction. And i^ may be they lost their sight, as old Toby lost
his, by the Swallows Tob. 2.
dung of that Papal nest. And think you that the battle will not go well
forward with such Leaders? or that if they pace after such Captains, they will
not fall before their enemies? They will doubtless. For if the blind lead
the blind, says our Savior, they must needs both fall into the ditch. Mat.
15.
And therefore the blind man in the Gospel, that mistook men for trees,
you will say, would have Mar. 8. 24.
made but a bad Leader. But the devil himself has a good answer for these,
as he had for those Pythonistes that took upon them to adjure by the name of
Jesus, Jesus Act. 19. 15.
we know, and Paul, and the Saints of God, but who are ye? And so much for the
further ances to make our fight successful in regard of our Captain whom we
serve.



We come now to those that concern our selves, as soldiers under him. And
these respect,

Either the matter of our fight.

Or else the manner of it.

For the Matter of our fight there is required:

1. Armor to fight in. 2. Weapons to fight withal.
For without these two materials, it is impossible that we should ever stand
before our enemies. And therefore it was a good policy of the Philistines, for
the keeping under of the Israelites, to let no Smith live among them, whereby
any warlicke materials 1. Sam. 13. 19.
might be procured, as well knowing that without these, they could never effect
any great matters; for the want of which, they might well be scoffed at by
their enemies, under the name of Iudaei imbecilles, weak Jews, as at the
building Nehe. 4. 2.
of the Temple. And therefore when it once came to this pass, That there was
neither shield nor spear among forty thousand of Israel; then was it a fit
time, as Deborah sung, to have war in ^he gates. Judge 5 8.


For armor then this is the first material that we require in a ^ouldier,
who would be victorious.

And therefore we read in the Gospel, that when a strong man ^nters on an
house, the first thing Luke 11. 22.
^e will do, is to take away his armor wherein he trusts. Indeed ^e trust
much to our armor in ^he battle, which made Achilles that he would never
undertake a ^ombate without his harnes; and therefore are they called, Arma
(...)b arcendo host, as Varro will ^aue it. But yet is this of no avail
neither, unless it be also complete and whole; for so the Apostl^ wills us,
Put on, says he, the whol^ Ephesians. 6. 17
armor of God: for if we lay open at any one part, there will the devil be
sure to strike.

Quaque patet fera regnat Ery^nis: And for this reason may he^ well be called
Beelzebub, i. e. the Prince of flies, because the fly^ will ever light upon the
wounde^ place.

And yet how many be ther^ now adays, that lay one part o^ Man. 10. 25
other open to the devils blow, for want of this complete furniture^ and so are
easily wounded. As

One there is that has not the head-peece of Divine wisedom^ on, and so lays
his head too fair^ to receive the devils stroke. An^ thus our grandmother Eve,
she^ was wounded; Ingenio perijt (h^^miseri) Gen 3. 6.
ipsa suo.

A second, he lies open at the eyes, by not putting before them Jobs covenant;
and so Achan Job 31. 1.
perished, Vt vidit, perijt: He saw a wedge of gold, says the Text, Ios. 7. 21.
Vidensque concupivit, and concupis cens abstulit.

A third, he looks not to his hands, to hold them up to God in prayer. And so
Moses was in fault;

Mosis manus erant graves, says the Text, and thus Amaleck, you Exo. 17. 12
know, had almost got the victory. And last of all (for I have here a large
field to march in) another looks not to the foot of his affections, as Solomon
aduises him, but has Transitum pedis, a hole Prou. 4. 26.
there for the devil to enter. And so was Achilles foild and slain. Our
Christian armor therefore must be complete and whole, Put on the whole armor
of God.

But what is armor to fight in, unless we have also weapons to fight withal.

Look but into Saint Paul's Armory, and there you shall find Ephesians. 6. 12
enough to furnish you.

Some for defense of thy self.

Some for offense of others.

For defense, thou have these four to cover the four chief parts of thy
body. As,

For thy Ioynes, thou have the Girdle of truth.

For thy breast and heart, the shield of faith.

For thy head, the Helmet of salvation: and

For thy feet, the shoes of peace to cover them from cold and harms, as it is
written: Quam speciosi pedes praedicantis pacem. Isa. 52 7.


But for offense, thou have only one, to wit, The word of God, which is the
sword of the Spirit, To note that we must be Tardi ad percutiendum, receiving
four blows, rather then giving one. But if the faith of Christ lies once at
the stake, as it does at this time in the Text, then Vade and percute Amaleck,
then let him that has Exo. 17. 9.
no sword, says Christ, go sell his garment and buy one: Then draw thy sword
Peter out of thy sheath, and make it drunk in the blood Luke 21. 36
of thine opposers.

For it may as well be said of Mat. 26.
this weapon in general, as of Goliahs sword in particular; 1. Sam. 21. 9.


Non est huic simile, That there is no offensive weapon like to this. Indeed
David mentions a bow as well as a sword. 2. Sam. 1. 18


But yet this is only useful for those enemies that are afar off, and
therefore are less to be feared; But if once those spiritual Philistines of
ours be come upon, as they were sometimes on Sampson Judge. 16.
to destroy, then Gladius Domini, must be Gladius Gideonis, Iud. 7. 10.
Then must the sword of the Lord be the sword of Gideon. I mean of every true
faithful Christian

And therefore as the ancient Romans did worship Victory for a Goddess, so
did the Alani also, says Marcellinus, worship the sword for a God, as the
chief means to attain the victory: for the word of God, says the Apostle,
is quick and powerful, yea, Heb. 4. 12.
sharper then any two-edged sword, peircing even to the dividing asunder of the
soul and spirit, of the ioints and marrow.

And these are our weapons to fight withal, of which we may say as Christ did
of Peter's two swords, satis est, here are enough to furnish a Christian
soldier. Luc. 22. 38


Where then are those Popish weapons of the Church of Rome, viz. their Cross,
their Holy water, their consecrated Oil, and the like. Surely, as the Apostle
Romans 3. 27.
says of works, so may we say of them, they are excluded: but by what law? by
the law of faith: Our faith will not admit them, our Religion will not bear
them: and why? silent ikter arma leges; because the law of God, which is regula
fidei, the rule of our faith, and our law of arms, makes no mention of them,
and no marvel, for as the Apostle said in another case, The Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal: so say I, the Law of Romans 7. 14
God speaks only of spiritual weapons, but are not these carnal? they are
doubtless; and think we then that they are not pitiful scare crows to put
to flight a spiritual adversary? Alas, we may say of them, as the Prophet does
of the Egyptian horses, They are flesh, and not spirit, Isa. 31. 3.
sarcasmi Diaboli, as Chemnitius well calls them, even gugawes to make the
Devil laugh; so that God has given them up to strong delusions, because they
being without law in these things, yet will needs be a law to themselves; Romans
3. 14.
and therefore we may well fear, that as the Prophet spoke of the Egyptians,
so it may be said of them also, That both they and their weapons shall go both
together into hell; for he that sits in Eze. 32. 17
hell, shall laugh at these weapons, Satan shall have these weapons Job. 41.
17. 29.
in derision.

But enough concerning the matter of our fight.

The manner follows.

And to make this good there be three special things required in it, which
like those three mighties of David will break through an host of enemies, and
bring 1 Samuel 23.
from thence the water of life.

The first of these is Wisdom, and therefore Paul who was miles veteranus, an
old beaten soldier, aduises his Ephesians to walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as Ephesians. 5. 15.
wise. So we must also fight circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise: it must
not be like the cockbraind march of Iehu, concerning whom the Scripture says,
that 1 Reg 9. 20
he marched furiously.

I place wisdom in the first place, because the Wise man, he tells us, that it
is the principal thing. And Pro. 4. 7.
again, comparing it in another place with wisdom, he tells us in plain
terms that of the Poet, Est acri potior bello prudentia dextra. Eccl. 9. 18.



That wisdom is better then strength. From whence it came to pass, says
Plutarch, that the old Spartan, if he conquered his enemy by force, he did
then offer only a Cock, but if by wisdom, he did then offer an Ox, as a
greater sacrifice then the former. But Aristotle he goes yet further, and will
have it to be (...), the only virtue and captain of a ruler.

(...), says he in the second of his Politiques, which was the reason why
David was elected of Saul, to be the chief over his men of war, because he
behaved himself wisely, 1 Sa. 18. 5.
says the Text.

And indeed, as want of wisdom and discretion is a great want in any calling,
so most specially in the military, in as much as our life stands always there
upon a most tickle point, that if a fool turn soldier, it may well be
feared, that he will either hold his weapon flat way; and so wound himself,
or else mistake his friend instead of his adversary. But for such, me thinks, a
School of Defense were better, wherein to learn skill, then a field to put it
in practice, because wrath carries such to valor, and not knowledge, and
therefore in fighting do they seek rather to perish, then to vanquish.

But it is here demanded wherein this military wisdom of a Christian soldier
does consist.

In answer to which, I will refer it to three chief members of the body.

1 To the feet, they must be held in with order, that so they do not range
out of their proper place, according to that of Solomon, A wise man will order
his steps, but the foolish, he goes out Pro. 19. 3.
of his own rank, and peruerts his way. And so we must fight orderly: all of
us must set our feet in battle array, and continue there in our standing, like
the Northern army, concerning whom we read, that they should run like mighty
men, and climb the walls Iocl 2.
like men of war, that they should march every one in his way, and not break
their ranks. The Philosopher could say that (...); that Arist. Polit. lib. 2.
order was the mother and preserver of all things; for which cause the Apostle
will have all things to be done in order, for God, says the same Apostle, is
the God of order, and not of confusion. As for 1 Co. 14. 40
disorder, that dwells only in hell, the place of all misery; and therefore
Babel is made a type of it, which signifies nothing but confusion. Genesis 11. 9.


But order must be on earth, as in other things, so more especially in
fighting Nam cum miles Centurioni, Centurio Tribuno obsequitur, says Tacitus,
facile fit aditus ad Annal, l 1.
victoriam.

But e contra, nothing sooner loses the field, then when men go out of their
orders and ranks, out of their places and callings, as when the master goes on
foot, and the servant gets up into the saddle, which was one of Solomon's Eccl
10. 7
evils that he saw under the Sun, when one goes up to the front, that should
come behind in the rear; Vsque adeo turbatur agris. Virg, Eclog



By this means does confusion march into the army, and after it destruction.
And indeed all now will be Captains to teach others, when as the Apostle
says, they have more need to be taught themselves, Heb. 5. 12.
or else they will have none of the Crown, no, nor fight one stroke in the
combat. That as it was said of the Egyptians, that all of them would be
Priests, so of these times; Moses wish is now Aegypti Sacerdotos omnes. Nu. 11
29
well nigh fulfilled, Omnes erimus Caesares, all of us would feign be
Captains; oh that I were a King, says Absolon. 2 Sa. 15. 4.
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.


Aut Caesar, aut nullus. But Absolon must first learn what it is to be a
subject, for, Non nosti longas Regibus esse manus?


For do thou not know that Kings must have long hands to guide the reins of
government?

And yet now will every Cobbler find fault with the face of the picture, when
his art reaches no higher then the foot: as Luther said, Vnusquisque habet in
se Pa^am; But does not he take too much upon him, O ye sons of Levi, datur
vobis seire.

Nunquid enim and Saul inter 1 Sa. 10. 11
Prophetas? well, if he be, Spiritus illum invasit malus, and prophetabat; 1
Sa. 18. 10.
an evil and disordered spirit has put him into orders, and behold he
prophecies; Quis autem 1 Sa. 10. 12
pater, as they said of Saul? for is he not the son of Kish, who went about
to seek his fathers Asses, and how then do we hear these things of him?
Proh pudor, Quis, Cui? as it was said of Arsacius, an unlearned Bishop, that
succeeded Origin.

Every cursed bramble now will take upon him to be a Prince among Judge. 9. 15
the trees, as in Iothams parable, and the son of the Thistle must needs
match with the Cedars 2 Kin. 14. 9
daughter. For will not this wood, says he, serve as well to make some throne
for a king, as some plash for a hedge? Are not all the people holy, says
Corah? Nu. 16 3.
Are not Abanah and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, says Naaman 2 Reg 5 1^
to Elisha, as good to wash, in as the river of Jordan? So are not we, say
they, as fit to be made Captains as other men? No, says Elisha, it must be
Jordan, and no other river; the virtue of healing is annexed by God only to
that river, and the King he can only come this ouerflowing evil. As for
others, nemo te conduxit ad hoc opus, this is enough, that no man has hired
them to this work. M(...).
Et nasci a principibus fortuitu^ est.


And every one cannot be borne to this dignity; how then can ye expect wages
for it, since every one shall receive his wages (...), according to his work.
Rather be ordered by your Captains, and quo in loco es constitutus, ibi astes,
and fight in that part of the battle wherein they have placed thee; for as
Christ said to his Disciples in another case, non vestrum est scire mysteria
regni; so say I, scire tuum nihil est. Mat. 13. 11


Alas, you are more brute then any men, as Hagar said of himself, neither is
there any knowledge touching these affairs Pro 30 2
lodging in you.

Wherefore as Christ said to Peter, so say I, quid hoc ad te?

Aliud plectrum, aliud Sceptru^, Ioh. 21 23.
as Stratonicus the Musician told Ptolemy; or as Basil said to the Emperors
Steward, who labored to pervert Scripture for the strengthening of the Arian
heresy, (...) It is thy part, says he, to look to the Emperors kitchen
stuff, and not to trouble thy head about the knotty places of Scripture. Vobis
hoc non datur; for as the twelve Apostles said, Is it meet to leave the word of
God and serve tables? Acts 6. 2.
so may we say on the contrary, is it meet, think you, to leave tables, and
come presently to dispense the word? no surely; for there is (...), a great
gulf of difference betwixt these two, Luc. 16. 26
so that those idle drones that would pass from hence to them, cannot, neither
again can those thredbare and pragmaticall tradesmen that would from thence to
us: indeed some Enthusiasts of late days have not been afraid to pass this
latter gulf; but who so bold, says the proverb, as blind Bayard; Partus enim
indicavit patrem, for their uncouth births have showed their breeding, and
their roauing discourses have laid them open what they were, well enough, viz.
straggling sheep, disordered men, and wandering stars, as Jude speaks, for
when ver. 12.
the Text has called for brick, these men have come with straw in their hands,
like those builders of Babel and confusion, at quis haec Gen 11.
requisivit? and when that has called for tile, they have come with stubble,
and have given thereby this witness of themselves, I am no Prophet, but a
husbandman, for man taught me Zac. 13. 14
to be so from my youth, so said Zachary, you know, who had an immediate call
from heaven to that sacred office; and if they can show the same patent, they
may pass freely. At da mihi talem, as Bernard said of young Timothy, and ego
cibabo auro, and potabo halsamo. No, no, immediate calls are now past, so are
extraordinary signs, and he that seeks now for such a sign, is but an
adulterous generation, says our Savior, but no Luk 11. 29
sign shall be given him, save only this, Go sow, and then reap, 2. King 19.
29.
plant vineyards, and then eat the fruit thereof.

All members, says the Apostle, have not one and the same office: Rom 12. 4.
but God has made some Prophets, some Apostles, others Evangelists, etc. so
say I, all that sight in the battle, have not one and the same rank, but some
are Captains, others Colonels, others Sergeants, and others again common
Soldiers, and such as do attend upon the baggage. Are 1. Cor. 12. 19.
all Prophets, are all Apostles, are all Teachers, are all Captains, are all
Colonels, are all Sergeants? If all were the eye, then where were the hearing?
So if all were Captains, then where were the Colonells? or if all were these,
where then were the common soldier and attender on the baggage? But God has
appointed, as to every member in the body, so to every soldier in the field
his right place, his proper Vbi, that so there may be no schism in the body,
no disorder in the Camp. He shall keep thee in all thy ways, says David:
Every man Psalm. 91. 11
then has his proper rank, his calling, his way; and God has said to him in
his entrance into it, as in Isaiah, This is thy way, walk Isa. 33. 21.
in it, and thou shall find rest to thy soul. But if thou once presume to
depart out of it, without license from thy Captain, thou have then no promise
of protection at all. And therefore the devil, says learned Iunius, was but a
bad Sophister, in alleging to Christ, Gods promise for preservation, without
annexing unto it the Mat. 4. Psalm. 91.
condition of walking in his ways: It being nothing else, says he, but
Fallacia Diuisionis, a fallacy of division, in separating those things that
must be joined; The way of God and his protection in it, being as nearely
linked together, as mercy and truth that kiss each other. For as Bernard well
glosses the place, He keeps us, In vijs, non in praecipitijs, in our ways,
and not in our downefalls: So that if Christ had thrown himself down, he
had then been quite out of Gods way, and so out of all promise of his
protection, For,

Extra viam nulla securitas: for out of the way is nothing but error, nothing
but danger. And therefore the Lord threatens the Jews, that because they did
not know his way, but went out of those bounds that he had set them, therefore
a Lion out of the Ier. 5. 6.
forest should slay them, and a woolfe of the euenings should devour them.
Indeed the sluggard says, Leo est in via, That there is a Lion in the way, but
how foolishly? Pro. 22. 12.
for I am sure that he walked, In via devia, in a cross and by-way, when he
met with the disobedient Prophet, and therefore slew him. 1. King. 13.
And so much for the first branch of our military wisdom, which was referred
to our feet, and this was order to keep them from swaruing.



The second branch of our wisdom follows, and this shall be referred to our
eyes, they must be held open by walking; and so we must fight with a heedy and
watchful eye: according to that of Solomon, That a wise man has Eccl. 2. 14.
his eyes in his head, he is ever watchful, and not like those of Laish, that
were a careless and Judge. 18. 67.
drowsy people. And therefore the ancient Romans, in their coins inscribed
to Mars the God of war; did usually join a Cock with him, which is the
emblem of watchfulness. And good reason we should be watchful.

1. Whether we respect our own disposition; or, 2. The disposition of our
adversary.
1. Our own disposition, as now most prone to sleep, and therefore Saint
Peter aduises us to watch, because the end of all things P. Pet. 4. 7.
is at hand. Now as the nearer the day draws to an end, the more apt are men to
sleep; So the nearer the day of this world is a drawing to his last period,
the more are we inclining to snorting and security; and we have ever good cause
to suspect that we are most inclined unto, because Nitimur in vetitum, Rom 7.
19.
the evil we should not do, that we do. And therefore we read of Abraham,
that when the Sun was going down, a deep Genesis 15. 12.
sleep fell upon him; Now if S. John's age was (...) the last 1. Ioh. 2. 18.
hour of the day, then must this wherein we live, needs be the last minute of
that hour. And therefore no marvel if now, with the disciples of Christ, we
be so willing Mat. 26.
to sleep and take our rest.

2. If we respect the disposition of our adversary, and therefore S. Peter
again aduises us to watch, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
because our adversary, the devil, walks about like a roaring Lion, seeking to
devour us.

1. He is our adversary, and therefore we must watch, for we must not trust
our adversary, says the son of Sirach, Eccl. 12. 10
because as iron rusts, so is his wickedness.

2. He is a strong adversary, as the Lion is the strongest of all the beasts
of the field. For if Pro. 30. 30.
the Lion roar, says Amos, shall Amo^ 3. 8.
not all the beasts of the field tremble? Etquae potestas comparetur ci, says
Job of him, under the Job 41 33.
Metaphor of a Whale?

3. He is a watchful adversary, as the Lion is said to sleep with his eyes
open: for which cause, says Pierius, did the Egyptian Priests make the Lion a
Hieroglyphick of watchfulness: Et vigilat hostis, says Austen, and tu dormis?
virtu^ and ab host probatur. O disdain not to learn that is good, even Ovid.
from thy adversary, and be thou as careful for thine own preservation, as
the devil is for thy destruction.

4. He is also a painful adversary, for he walks about, says the Text. The
original word is (...) Magnus quidem Job 1. 7.
Peripateticus, a great Peripateticke, for his walk is, In circuitu, as in
Job; It is motus circularis, which knows no end, but is still in action, and
like the Pharisaicall Jesuit, will Mat. 13. 15
compass Sea and Land to make a Proselite. And think we that Satan will do
all this to no end and purpose? No surely, he does it,

5. To this end, namely, to destroy us, to devour us, for his mouth is an open
sepulcher, as David speaks of the wicked: Psalm 75. 9.
and the grave, says Solomon, is Pro. 30. 16.
insatiable. Now if Saul be a sleep, it is then easy enough for David to
take away his 1. Sam. 26 11.
spear, and his water-pot from him: For while the Husbandman Mat. 13. 25
slept, says the Text, then came the enemy and sowed his tares.

It is a Proverb in the Netherlands, That when the Spaniard sleeps, the
Devil rocks the cradle; Sure I am, that is true in our spiritual warfare also
here below, That when we sleep, like Jonas, in the cradle Jonas 1.
of security, that then Satan, Hostis ille Catholicus, that universal enemy
of all mankind, is most busy in plotting our destruction: And so Job speaks
of him, under the Metaphor of a Whale, when he calls him, The king over all the
children of pride. And it is easy here also Job 41. 34.
to make application; all which gives truth to that of the Poet.

Invadunt vrbem somno vin^que Virg.
sepultam.

And thus it befell Balthazar, for when his eyes were, in the Poets phrase,
Somno vinoque graves, heavy through wine and sleeping, Darius he enters the
gates of the City, standing open for destruction.

And so much for the second branch of our Military wisdom, which was referred
to the eyes, they must be held open with watchfulness.

The third and last follows, which shall be referred to the head, this must
be held up by wisdom and discretion (i.) we must rightly discern betwixt
the head of the body, and other inferior parts, that so if we put any to the
hazard, it must be they that are less principal; but as for the head, which
like the Tower of David, has a superintendencie above the rest, this must be
sure to be warded, according to that of our Savior, Be wise as serpents. Now
the chief wisdom of the Mat 10. 16.
Serpent, says Pliny, consists in this, viz. in saving of his head: so above
all, must we be sure to hold Christ Jesus, who is Caput and defensor fidei, The
head and defender of our faith unwounded, our Captain untouched, to hold the
fundamentals of our Religion inuiolate, the foundation of holiness vnraced;
whatsoever become of the hay or stubble that we build upon it, and then Saint
Paul tells us, That although we suffer a little loss thereby, yet shall our
selves 1. Cor. 3. 15.
be saved.

And yet I would not have you think, that we can ever be strickt enough,
either in our faith or manners, God forbid, for the word is (...) in the
Ephesians, (i.) walk accurately, as the best Ephesians. 5. 15.
Expositors render the word; or else straightly, as others: and therefore David
tells us that he Psalm. 115.
held straight all the commandments. But yet, as Solomon does well distinguish
betwixt mirth and madness, so do we here, Eccl. ^. 2.
only sanctity from superstition; that, as the proverb has it, be merry, but
wise; so say we, be as zealous as you will, but yet according to wisdom and
sobriety; for though a man can never be too zealous, yet he may be sometimes
Romans 12. 3
too superstitious. But alas, there be too many now a days, that do not hold
this head, as Paul spoke to the Colossians concerning the worship of Saints and
Angels; and we speak this to Col. ^. 18.
their shame, especially the Priests and Levites, who hold all that they have,
in capite, and this, we say, is the surest hold, for it was Platoes tenet, with
some other, that in this member was the seat of life and being. But sure I am,
Democritus.
that in holding Christ the head of our faith, we shall live for ever, since
eternal life is in him, says 1 Io^ 5. 12.
the Apostle.

And so much for the first thing requisite in the manner of our fight, which is
wisdom.

The second follows, and this is strength and courage, for I do not mean
here so much the strength of the hand, as that of the heart, when with Richard
the first, we have Ceur de Lion, a S^ow ^n Chron.
Lions heart, that will not be danted: and therefore Socrates being asked what
strength was, answered, that it was motus animae cum corpore, for if strength
be deficient, alas what shall become of wisdom; it shall be, me thinks, like
a child that is come to the birth, but for want of strength, cannot be
delivered, as Hezekiah spoke in Isa. 37. 3.
another case. For as strength without wisdom is wanting in the noble
disposition of warlike stratagems, so also is wisdom without strength failing
in the due execution of the same: wisdom indeed may serve to guide, but it is
strength and courage that must defend our selves, and offend our enemies.

And therefore David being now ready to leave the world, leaves this to his
son Solomon, as his last gift and legacy, Be strong, says he, and of a good
courage, ^.
and thou shall prosper: and surely it was (...), a gift worthy of such a giver.

As Iphicrates then had it proclaimed to his soldiers before the undertaking
of any hard exploit, If any man have left his heart at h^me, ^et him fling
down his colors and be gone. Or as Gideon said, If any man be fearful, let
Judge. 7. 3.
him depart; so say I, if there be any white liuer'd Christian among us, who
for a term of disgrace, or a little blast of opposition can be content with
Peter to deny his colors of Christianity, abeat, pereat, profundat, perdat;
away with such Ter. Heaut.
a wretch, but withal let him, without repentance, perish eternally. We read
of Christ our Captain, that he could endure the Cross, and despise the shame,
to run on Heb. 12. 1.
the race that was set before him: And let as many of us, says the same
Apostle, as would be perfect, look up to Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith: consider him who broke through such contradictions of sinners, and by
him be encouraged to resist unto blood, striving against sin, as the Apostle
speaks, and not to verse 4.
deny our innocence to the death.

Quid enim desperandum Christo Duce? for what need we fear, having such a
Captain, who for our sakes has led away captivity (...)ph. 4 8.
captive, as the Apostle speaks, and has crushed in pieces the very head of
the maligning world: for be of good comfort, says our Savior, I have
overcome the world; Et licet atrociter loquantur, Ioh. 16. 33
says Tacitus of Vitellius soldiers, minor est tamen apud victos animus. And
an enemy, Hist. li^ 3.
we know, that is once beaten, though he speak big for a time, yet if he come
once to strokes, his courage will then quickly faint and quail. Only let that
exhortation of the Apostle take place with us, To lift up our hands that Heb.
1^ 1.
hang down, and our feeble knees; yea, our hearts also that hang down toward
our feet, saying with David, I will not fear though ten thousand of enemies
do band Psalm 3. 6. So a cow and is described, cuius a(...)mus in pedious.
themselves against me, or with Paul send forth that triumphant challenge,
What shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ? shall
tribulation or anguish? etc. No, I am persuaded Romans 8. 38
that neither life nor death, no nor any thing else shall ever be able to
separate me from the love of God in Christ. And then good luck have we with
our honor, as David has it, Ride on because of the word of truth and
meekness, and Ps^. 45. 4.
our right hands shall teach us terrible things. The camp of Christ will admit
of no weakling, of no dastard; and hence it is that S. Paul in his Panoply
speaks of no armor atall for our back parts, Ephesians. 6. 12.
but only for those that are before; to show that he would not have us afraid
to look our enemies in the face, but to quit our selves like men, and be
strong: and not 1 Co. vlt. 13
to be like those of Ephraim, who turned their backs in the day of Psa. 78. 10.
battle: for, shall such a man as I fly, says Nehemiah, I will never Neh. 6.
11.
do it. Indeed I must needs confess, that in our earthly warfare we often
times become strong by making our selves weak, and overcome our enemies, like
the Parthian, by flying from them: But in our spiritual warfare it is not thus
Resist the Devil, says S. Peter, and then he will flee from 1 Pet. 5. 9.
you: but if we fly from him first, thereby hoping for the greater advantage,
then acrius urget hostis, the enemy will come with the greater violence,
because we wrestle not, as they do, against flesh and blood, says Paul, but
against Ephesians. 6. 12.
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places; and
therefore as they can the better discry our purposes, so will they also prevent
our practices, as well knowing whereof we are made, and remembering how we be
but dust. But enough for the second requisite in the manner of our fight, and
this is strength or courage.



The third and last follows, which is constancy and perseverance; and this
must strike the battle through, and make up of all the former flowers a
complete garland of triumph.

For as Christ said to the young Mar. 10. 21
man who professed that he had kept all the commandments from his youth; so
say I now to you that have used all those other means from the beginning of
your days, unum adhuc superest, there is yet one thing wanting to perfection,
and this is constancy in them to the end of your days. For as finis does
movere ad pugnandum, so does it also post pugnandum exhibere coronam, as it
does provoke us to fight at the first, so also does it reward us for fighting
at the last; for no man is crowned, says the Apostle, unless 2 Timothy 1.
he strive first: and as we are not crowned unless we strive first, so
neither unless we strive last, even to the last period of the battle, finis
enim coronat opus, for the end is ever that which crowns the action; so says
our Savior to the Minister of the Church of Smyrna, Be faithful to death, and
then will I give thee a crown of life. Reu. 2. 10.
And this was the reason why God commanded, that upon the outward skirts and
end of Aarons garments there should be Pomegranates of blew silk and purple,
because of all other fruits does the Ex. 28 33.
Pomegranate bear most the resemblance of a crown upon it; so that as David
has it, the oil of grace must run down from our heads, even to our beards;
and not rest there neither, until it has touched the end of the combat, the
skirts of our clothing: Psa. 133. 2.
and therefore it is lamented by the Prophet touching Jerusalem, that her
filthiness was in her skirts, and her end was worse then (...). 1. 9.
her beginning. But if any man turn his hands to the plow, says Christ, and
look back again, such a one is not fit for the kingdom of (...). 9. 60.
heaven. Neither shall my soul, says God, have pleasure in him. We must not
(...), for the word is Heb. 10. 38
used by S. Luke, and signifies properly, to shrink back, as cowardly Luke 18.
1.
soldiers do in war, when there is apparent fear of danger, and so it is
noted in the margent of your Edward Bibles.

It is but an hypocritical trick to enter into the performance of Sir Francis
Bacon. In Charles the 8. his expedition, on which some compare them to a flea,
soon skiping into a country, and as soon out Heylen. Hist^. Gen 15. 11
good duties, as a stranger does into an Inn, or as the French did sometimes
into Italy, as one said of them wittily, only to chalk up their lodgings and
be gone; But a true Christian Soldier, he will always deal with his
spiritual enemies, as Abraham did with the fowls that lighted upon his
sacrifice, never leave driving them away until the evening: he will wrestle
with them as earnestly as ever Jacob did with the Angel, Genesis 32. 22
even til the day of salvation break, and the shadows of the night flee away:
Which if we do, then shall we be truly called, as our father was before us,
The Israel of God, because we have fought with our enemies, and prevailed.
There now wants nothing but Paul's desire, and then may the Phil. 1. 23 Cupio
dissolui, etc. Isa. 40. 1.
company be dissolved, and be with Christ. Then speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, says the Prophet Isaiah in the person of God, and tell her that her
warfare is accomplished: For now shall our righteousness go before us, as the
same Isa. 58. 8.
Prophet speaks in another place, and the glory of God shall be our reward.

In a word, now shall be brought to pass the saying that is written: We have
fought a good fight, we have fulfilled our course, we 2. Tim. 4. 8.
have run our race, we have continued in the faith, hence forth therefore is
laid up for us a Crown of righteousness.



Which God give us, for Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior.

FINIS:

