THE Most royal and Honorable entertainment, of the famous and renowned
King, CHRISTIERN the fourth, King of Denmark, etc. who with a Fleet of
gallant ships, arrived on Thursday the 16. day of July 1^06. in Tylbery-Hope,
near Grau^send.

With a relation of his meeting, by our royal King, the Prince and Nobles of
our realm: the pleasures sundry times showed, for his gracious welcome, and
most famous and admirable entertainment at Theobalds.

With the royal passage on Thursday the 31. of July, thorough the City of
London, and honorable shows there presented them, and manner of their passing.

By H. R. AT LONDON

Printed for H. R. and are to be sold by William Barley, dwelling in Gracious
street, near Leaden Hall gate. 1606.

To the Right worshipful and most worthy favorer of all virtues, Sir Thomas
Smith Knight, all increase of worship in this life, and after death the joys
eternal.
RIght worshipful: as I was in the time of your worshipful father, for many
great favors bounden. so have I ever devoted my self and all my ability, to
your worship, and all the rest of his worshipful progeny. Amongst all which,
your self, whose virtues God has regarded, and the Prince worthily respected:
I have in my cheifest thoughts sought, to acknowledge my duty, and to manifest
my zeal to that worshipful house; from whence you proceed. And albeit, to
mine own knowledge, you have been a spectator of those things, wherewith I
now make bold to present you: yet thereby I have thought to manifest my love,
and humbly beseech you, that you vouehsafe the acceptance thereof. (The rather)
for that it concerns the honors done by our King, unto his most dear
beloved brother: all which, your self being better acquainted with, then many
others; that by fostering it, your honored name shall be had in acceptance,
with many thousands of this realm, whose desues are great, to hear the truth
of al these honorable entertainements given and received. Thus humbly
commending my self unto your worships favor, and humbly craving pardon for my
presumption, I cease from your further trouble, and and rest in all humble duty
at your service.

Ready for ever to be commanded: Hen. Robarts.

The royal, rare, and most honorable intertainment of the famous King,
Christierne the 4. King of Denmark etc. since his first arrival on shore, the
17. day of July 1606.
WHen it pleased GOD, to place the Imperial crown of this most blessed, and
famous kingdom, on the head of our most glorious and renowned sovereign King
James, it was not a little admired amongst the commons of this land, the honors
done his highness, by most Christian Kings, and Princes, who by their
Ambassadors, as from France, Spain, Italy, Denmark, Holland, and others, not
only presented their honorable loves, and joy for his happiness therein, but
desiring peace with his people and state, with love in all honor to be
continued amongst them and their nations.

Their honorable and Christian request, his Highness with all honor embraced,
with such kingly conditions, love, and fame, to him and his subjects, as all
the Kings and Potentates of the world may admire, and his own people joy in
such honored peace.

For thereby have our Merchants sure and safe traffic to all nations, and
they to our land, where they trade at their pleasures.

Since when, diverse nations, which with good regard of those blessings, God
has endued this Realm withal, and the troubles of their own countries,
preferring their quiet, above their native country, wealth, and friends, have
left their home-borne regions, and placed themselves hero with their families:
where they live free from those dangers they were subject unto, under the
government of a most religious and honorable King, inioying their wealth
without fear, and resting in all tranquillity of mind, and security of
their estates, praise God for his excellent Majesty, that so carefully
tendereth their lives and safeties, as his own peoples.

Peace and all happy tranquillity, with so many countries being established,
and his Majesty enjoying the blessing of the most high God that placed him,
Ambassadors from state to state, oftentimes passed, whereby the Kings from
far, received joyful tidings of his royal government, health, and welfare,
and his Majesty likewise, from them and their kingdoms. The affinity of
blood, and desire of true brotherly love to be continued; which Love is the
true Loadestone that draws friends, and moves the heart to desire the
company, which they most honor and esteem often, as we have read many famous
examples of all estates, as well Princes, as others.

But in man's memory has not been heard, (nor hearing) with more rejoicing
seen, so ^are and most excellent a simpathie of true and honorable love, as is
most apparent, by that most royal King Christian of Denmark: who nothing
regarding the dangers of the seas, nor any other accidents, albeit he did often
times hear of the gracious and happy estates of our dread sovereign King
James, his Royal and most esteemed Princely sister Queen Annc, Prince Henry
and their royal issue, that such is his great desire and Kingly affection,
that no report what so ever could satisfy his Kingly mind, but in person
adventured, to be partaker of their most royal presence, and to participate
with them and their may call companies, wherein no doubt a most honorable
and true combined royal mind is expressed.

For which honorable intention, his ships of great strength were prepared, and
2. Pinnases: the Admiral wherein his own person came, being a most huge ship,
is esteemed of 1500. Tons: which ship is so adorned with rich gold and very
excellent workmanship, as many thousands upon report ther^of, of purpose have
gone to Grauesend, where she does ^yde, to view her. Besides, the beauty and
riches of this great ship, she is appointed with most huge ordinance, men and
victuals, sit for so Kingly a presence. The rest likewise accordingly
complete, all rich in Ordinance, men and munition.

The Kingly attendants of his person, and all others of his train, furnished
in apparel very rich and most beautiful, every one in his estate and place:
his Counsel and chief men, very decent after their country fashion, richly
decked in silk with gold and silver lace, Jewels and chains of rare
estimation.

His Pages, and guard of his person, in Blew Velvet laid with Silver Lace, for
their best suit, and one suit for to exchange of other silk: whitish colored
Hattes, with bands embrodered: most of them, either white or blew stockins: his
Trumpetors in white Satin Dublets, Blew Velvet hose trimd with silk and
silver lace, watched cloakes guarded with sundry colors, and white Hattes with
Blew silk and gold bands embrodered: his common guard of Soldiers, with
Muskets furnished, very rich: white Fustian dublets, watched hoase with white
and Blew Lace, loose Cassockes large and fair, like our foot-mens coats, with
white and Blew lace, Hattes with bands suited like: and all his common
soldiers, in cassocks and hoase of watched color: the master and his mates,
Gunners and chief officers, being very rich in their apparel, his Trunckes
and other provision for carriage, covered with read Velvet, trimmed with blew
Silk and Gold lace: his Sumpter clothes and couerings to cover his lading, of
read Velvet, with blew silk, and gold lace, all made after the English
fashion.

For the government of his followers of all sorts, according to his Kingly
pleasure, he ordained a Marshall, who had under Marshals many, with great
charge from his Majesty, that if any man of his company should be drunk, or
otherwise to abuse himself in any manner toward Englishmen, or his own
followers, to be punished sharply. such is the royal care and honor of his
excellency, which is duly executed.

All things being ready for the voyage, which with great care of all his
officers was accomplished, after a most honorable order taken for government of
the Kingdom in his absence, the wind serving fitly, and a heavy parting of
the Queen his honored and most gracious Mother, with the States and chief of
the land, with tears of sorrow plentifully shed of his loving subjects, and
their hearty prayers zealouslie made to GOD, for the prosperous success of his
Majesty at Sea, and happy arrival to his desirous Port, he bad them all
farewell, leaving them to their charge, and betook his royal person to the
mercy of GOD, that guides heaven, and earth, and seas, and in all dangers
protecteth his people.

And by Gods providence, who sends winds at has pleasure after some more then
ordinary (...) of our dread sovereign and his people (...) (...) coming, ^
royal fleet had sight of (...) (...), and in safety e^^ed the same, bea(...)
of Tham^s, beholding and with g(...) pleasu^e admi^ing, the sweet and pleasant
(...) and (...)lay of the Land, not des^^ing to (...), to (...) his ex^ellent
person, vnti^l the Kings majesty our sovereign came. But applied wi^h h^s
shipping, so high as Tilbury hope, a road some two or three miles distant from
G^^^s^^d, a Port town in the county of Kent. Where some small way off the
road, more nere the town, they came to anchor, whereof our gracious King
being, by poasts advertised: having his Ba^ges ready* who being a King
replenished with all Kingly courtesy, well considering of those great trauells,
this Kingly brother had under gone, to see his Highness, the Queen, and their
honorable progeny, without long stay this mirror of all h^nour, King James
accompanied with the Prince, his counsel and many of the nobility of the Land,
with great store of Countiers which gave their attendance, took their Barges
toward T^lbury, where the King in his ship attended his Kingly company. The
Denmarks looking earnestly now for the coming of the King, with his company.

When they came sayte with the towns end at Grauesend, they from the ships
discried the barges, and gave notice there of to the King and presently at the
command of the Lord ^dmirall of the fleet, the company was by the Boatswains
whistles called up, and in all the gallant manner that might be, each man in
his Livery, making a gallant show, and noise of Trumpers, after the sea manner,
and meeting of friends The Tacklings, tops, and every part of the ship, was
so replenished with men, that hardly might you decerue the ropes, or see the
ships sides.

The King ariuing at the ships side, was entertained most graciously by the
Denmark king to his ship, with the Prince, Nobles, and Gentlemen of his
train. Which by King James, the Prince, and Nobles, was again requited with
Kingly embracings, and most honorable entertainment to this Country. Like
honorable favors and great welcomes were made his followers, by the Counsel
of England, and the^^s; to the great joy of all the beholders. One house and
something more being spent with great delight aboard the ship: these famous
Kings Ioyed in each others company. The Tide serving, they set foreward to the
Court.

The two Kings and the Prince in his barge, were placed, and the Noblemen of
England courteously entertained into their companies, the Noble men, and best
of the King of Denmarks train.

The Barges falling off from the ship, after they had ^owed some small way.
The Admitall discharged such a thundering peale of Ordinance, whereof many are
Cannones of brass, as the smoke dimmed the skies, and their noise was heard a
far way off: after her, the vice and reere Admiral, and so all the rest,
which made a long peale cuery ship taking his turn very orderly in exceeding
good sort.

By this time they came to the blocke-houses situat near Grauesend, who
followed, in discharging their Ordinance in like manner, with such good
industry and care as was very well commended, and highly praised of both kings
and their companies. This honorably welcome given and received, they pass the
river, till they came to Greenewich: where the royal Court of England lay. All
the way passing, the royal King of Denmark, with many loving favors showed
his hearts Joy in embracing the noble and most honorable Prince Henry.

Being now on our English land, a more kind welcome was again begun, to all
the strangers. To behold the multitudes of people which came to see them, was
admirable: especially, having so small knowledge of the Kings arrival.

In royal manner they entered the Court at Greenewhich, where our gracious
Queen Anne lay. unto whom, you need not doubt, but this happy tidings, and
Kingly brothers company was most pleasing and joyful: as appeared at their
most royal and kingly meeting, of these most great Princes brother, and
sister: whose trauells he holds for pleasure, and therein takes great
comfort, inioying the sight and welfare of so high and mighty a Princess his
dear siste. Queen Anne, and so toward and happy islue of their loins, as
were present, that in that in them and their presence no Monarch of the earth
might think a more happier contentment.

This night being Friday at night, and the. 7. day of July, the royal Kings
reposed themselves in the Court, and Satterday all day and night, with great
welcomes and joy of either of them.

On Sunday the 19 day, King James, accompanied with his brother of Denmark,
and Nobility of both kingdoms, very rich in their courtlike attire, The King
being in English fashion, went to the Chapel, where they heard a learned
Sermon, preached by the Reuorend Father, the Bishop of Rochester. By all the
way as they passed and returned, the Royal King with admiration, gave great
and honorable regard to the multitude of people there present: The honorable
state, and gallant managing of the Nobility, and Courtiers, with the rare
company of Gentlemen Pensioners, and the Guard in their rich Coats, as he
wondered highly, at that rare and most high service and sumptuous attendance.

The time of dinner being come, the Guard of our King appointed to give their
attendance, on the Gentleman Sewer, carried up his Kingly vvands, where wanted
not any thing, that could possibly be gotten, with Wine and Beer, plentiful,
all served up in most honorable manner, with the noise and excellent Music
of Drums and Trumpets, which moved his Highness to much delight.

This myrror of esteemed grace and honor, King JAMES, the glory of all
Christendom, for receiving foreign estates, so entertained this pu^sant King
his brother, in person accompaning him, in all royal pleasures delighting him,
and most plentifully feasting him, as shall never be rased out of memory, so
long as the world shall have any being. But the Chronicles of these two united
and famous Nations, to the end of all ages ensuing, shall record the honors
given and received, between these two most famous and royal Brothers, Kings
of England and Denmark.

The dinner finished, and the first Sunday, after his coming to the Court,
innumerable was the numbers of Citizens of London, as well of the better sort,
and gentry, as the Commons, and other adjoining parishes, and towns, which
flocked therherto see the Parsons of these two beloved and famous Kings. The
sight of which people, might cause the greatest Prince in the world to admire
them, and in their admiration, to rejoice in so fair and pleasant a sight, of
so many well demeaned people, but more in the true loves to them. Both which
was the cause of their coming thither.

This Sunday spent in Gods praises, and their comfort. On Monday in the
forenoone being the 20. of July. These gracious Kings accompaned with our
Royal Prince, and many Honorable persons most ritchly mounted on Steedes of
great prise, and furniture fair, hunted in the Park at Greenewich, and killed
two Buckes.

Afternoon, their high estates, went to Eltham a house of his Majesty's, some
two miles distant from the Court, where in the park they hunted with great
pleasure, and killed three Buckes on Horseback, being followed with many
companies of people, which in their loves, came to see them: whereof a great
many, not used to follow such pleasures as hunting, especially being on foot,
thought not on their pains but in joy of their hearts, (which no doubt was
pleasing unto them, they endeavored with all their power to follow after their
horses, as never wearied in the view of so royal company, thinking themselves
most happy (of many other) to behold so rare and excellent a sight, two kings
and a prince. and surely in the opinion of many, their royal persons might take
great pleasure to hear their continual cries to God for his blessing, and to
preserve them, their states and dignities, from all malice and traitors
practices, for ever.

The Sun growing nearer to his place of rest, their pleasures finished, and
they returned themselves to the Court, all the way pacing easilye, that the
people might the better obtain their desires in beholding of them.

This first days pleasure with great delight finished, they reposed
themselves until Thursday the 24 of July, at which time the morning being
fair, everye man in his place gave their attendance, the Barges waited for
their Majestyes, which about a x^. of the clock came abrood them, accompained
with his Brother the King and Prince, and were rowed to Black-wall, where their
Coaches with their train, attended their coming, with such multitudes of
people as were not to be numbered: at the landing there of his Highness, the
Merchants ships which ancored in the road these, discharged such a peale of
ordinance, as gave great contentment to that royal company.

There hence they set forwards the way that leads to Stratford, and so to
Theobals twelve miles distant from London a famous and most delightful house
of the Right Honorable Earl of Salsburie, all the way met with great company
of people, which saluted them and prayed for their happiness, but most
especially until they came three or four miles from London, all which way was
so replenished with men and women of good sort, some on foot, some on
horseback, and some in Coaches, that there was hardlye way left for their
royal company to pass them, such is the love of this nation to the King and
his Lovers and friends, and in their love, their desires so great to behold
their delights, that no pain (whatsoever) but they esteem as pleasure, to
enjoy it, especially to behold so honorable and heavenly sight, two anointed
kings, and so royal a Prince, whom God in his great mercy evermore
preserve, and keep from all Traiterous practices, and other evils. A men.

Before these Royal persons came (near the house of Theobals) there was
strewed in the highwayes abundance ofleaues, colored green, cut like Oaken
leaves, on every one of which was written in large Roman Letters of gold,
(Welcome, Welcome) which being presented to their Majesty's, they praised the
device, and found their welcomes as great to them and theirs, as was spoken of.

At this most beautiful house, after their welcomes given by this most
bountiful Earl, Patron of that famous place, they spent their times four
nights and days, where they receive many great delights in hunting in the
Chaces and Parkes near adjoining, where they killed store of Dear, with great
pleasure.

Some other times they spent in vewing the admirable pleasures that place
affords, beholding in great delight the sweet groaues, gardens, and walks,
which with such rare workmanshippe is so beautified, and for varyetie so
exceeds, that time steals too fast away, for the beholders, especially
where Judicial eyes does take pleasures therein, so rich, rare and of such
exquisite perfection is that place, that a man may fail in discribing the
same, but cannot suddenly be wearyed with many times viewing and reuiewing
thereof.

On Sunday they rest from their pleasures, giving the honor of that day to him
that sanctified the same, and hearing learned Sermons.

Amongst all the things which was to be noted at this honorable place, during
these two royal Kings stay there, this I may not ouetpasse.

The house b^ing twelve miles off from the City of London, not-withstanding
the distance of the places, the great abundance of people, which came from
London, to see these two royal kings and Prince, weresomany, that a man may
wonder at, but not certainly reposse^ the high ways thither, day nor night,
never free for multitudes of People, going and coming in such great
companies, that all the Towns and Villages adjoining, were so replenished with
people, that there was not lodging to be had for many comers thither, not
victuals for their moneys, whereof many of good sort complained, and might
have fasted, had they not been provided for in that honorable house. Such was
the bounty of this Noble Earl in his large allowance to all Officers for that
time, that Beef, Bread, Beer, Wine, and other Vyandes, was not denied to any
that were either acquainted in the house with the Officers, or any their
friends which would seek it, as many sound to their great comfort and honor of
the honorable Patron of that house.

The four days appointed for the stay of this royal company there, brought
to end with many delights and pleasure, to Gods glory and their Graces good
contentment.

On Monday, being the 28. of July, after dinner, they leave that place,
retourning gracious thanks to this worthy Earl for their cheer and
pleasures, which being truly considered of, may deseruedlye be spoken off in
all honor in the Courts of the mightiest Potentates.

As the Strangers, Partakers of both pleasures and cheer, to their great
honor^ does appliud and for ever will commend in all places the renowned Earl
and his most kind and royal entertainme^t, they received at this famous house
of Theobals by his bounue.

The same night they returned again to Blackwall, and from thence to
Greenewich, where our gracious Queen Anne (the hearts delight of these two
royal Kings) kept her Court, unto whose gracious and most loving company
they were welcome, where, to the protection of the God of all glory and peace
we leave them, who ever defend them and all theirs.

Thu^ have I brought to end the first welcome and ariual of this famous
stranger King, with his beginning of progress to Gods glory, their great
pleasure, and content of many thousands, whose desires were enriched with
beholding their persons.

At this place of Greenwich they repose themselves until Thursday, which was
the 31. of July, and the day appointed for their coming through the city,
where they spent the time in solacing themselves, with her gracious Majesty,
the Prince and Nobles of his court.

About two of the clock in the after noone, the tide serving them to go to
London, these two Royal Kings accompained with the Prince, and Honorable
privy Counsel, the Lords and estates of the Land, and a most worthy company
of Knights and Esquires, The Kings Barges giving their attendance, their
royal persons came aboorde and were rowed toward London.

By the way as they passed, they were saluted with great peales of Ordinance,
from the Merchants ships which rid in the Thames, the gunners of them so
carefully applied their business, that they were highly commended for their
care: And their owners which were at charge thereof, had thereby great
commendatio^s. With these delights and other musical noise of Drums and
Trumpets, they passed on until they came to the Tower-wharsse, where those
most gracious Kings and Royal Prince landed.

There they made no long stay, but as sudainely as the Train could be
marshalled according to their ancient manner, they set forwards, where the
kings was entertained by that worthy Magistrate Sir Leonard Hollyday, Lord
Mayor of the honorable City of London, who delivered the Sword unto his
Highness, who graciously received it, and then proceeded.

The Marshals of the City first, who had with great care, and deserved
co^mendatio^s for their travails, from the morning very carely rid up and
down the City, carefully ouerseeing the multitudes of People which came to
be partakers of these royal sights, who by the straight co^maun deme^t received
from the Lord mayor and Aldermen for the peoples safeties, that no harm might
befall any of the companies: so highly, and with such great regard did they
apply themselves in placing and governing them, that thereby much harm was
prevented, which might otherwise have happened by the unruly multitude, as is
oftententimes seen at such times and places.

The Marshals had allowed for their attendance 12. men, suited in yellow
Fustian, with ash colored hats, red bands and red scarfes, and each a
up-staffe in their hands.

Next them, two trumpetters of his Majesty's, after whom followed the
Knight-Marshals men of his highness household, a famous and most worthy knight
Sir Thomas Vauisor. These his followers were all suited in clay color
cloakes, streamed with silver lace, white Doublets and green hose, with white
hattes, the bands rolled white and green, and guarded in the brimme with
green silk: of this company was twenty three persons:

Then followed the Messengers in their coats very richly embrodered to the
number of fourteen, then a Harrold of arms,

After whom followed his Majesty's Trumpetters, led by their Serieant in a
cloak of Carnation Velvet, bearing the silver Mace of his office, and the rest
of his company to the number of xiiij in their liuerie coats, verrie rich and
well mounted. The^ follows the kings of Denmarkes Drume riding upon a horse,
with two Drums one of each side the horse neck, whereon he struck two little
mallets of wood, a thing very admirable to the common sort, and much admired.

Then follow the Denmark Kings Trumpeters, being aleuen in all, decently
attyred after our English fashion, in Cloackes of Watched, guarded with black
and striped white; Blew Velvet Hose, and white Satin Doublets trimmed with
Silver Lace; White Hattes, with Bands imbrodered with Gold.

With this company, the Kings Guarde began to come forward; which marched
Soldier like by the sides of the Train (for a time) to keep the way.

After them, more Harroldes, in their rich Coats; Then the Kings Gentlemen,
and Courtiers, being most gallantly mounted, and rich in their Apparel.

Then a troop of most gallant Knighes: of whose riches a number may admyre: of
whom, many of them wore strange Feathers, of rich and great essteeme: which they
called, The Birds of Paradise.

These passing on, follow the Knights of the Bathe, so richly garnished both
in Apparel, rich Iewelles, with gallant Horses, and costly furniture, that
all the Princes of the world may admire to hear thereof: But more, to see the
most exceeding richness, and most gallant personages of them.

Then follow more Harroldes: the worshipful Deane of his Majesty's Chapel,
and one other with him.

Then Barrons, and the Nobilite of England, of the younger fort; very rich,
and well attended upon: The Masters of his honorable Court of Requests.

Then the Sargiants at Arms, with their rich Maces, in number nine.

Then the reverent Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, the Lord Bishop of
London, and others.

Then the right Honorable Earl of Salisburie, and other Earls, both of the
Counsel, and others: amongst whom, were placed in great honor, the Lords and
chiefest of the Demnarke Kings Nobility and Counsel: who wore the most part
of them, rich Jewels on their left Breasts: all men of great gravity, and
seemly personages.

Then came the right honorable Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admiral of
England, who carried the Sword: and between two other two, the Lord Mayre of
London, who carried a Mace.

Then came the most gracious Prince HENRY, whose sweet, and most Maiesticall
grace and favor, the whole company with due honor to his Grace, did applaude,
and pray for his most gracious Father, and all theirs, in all health to
continue.

Then follow these two famours Honors of Estate and Majesty, the two KINGS,
our dread Sovereign, and his beloved Brother, Christian the fourth King of
Denmark: who regarding more the true love of their Nation, then gorgious
Apparel; whereof they have plenty: yet in their P^easures, they contented
them selves in plain Suites to be attyred: But rich in Jewels, them selves not
far unlike; and their Horses near colored and suited.

About whom on the sides, marched (...)e Denmark Guarde, suited in Watched
Coats (...) Hose, Soldier like, laced with white and (...) Laces whitish
Hattes, with blew B^^d^s, and gu^^^ Halbardes.

These two most famous Brother Kings, ryding in such love, and in Majesty so
surpassing, did so joy the hearts of their Subjects, and the whole world may
admire: yea, such was the honor of this day in London, and exceeding joy, to
behold these two famous Kings, and their unity, as will, while they have any
being, never be rased out of memory.

These royal Kings passed, after them followed the right Honorable Earl of
Worcester, one of his priuic Counsel, and Master of the Horse.

After whom followed his Majesty's Gentlemen Pentioners; who made a most
honorable and great show, such was their riches both of men and Horse: amongst
all which, their rich Searses and Feathers; which made a glorious show, was to
be admyred* which were thus suited: Their Feathers yellow and read, their
Scarsses very large, laced with fair gold Lace at each end.

Next to them, the King of Denmarkes Guarde marching three and three Soldier
like: After whom, came our gracious Kings Guarde, in their rich Coats; to
the number of 180. or there aboutes: whose comely personages, and seem^lin^sse
in Apparel, does so amaze the mind of all Strangers coming into this Land,
as they be admired at, in all christian Kings Countries, for their Persons,
civil government, and kind entertainment of Sraungers.

The Train thus marching, as I have described, rid on til they came to
Cheapside: all the way as these two famous Kings passed from the Tower Hill,
stood the Companies of London, in their Liveries Gowns, and Hoodes: for whom
there was Places double rayled; which was hanged with blew Broad-cloth; and the
Rayles garnished with Ancients very richly guylt with the Kings Arms of
England; the Ancients of Silk of each Hall, with Streamers and Pendants of
their Arms, and several Fellowships, the better to be known.

The Windows and Penthouses richly decked with Arrace, and other costly
hanginges.

With great admiration, passed these famous Kings, till they came to
Cheapside, viewing the numbers of people, which stood in Windows, the
Streets, and other places, showing lovely and gracious aspectance of their
loves, by their favorable countenance.

In their passing at the great Conduit in Cheapside, was made with green
Boughs, a very artificial Arboure, which was garnished with all sorts of
delightful Fruits. In this Arbor was placed most sweet Music; which
greatly delighted the hearers, and no doubt pleased his Majesty.

At the little Conduit as they proceeded, there was erected a most stately
Pagant; such as for the rare device and beauty, was, and is to be admired, and
has seldom been seen: a matter of such state, and rare edifice, in so short
time to be accomplished, the workmen and plotters thereof, having not past
twelve days of respit, after their first warning.

Here these most famous Princes, and most admired Kings stayed, beholding the
devises, and rareness of the same: unto whom were delivered (in name of the
Lord Mayre and his Brethren the Aldermen, which stood near them in their
Scarlet Gowns, and all the Commons of the City,) a most pleasing speech:
which ended, the Kings gave the City thanks, and proceeded, till they came
to Paul's Churchyard.

Where at the School of the Worshipful Company of Mearcers, called Paul's
School, there were other delightful speeches delivered: to which they
graciously harkoned, and honorably accepted.

Then rode they on without stay, to Fleet Conduit, which was garnished
sweetly: on the top was placed delightful Music; and were presented with
other speeches, which was graciously accepted.

When they came to Saint Dunstans Church, they were presented with a noise of
Cornets, which showed their cunning to be excellent, and very pleasing to both
their Majesty's.

Heere-hence they proceeded to Temple-barre: where his Majesty, and his
brother King, giving many thanks to the Lord Mayre and Cit^zens, for their
great charge and pains, delivered the Sword to the Lord Mayre; and rode on
their way to Somerset House: wherere they reposed themselves that night, and to
their Gracious further pleasures.

The Lord Mayre returning, was met by the Sheriffs and Aldermen of the
City, who accompanied him to his house.

Thus finished this days work, to Gods glory, their Highness great delight:
which the omnipotent giver of all grace, and preserver of his, ever increase,
and protect them, and all their royal progeny from all detestable practices
in this world: and in the last, Heaven be their inheritance. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

