NEVVES FROM ALEPPO A Letter written to T. V. B. of D. Vicar of Cockfield in
Southsex.

BY CHARLES ROBSON Master of Arts, Fellow of Qu. Col: in Oxford, and Preacher
to the Company of our English Merchants (...) Aleppo*

Containing many remarkable occurrences observed by him in (...) thither*

Plus valet oculatus ^estis unus, (...). The witness of the eye does far
excel,
the witness of the ear in high degree
What others do by hearesay only tell,
this man most plainly with his eyes did see.
LONDON, Printed for M. S. 1628

NEWS FROM ALEPPO
Deus nobiscum.
Mr. VICARS,
MY duty and love premised. I crave your pardon Sir, for not writing you by
the last ships: my much distractednesse with the nouelty of the place, and my
new employment, made me forget almost my self, or else surely I should scarce
have forgotten you: to repay that negligence, behold, what I sent, and do send
in parcels to others, I here make up a complete body for your view, the
summary of those few observations, which I did take in my journey, and have
taken of Aleppo.

Having past the Flats without danger (God be thanked,) we lay wind-bound a
fort-night at Deal. At last God sending us a fair wind we loosed, and
sailing pleasantly along our own coast just before the wind, never did so
much as tacke about, or loosen sail, till for fear of ouershooting the
Straights mouth, we were glad to lie a Hull.

The next day, he that has the winds in his hand, commanded them to follow
us; and we finding our selves too far North, steared our course toward the
South: scarce had we kept this course five hours, but we spied land toward
the North, it being very foggy toward the South, and the Mariners making it,
found it to be Ape hill; That one of Hercules his pillars which stands on the
Afric shore, or rather indeed one of the Jaws of that straight mouth which
opens into the vaste Mediterranean sea. The other being the high hill of
Gibralter on the Spanish coast. We entered these Jaws with a prosperous gale,
and with the current we slid along the Spanish coast, their old and new
Gibralter, their Malaga and many other towns, many hundred forts. I mean not
to write you a Diarie, but an Epitomie. Your own skill in Geography can direct
you (I know) not only through the Mediterranean, but the World. Where you
cannot only follow us, but prevent my discourse of this passage.

The first port we made (after a little tossing in the gulf of Leons) was
Legorne, in the Dukedom of Florence. There we stayed three weeks. The
currences that I then observed (beside the historical, which before this I
know you have heard) were these.

Legorne is the only Port-towne of the Florentine: strong in its situation,
stronger in its Garrison which is always there resident. The first and last
Mass that ever I heard, or hope shall hear, was at a convent of Capuchins a
mile hence. Where one morning, I and others walking to see the convent, it was
our luck finding their Chapel open to enter it. Where unexpectedly we found
what we little looked for, the Friar at the Mass. Being entered, there was no
retiring at the door, yet we found one into a corner; Where we beheld with a
pleasing detestation, their ridiculous superstition. The Priest he mumbled
Latin, and the people as though they had been his Apes, when he beat his
breast they beat theirs, when he lifted up the Host, they lifted up their
eyes and hands, when he kneeled, they did, and yet understood not one word
what he said. I pitied them that served the Lord of Spirits, not in Spirit and
Truth, but in a mimicall action; and yet (if charity had not prevailed against
reason) I should and might have doubted, Ridendi magis essent hi, magis anne
dolendi: I cannot but say of theirs what Lactantius says of the heathenish
service of the Heathens to their gods. Lactan: lib. 1. Inst: c. 21. Quis non
rideat, cum videat homines ea serio facere, quae si quis faciat in Lusu, nimis
lascivus et ineptus esse videatur.

Being to stay in Legorne three weeks, I deemed it (though there be no
Inquisition there) not safe to stay there all the time, fearing that either by
the sight of their abominations, or some attracted notes of me amongst the
Italians, I might endanger my self: I took horse therefore and rid to Pisa,
one of the two Universities of the Florentine: Florence being the other. And
what I came for there, I had free liberty to observe, their monuments and
their manners; which in brief were these.

I saw there first their Church of St. Stephen, and the College of their
Knights all going in long black cloakes with the party white and red Cross.
In their Church I saw our Ladies Picture more gloriously apparrelled then any
of our picture (I would say painted) Ladies in England are, when they would
seem most glorious to dazell the eyes of doting Courtiers. Thence I went to
see their Schools built like ours, but the comparison of ours and theirs is
like chalk and cheese: they have only four filled with seats like the
bodies of our Parish Churches in England, and the Readers pewes standing, some
in the midst, some at the end of them.

The next thing was the Hospital of Bastards, maintained and brought up, as
they are begotten in common: for Stews being here allowed, all have free
access, and if children be begotten it is good reason all should pay for their
bringing up. Here they are put in by the Overseers of the Hospital at a little
Iron grate, none knowing whose they are; Here they are brought up neither
knowing Father nor Mother, and as they are capable they are bestowed, some to
Prent^zes, some to Schools, some to other things. It being usual with the
whores their mothers, and the knaves Friars, etc: their Fathers, to set some
secret mark upon them, and so when they come to years to know them, whom at
their birth they durst not acknowledge. Sure he was some charitable
whoore-master that was the founder of this honest Hospital. Having seen and
known Italy, I shall never wonder nor pity it, if all our deboyst drunkards
and whoore-masters turn Papists: and wish that they only.

The next thing worthy note, was their great indeed, and stately Church; whose
brazen gates in dumb pictures speak the history of the Gospel. Beside it,
they showed us a little plot of earth, which they say was conveyed from
Jerusalem, and is able to dissolve a carcass into dust within the space of
four and twenty hours. In the same Churchyard there is a Belfraye from the
very foundation to the top stooping, not through any infirmity of age but so
built. It is a saying among them that the great Duke has three wonderful
Towers; one in the water at Legorne, whose foundation is laid in the Sea, and
is a Lantern or Watchtower. Another on the land, this at Pisa. The third in
the air at Florence: whose foundation being upon a wall of three yardes high,
and one foot broad, all the body seems to hang in the air, a curious piece
of workmanship, they say that have seen it; I did not.

But to return to Pisa: other things worthy the noting there, was their
Physicians Gallery furnished with the rarities of nature, diverse Mummies,
curious Anatomies, all kind of Minerals, the rarest drugs, bread and cheese
converted into stone, rare fishes, the skins and feathers of strange birds and
beasts, all their medicinable parts; and as though they would rob nature to
make this her treasury, here is (if you will believe them) the Phoenix his
head: But I think it is rather a Pelicans, for at Smyrna I did see a live
Pelican with just such another head. Adjoining to this curious gallery is the
garden of Physicians, wherein we being wearied with seeing diversity of
Simples and Herbs, for a compendium it was told us, there were two thousand
kinds of Simples in that garden. This garden is of no great extent, but most
exceeding pleasant; curiously divided into plots according to the nature of the
herbs there planted, the cold by themselves, the hot by themselves, etc. From
Pisa we returned to Legorne, and so to Sea; and sailing along the pleasant
coast of Italy, and then Calabria, not always having the land in sight, at
last we passed by a little Island some five Leagues before we come to Sicilia,
which belcheth out continually huge flames of fire. I did see it vomit up eight
times while we sailed in sight of it: the name of this Island is Strumbola. The
next morning we discovered Sicilia, and the Calabrian coast, and to the eye
were locked in on every side with land. At last we opened that ancient and
dangerous Gutt that opens into the Phare of Messina. Here before we durst
enter, we expected a Pilot; this old Scilla and Charibdes, though it be not so
much feared as it was in ancient times, yet it is as dangerous as ever it was:
on the Calabrian shore there are fearful rocks, and a strong current, on
the Sicilian shore fearful sands. The midst the safest, but hard to be hit
when the winds are high, hard to be kept by reason of the current. The old
town Scilla stands still upon the Calabrian shore, Statio male fida
carinis: whether seldom or never any ships but wrackt ones approach: But God
be thankt we past it without all danger, and sailing in the deep Phare
betwixt the pleasant Sicilia and Calabria we at last came to an anchor some
three miles short of the ancient, still flourishing Messina, a most goodly
city to the eye, (for we did not go ashoare, but only delivered some goods
there) just over against it on the Calabrian coast stands the as ancient, but
less flourishing Rhegium. The same day, to my no little and the rest of the
passengers grief, we were ravished from Sicilia, which had ravished us with
delight. The Sea which parts Sicilia from Calabria is three Leagues over, but
seems to the eye scarce three miles. Sailing along here, we (at last) espied
the scortched top of Boiling Aetna, now Monge Bella; whose Bellows yet go,
but age has tamed him, that he does not now burst out as he used to do.
After this some days enterposed we entered the Archipelagus* now the Arches,
and there sailed over almost all Homers Iliads; the little Islands of the great
Kings that invaded Troy. The first was now called Seruga; the whole possessions
of Menalaus; The most famous of them are ^ndria, Negropont, Tenos, Melos,
Antimelos, the double Delos now uninhabited, and only sought unto for the
vaste relics of Apolloes Temple, environed with those Isles which encircle it,
and commonly and truly called the Cyclades. These are Surffo, Surffanto,
Mycona, etc. At this A^ycona we stayed three days by reason of the
extreamitie of weather: A barren Island of small extent some fifteen miles in
compass, wholly inhabited by poor Greeks, having but one, I cannot tell
whether to call it, village or town of the same name with the Island, subject
to the Dominion and spoil of the Turks. In all my life I never saw a place
better peopled with women; their number exceeding the number of men five for
one: The barrenness of the I Will is much helped with the industry of the people,
forcing corn out of the rocky mountains, scarce passable for men: yet they
continue so poor by reason of the Turks pillages, that unless they were
merry Greeks indeed, any would wonder what delight they could take in-liuing,
living in continual fear, in continual and extreme necessity. Here (as
Travelers use to do) the first thing I visited was one of their Churches:
where by chance I found their Septuagint, and an old man nothing differing in
poverty or habit from the rest, there conning his lesson, I took the Bible and
red in it; he stood amazed at it, and offering to kiss my hand spoke to me in
the common Greek, which is so degenerate from the true and ancient, that there
is either none or little affinity betwixt them. I answered in the learned, but
I perceived he understood me as much as I did him, which was scarce one word.
Then I thinking that though he understood not me he understood the Bible, I
spoke my mind to him by pointing out sentences in the Bible, but he understood
them as much as he did me. I wondered at their ignorance, and Gods Justice: and
relating this story to one of the Merchants that had lived some time amongst
them at Sio, he told me that none of their Colieroes but that read the Bible
in the learned Greek, their Leturgy being in the same, but scarce one of a
hundred could understand it. I did not wonder at this, calling to mind the
history of our Masse-mumbling Priests in Queen Mary's days. In all their
Churches fairer then their ordinary houses, scarce either fairer or larger then
ours, they have printed, but no carved Images. From hence we loosed, and
sailing by the famous Chios now Sios, and Mitelene old Lesbos, mixtly inhabited
with Turks and Greeks, and only the ruins of what they were, At Port Gabro
a part of Mitelene we parted with our consorts, they toward Constantinople,
we to the Bottom.

The next port we made was Smirna, (that famous primitive Church) now not to be
found in the now Smirna, all buried under the beastly new Turkish Smirna, so
that the novelties have swalowed up the antiquities, and the very ruins of old
Smirna are ruined: only there remains a deformed form of the ancient
Amphi-theater whose Arena is now seated with Olive trees; and Policarpus his
Miter in the custody of the Turk: which I rather think to have been the
cappe of some Turkish Santone, for it is all over wrought with Turkish letters.
Loosing hence we sailed by Pathmos, Rhodes and Cyprus, who are better
described by the learned pens of many of our English, then they can be by
me, who only passed by them and had no opportunity to observe them.

At last (by Gods favor) we arrived in safety at Alexandretta alias
Scanderone, which we found full of the carcases of houses, not one house in it.
It having been a little before sacked by the Turkish Pirates. The vnwholesomest
place in the world to live in, by reason of the gross fogges that both descend
from the high mountains, and ascend from the moorish valleys. The hills about
it are so high, that till ten of the clock in the morning the Sun seldom or
never peepeth over them. Here we took horse, (not daring to stay above two
hours) for Aleppo, paying two and twenty Dollars for a Ianizarie to be our
guide, six Dollars and a half a man for our horses, besides half a Dollar a
day to find our horses meat: our noone and nights lodging were the open
fields, our victuals such as we brought from Scanderone; our Guide proud and
surly, our journey the most troublesome that any before (by relation) ever had.
Aleppo is but distant from Alexandretta threescore miles English, yet we made
four days iourneys of it: and were (though others by reason of the extreme
heat of the Country use only to travel upon the night) forced to travel
day and night. We (but then we knew it not) were within a flight shot almost of
the fort of Christendom, the ancient and famous Antioch: and having all the day
before ridden along the plains of Antioche in the scortching of the Sun,
some three hours before night we crossed the river Orontes with no little
danger, and brought those very hills which we descended in the morning about
midnight just opposite to us, there being not for all that days journey
riding, half a mile got toward the finishing of our journey; it being an
usual roguery of the Ianizaries to lead the passengers out of their way, that
being so much longer on their way, they might get so many more half Dollars. We
did see in this journey the foundations of many large cities, and in one place
the steeple of a Church environed with the walls of a seeming, decayed, yet
large Monastery; which we pitying, and enquiring what it had been: either
our Ianizarie through ignorance could not, or through surlinesse would not tell
us. God preserved us almost to a miracle in health, and the fourth day about
noone, being the twenty sixth of June, we arrived at Aleppo: where I found my
welcome exceed my hopes: and where ever since, (the Lord be praised for it) I
enjoy as good health as my dearest friend could wish me.

The air here is most subtle, most pure, so that he which brings no
diseases with him is troubled with few: from the end of May, till the end of
October we see no clouds. The heat, though it be great, is more temperate
then Spain, less dangerous then Italy; much amitigated by a Westerly wind
which blows here all the Summer long; yet by reason of the heat, as in all
hot Countries, men are much subject to Feauers, which are seldom vehement;
always either soon prevented, or speedily cured. Our country men and the
nations both observe, that once in ten year the country is infected with the
Pest, but which is wonderful, begin when it will, it never endures longer
then the Twelfth of July; so that, though it rage upon the eleventh, after the
twelfth none are infected; O the wonderful works of God.

The country is part of Syria, and abounds, as of old, with superfluity of
all necessaries: unhappy in nothing but the cursed Lords of it, the Turks: The
land cries out on the slothfulnes of the owners; and the unhusbanded plains,
for many miles together blame their stupidity. The Lord when it pleases him
will cast out these usurpers, (and as I hope and pray) restore it to the true
owners, the Christians. The City of Aleppo stands in a valley which seems
to contend with it self whether it should be more pleasant or fruitful. It
is (...) walled about, but weakly in respect of our Cities in Christendom: by
reason of the often change of Lords it has lost the history of its own
antiquity: so that both Turks and Christians, (the now inhabitants of it) are
ignorant what it was before it was conquered by Selimus the great Turk, and
being circumcised by him, was called by the Conqueror Alep, which in the
Arabic tongue signifies milk, by reason of the abundance of it hereabout:
yet in all probability it was that Zobah mentioned, 2. Sam. 8. Being within
twelve miles of the valley of salt where David did fight with Hadedezer King of
Zobah, and there being not beside it in all these parts the lest Vestigia of
any City. And the Turks and Jews both have a tradition that the Castle was
built by Ioab: howsoever it was not famous till of late, yet surely it was
before.

For the Inhabitants of it, and the concourse of people, it is an Epitome of
the whole world. There scarce being a Nation of the old World, (except that
all-hated Spaniard) who has not some trading either here or hither. English,
French, Dutch, Italian, Jews, Greeks, Persians, Moors, Indians, etc.. Men of
all Countries, of all Religions: Georgians, Nestorians, Cophti, Arminians,
Georgians, etc. The description of whose different customs in their
conversation, and tenants in their Religion, deserves rather a volume then a
letter: and a more appropriated obseruer of them, then I can be. Wherefore
omitting them, I will only acquaint you with some observations of not ordinary
things that are, and have happened in and about Aleppo.

About a mile from Aleppo South-west, there is a little craggy mountain of
Oyster and Cockle shells and fish bones, though the name of Oyster or Cockle be
never heard of in Aleppo, The Sea being threescore mile off: under this hill is
a little house or cave, wherein in a stone upon the pauement is the print of a
man's hand which the Turks say was Halies, as much reverenced by the Persian
Mahumetans, (who maintain him to be Mahomets successor) as our Ladies pictures
in Spain or Italy, but with far less pomp, far less superstition, far
less Idolatry. Near this there are Saxa loquacia, Grave stones that being
beat upon, sound like our bells in Europe. About twelve miles East from Aleppo,
is the valley of Salt, a great lane, whose extent neither a whole days
travel, nor any report, could certify us. That which we saw of it was partly
covered with water, part with a short grass, partly with sands like the sea
shore. The water is saltish, and being dried up by the heat of the sea, the
sand that is left, raked together without further help either of man's wit or
industry, becomes perfect and fine salt, in such abundance, that it is
sufficient not only to serve Syria, but is transported into Arabia, Persia,
and other adjacent countries.

The next obseruable thing is a famous Aquaduct that serves and suffices the
whole City with water; a relic either of the Romans curiosity, or the
Christians care: now useful to those that are most unworthy of it, the Turks.
The fountain heads are seven miles from Aleppo, where many fountains vent
themselves by subterranean passages into 3. little lakes; whence the waters,
(being drained into a narrow stone channel of one yard broad and three deep
Have to Aleppo. And being before they come thither, received into wodden pipes,
are conveyed into the curious cesternes, which are in the Courts of their
Mos'kehs or Churches, whence either it is fetched for private uses, or forct to
wash the stinking feet of the profane Turk before they enter unto their
bawling devotion.

One strange thing more there is. The rubbish and filth of the City thrown out
about the walls in very few years hardens it self into a rock.

The historical occurances that have happened in Turkey since my coming
thither are these. Tripolie December last was sacked by the Emy of Sidon. The
Bashaw of Aleppo went to quell him of the two, that had given the first
occasion of these civil broils; and returned with a purchase of twenty
thousand dollars from the Emy of Tripolie: first for offering the Emy of Sidon
some provocation, secondly for suffering this town to be sacked, having fewer
soldiers in pay there then the King allowed pay for. At the sacking of this
City, many ancient Christian maniscripts were found, and there burnt for no
other cause, but because they begune in the Arabicke tongue with In nomine
Patris Filii and Spiritus Sancti. The French then residing at Sidon could not
redeem them (though they did much endeavor it) at any price. There is no
Article of Faith, so harsh to Jew and Turks as this of the blessed Trinity.

The grand Vizier, that had been almost a whole year on his way with the Army
against Persia, wintering at Ameet (anciently Amida) died December last, and
the Bashaw of Ameet succeeded him in the place of grande Vizier: The then
Bashaw of Aleppo was made Bashaw of Ameet and the Bashaw of Damascus, the
Bashaw of Aleppo. When the King appoints any Bashaw, he shows him a sword
and a vest, the one instructing us for war, the other for peace: after this
very shortly we heard of the great Tefterdames or Lord Treasurers death. The
soldiers from all parts resort to the Vizier to go against Persia, but this
year there can be nothing done. God increase the mutual enmity of these his
obstinate enemies, and make these Mahumetans his instruments to be their own
mutual executioners. We hear at this present that the Georgians have put
fifteen hundred Persians to the sword, upon this occasion: the Persians
according to their customs exacted women and children from the Georgians: the
chief of the Georgians consulted together, and thinking it a fit opportunity
to break off this cruel slavery, used this policy; they said that their
people begun to be tumultuous and they could not well know what to do, but if
they would send some of their own soldiers into some of the Georgians towns,
or near them to terrify the people, then they might persuade the^ to it. The
Persians little suspecting their fraud, sent as many near every great town as
they thought convenient to strike them in a fear: but the Georgians having
resolved before what to do, unawares issued out upon the Persians, and put
them all to the sword, and sent their heads to the great Vizier of the Turks.
The news is most certain, but the manner is differently related. This day
there came into Aleppo three Vnderheads, of the followers of a rebel about
Antiochia called Abasite: against whom the Bashaw of Aleppo sent out an Army,
and had this victory, but the rebel himself escaped with most of his segmen,
(a kind of hireling soldiers like our cassacks in Europe.) We hear also from
Constantinople that Smyrna has been sacked by another rebel in those parts
called Gente^togli: others say, he only came to Smyrna, and taking away the
chief Ianizaries and Spies, did no hurt to the City.

These are all the news of Turkey: we should be glad to hear some from
England, I have not had so much as one Letter, but from Master Fethplate, (who
writes business, not news;) since I came from England. Remember my kindest
salutes to your second self, and when you write into the Country, remember I
pray you my duty to my parents, my love to your mother, remember me in your
prayers: The Lord bless us all.

Allepo, May 18. 1628. Your very loving friend, CHAR: ROBSON.


