VERA EFFIGIES LODOVICI ROBERTS CIVIS and MERCATOR: LONDI: NATs BELLOMARISCO
INSVLA MONA ANNO DNI 1596
This is th'effigies, yet his real worth in this his work, a liuelier shape
brings forth (Which shall out-liue his fate, and give in trust his Name to
fame, when he is writ in dust ^his speaks him outward, But his inward part
is best expresst, within this Book of Art.



THE MERCHANTS MAP OF COMMERCE: WHEREIN, The Universal Manner and Matter of
TRADE, is compendiously handled. The STANDERD and current COINS of sundry
PRINCES, observed. The Real and Imaginary COINS of ACCOUNTS and Exchanges,
expressed. The Natural and Artificial Commodities of all Countries for
transportation declared. The WEIGHTS and MEASVRES of all eminent CITIES and
TOWNS of Traffic, collected and reduced one into another; and all to the
MERIDIAN of COMMERCE practiced in the famous CITY of LONDON.

By JEWS ROBERTS, Merchant.

Necessary for all such as shall be employed in the public Affairs of
PRINCES in foreign Parts; for all Gentlemen and others that travel abroad
for delight or pleasure, and for all MERCHANTS or their FACTORS that exercise
the Art of Merchandising in any part of the habitable WORLD.

AT LONDON, Printed by R. O. for RALPH MABB. MDCXXXVIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND VVORTHILY EMINENT MERCHANTS:
St. MORRIS ABBOT, Knight, Alderman of the City of LONDON, and Governor of
the Company of English MERCHANTS, trading into the East Indies*

And HENRY GARRAWAY, Esquire, Alderman of the said City of LONDON, and
Governor of the Company of English MERCHANTS trading the Levant Seas.

YOur excellent skill, (much honored SIRS) in all the particular parts of
Merchandising, and your skillful excellency in the Universal Commerce of the
World, not only demonstrated by continual experiments, but also practiced by
sundry demonstrations, (especially under your Government, in those so worthy
and honorable societies, of which you are at this present the happy
Governors) prompted me, that you were not only the fittest PATRONS of this
Model, but the best Judges of the WORK it self; and therefore if I were not
induced by any other motive, nor yet moved by any other inducement; yet this
alone might both move and induce me, not only to present you with this
Dedication, but also crave from your Worths a friendly and favorable
Protection.

But the further consideration of my particular Obligement, and the daily
experience of both your loves, challenged this justly from me, as the
acknowledgement of my respect and service: for before I had the favor of your
acquaintance, I was made acquainted with your favors; and in Constantinople
before you knew me, I had the honor of your employments; and after my return
thence, I found the approbation of my former endeavors extended it self not
only to my admittance (as a Member) into those Societies you govern; but since
into places of trust and repute in both of them.

Your experience and judgment then in the contents of this Tract considered,
and my never-dying Gratitude for these your noble courtesies remembered: please
to Patronise these my Labors, and in a fair construction accept of this my
New-yeares acknowledgement: So shall both of you reap the Honor due to your
own Worths, and I the respect due to a grateful FACTOR, which with all
faithful expressions I shall ever covet to preserve; that I may as well
futurely as formerly be honored by your good opinion, and entitle my self
still your thankful and affectionate friend, to serve you.

January 6. 1688. JEWS ROBERTS.

TO THE THRICE WORTHY AND WORSHIPFUL
WILLIAM HARVEY, D. of Phys. DANIEL HARVEY, Merchant. MICHAEL HARVEY, Merchant.
JOHN HARVEY, Esquire. ELIAB HARVEY, Merchant. MATTHEW HARVEY, Merchant.
BRETHREN: And JOHN HARVEY, Merchant, only Son to Mr. THOMAS HARVEY,
Merchant, deceased.

THe Draught of this MAP of COMMERCE (Right worthy SIR and SIRS) was above
twenty years past roughly traced out and delineated for the furtherance and
help of mine own employment beyond the Seas, at the charges and expense of
that worthy Merchant, your loving Brother, and my deceased Master THOMAS
HARVEY; since whose death, you were pleased for some years to second what he
had thus given a a beginning unto, and by a continuation of that my then
employment, and an acceptance of my then endeavors and service in many parts
of the World, enabled and gave me means to proceed with that Model I had to
this end thus begun: But time and my Mercantile Affairs not permitting me at
that time to collect all those fit materials in those places, as were useful
and necessary to perfect this Fabrique, I have since my return from my former
employment, been so much assisted by your help, and so much helped by your
assistance, that I have brought it after many years toil (notwithstanding my
many other public and private affairs) to that perfection you now see it.
Such then therefore as it is, in regard of the respect I owe to the memory and
worth of that my deceased Patron, and of the grateful acknowledgement Iowe to
your particular and joynt-courtesies:

Be pleased to accept of this my thankfulness, and let the WORK (as a Child
first bred under your Roof, and since nourished and educated abroad for many
years at his and your charges) find from you all not only a favorable
Patronage and courteous Protection, but also a friendly acceptance. So shall
the Author have just cause to honor your love, and still persever to love your
honor, which he prays may not only yearly, but hourly be multiplied and
increased unto you,

Resting yours most affectionate, to serve You, LOD: ROBERTS.

To his much respected friends, the MERCHANTS of ENGLAND in general, and to
the courteous READER, whom it may concern.
I Was not ignorant, (Right worthy friends) when first I undertook this task,
and busied my self to compass this Work, how difficult it would prove to be
in it self; what slender furtherances I had to accomplish the same; and how
weak my own abilities were to give it perfection: yet notwithstanding all these
obstacles, when I had duly considered the general want thereof, and the
common benefit and commodity that would redound thereby, especially to those
of my own profession (if it might be fully, or in some measure truly
perfected) I resolved (considering the silence of those of better indowments)
to take the same in hand, and cheerfully and willingly laid both my hand to
the Work, and my shoulder to the burden, collecting and gathering with
laborious industry, and industrious labor all those principal points and
heads, as might either conduce to the accomplishment of the building, or any
way further my intended fabrique: So that by my continual toil, and search
after fit and apt materials, I hoped that at length a good issue would crown
my endeavors, and finish this my intended undertaken task.

But after long and tedious inquisition, I found that the further I sailed in
this Ocean, the vaster were my desires, and the fewer were my furtherances to
my wished Port; so that perceiving the Work thus to increase upon me, beyond
my expectation and first purpose, I was constrained (with the wind-scanted
Seaman) to cast about again, and limit my self to a narrower scantling; for
that to do it at large, and as the matter punctually required, was far
beyond the reach of my knowledge; yet because I could not do as I would, I
resolved to do as I could, and thereupon begun again to involve these my
first scattered Collections into a lesser mould, and reduce my first thoughts
and observations into such a second limit and order, as might best befit my
experience, and the compass to which now I had confined it; conceiving that as
my intentions (joined to my labor and pains herein) tended only to the good
of others, and principally of Merchants and their actors, that reside or
negociate in foreign parts, so they will in requital be induced to have a
good opinion thereof, as a reward to me, for the benefit that shall redound to
them by the same, excusing those errors which peradventure the better
experienced may by trial find in the perusal of this Work, and the defects
which my ignorance has enforced me to let pass, which by reason of the
diversity and rarity of the matter the same is most subject unto, and the
rather because I have been constrained oftentimes in this Desert to travel
without a certain guide, and not seldom to navigate by another Compass,
having not in any Language or Country met with any Author, that could either
totally conduct me, or truly rectify my steps when I went astray; yet I must
confess I met with some that shot at the mark I aimed at; but it was at
random, and came not home to my proposed blanke; and I found some that took
up stuff upon trust, and a second followed him, and a third that second, and
here (not able otherwise to contradict nor amend) I also became a follower of
theirs; some again I observed to have borrowed from others, of which number I
may account the Collections of Claud Bojer Lionois, of Gio: Mariana a
Florentine, of Jacob Cartolano, a Venetian, of Gio Baptiste Zuchetta a
Genovois, of Mr. Malines and Mr. Hunt our own Countrymen, and some others,
who again gave addition to what they had in this nature gathered; but all
these (though by their endeavors meriting due commendation) yet satisfied not
thoroughly my curiosity, nor the earnest desire I had to bring this Work to a
more absolute perfection: therefore in this case I was furthered by some
friends, whose Star led me when I was benighted, and whose Candle lightened
me, when otherwise I should have stumbled; by which means, and my own old
twelve years collections, during my aboade and employment in many parts of the
World, I have at last by due sounding of the Channel, safely sailed over the
Ocean aforementioned, and brought my Bark to an Anchor in her desired
Harbor; and I hope so well observed the depths, shoulds, rocks and sands
thereof, that he that navigates after me, and by this my Mapp, shall be
secured from all dangers, and thereby bring his accounts to that wished Port,
that may prove both to his own profit and Commodity.

Now Gentlemen, having thus then understood with what industry and care the
materials of this Edifice has been collected, what pains has been used to
bring it to this conclusion and perfection, and having truly weighed the
benefit arising thereby; all these I conceive are effectual inducements to
challenge a fair acceptance from you: yet notwithstanding all these real
arguments I cannot deny, but the Work it self may not only suffer in the
opinion of the censorious, but be also subject to the verdict of the judicious,
both in the form, manner, method and Title thereof, which I shall easily be
brought to acknowledge, though as easily I might allege, that had not my
younger years been drawn by adverse fortune or cross fate, from the study of
Arts to the study of Marts, I might peradventure have delineated this Mapp
with more curious colors, illustrated it with more diversity of pleasing
objects, and adorned it with some more delightful variety; but proceeding
thus from the Pen of a Merchant, from whom such excellencies cannot be
expected, it may the rather find a favorable construction from the ingenuous of
my profession, and from the learned of what Art soever, to whose judgment and
candid censure, I shall willingly submit both my self and these my Labors;
and for those whose tender appetite cannot relish it in that nature as it is,
and who are ignorant of my pains herein, it will not be judged to be a point
of ill manners in me to tell them, that this method, form, and Title was
prescribed me by the necessity and consequence of the Work in hand, and by the
Enthusiasme of my own fancy, which I conceived in some sort I was bound a
little to please, partly to ease the burden I endured in the building, and
principally to add some delight and pleasure to the toil I underwent in
rearing the same.

Now as touching the Structure it self, many motives have induced me to lay
the foundation thereof upon the knowledge of Geographie, and upon the use of
Mapps and Sea-Cards in general, so delightful, profitable and necessary to
the Merchant, that it cannot be by him that would be accounted such a one,
neither neglected nor omitted. The principal parts thereof I have touched, so
far only as conduced to the enlightening of the matter in hand, and to the
general understanding of the ensuing Tract: from hence (for method sake) I was
enforced to a cursory survey of the four principal parts and divisions of the
World, according to modern Authors; from this I descend to the Empires,
Kingdoms, and particular Provinces of each of them; and thence to the eminent
and most noted Cities, and Towns of Traffic therein, whose situation I have
superficially run over, and in some sort, observed the most remarkable passages
as have presented themselves within the compass of my reading; and for matter
of Trade, I have in the first place observed the natural artificial
Commodities therein found; then the Coins there in use and current, with the
value and denomination thereof, and the species wherein Merchants do there
frame and regulate their accounts by, also the Weights and Measures of those
places, together with their Exchanges, and how these are found to be calculated
amongst the Italians, who are accounted the most expert Bankers and Exchangers,
with all other fit instruments and materials, as at this day is found practiced
in the Art of Merchandising, in all the parts of the habitable World.

And in conclusion, I have added a Table of the longitude and latitude of all
these eminent places of Traffic, not only thereby to satisfy the curious,
but the better to guide the inquirer to any such City or Town sought for: In
the rest, I have (following the example of many Merchants) showed the worst
first, and the best last; I mean declared the particulars of the Trade of
America, as the least and worst known unto us; then of Africa and Asia, and
last of all Europe, as the best, and best known to us, and according to my
Title included and concluded all, within the famous City of London where we
abide, which ever with all gratefulnes as the place of my Education in the Art
of Merchandising, I am obliged to honor.

And to conclude, in all this Work my ambition still has prompted me to an
endeavor of pleasing all Merchants in general, and (if I may not be thought
to judge too favorably of this Child of my own brain) I may be induced to
believe I shall hereby please not only the most, but also the most ingenuous.
I am confident, were my Labors truly scand, my endeavors might challenge
that thanks I expect; and he that knows both my public and private
employments, may well answer for me, and excuse the defects or omissions, that
may by further trial peradventure be found herein; and if in the future I find
this acceptable, I may yet be encouraged to publish some other Works, which
in this kind I have hewn out to your profit and commodity: till when, and
ever, I remain,

A welwisher of your prosperities; JEWS ROBERTS.

To his honored friend and Kinsman, Mr. JEWS ROBERTS, Merchant.
HOw ere our ruder Contrymen despise
The Mysteries of Trade and Merchandise;
With whom it is counted Learning but to know
The price of Runts, how Sheep and Cattle go:
Such as (for COIN) do only understand
That which with them does pass from hand to hand:
And as for Weights and Measures, find no ground
For any other thanthe Yard and Pound:
So as thy BOOK, to these that judgment lack,
Seems of less use then an old Almana^ke:
How ere (I say) their ignorance incline
To make wast paper of this Work of thine;
Yet please t'admit one from thy native Clime,
And of thy Blood too, to speak truth in Rhyme.
A verse protects not falsehood, and a Lie
Is not excused by being good Poetry;
That Is but to sin more wittily, and be
Guilty of a more quaint impiety:
Such praise You Would scorn; and (though the vice of Time
Make Sin in prose, but Courtesy in rhyme)
Your better thoughts would never with patience brook
That any damn himself to praise your BOOK.
I Will then bring no feigned Eulogies t'invite
The thrifty Buyers colder Appetite;
Or (like a begging Prologuist) forespeake
A fair Applause, for fear the Author break:
No thy Composures far transcend that fate,
And scorn alike the Vulgars love and hate.
They that (like Thee) refused no pain or toil
With foreign Trade to enrich their Native soil,
And (like discreet Camelions) can comply
With each Man's humor for Commodity:
That have read Kingdoms over, and can tell
What Men, for Letters put together, spell;
And understand too even the most perplexed
And hidden meaning of that darker Text:
These and these only are allowed to be
The equal Judges of thy BOOK and THEE.
And sure Thy merit cannot want it is meed;
For doing well's rewarded in the deed.
M. E.

To my honored friend and Cousin, Mr. LODOVVICKE ROBERTS Merchant, upon his
BOOK.
Steeled was his Courage, and undaunted Mind
Who first spread Sails to catch the nimble wind;
Culling the stately Pines from lofty Woods,
To cut a passage through the raging Floods:
The hazard of this Enterprise did make
Thee this laborious Task to undertake;
To make that way familiar, which before
Was full of doubt; that where fear kept the door
Security might enter, and men now
Through Neptunes field safely might drive their Plough
Our English Merchants justly may style thee,
Not only Typhis, but their Mercury:
For, how each Country does to others prize
The value of its Native Merchandise;
What profit such COMMERCE to us may bring,
Their Rites, and how the Image of our KING
In foreign Climates is preferred before
Exotic Princes, stamped in the same Oar,
Thou in this little VOLVME do contrive;
That Merchants seeing them (through perspective)
Discharge their Factors; for thy BOOK alone
Seems a sole FACTOR for our NATION.
CAMBRIA rejoice; hereafter thou may write,
I bore the MAN, who lent the World this light.
F. H.

To my loving and much honored Cousin, Mr. JEWS ROBERTS Merchant, upon his
MERCHANTS MAP of COMMERCE.
MY praise is bootlesse, and to discommend
Is fitter for a Slanderer then a Friend;
For my small judgment in this Art of Gain
Makes both my verdict and my Censure vain:
Yet I Have perusd thy BOOK, and there have seen
A Work of wonder; and though have not been
Far from my Native home; yet now I find
The Worlds worth closed within thy knowing Mind;
I see the Riches of each Countries soil
By this thy Art brought home, without our toil;
I find the Rarities of each Place and Town
Brought to our view with ease, and thou have drawn
All foreign COINS to Ours, and ours to theirs;
Their Weights and Measures too, to us appears
All but One thing; thy most industrious hand
By this thy skill, has crowned thus this Land
With strange Outlandish wealth, which shall commend
Thy worth to after Times; and I, thy friend
And Kinsman, glory shall that this thy Fame
Has thus raised up a WORK t'outlive thy Name.
ROBERT ROBERTS of Llanvair in Anglesey.

Ad Ingeniosum exactissimi hujus operis Authorem, Dm Lodovicum Roberts,
Mercatorem Londinensem.
MVltatuo (fateor) debentur carmina Libro,
Qui dedit ingenij tot monumenta tui.
Siste pedem, nec vade for as Mercator ad Indos:
Huc ades, his paucis discere multapotes.
Spargitur his folijs nummus peregrinus, et Aurum,
Argentum, Aes, varijs sculptamoneta modis.
Aspicerem, legem, placida brevitate docentur,
Artificis, patriae, gloria, fama, decus.
Vade Liber, plausuque volent (Lodovice) labores:
Primadabunt merit is praemia digna tuis.
Ad LECTOREM.
QVisquis eris (Lector) Librine supprime laudem,
Ingenuum dices, si legis artis opus.
Qui flocci pendes, tents componere tale.
Da sibi quod tibivis: Lector, Amator eris.
GVLIELMVS ROGERS.

To the eminently deserving Author, Mr. JEWS ROBERTS.
TWere needless sure to fix a Poem here
To draw the taken READER in by The Ear;
It Is cheap to praise the Author; we commend
No worth in the Work by that, but love toth' Friend;
And (by an open way of Flattery) make
The Work approved for the Authors sake:
So, (though we loath) the thick-lipt Nurse we kiss
For the Babes sake, that by her nourish't is.
Thy Genius, that first stamped a worth on This,
Above its Reader, or its Praiser is;
And we may make a doubt, whether best takes,
The Coin thou speak of, or the Coin thou makst;
And live indebted, that thou have brought hither
To us, the Trade of all the World together:
And (as in the Worlds MAP spacious Kingdoms lie
Deciphered by small Atoms to our eye)
So the great Worth in every Page by Thee
Expressed; is richer then a MONARCHY.
Live, live to Fame; and may its truth to You
Make me a POET and a PROPHET too.
THO: BEEDOME.

Ad clarissimum virum D. Lodovicum Roberts Civem Londinensem, linguarum
modernarum artisque Mercatoriae scientissimum; Chartam Mercatoriam edentem.
QVid dignum Lodovice tibi, quid pectorepromam,
Quo possim merito solvere digna tuo?
Carmina quid canerem, dulces imitantia Musas?
Carminasunt Libris inferiora tuis.
Laudibus eveherem? tua pura modestia pellit:
Notaloquor. Lauds respuis ipse tuas.
Desistam melius. Reliquos tu pande labores.
Laus Chartae Mercis nulla sat esse potest.
HENRY GARTHWAITE.

To his worthy Friend, and loving Fellowservant, the AVTHOR.
It Is an old custom that this Age has got,
To praise their friends in print, I Will praise thee, not
Because I am thy friend; only I Will tell
The World, the WORK which thou have done so well
Speaks both thy worth and praise; it cannot miss,
Those that are not thy friends must needs praise this;
This thy COMMERCE, Child of thine Industry,
Joining both POLES in near affinity,
Nurse of thy Countries honor, and by which
Only, all Kingdoms of the World grow rich;
And (by the Current of a mutual Trade)
Thou shewst how happy all the Earth is made.
Let others praise Thee; yet in the degree
Of Virtue, live beloved by W. B.
Ad charissimum Fratrem Dm Lodovicum Roberts Civem Londinensem.
QUas Phoebus merces terris adspersit Eois,
Et quas occiduis aspicit ipse locis:
Quicquid produxit Zephyrus, tu quicquid et Eurus,
Antiquus quicquid et novus orbis habet,
Collig is in fascem: numismata millia centum;
Mill tibi merces; cambia caecapatent.
Perge bear tuos foeliciprole cerebri,
Utraquevix tant as India jactat opes.
TASSS.

To my ever loving friend Mr JEWS ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MAP of COMMERCE.
CAll up the ancient Bards and let them praise
This Britains skill not known in former days,
For then Astraea fled and left the land,
But now is returned with Balance in her hand,
And teaches out of Roberts new found treasure,
To know the World throughout by Weight and Measure.
First then lets weigh the man, weigh his good will,
Then weigh our words, so shall we speak none ill.
Charles Fetiplace.

To his friend Mr. JEWS ROBERTS MERCHANT.
SOme Merchants travail without rest,
From North to South, from East to West,
To gain their wealth; which home they bring
To fill their chests; or with full wing
Profusely spend it here in pleasure,
With health, time, credit and their treasure.
But thou, experience having taught,
That what is buried comes to naught,
Here largely shows by course of Trade,
The Merchants MAP, COMMERCE to aid;
And so by spending gathers more
Than they that basely hide their store.
Ralph Hanson.

To his much Honored friend Mr. JEWS ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MAP of
COMMERCE.
1.
WHen that the portall of this goodly frame
Was first presented to my greedy eyes,
(Before I saw the Master Builders name)
Me thought it was a promising Frontispiece:
And then desires did kindle in my breast,
To enter further and to view the rest.
2.
But looking longer on that beauteous Porch,
I spied insculp'd on the outside building,
The Authors name, that like a burning torch
Did set on flame my pristine ardent longing:
By that the builder of the work I knew;
How could I then but thirst for further view?
3.
I craved admittance, 'twas a needless suite,
(The Arts (they say) are called liberal;)
As Soon as entered I was stricken mute,
And made my moan to the Muses several:
They promised aid; but yet when I had done,
They said 'twas lighting tapers to the Sun.
4.
Lo here I met with many sacred Arts,
Which keep their Courts and usual residence;
At Ox and Camber those two famous Marts,
Partaking most of their munificence.
These franckly sent this Architect a piece,
To beautify his curious Edifice.
5.
Me thought I saw them sadly to lament
The adverse fortune of so brave a Wight,
That was not to their learned mansions sent,
Never could his Stars have wrought him worser spite:
But yet to conquer their malignities,
Th'enricht his Thesis with their dignities.
6.
Here did I see with strange variety
The great Colosse of the terrestrial Globe,
Brought by the Art of rare Geographie,
Within the compass of a paper robe;
So rich the form and so compendious,
As struck amazement in my wondering Muse.
7.
I further looked and saw with admiration
Th'exact composure of two matchless lights,
They serve not only for the contemplation
Of men Merchantile, but of Gentile spirits;
The one descries the paths of merchandise,
The other shows Exchanges mysteries.
8.
I Have read of Drake and Martin Forbesher,
Whose manly faces all the Poles did see,
With others famed for the Globes surrounder,
Their worths have sweld the Worlds great History:
I honor much those Heroes memory,
As Much I loathe the stain of flattery.
9.
But my opinion freely I Will express,
And think that none will judge it Heresy;
That of the World in this MAP of COMMERCE,
This age shall find more rare discovery:
For here that Massy Ball and all its traffic
At once is seen, as through a perfect optique.
10.
Go on (brave wit) and let the World possess
Some further fruit of thy wel-tempred brains:
Though Critiques snarle, it matters not a rush;
Honor and thanks attend thy matchless pains.
The unborne Babe that shall a Merchant be,
Shall honor in this work thy memory.
I. H.

To the no less ingenuous, then really industrious Gentleman, Mr. JEWS
ROBERTS, Merchant; and one of the COMMITTEES for the East India COMPANY:
Upon his Book entitled, THE MERCHANTS MAP OF COMMERCE. With an
Animadversion to the Reader, and Allusion to the time of the first Impression,
being the beginning of this present Year; MDCXXXVIII.

HAd I (by frequent Traffic on the BVRSE)
Been verst in the notes of Mercantile Discourse,
In proper Accents here I might set forth
Some fair Expression of Thy pregnant WORTH;
Or raised a TROPHEE to Thy virtuous NAME,
Of equal PARR, to Thy Deserving FAME:
But, (having only touched APOLLOS Lyre)
Grant me yet room amongst this numerous Quire:
And, (as I am) accept of what I bring,
A Posie mean for such an Orient RING,
A RING for every MERCHANT meet to wear,
Though vast in Compass, as the Orbique Sphaere:
Thy Book I mean, the MAP OF fair COMMERCE,
That takes Circumference ore the UNIVERSE.
Where first, (as to the life) I find displaid 1.

Due Method, and material form of TRADE;
The STANDERDS value secondly, injoynes
Of PRINCES to observe their current COINS: 2.

The third, COINS real, and imaginary,
Accounts, Exchanges; and wherein they vary: 3.

Fourthly, COMMODITIES for Transportation, 4.

The various sorts of every several NATION:
Fifthly, of TOWNS and CITIES eminent, 5.

Their Weights and Measures to the full extent:
Lastly, reducing all to One, (by This) 6.

LONDONS COMMERCE, our fair Metropolis.
Rare MERCHANT of the MUSES! may I call
Thee Merchant? or Great FACTOR General?
This Proof piece of Thy Service for the rest,
May well oblige Them to Thy dear behest;
For, of Thy equal sure no AGE can boast,
That bringst Us Traffic home from every Coast;
Rat'st the Commodities, the Coins, the Measures;
And sum'st (in fine) a very Mass of Treasures.
Go on, and prosper in Thy fair Designs;
May these elaborate and experient Lines
Add to those honored PAIR of CITIE-SAGES,
That shall receive them to their PATRONAGES.
Mean while, (and to transmit my free Applause
READER, to Thee (without collateral cause)
Of the AVTHORS Worth; not hereby to prefer
This MERCHANTS MAPP, (as does the Stationer,
For his own private profit) but for Thine,
To whom Our AVTHOR does His Work resign)
This I infer; It has no PRESIDENT
For THEORIE; and to make equivalent
Thy practique Part; the Author here bequeaths
A VOLVME, not more continent of Leaves,
Then various fruitful Matter; which his toil
Has brought Thee home from every foreign Soil;
And (as deep speld in GEOGRAPHIQVE Arts)
Ran smooth division over the WORLD in Parts;
Searching the bowels of each Kingdoms STATE:
And not alone of TRAFFIQVE there relate;
But Customs, Habits, Strength, and Government,
Decked in so new HISTORIQVE Ornament;
That here Thou may with ease and pleasure see
The Rate and State of every MONARCHY.
Nor need'st Thou yet demand for whom is made
This fair Commerciall MAPP, this Mapp of Trade:
To All it is needful; specially for Those
That most for Travail shall themselves dispose;
Or those who would employ or them or theirs
In The public way of PRINCES great Affairs;
Or any, who for private RECREATION,
Make (by conceit) continual Transmigration:
In fine, (and chief) for All that exercise
In The spacious WORLD the Art of MERCHANDISE.
Since now, for general Good (as't may appear)
This HARVEST comes in the entrance of the YEAR;
(As to so MANY useful;) Many be
The future BLESSINGS shall be shour'd on THEE:
Yea, All (in part) Thy LABOVRS to requite)
Bless that New-YEARE brought this new WORK to light.
MATTHEW RHODES.

In praise of my friend the Author, and his BOOK. To the READER.
IF thou would be a Statesman, and survay
Kingdoms for information; here is a way
Made plain, and easy: fitter far for thee
Then great Ortelius his Geographie.
If thou would be a Gentleman, in more
Then title only; this MAP yields thee store
Of Observations, fit for Ornament,
Or use, or to give curious ears content.
If thou would be a Merchant, buy this Book:
For it is a prize worth gold; and do not look
Daily for such disbursements; no, it is rare,
And should be cast up with thy richest ware.
READER, if thou be any, or all three;
(For these may meet and make a harmony)
Then praise this Author for his useful pains,
Whose aim is public good, not private gains.
Iz. Wa.

SAMUEL VVILLIAMOT, to his ever honored Brother in law the Author.
THis learned Issue of thy teeming Brain
Calls me not UNCLE; yet let me obtain
The Nurses usual freedom, to embrace it,
And show it my best love, though 'twill not grace it
For though newborn, it speaks as if it were
The Son of Mercury, or Ulysses Heir.
Thy worth to praise, were fitter Homers Quill
Then my rude Verse; yet here accept my will.
S. WILLIAMOT.

To my ever loving friend Mr. JEWS ROBERTS Merchant, upon his MAP of COMMERCE.
THough many know much; yet we seldom find
Spirits so free, and profitably kind,
T'impart what or the industry, or sweat
Of a whole Lifetime, could observe, or get;
Like cunning STATISTS enviously prone
To keep all Secrets of their Art unknown;
Out of a fear that some (lesse-witted) may
(Meeting their Rules) become as wise as they.
But friend, thy Candor's such, I dare acquit
Thee of that malice, by thy labored Writ:
And must commend thy judgment too, in this,
That fixed thy Fame on such a Piramis,
As, (but the WORLD) 't had mist a Basis, great
And vast enough, whereon to plant its seat:
And, (if my Word may pass) this glori's Thine,
Men sail by all MAPPES, but must thrive by Thine.
W. Lewis.

To his dear Brother in law, Mr. Jews Roberts, Merchant, on his MAP OF
COMMERCE.
SHould I write in thy praise, it would be thought
Friends will commend, although the Work be naught;
No, I will leave it to each READERS mind,
To judge the WORK as he the worth shall find:
And if they say this MAPP is not done well,
Bid him that blames it, bring its parallel.
R. HILL.

To my most dear Father Mr. JEWS ROBERTS Merchant.
A Fathers love may well excuse
The weakness of my Infant Muse,
Yet ('among the rest that praise thy Pen)
As last admit me say, -- Amen.
GABRIEL ROBERTS.

(...) New and accurate Map of the World, drawn according to the best and
latest discoveries that have been made


THE MERCHANTS MAP OF COMMERCE
CHAP. 1.
The description of Countries conducible to the description of Cities and
Towns of Traffic.

BEFORE I descend to the particular parts The description of Countries,
conduces to the description of Cities and Towaes of traffiqu^.
of this Treatise, and before I describe the Scituations of these Towns and
Cities of Traffic, which here I intend to handle, I must of necessity for
Method-sake, first by a coursory draught describe the Countries, Kingdoms and
Provinces; wherein the same are found to be situated and placed, and to do the
same orderly, and as the subject requires, it is fit I should survey the
means whereby the same is or may be performed, which according to the opinion
of the Learned, is noted only to be done by the knowledge of Geographie; which
in it self is esteemed to be a knowledge so needful and requisite for a
Merchant, Factor, or any other active person whose occasions may draw him to
see or abide in foreign parts, that it may not be neglected nor omitted.
Neither is it held only necessary to such as manage private affairs by
Merchandising, as Merchants or Factors, who are led thereto by the Motive
profit; but also to such persons as are more Eminent, and such as are of
greater quality, whose motives are the public affairs of Princes, as
Ambassadors; or pleasure and delight, by Traveling, as Gentlemen, whose motive
may be properly termed curiosity of mind and search of novelty; which last by
observing the Fashions and Manners of diverse Nations, and the government and
Policies of those Kingdoms, do not only very much benefit themselves, but
better their understandings thereby, making their knowledge more capable of
either public or private employment, when they return to their native homes.

The like I conceive the ingenious Merchant or Factor may (if he please) do,
for being in his younger years employed abroad in merchandising, he may by
well husbanding his mercantile employment and time, join a future benefit of
mind, to a present profit of estate; and by a provident judgment, and a
judicious pro vidence, so manage his idle hours, and vacant time, that he fit
his capacity, not only wisely to undertake and discreetly to undergo, but also
skilfully to perform the greatest employments that are incident to the service
of a State or Kingdom, neither is it a rare or extraordinary thing to find
those that have had their education thus, to have proved not only good
commonwealths men, but also excellent Statesmen: our own Country has afforded
some examples in all ages, but in other Countries many more are daily found,
for it must be acknowledged, that from this School those ripe and mature
judgments have sprung up; that in many Countries abroad, have given sufficient
testimony to the World of their excellent abilities this way: and that the Art
of merchandising, together with the frequenting of foreign Countries, at the
first to that end, has afterward rather furthered, then any way backwarded
their abilities to undertake, and judiciously to perform the same.

The ancient policies and present flourishing continuance of the state of
Venice, the politic and rich estates of the Netherlands, Merchandising the
first School of the present government of many Commonwealths.
the opulent and eminent quality of the Duke of Toscanie; the wealthy
wellgoverned Hans-townes in Germany, (and many more which I could nominate,)
make good this assertion, for in all these, merchandising is found to be the
School from whence they gather their first principles, and indeed the chief
foundation upon which their fabric of political government is raised: the
scale by which their counsels are framed, and the pillars by which the same is
seen to be supported and maintained.

How excellent is it then for a Merchant (that has another proper and peculiar
end of his travels,) so to employ his time and spend his hours, as that he may
at pleasure, without cost or charges, reap that benefit to himself which
others purposely come to learn and painfully labor for, with great expense of
time and money; and yet for all this, are peradventure destitute of those
helps and furtherances, which Merchants and Factors by reason of their abode
or vocation do continually enjoy, and who return as ignorantly home
(perchance) as they went out; or happily furnished with some such cursory
speculations, as reach not into the depth of such policies of government, as
the real intent of their travel does truly require; whereas the Merchant that
comes thither, not purposely to that end, but to benefit himself as a Merchant,
may gather and lay up those his observations obtained as pastimes, and
collected as recreations, which will further and furnish him afterward; either
by discourse for pleasure, or by necessity for profit and commodity, when he
shall please to publish his secret treasure and put the same in practice.

Geographie (by what has bin said,) being then granted to be Geographie
delightful, profitable, and necessary to the Merchant.
both a profit and a pleasure to all, and specially to the Merchant, it must
necessarily be granted to be useful also: for though we living in this Island
acknowledge none for Merchants but such as adventure their estates at Sea, and
are by this means accounted for real Merchants; yet those that are versed in
this profession, and seen in this Art, know also that there be Merchants
likewise that have their residencie in Continents, where neither Seas are
known, nor yet navigable Rivers found, yet for all this, supply with land
Carriages of Horses, Mules and Camels, by industry and labor, what Nature and
our habitation does freely afford unto us; by the commodity of the encompassed
Seas in shipping, and these are observed and found to travel by Land in
Companies and Caravans with their Merchandise from one Country to another, (as
we do by Sea in Ships and Fleets) paying their duties, customs, and toles upon
the entry, and confines of every several Princes dominions.

How then shall this land-travelling Merchant know whose Kingdom he is in?
what Prince commands, or who is lord of that The commodity of this knowledge to
Merchants.
ground he treads upon; but by a speculation herein? Whereby shall he know what
way he has rid and traveled, where neither Miles nor Leagues are accounted,
or in use but by this? how shall he know which way his course lies, where
neither paths nor highways are found to direct him, nor guide to inform
him; or how far he has yet to go in that Princes dominion but by this? How
shall he know what Rivers run in his way, what Straits or Mountains he has to
pass over but by this? Nay hereby he is instructed whether those streams be
great or small; and whether passable by Boat, Bridge or Foord; and by this also
what Plains, Woods and Hills, with their extent fertility, and confinement,
the better to provide for his accommodation, and the necessaries of his
Journey; as also what Cities and Towns of traffic stands in his Road; the
limits and bounds of kingdoms, the disposition of the Inhabitants, the
alteration of the Climates, the Laws of those several Regions, the Commodities
that those Countries do afford for merchandising; the plenty and scarsity
thereof; and lastly, how they are supplied with foreign Wares and Merchandises,
either by Land, Seas or navigable Rivers; and all these (besides many other
needful lessons) may be hence learned and observed, which laid up in memory
both in the course of his life and traffic, may in after times much profit
and advantage him. The benefit reaped thereby being thus briefly expressed, the
thing it self challenges in the next place to be handled, which according to
my skill and insight; I shall succinctly touch so far as is needful to my
present purpose.

Geographie in brief then, is an Art that does demonstrate by rules in a flat,
level or Plano; the whole Sea and Earth, and the division Geographie
demonstrated.
thereof, setting down by a certain method, the limits and extents of
Countries, Provinces and dominions of Princes; the situation of Cities,
Towns, Hills, Rivers, Woods, etc. The bounds of Seas, Capes, Islands, etc. All
which is performed and expressed by apt lines, numbers and parts of the
Heavens: and lastly, it gives rules to know the distances of the said places,
either in leagues or miles from one Country, City or place to another; all
which being also necessary to be known by the Merchant, I will in few words
declare the same.

First then to make the same more evident, the ground of this Art is ordinarily
demonstrated and best expressed in Mappes and Maps and Cards.
Cards, which does comprize both the Earth and Waters, of which making one
entire body, the Cosmographers do inviron with five Circles, the first is the
equinoctial, then the two tropicks, and lastly the two polar circles; thereby
dividing the whole, which now we call the World into five Zones, two whereof
are found to be cold, two temperate, and one extreme hot: all which in these
our days are found to be habitable, contrary to the opinion of some ancient
Cosmographers, of which circles and their particular parts, divisions,
demonstrations and descriptions, it will not be unproper I should briefly
handle, as an entrance into this work, and for the better understanding of
what is to follow hereafter.

Every Map or Card then for the most part is commonly The use of Maps and
Cards in general. Meridian.
traced with two sorts of lines or circles, that is Meridians and Parallels;
the Meridians are either right or Circular lines, passing through both the
poles of the World, and are imagined to be drawn right up and down from the
head to the foot of the Map, and called Meridians, because that when the Sun
comes to touch any of those lines, it is midday to those that dwell under the
same.

And Parallels are either right or circular lines, imagined to be equally
distant one from another, which do cross the aforesaid Parallel.
meridians with right angles; and in the very midst of these Universal Maps
and Cards, are most commonly drawn, from head to foot a right line, which
signifies not only the first Meridian, but also the axletree of the World;
the upper end of which line is called the Poleartick, or the North Pole, and
the nether end is called the Poleantartick, or the South Pole, and this line is
crossed in Poles Artick and Antartick.
the very midst betwixt the two Poles, with another great circle, or rather
right line called the Equinoctial; because, that when ^quinoctiall.
the Sun comes to touch this line or circle, the day and night is equal
throughout the whole World, the one half of which line toward the right hand,
shows the East part, and the other half toward the left hand, shows the
West part of the World; so as these two lines, the first meridian and the
equinoctial, do point out the 4 quarters of the World; East, West, North and
South, from whence the 4. principal winds do blow, between which winds are
set down in all general Maps, and generally in all Sea-cards the other
division of the winds, which as not much pertinent to my present purpose, I
willingly omit.

Further, it is to be noted that both the Equinoctial and the Meridian circles
or lines are divided each of them into 360. degrees; so as every quarter of
them contains 90. degrees: and in the Equinoctial are set down the degrees
of longitude, which is the length of the World, round about from West to East,
and from East by West home again. The first degree whereof begins where the
first aforesaid Meridian crosses the Equinoctial, in the very midst of all
Universal Maps in general, and so proceeds Eastward unto the number of 180.
degrees; which is as far as you can go Eastward: for from thence by reason
of the roundnesse of the Earth, you must needs turn back again VVestward,
until you come to the 360. degrees, which is the last degree of longitude, and
ends where the first degree begins.

Moreover, in the said first Meridian are set down the degrees of latitude,
that is, the breadth of the World, both in Northern and Southern, for from the
Equinoctial to the North Pole, are contained in the aforesaid Meridian 90.
degrees, and that is called the North Latitude; and from the Equinoctial to
the South Pole are contained in the said Meridian, other 90. degrees, which is
called the South latitude; and in most Mappes the Equinoctial Line is divided
and crossed with 18. Meridians, on each side of the first Meridian, dividing
the Equinoctial into 36. several distances; every distance containing 10.
degrees, and every degree contains 60. Italian Miles of length.

Again; betwixt the Equinoctial and each of the Poles are Circles Artick and
Antartick.
drawn certain Circles or lines, which as I said before, are called Parallels,
of which most commonly it is found that 4. are pointed with red ink,
signifying, the 4. lesser circles; the highest toward the North Pole, is
called the Circlearticke, which is 23. degrees distant from the Pole; and the
lowest toward the South Pole is called the Circleantartick, which is also
distant 23. degrees from the Pole; and as touching the other two red Circles,
the one lying betwixt the Circlearticke and the Equinoctial, it is called the
Tropique of Cancer; and the other lying betwixt 2 Tropiques. 1 Cancer, 2
Capricorn.
the Equinoctial and the Circleantarticke, that is called the tropique of
Capricorn, and each of these two tropiques is distant from the Equinoctial
23. degrees, 2. 8. which is the greatest declination of the Sun; for betwixt
these two tropiques the Sun continually makes his course, and returns,
mounting never higher then the tropic of Cancer, nordescending never lower
then the tropique of Capricorn: for which cause some do set down in their Maps
betwixt the said two tropiques an overthwart line, signifying the ecliptic
line, under which the Sun continually walks.

Furthermore, by help of the said 4. circles, the Earth, (as I said before) is
divided into 5. Zones, one hot, two temperat, and two cold: The hot is
contained betwixt the two tropiques in the midst of Five Zones and where placed.
which the equinoctial line is placed; and of the two temperate Zones, the one
lies betwixt the tropique of Cancer, and the Circleartick, and the other
betwixt the tropique of Capricorn and the Circleantartick; and of the cold
Zones; the one lies betwixt the north Pole and the Circleartick, and the other
betwixt the south Pole and the Circleantartick.

Moreover, besides the 4. special Parallels, there be also diverse other
Parallels drawn on each side of the equinoctial, both Northward, and
Southward, which crossing in certain points, the first meridian marked with
degrees, do show the true latitude of every place, and under what Clime or
Parallel it is: and also how many hours the longest day of any place under
every Parallel is, beginning to account the same; either from the equinoctial
upward, toward the north Pole, along the first meridian, marked with degrees
of Northern Latitude, or else from the first Equinoctial downwards toward the
south Pole, marked with degrees of southern^ Latitude.

Also this World in all common Maps and Cards is divided into 4. parts, Europe,
Africa, Asia and America, the bounds whereof The division of the World into 4
parts.
will not be amiss here to be observed, and how many miles each particular
division contains, as well in longitude as in latitude, according to the
opinion of Mercator, whom I willingly follow for my director in this point.

Europe then is bounded on the North with the North ocean Sea, and on the South
with the Mediterranean Sea; on the East with the Europe.
Flood Tanais, and on the West with the West ocean: and Europe in measuring
with a right line from the farthest part of Ireland on the West unto the Flood
Tanais, on the East, both places having 52. degrees of latitude, has in
longitude 2166. miles, and in measuring Long 2166. Miles. Lat. 2220. Miles.
with a right line, from the farthest part of Morea on the South, whose
latitude is 35. degrees unto the North Sea side, having 72. degrees of
latitude, has in longitude 2220. Miles, or thereabouts.

Africa is bounded on the North with the straight Sea Gibalter, and with the
Mediterranean Sea; and on the South with a Sea which Africa.
divides Africa from the South Land, not yet to us fully known; and on the
East with the red Sea, and on the West with the great Atlantic Ocean: and in
the measuring of Africa with a right line, from Gambra on the West, unto the
cape de Gardaso on the East, both places having 10. degrees of North latitude,
has in longitude 4425. miles, and in measuring with a right line from the
Long. 4425. Miles. Lati. 4020. Miles.
50. degree of the equinoctial unto the Mediterranean Sea; it has in North
latitude 32. degrees, which multiplied by 60. makes 1920. Miles, and in South
latitude measuring with a right line from the 50. degree of the Equinoctial
unto the cape of bona Esperansa, it has 35. degrees, which also multiplied by
60. makes 2100. Miles, which makes the whole latitude of Africa to be 4020.
Miles, or thereabonts.

Asia is bounded on the North, with the North ocean Sea, and on the South,
partly with the red Sea, and partly with other Seas Asia.
and gulphs adjoining thereto; on the East, with the East Indian Ocean, and the
straight Sea of Anian; and on the West with the Flood Tanais and Fennes of
Moetis, with the Chimerian and Thracian Bosphorus, the Euxine and Mediterranean
Sea, and part of the Arabian gulf: and Asia then in measuring with a right line
from the mouth of the Flood Tanais, to the Promontorie Tamos, both places
having 50. degrees of latitude; has in longitude 4284. Miles, and in measuring
with a right line from the 150. degree of Long. 4284. Lat. 4500.
the equinoctial, unto the Promontory Tabin; it has in North latitude 75.
degrees, which being multiplied by 60. makes 4500. Miles.

America is bounded on the North with the North Ocean Sea, America.
and on the South with the Magellanick Sea; on the East with the Atlanticke
Ocean, on the West with the West Indian Ocean, and the straights of Anian, and
in measuring with a right line from the straights of Anian to the farthest part
of Estotiland upon the 64. degree of latitude, has in longitude 164. degrees
which makes Long. 4264. Lat. 3210.
4264. Miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 270. degree of the
Equinoctial unto the North Sea: it has in North latitude 76. degrees, which
makes 4560. Miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 305. degree of
the Equinoctial unto the Magellanick Sea; it has in South latitude 53.
degrees, which makes at 60. Miles the degree, 3210. Miles.

Thus far shall suffice to have spoken ingenerall of the Lines, Circles and
divisions of the universal Maps, and Cards found to be made by our modern
Cosmographers. That which comes in the next place to be handled, as the more
material and useful part, belonging to my present work, is the knowledge and
situation of every Kingdom, Region, City, Mountain, Flood and Lake found in
this circumference: also the knowledge of the Seas, together with the Islands,
Ports, Capes, Points and Bays which do belong to every one of the aforesaid
parts and divisions of the World, and that are found therein comprised, which
principally is manifested and learnd by the longitude and latitude thereof in
it self, which teaches these particulars: first, the very situation of the
place; secondly, the very distance from one place or City to another; thirdly
how one place lies from another; and lastly, with what wind you may sail from
one Point, Cape or City maritime to another: in which four things the chief
use of Maps are found principally to consist. First then, the degrees of
latitude or the Latitude how accounted.
elevation of the Pole (being both one thing) is accounted from the
Equinoctial to either Pole which is 90. degrees, and the degrees of longitude
accounted upon the said Equinoctial from the Isles of Cape Verde toward the
East, and so round about the Earth till you come to the number of 360. degrees:
where it is to be noted that the Provinces and Towns situated under one and
the same degree of latitude, have at one self time like hours of the day; but
those that are situated under diverse degrees of longitude do differ in number
of hours; and that is the cause that when it is in one town noone-tide, it is
in another town distant thence 30. degrees toward the East two a clock in
the afternoon, and so consequently for every 15. degrees distance, it is then
found to differ one hour in time.

Also those that dwell under one and the self same degree of Days and nights
differ according to the latitude.
latitude have equal quantity of days and nights; but yet so as they which
dwell on the South side of the Equinoctial have the shortest day, whenwe have
the longest, and have their Winter when we have Summer: and those that are
under diverse degrees of latitude, have inequality of days and nights; for the
nigher that any Place is situated toward any of the Poles, the more hours
the longest day of the year in that place has; and those that dwell under the
equinoctial have always their days and nights of like quantity: but I
understand here by the day the space between Sun rising and Sunsetting; so
that to those that have 30. degrees of latitude the longest day is almost 14.
hours, and the nigher the Pole, the longer, insomuch as those that dwell under
the Pole, and whose Zenith is the Pole, their year is but a day and a night,
that is to say, they have six months day, and six months night.

It is also to be noted, that the Meridians are found to have many necessary
uses in the general and common Maps, for thereby is learned that it is
noontide or midday sooner in one place then in another, by observing that
Meridian that is most toward the East, which the Sun touches always sooner
then that Meridian which is more toward the West.

By the Meridians is also known how the Eclipse of the Moon Meridians and
their use.
appears sooner to one place then to another, and shows what variety of
time; for they whose Meridian is toward the West, do see the Eclipse of the
Moon sooner then they whose Meridian is more toward the East; whereas indeed
the Eclipse of the Moon is seen to all places (where it can be seen) at one
very instant of like greatness, and yet seems to be seen later or sooner by
reason of the diversity of the time of the day, in places standing one East or
West from another; and if the distance betwixt those Eclipse of the Moon when
seen.
two Meridians do contain 15. degrees of the Equinoctial, then the Eclipse
appears to be sooner to the one then to the other by one whole hour,
according to my former assertion, for every 15. degrees makes an hour, and
therefore observe how many 15. degrees you find betwixt the two meridians, so
many hours are to be accounted, and if fewer degrees be found, then the time
of the Eclipse is to be shortened accordingly, attributing 4. minutes of an
hour to one degree, etc.

As for the Eclipse of the Sun, it is seen neither generally nor fully at one
self same time, nor yet of the same greatness in all Eclipse of the Sun when
seen.
places: indeed it appears sooner, to the Western Countries then to the
Eastern; but the diversity of the time of appearance does depend not only of
the number of Meridians betwixt the two places, but also of the swift or slow
motion of the Moon, which coming betwixt us and the Sun takes the sight of
the Sun from us.

The latitude and longitude of Cities and places may be found Latitude and
longit. found out by the Meridians.
out by the meridians also; but here it is observeable that the degrees of
latitude are in all places of like bigness, as making ever 60. miles, but the
degrees of longitude proceeding from the Equinoctial toward any of the two
poles, are unequal, and every one shorter then the other, and containing 4.
miles; so that if two Ships were under the Equinoctial 150. degrees distant
each from other, and being to sail toward the North pole, upon the same
course when they come to the 60. degree of latitude, their distance shall be
but 75. leagues, and the farther they go toward the Pole, the less distance
they shall be one from the other, insomuch as when they are right under the
Pole it self, they shall both meet: but this point does more particularly
concern Navigation, which so far forth as it is requisite to the knowledge
of a Merchant, I have handled in my Book of the Factors Aviso, which together
with a collection of the Sea-lawes I intend (God willing) hereafter to publish.

Now forasmuch as the use of these latitudes and longitudes is most necessary
and needful in this Art, it is proper I should set down the ways whereby not
only these latitudes and longitudes, but also the distances of all Cities and
places by all universal Maps and Sea-cards that are perfectly drawn and
delineated, is learned and found out.

First then, to find out the longitude of any place, do thus: Extend To find
out the longitude of a place.
a thread so as it pass through the Pole and through the place whose longitude
you seek in any Map or Card, even to the very Equinoctial and somewhat beyond,
holding the thread strait, and then the number of degrees written upon the
Equinoctial or Parallel will show the longitude;

Again, by the Meridians likewise are known what longitude any place in the
Map has: as thus; Set the one foot of a pair of compasses in the place it
self, and the other in some Meridian, that is next unto it, whither on the
right hand or onthe left it matters not; from thence draw down your compass,
following still that Meridian until you come to the Equinoctial line, and
there mark upon what degree of the Equinoctial that foot of the compass
which you did first put in the place does rest; then count how many degrees
that is distant from the first Meridian, and that is the true longitude of the
place; and note that that longitude serves to all the places that be under
that Meridian, though they be never so far distant one from another North and
South.

Now for the latitude of that place or anyother, do thus: Set To find out the
latitude of a place.
the one foot of your compasses in the very pole, extending the other to the
place or City whose latitude you seek, and keeping your compass at that
widenes, bring the movable foot to the first Meridian whereon the degrees of
latitude are marked, and there staying it, the number of the degrees counting
from the Equinoctial upwards toward the Pole, will show the latitude of the
place sought, and note that the like latitude have all they that dwell under
that parallel, how far soever they dwell asunder east and west, and by
knowing the latitude of any place, you may quickly also find in some Maps under
what clime or parallel such a place is situated, and of how many hours the
longest day is there.

Now to know how one place bears from another and with what wind your Ship is
to be directed from one Maritime port to another, is needles here to be
handled, as not pertinent to my task; but for what distance is betwixt two
several places, many Cosmographers have found, by several ways taught the
same, one only, the most common in use, I will pitch upon, as the most facile
and easy.

To find out then the distance betwixt any two places, do thus: To find out
the distance of two places or Cities.
Set the one foot of your compass on the one place, and the other foot on the
other place, and apply that wideness to the equinoctial, and look how many
degrees of the equinoctial that wideness comprehends, and allowing 60.
Italian miles to every degree you shall have the distance by a right line of
those two places demanded.

But if the said two places have both either North or South latitude, then
substract the lesser latitude out of the greater, so shall you find the
difference, which difference if you multiply by 60. the product will be the
number of miles; and if to the whole degrees of difference there be annexed
any minutes, then you must add to the product for every minute a mile.

But if one of the two places have North latitude, and the other South
latitude, then you shall find their difference by addition only, The distances
of two places having different longitudes and east and west latitude.
and not by substraction.

Now if you would find the distance of two places, differing only in longitude,
both places having either east or west latitude; then substract the lesser out
of the greater, so shall you have the true difference, which difference you must
multiply by the number of miles belonging to their latitude, which commonly is
found on the North-west side of the Maps, or by the table of miles answerable,
of one degree of every latitude, and the product thereof will be the number of
miles; whereby the one place is distant from the other; but if the one place
have East longitude, and the other West longitude, then you must find the
difference as well by addition as by substraction.

To conclude this point, I conceive it not much material to my purpose further
to insist hereupon; for the diligent and ingenious will easily hereby
comprehend the benefit that may redound to him by a general inspection in this
Art, referring what is here by me willingly omitted to his own private search
and study, and to such Authors as have learnedly written of this subject more
at large; and therefore from the universal knowledge of Maps that points out
the general divisions of the World, I will come to the particulars comprised
therein, and view the subdivisions thereof, as Potencie, Might and Soveraigntie
have prescribed rules thereunto.

This World then, consisting as I noted before of four principal parts, and
every part consisting of several Empires, Kingdoms and Provinces in which
many commodities both natural and artificial are found fit for Commerce, and
traffic, and also wherein are noted to be diverse eminent Cities and Towns
of great concourse, of Shipping, Merchants and Trade; which Trade is maintained
and driven by the said Commodities and Wares, and by the natural inclination
of Mankind to enrich themselves by, Invention, and Time; has devised the Art
of Merchandising, and by means of Weights, Measures, Coins, Exchanges and
Accompt-keeping, have drawn the same to certain heads and principalls, which
in this MAP OF COMMERCE I shall endeavor to demonstrate: But before I fall
to particulars, it is requisite I should first say somewhat of the same in
general.

CHAP. II.
Of the Art of Merchandising and the general parts thereof.

MERCHANDISING (truly considered in it self, and rightly practiced) may well be
said to be an art Merchandising accounted an Art.
or science invented by ingenious mankind, for the public good, commodity and
welfare of all Commonwealths; for thereby some places and Kingdoms are
supplied and furnished with those necessary things, whereof Nature her self
has proved deficient in, and which in some other places or Kingdoms has
abounded, tending either to the need, ornament, or commodity of humane life,
and is performed by exporting the superfluities, that are found in the one, to
furnish the defects and wants that are found in the other: and the Arts-men
that are seen thus to practice and exercise the same, and which do thus
transport these things from one place to another, are generally known to us and
commonly termed by the name of Merchants, and the things themselves wherewith
they negociate and traffic are termed merchandises or commodities.

Merchandising then of it self in effect is nothing else but a Merchandising
what.
Commutation, bargaining, contracting or exchanging of one man with another,
and by giving by one, so much of one thing or commodity, to have of the other,
so much and the like value, of some one other differing commodity else; and the
things themselves subject to this commutation, or exchanging, are principally
observed in all places to be two; first wares or goods, and secondly moneys or
coin; which two are usually The ma^rials of Merchandising, are commodities and
Moneys.
observed to be contracted and bargained for, in three several distinct
manners.

The first is goods for goods, and this is termed bartering. The second is
goods for money, and this is termed bargaining, and the Commutations
d^stinguished into 3. manners or kinds.
third is money for money, and this is properly amongst Merchants, (in these
days termed) exchanging, from whence it proceeds; and may be concluded, that
all merchantile affairs and commercelike negotiations may be distinguished
into three kinds or sorts, that is, into Bartering, commonly called Trucking;
Bargaining, commonly called buying and selling; and into returning of moneys
from one place to another by bills, commonly called Exchanging.

The first of these was taught to mankind by necessity, who to provide himself
of things that were needful, gave in liew and in Trucke thereof and for the
same, the things whereof he had store and plenty: The second kind was found out
and invented to facilitate the first; and the third and last to facilitate the
second.

In the times of old amongst us, and yet in these days in many Bartering.
places of America, Asia and Africa; the first manner of Bartering was and is
yet in use and practiced, where though gold and silver and brass was not known
nor accounted as a stamped coin, yet it was then both here, and is still there
held in greater estimation then was any other commodity or metal; the which
Homer infers in his relation of the Trojan War, where he mentions that
Achilles his golden Armor, was valued in barter at one hundred Oxen, and that
the brass Armor of Diomedes was valued in barter but at nine: But Man in
process of time, finding it too too difficult a thing, and too too troublesome
a business, to carry about him, all things thus bartered and trucked from one
place to another, chose out one singular thing; which as a common standard or
measure, should countervaile and be in Value as all other things, and which
should be received and accounted of in payment, satisfaction, and equivalencie
to all others, and the things thus chosen and estimated, was gold, silver and
brass, the most excellent of Metals, which being then and since, by the
authority of Princes, divided into great and small pieces, and into several
and distinct parts and denominations, was stamped and coined with several
characters, to denote thereby the true weight and value of the same; the which
was first done by Servius in Rome of brass, whereon was imprinted the image of
Sheep and Oxen, betokening the wealth and riches of those days, as moneys do
now with us; and because that ten of those pieces was then called a denier,
therefore it is, that universally all such moneys are still called by the
Latins Denarij: this being then the original of Moneys, afterward came to be
coined both of silver, and gold; as I shall more at large have occasion to
demonstrate in the Chapter of moneys, in this following Treatise.

This first sort of Merchandising or Commerce then, as I said Bargaining.
before, termed Bartering or Trucking, of one commodity for another, begat
consequently by the means of moneys, the second manner of negotiation, which
is buying and selling, or bargaining; for all Merchants that would transport
commodities from one Country or place to another, to effect the same, needed
either other commodities, wherewith to barter and so to procure them, or money
and so to buy them; and therefore to facilitate Merchandising, and to take away
the incommodity and danger of the carriage of moneys, about a man, or from
place to place, A mean was invented to have the same in what Country a man
pleased, without trouble or danger of the transport, carridges or rigor
thereof; and this was found to be best performed by exchange, Exchanging.
which is the third sort of commutaetion; the which is noted to be no other
then the giving of so much moneys in one place to one, who should cause it to
be again repaid in another place by another for him; as for example, Edward
has here in London one thousand pounds, and desires to remit the same, or
have it in the hands of Joseph, who resideth in Venice; and Lodowicke has one
thousand pounds in Venice, in the custody and hands of Thomas, which he would
get, receive, and recover out and have them here: it happens that Edward
meets with Lodowicke, to whom he delivers and pays the said one thousand
pounds; and thereupon Lodowicke writes to Thomas, that he pay the said
thousand pounds to Joseph, and thus each party come to be both satisfied and
accommodated; by which it may be discerned, that in all exchanges, there is
concluded two payments, two places, and fouro distinct persons; as he who
pays in the one place, and he who receives in the other; and he who
receives in the one place, and he who pays in the other; and from hence it
consequently follows, that no man can remit, except there be another to draw;
nor no man can in the second place receive, except there be another authorized
to pay.

In this manner then came in use the original of exchanges, purposely
Exchanges drawn into a profitable Art, and the reasons there of.
invented to accommodate Trade and Commerce, the which at first was practiced
without either benefit or loss, or any other consideration; and to render
again the self same sum and parcel as was received: but in process of time
it came to be considered, that the giver or deliverer of the money came both to
lose a certain space in time ere the same was repayd, and did also run a
certain risgoe in the payment thereof, which the receiver or drawer enjoyed,
and profited by; and therefore it was held reasonable that the deliverer should
have some fruit and benefit, in requital and satisfaction thereof, which
afterward occasioned that the second payment came to be somewhat greater then
the former; and that in consideration thereof there should be restored, more
then was received: The endeavor of this gain then has converted exchanges
since into an art or mystery; from whence it proceeds, that many are found
at this day to remit and deliver moneys, to the intent, to have the same
returned with benefit, and not for a need or necessity to have it more in one
place then in another; and many again are found to be takers and drawers, not
with intent to withdraw or recover their money, from another person, or place;
but to serve themselves and their occasions with that of others, for a certain
time, paying and allowing for the same, that consideration and interest as is
agreed upon, and covenanted between them; which really and in effect is nothing
else but a certain kind of permitted Usury, and therefore by some accounted as
a thing unlawful, though by many, and by the common and received practice of
the World, it is upheld and maintained with many solid reasons and substantial
arguments; besides which, it is considerable, and peradventure it may well be
granted, that if it were not, that there is by this art and mystery, again
and profit made thereof, very few exchanges would present; because that draughts
and remittances would in this nature but seldom happen, that would or might
any way be available to Traffic and Commerce, and less benefit would
consequently redound to the public and universal Commerce of Kingdoms; and
therefore though the intention of particular exchanges, be not always found
good herein, yet the general good effect which it produces, and that
proceeds therefrom, is in it self and in the true use and custom thereof
both approved and laudable.

Now in the first sort of commutation, which I term bartering, Things
considerable in Bartering.
many things do happen considerable and necessary in the art of Merchandising;
the first is the knowledge as well in the commodity, thus to be delivered, as
in the commodity so to be received: next a knowledge in respect of the value
and present request and estimation of both; then in respect of the quality,
whether it be lasting and durable, or impairing and perishable; and lastly in
respect of the property, whether it be of it self natural and growing, or
Artificial, and made by the hand and industry of man; and lastly in respect
of the quantity, whether plentiful and in abundance, or scarce and in few
hands.

In the second sort of commutation, which I term bargayning, or Things
considerable in Bargaining.
buying and selling, are likewise besides the above mentioned, these
particulars to be well known and considered; first a knowledge how the
commodity is either bought or sold, as either by weight, as are ponderous
commodities, or as by Concave or long measures, as are commodities of length,
or commodities solid or liquid; the knowledge of which weights and measures, is
in like manner perfectly to be known, and really to be understood; and then the
finenesse, goodness and current valuation of the money of the place, is also to
be known, and perfectly and rightly to be found out and distinguished, that the
bargain may appear to be made the more justly, equally, and conscionablie
between both parties; and for the needful circumstances observed in
bargaining, these four things are considerable, as having necessary
dependances upon.

First, a Merchant must know what to bargain for, and under Prncipally four.
this the knowledge of the commodity it self is comprehended. Secondly, how to
bargain, and under this the knowledge of the weights and measures in the
general is comprised. Thirdly, when to bargain, and under this the fit and
proper seasons of bargaining are generally included. Fourthly, with whom to
bargain, and under this point is comprehended, the person and party
interessed, that requires the accomplishment or credit in the bargain.

Now in the third sort of commutation, which is here termed Exchanging, the
things necessary to be known and considerable by Things considerable in
Exchanging.
the said Art of Merchandising are these: First a knowledge of the finenesse,
goodness and current value of the Princes Coin, both where the party
Remitter abides, and whither the said moneys are remitted; then a knowledge of
the current rate of the Exchanging of the Par or Value for Value, both
according to the Standard of the Country, and according to the valuation of
the current Coin there passable; then of the Vsance of the Place; and lastly
and principally, to avoid all prejudice and loss, a knowledge is to be had of
the party who is the Drawer and Receiver of the same; and in default made of
current satisfaction and payment accordingly, knowledge is to be had of the
due and true manner and form of making of all legal intimations, protests,
and other such needful instruments, circumstances and observations as are
requisite thereto, according to the strict and solemn rules required in a Bill
of Exchange, which in its due place I shall more at large declare.

Now forasmuch as many of these before mentioned points may as well be included
within the mystery of some subordinate tradesmen, as comprehended within the
bounds of the Art of Merchandising; I shall not need to insist farther
thereupon, only here insert some other principal parts and points more aptly
comprised within the particular limits of this Science, which in brief I will
only nominate, as fitly serving for an Induction to this present MAP OF
COMMERCE, and as being the proper instruments, wherewith also this Art of
Merchandising is practiced.

I have noted before that Merchandising principally consists of Adventures
made abroad into several Regions, and that for the most part Merchants are
found to traffic and negociate into diverse parts and Countries of the World
by the help and benefit of the Seas and Navigation, and have to that end their
Factors, servants and agents resident in foreign parts to perform those
their Mercantile Occasions, and that Ships and Vessels of all burdens are
daily seen to be by them so employed and set on work through all the parts of
the habitable World, therefore the next point needful their knowledge, and
comprised in the Art of Merchandising, I may entitle under the name of
Shipping; which properly consisting of sundry portions may be fitly
distinguished within the duties of four several distinct persons.

The first Person is represented in the building of a Ship, wherein First
duty to build, belonging to the Shipwright.
the whole materials are to be considered; next the Art of the framing, forming
and making thereof, is to be observed, the due rules of length, breadth, depth,
stowage, offense, defense and commodiousnes in general is to be noted with
all other circumstances thereunto appertaining: and this I hold to be the
proper duty of the Ship-wright, and the knowledge consequently not unproper to
the Merchant, and fitly comprehended within the Art of Merchandising.

The second is represented in the setting forth of this Ship, wherein her
tackle, apparel, victual and munition and all her needful Second duty to
furnish and set out, belonging to Owners.
and dependent furniture is to be considered, her provision and store is to be
observed: and this I hold to be the proper duty of the Owners and letters out
of Ships to freight, and the knowledge most proper for the Merchant, and
comprehended also in the Art of Merchandising.

The third is represented in the sailing of this Ship, wherein Third duty to
sail the Ship, belonging to the Pilot or Master.
the Art of Navigation is generally to be considered, with all circumstances
thereunto of right appertaining, which I hold to be the duty of the Master and
Pilot, and how far this knowledge may be necessary to the Merchant, I have
mentioned in a Book entitled The Factors Avizo, which I may, if occasion
serve, publish to the use and benefit of Merchants and Factors that frequent
the Seas, and take pleasure therein.

The last is represented in the employment of this Ship, wherein is Fourth
duty of employing this Ship, belonging to the Merchant.
considerable these six things. First the lading of the goods aboard, by which
this Ship comes to be employed, which must be done in fair and dry weather
and at fit seasons: secondly the stowage thereof aboard, which must be done
without prejudice or hurt of one commodity to another, by building of bulk
heads and providing of desnege and the like whereon the said goods must bear
or lie upon: thirdly in truly marking the said goods, that it may evidently
appear who is the right Owner and proprieter thereof: fourthly in really
paying and truly discharging of all customs, duties and charges thereupon,
that neither the Ship nor goods may be subject to loss, confiscation or
prejudice thereby: fifthly in making assurance thereon, that the Imployer
preventing losses may not endanger his whole Adventure: and sixthly and lastly
in a general knowledge of all the Sea Laws comprised either in the Role of
Olcron or Consolato of Barcelona, that all controversies between the Merchant
and Mariner may be avoided; that he may thereby the better right himself, and
do also that which is right to all others; and this I hold to be the proper
duty of the Merchant and his Factor.

In order to this I may here nominate such other things as are A Merchant is
to know the form of a bill of Exchange.
needful to his knowledge, and which have a necessary dependence upon the Art
of Merchandising, as next to know all manner of specialties proper to his Place
and Calling. And first the manner, form, force, and virtue of a bill of
Exchange, the terms, and proper method thereof, with all manner of
observations required thereto by the solemn, and strict rules of the
proceedings commonly used therein.

Secondly, the making of all Intimations, and protests, in all cases Secondly,
of all manner of protests and intimations. Thirdly, of charter parties.
whatsoever incident to this Art.

Thirdly, the manner and making of all charter-parties for the fraightment of
Ships; wherein all conditions and their circumstances must be truly and at
large set down and declared as the time when the covenanted Ship is to depart,
the Ports, where She is to unlade, the days agreed upon for her unlading, the
sum agreed upon for freight, and all other the particular conditions accorded
upon, the better to avoid all inconveniences and contentions in law that may
happen thereupon.

Fourthly, the manner of making of bills of lading, wherein the goods laden and
the condition thereof is to be truly set down: Fourthly, of bills lading.
also the Ship wherein the same is put, and the Master or Pilots name, and who
takes the charge thereof; the place of unlading the said goods, and lastly,
the freight to be paid for the same, when delivered according to conditions
specified.

Fifthly, the manner of making of policies of assurances; wherein Fifthly, of
Policies of assurances.
the goods assured is to be nominated, the Ship upon which the same is laden,
and the Master thereof declared, the dangers and Adventure assured to be
specified, the places whence and whither bound noted, the rate or premio agreed
upon observed; and lastly, the persons or Parties assurers subscribed, etc.

Sixthly, the manner of making of all manner of specialties and bills of debt,
either as they are simply in use amongst us in England, Sixthly, of bills of debt
and obligatory.
or obligatorie, as also to know the force and strength thereof in law, both
here and beyond the Seas, with transportations thereof, as is used in many
foreign Countries; wherein is to be set down the name and profession of the
party debtor, the sum owing thereby, to whom the same is due, and the time
when the same is payable, and the place where, and in bills obligatorie, the
penalty for non payment accordingly.

Seventhly, when the same is discharged, the form and manner of an Acquittance
and general release in full discharge for the Seventhly, of an acquittance.
payment thereof.

Eighthly, the manner of drawing a Letter of Attorney or procuration, with the
strength thereof both here and beyond the Seas: Eighthly of a letter attorney.
wherein is to be mentioned the power and authority given, the party that
gives the same, and the party who receives it, and the scope, end and
determination thereof; and lastly, to conclude these necessary appurtenances
and dependances upon the Art of Merchandising, there must be added a right and
perfect skill Ninthly, In accompt-keeping.
in Accompt-keeping, that thereby all his daily Affairs, his Adventures,
Shipping, Sales, Buyings, Payments and Receipts, etc. may orderly and truly
be manifested, which is so far forth to be learned and known, that his
Estate, Gains and Losses, and all passages that are else needful happening in
the course of his Negotiations, Merchandising or Commerce may appear, and
which may thereby be either yearly, or oftener reduced into a balance, to his
own contentment, and to the commodity of his Estate and daily Traffic.

And as a handmaid or Usher to this Art of accompting, he must, to finish and
make up these helps and furtherances, have the Tenthly, of Arithmetique.
assistance of the Art of Numbering or Arithmetique, in which whosoever is
ignorant may not challenge to himself the Title of a Merchant, nor be said to
have any judgment in the Art of Merchandising, nor hardly deserve the
attribute of a rational man.

These are now the principal parts of the Art of Merchandising, and the Basis
whereupon the same is observed to have its foundation, as it is seen practiced
and exercised by all Merchants in general in these our days throughout the
habitable World, the most part whereof I have more particularly handled in the
following succinct Chapters, and some others I have willingly omitted, as being
such as are so inherent to the Art it self, that every knowing Merchant must
not be ignorant therein, having in all other respects endeavored to make this
MAP OF COMMERCE so perfect, absolute and complete, that it may stand the
Merchant (especially the Learner) in stead, both at home and abroad beyond the
Seas, and serve him as a guide and Tutor to direct and instruct him in all the
parts of the Art of Merchandising.

And having thus run over the ground of this Art it self in the general, I
will in the next place begin with the Cities and Towns, where at this day it
is found, that for the most part this Art of Merchandising is seen to be
practiced and used.

CHAP. III.
Of Cities and Towns of trade in general, mentioned in this MAP of COMMERCE.

MY purpose is not here to show the antiquity of Cities and Towns eminent in
trade, only mentioned in this Map.
Cities and Towns, according to their first original, nor the manners and
custom used in their first foundation; neither yet speak of the diverse kinds
thereof, as at this day they are in themselves observed to be: But my intention
is, in this following Map of irade, (having briefly showed the common division
of the 4. parts of the World,) to nominate and quote out, the chief and
principal thereof as they are known to be to Merchants, and as they are found
the most eminent and absolute in the trade of Merchandising; and therewith
distinguish the diversities that are observed to be therein.

An absolute and complete City or Town, as some learned have Six parts
required in a complete City.
set down and expressed, cannot subsist of it self without six principal
parts and helps, for the supportation thereof; and without which no City or
Town can properly be said to be, or to have a being: First, it must have
Victuals to feed and nourish it; and this is the proper task and duty of the
Husbandman and Shepherd. Secondly, it must have Arms and Armor to defend it,
and offend its Enemies; and this is the proper task and duty of the Soldier.
Thirdly, it must have wealth and riches, as sinews for its employment, in
private and public affairs; and this is the proper task and duty of the
rich and eminent inhabitants of this City. Fourthly, it must have Justice for
criminal and civil causes, to punish the bad and reward the good; and this is
the proper task and duty of Counselors and Senators of State. Fifthly, it
must have Religion and the worship of GOD duly and reverently performed in it,
and this is the proper task and duty of the Priesthood: And Sixthly, to make it
a complete, able and absolute City, it must have Trade and Arts, practiced
therein, and this is the proper task and duty of the Merchant and artificer
that inhabit it. Now though many Cities are seen sometimes defective, in some
of these parts, and are not so well furnished as this rule and the exactnes of
a complete City requires; yet it is daily manifested to the judicious and
learned in policies of State, and government of commonwealths, that Merchants,
and such as exercise the trade of Merchandising in Cities, do supply by their
endeavors and abilities by traffic, most of those other parts and helps
here before specified; and which are or may be found deficient and wanting
therein. For setting aside the worship and service of God, which is only fit
and proper to Divines and Churchmen: The person and purse of the Merchant
supplies in a fair measure, all the other parts beforementioned; for first the
Merchants Navigation and traffic, is seen to supply the City with corn,
grain, The Merchants purse and person supplies many defects in a City of trade.
cloth, etc. and all manner of provision, both for back and belly, delight and
ornament, tending either to pleasure or need; and this way he performs the
part of the Husbandman and Shepherd; His traffic is seen to supply the City
with arms, armor, and all manner of ammunition, either offensive or defensive;
and thus far he perfomes the part of a Soldier: His traffic likewise is
seen to bring Riches into the common purse by customs, imposts, and such
duties; and thereby may be said to perform the part of the wealthy and most
eminent thereof. He is seen by his wisdom, travel, and experience abroad, to
be able oftentimes to sit at the stern of the Cities government, punishing the
vicious, rewarding the virtuous; and herein be performs the part of a Senator
and Counselor: neither yet is he wanting in many other particulars, to perform
the duty of a good patriote and citizen, (not comprised within any of these
aforesaid limits;) for his traffic is seen to improve the Countries
commodities, to set the poor and needy on work, to invent new fabriques,
stuffes and the like; to plant foreign colonies, to settle peace and amity
amongst Princes, to build warlike Ships, to train up Seamen; and to make the
City and place of his abode famous and eminent by sundry other means, which I
could exemplify if need were in this place, and which at present I willingly
omit.

Now then if the Merchant and the art of merchandising be so excellent, and
consequently necessary in a City, and brings with it so many benefits and
commodities: how happy then is that City, where many notable and well governed
Merchants are found to reside, and where their care of their own profit is so
necessarily interwoven with the care of the commonwealths, and its good, that
to themselves and to their Country; their labors and adventures do bring in
thus mutually, not only a commodity, but also an honor: but to the matter,
All Cities and Towns What Cities are found fit for trade and commerce.
are not found in themselves proper for commerce and traffic, nor yet all of
them fit residences for Merchants; therefore it is seen by experience, that
trade has settled it self principally in two sorts of Cities and Towns, and in
such first the Inhabitants by inclination; and then Forraigners and Strangers
by conversation, are observed and noted to have planted themselves and
established a trade therein.

Traffic then residing and abiding principally in two several Two sorts of
Cities of traffic.
sorts of Cities and Towns, by daily observation are found to be such as
these; the first is the Maritime, and these are they that have their situation
on the Sea shore or coast, or upon navigable Rivers and streams; and the
second are they that have their situation within some continent, and may be
called land Towns and Cities, distant both from Sea and River. And though that
in both these, trade and commerce is observable to be settled and driven; yet
the manner and common form of this trade is found to differ much, as being both
of them proper to two several sorts of traffic and Negotiation. Sea Towns of
trade what.


The trade observed then to be driven in Sea Towns or Cities, seated on
navigable Rivers, is noted to subsist principally by navigation, and by the
easy transportation of merchandise by that commodiousnes, from one place to
another; which is indeed the most proper and customarie way, whereby traffic
is in these days seen to be maintained and preserved; for in many places thus
situated, it is noted that eminent Merchants do reside, who by reason of this
neighborhood of the Sea, and consequently of navigation, do hold a
respondencie and trade from one fit place to another, over all the known parts
of the habitable World, importing the commodities of all other Countries, and
exporting the native commodities of the place it self; and of this sort is
Marsilia, Amsterdam, Genoa, Venetia, Sivil, Lisborne, London, and many others,
etc. But the trade observed to be driven in inland Towns and Land Towns of
trade what.
Cities, subsists by carriage of commodities by land, which in some places is
done by Carts, in some by Camels, Caravans, Mules, Horse, etc. as is at this
day seen practiced in many great Cities of the World; as at Aleppo in Turkey,
at Spahan in Persia, at Agra in the Moguls Country, and such other, who enjoy
neither the benefit of Rivers, not yet the commodity of the Sea it self by
many miles distance; yet therein are oftentimes found residing many Merchants
of great eminency and a nample trade is discerned therein, as may be seen in
this following tract. And sometimes to add some furtherance to this their
want: some of these have a Sea port or haven, as the nearest whereto ships from
other parts do come in; and do there both land and relade as occasion
requires, in which nature is Alexandria to Aleppo, Combrone to Spahan, and
Sindy to Agra.

Besides which, I might here add a third sort of Cities, where yet trade is
noted to be settled, differing from both the former, and Towns of trade
inmanuall arts and fabrics.
which cannot be comprised within either of the limits; and these are such as
subsist by some excellent or curious manual Arts or fabriques, as is Norimberg
and others in Germany, Roven in Normandy, Florence in Italy, and Norwich in
England; and some others, whose trade subsists by the benefit of nature,
producing of it self, special or needful commodities for traffic, as does
Bordeux by Gascoine Wines, Zante by Corrants, Smirna by Cottens, Gilan in
Persia by raw Silk, Ivisa by Salt, and the like: and where these are joined by
situation proper for traffic to the former, they are found to be far more
absolute, eminent and complete, as shall be discerned also in this following
tract.

These are then the Cities and Towns which generally in this The Cities of
trade mentioned in the Map of Commerce.
Map I handle, relating as near as my observation and reading will permit
me, the commodities that the place does naturally afford for Merchandise, and
the commodities the same is noted properly to vent; together with the time when
the same is either sent out or brought in, the quantity, how much; with all
other such circumstances as are thereunto belonging.

Moreover it is to be noted, that in all Cities and Towns of Five places in a
City depending upon trade.
traffic, there are always found five particular places, that only have a
being and dependencie upon the trade thereof.

The first place is it where Merchants and tradesmen do assemble and meet at
certain hours, and limited times of the day, to confer The Burse or Exchange.
and treat together, concerning Merchandising, shipping, buying or selling, and
the like; as is seen to be the Royal Exchange of LONDON, the Burse in
Antwerpe, the Piazze in Venetia, and the like in other places.

The second place is it where the Princes, customs, and duties The Custom
house.
upon all Wares, either imported or exported by way of Merchandise is seen to
be paid and collected, where officers are appointed to attend the same; and
where all Writs, as Cockets, bills of entry, Certificates; and the like are
granted, both to load and land goods, either going out or coming in, and these
are called by several names, as in most places Custome-houses, Dattio,
Commercios, and the like.

The third place is it where Merchants do keep their goods and Magazines for
commodities.
wares in, where weighers, porters, car-men and laborers do hourly attend to
be set on work; where Brokers and Contracters are daily employed in making of
bargains, showing of Wares, transporting of bills of dept, and such like, as is
seen in the Besistons and Basars in Turkey, Alfond^ces in Barbary, pack-houses
in the netherlands; and as was accustomed to be done in the stillard in London.

The next place is it where the public beam is set up, by the authority of
the Magistrate, to weigh all ponderous commodities Kings Beam.
bought or sold; to decide differences and controversies arising by weights and
weighing, and where a sworn weigher, with laborers at all hours attends
upon Merchants occasions, and who by his place is to keep a Register of all
commodities weighed, to serve if need shall so require; and in this nature is
the weight-house called the Kings beam in London, the Domme at Amsterdam, the
Viconte in Roven, the Romano in Marsilia, and such like in other places of
trade.

The next and last place is it where the public measures, both Met-house.
of length, of dry, and of liquid commodities, in every City are kept and set
up by the authority of the Magistrate, to measure all measureable commodities
bought or sold; to decide all differences and controversies arising thereabout;
and where a sworn measurer is to give attendance with other necessary helpers
at all hours to dispatch Merchants occasions, of which he is to keep a
Register to serve in time of need, as was seen of old to be the standard of
Cheap in London, and as is found the like in other places.

And thus much shall serve to have said of Cities and Towns in general, of
trade, and of the principal places found therein, which have a dependence
thereupon; which few Cities in the World, of traffic do want or are found to
be defective in.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Customs, Impositions, and other duties in general paid by Merchants upon
commodities in all Cities of trade.

TRADE in its self, has ever been found to be, not Customs payable to
Princes.
only beneficial to the City and Country where the same is exercised and
preserved; but also to the Princes and Sovereigns who command the same; and
though the commodities and benefits that it brings with it, be many and great,
yet the principal are such as accruing to the Princes coffers, comes to them
by the payments of certain customs, imposts and duties, that are by them
imposed upon all commodities and wares, which by the way of Merchandise is
either imported out, or exported into their dominions, and for the better
raising and collecting of which, there is seated as is before remembered, by the
said Princes and their authority in every such City and Town (where any trade
and concourse of Merchants is found to be) certain public houses, as
offices by the name Custom houses.
of Custome-houses where these duties are collected, and where the Traders and
Merchants do accordingly pay and satisfy the same.

The duty then of Custom, though in all Countries it be generally Customs
not always alike in all places.
paid, yet it is not always found to be paid alike in all places, for it is
sometimes found to be more and sometimes less, and often times in some
Countries it is paid according to the will of the Prince who imposes the same,
as being partly a Prerogative inherent to their Scepters, and partly as they
are absolute Commanders in those Cities, Ports and Havens where this Traffic
is so exercised, and is found to be payable as I said before, upon all Custom
due upon all commodities.
manner of commodities used by way of Merchandise, either exported or imported
out or into their Dominions, Countries and Cities.

This duty then thus called Custom, is conceived by some to The original of
Customs.
have its first original from a safeguard given by those Princes at Sea, to
their Subjects and Merchants from all Rovers, Pirates and Enemies, and a
protection for free trading from all such dangers from one Port or City of
trade to another: but we see that in these days the payment of the duty is
still continued, and is daily paid by all Merchants; but the first institution
and ground thereof (if so it was) is by many Princes either totally omitted, or
at least wise forgotten, and therefore it may now be more properly called a
Custom then heretofore, and the places where the same is paid and collected
called thence Custome-houses.

The Merchant then who intends to negociate and traffic The Merchant must
learn what the Customs are, and duly pay them.
into any City or Kingdom (seeing there is a necessity in the payment and
discharge thereof) ought first diligently and carefully learn and observe the
sum and quantity payable upon all commodities whatsoever; and then truly and
honestly satisfy the same according to the ordinances and proceedings used
respectively in those Countries, partly to avoid the danger of the loss of the
commodity (the nonpayment being in many places the forfeiture) and partly the
better thereby to make his calculation either to buy or sell to profit, and
that before he make entry of any goods in the said Custome-houses or office
(thus appointed for the collecting of this duty) and that he take notice what
the true and right custom in it self is; to further which knowledge it is
often seen that a settled rate by Book or particular Teriffe either in print
or writing may easily in every such City of trade be had Book of rates.
and obtained: But if (as it is sometimes seen) in some places that the same
cannot be had, then the Trader must learn in this case from others what the
duty and Custom of the place is; wherein much care and circumspection is to
be used, for the fraud and poling deceit, that is practiced in sundry
Custome-houses by many officers where no such Books are public, is
excessive, when either they collect the same to the immediate use of the
Prince, or when they collect the same to their own use, being let out to farm
by contract and yearly rent unto them by his authority; many Merchants being
deceived by their devices and slights, many under officers and new offices
being daily hatched up and maintained by the chief Customers and Farmers, not
only to the detriment of Merchants and of all Trade in particular, but also to
the prejudice of the Sovereign and all Traffic and Commerce in the general.

These Customs then, as I said before, are noted not to be paid Custom
differs in many respects.
in all Countries alike, for they are found to differ in diverse regards; the
principal whereof I have observed to be these.

First, they are found to differ in regard of places and kingdoms, In regard
of place.
as a far greater Custom is paid in Spain, and generally throughout the King
of Spaines Dominions, then in France, Italy, Turkey, and in some other places.

Secondly, some difference is also found in regard of times, as in In regard of
time.
privileged Towns, inioying free Faires, Marts and Markets, as is seen
observed by custom and long use in Roven, Beaucaire, Franckford, Mesina, and
other places where the Customs are then and at that time little or else
nothing, or far less then at all other times of the year besides.

Thirdly, somewhat again in respect of Cities, inioying a more In regard of
Cities.
peculiar privilege and continued freedom in Trade in sundry Kingdoms, where
little or no Custom is paid upon any commodity whatsoever, either during a
year after the importing of the goods, or for certain limited time or
months, as it is seen in Ligorne, Marsolia, and in many other free Cities and
hanse Towns, etc.

Fourthly, somewhat again in regard of commodities, as is seen in In regard
of commodities.
England, and many other places elsewhere, where some commodities are higher
rated in the custom than other some; some paying after the rate of 5 per Cent.
some 10, some 15, and some 20 per Cent. and some yet more, and some less.

Fifthly, somewhat again in respect of the weight, as is seen in In regard of
weight.
Roven by the Viconte, in Lions by the Kings beam, in Stockholme by the
Merchants weight; and so in other places where there is used a large weight in
favor of the Merchants to pay their Custom by, and another lesser to buy and
sell withal.

All these things and many others, as necessary to this Commerce, Strictnes for
not paying of Customs.
must be truly learned; for ignorance herein is not pardonable, and is ever a
prejudice to him that is found to exercise Trade; for the rigor and strictness
practiced in sundry Countries herein against Merchants is extreme, whereas
these Customs are not duly and truly to the utmost satisfied and paid.

As first in Russia, Denmark and Sweden, the law is, that if a In Russia
Denmark, Sueden.
Merchant do not declare all his goods in the Customehouse which he either
imports or exporteth, but concealeth some part thereof; all the rest of that
commodity being of the same kind, are forfeited to the Prince without favor
or redemption.

In Spain, and generally throughout all the King of Spaines dominions, In
Spaines Dominions.
the commodities concealed are only forfeited, unless they be prohibited, or
as they term it Contrabanda goods, and then all is lost.

In England, Scotland and Ireland the like; for there the goods In England,
Scotland and Ireland.
concealed are only forfeited; but yet they may be had again upon
composition, for the Officer that makes the seizure has power by a License
sued forth to compound for the one half, which is his part: and if no int^tion
to defraud the King appear in the fact, the Barons of the Exchequer will deal
favorably with the Merchant for the other half, which is the Kings, and if a
Merchant cannot for want of a factorie make a direct or perfect entry, he may
declare his goods in the Custom house, at sight; and taking up the same, it
may be either weighed or measured, opened and perused by an officer, and then
afterward the Custom may be satisfied accordingly without further danger.

And if the Merchant would again ship out those goods, so brought in by him,
he may do it by certificate free of Custom for 13. months, and have the
impost thereof returned to him again, provided the property has not been
during that time altered.

There is also by way of tares granted to the Merchant in the Custom house 5.
per cent. upon all commodities, either weighed or measured, and allowances upon
Wines and Oils for leakage, and upon Clothes, Kersies and such like one in ten
for wrapers, with many other limited observations, which are found published in
his Majesty's declaration, before the printed Book of rates for Customs in
England, etc.

In France, Germany, and many places of Italy and in the low Countries, In
Germany, France, Italy, Netherlands.
the goods concealed are only forfeited; but the same may be afterward
compounded for, wherein the circumstances will in some places be considered,
and the manner how the error grew, and whether it appear to be done with a set
purpose or not.

In Constantinople, Smyrna, and many places of Turkey the goods In
Constantinople, Sm^a.
concealed are not at all forfeited, but are to pay double the imposed custom
if taken, and then to be again restored.

I have noted that the rates of the customs is found to alter in sundry
countries, as in Spain and Portugal is paid upon diverse goods, 10. per cent.
upon some 20. and 25. per cent. In Turkey is paid by the English only 3. per
cent. but by all other Christian nations 5. per cent. and the same is not there
paid nor satisfied in moneys, as in other Countries, but in species and in
kind, except compounded for before hand, and so by a value reduced into moneys:
so also it is in some Countries more and in some less, sometimes settled upon
the hundred in value, and sometimes upon the piece; and in China and some
places of India it is noted that in favor of this duty the vessel and Ship
is measured in length, and breadth, and depth; and so by a certain rule and
sum the custom is levied accordingly, upon all sorts of goods abord her
without distinction alike in bulk.

Besides this duty of Custom paid in most Cities by Merchants, Impositions
upon goods.
as I have showed, there is another duty like to this, which is called by the
name of impositions, because the same is imposed upon some certain and
particular commodities, and not in general (as customs are) upon all; the
which also is not alike rated upon all wares: for though they be found now to
be much of the same nature as customs are, yet originally they are conceived
to be nothing but custom strained beyond a fair proportion, and are imposed
oftentimes more for the enriching of some private courtier then for the profit
or benefit of the Sovereign, and which in themselves are found to be, very
heavy excessive and burdensome upon some particular commodities; and
therefore, as there is a necessity in the payment thereof; so is there likewise
a necessity that the same be truly learned and known, and also the commodity
upon which the same is so imposed; lest otherwise the Trader make a short
reckoning in his accounts, and find this impost to deceive him of his expected
and hoped for gain.

To conclude, neither are these duties thus to be only learned Fees to
officers to be paid and known.
and duly satisfied according to the customs and usance of every City and
Country, but also all such appurtenances, as belong thereunto, in the passing
of all goods in the said offices and Custom houses, as in bills of Entries,
Cockets, Certificates, passing of Bonds, and all fees thereunto appertaining
and thereupon depending, as to Waiters, Searchers, Clerks, Visitors, and such
like, be also known and satisfied, the better to avoid the dangers and
inconveniences that may happen by the default thereof to the goods whereupon
the same is liable.

These Customs then and Impositions thus varying by time, places and
circumstances, and imposed, altered and changed oftentimes at the will of the
Prince, are not by the industry of any one hand, to be punctually known in all
places; therefore it suffices me to have given here these general rules and
observations conducing both to the knowledge and the necessity of the discharge
and payment thereof, for the better Reiglement of Commerce in this particular;
therefore I may be held excusable, if I be found in this point to be defective
in this MAP, and so concluding herewith, proceed to the next point, which is
of the Monyes and Coins of sundry Kingdoms used in the traffic of
Merchandising.

CHAP. V.
Of the Moneys and Coins of sundry Countries, used in general in the
traffic of Merchandise.

AMongst all the diversity of Metals which GOD Silver and gold the most
excellent of mettalls.
the Creator has shutup in the closet and concavitie of the earth, none is
accounted more singular and excellent than silver and gold, of which the
communication and Commerce of mankind, have framed and invented the use of
money and coin, which money and coin, may be properly termed to be the
universal measure of all things in the world, and though that thus naturally
and originally they be but metals, and so to be in themselves accounted, yet
in value and estimation, the monyes and coins made thereof are to us (as all
things) for they are to us, (converted once to this use) as meat, cloth,
house, horse, and generally what other thing soever man has else need of; and
thereby it is evident and manifested that all things are obedient and in
subjection to monyes; and that by this devise, a mean was found out and
invented, whereby one thing should be to Merchants as all, and therefore men
thrust forward by Coins made of Silver and Gold.
natural inclination and worldly judgment, chose to this end and use at
first, the thing that was found most durable, proper, and maniable, which they
only observed best to be metal; and amongst all metals gave silver and gold
the pre-eminence in the invention of monyes, which of their own nature was
thus observed to be most durable, and incorruptible, and of which we find as
well in these our times as in times past, most Princes of the world to make
their current coins of, between man and man in trade of Merchandise. I deny
not but in the innocence of those golden times of old, when Bartering and
exchanging before the use of gold and silver.
neither silver nor gold was put to this use, there was yet a traffic found,
and a Commerce practiced amongst mankind, which may be imagined did not then
extend it self to buying and selling in that same nature, as now it is in use
since the invention of Monyes, but only to a trucking, exchanging, and
bartering, and that only for things necessary to back and belly, to feed and
cloth, and so to preserve life; but these times worn out by a more acute age,
and men laying to themselves a foundation of soveraigntie and greatness, the
stronger still depriving the weaker, and riches thereby becoming desirable,
this mystery crept up, and was admitted, and therefore from these two
mineralls was found out a body, which once authorized by power of the
Magistrate, had a predominancie over all earthly things, and by which was
squared out and leveld (as by an indifferent measure) all things appertaining
to mankind, the abundance thereof brought with it the abundance of honor,
attendants, necessaries, and superfluities, so that he that had most in his
possession, was accounted of, as being the most eminent and greatest personage
in the eye, rule, and esteem of the world.

But to come to the present times, though in the general throughout all Europe,
it is now found that Coins and Moneys, of silver and gold (as is before
observed) is only in use, and that all Commerce and traffic is principally
drawn and maintained thereby; yet is it noted in this Map, that all Nations
have not yet submitted their judgment to the prerogative of these two
mineralls, but retain still in use some other things serving in their stead
and place; for first in the Islands of Porto Ricco, Saint Dominico, and in many
places Several sorts of moneys in use in several Countries.
of America, they have in use small pieces of Lether, current for Coins
amongst them, not that they want silver and gold, for they enjoy it in greatest
abundance, but want the use and invention thereof; as of late days it is found
to be established there by the Moneys of lether in S. Dominico, etc.
Spanyard, as with us in Europe. Neither was this only the custom of these
parts alone; for it is observable, that in Peru, and elsewhere, where the
greatest plenty of silver and gold was found out and dug, it was never put
to this use by the Inhabitants themselves.

Diverse yet in this kind to this day is the custom of Coins and Moneys that
are used and goes current throughout the world; for beside the aforesaid use
whereto these metals have been put, as to be thus employed, the common
Standard to rule all trade and commerce, and the estates as well of the Prince
as subject in Europe and many other parts of the world: those Nations that have
been defective in this point, and that have not valued these metals as the
Europeans do, have yet found out some particular thing or matter, whereto they
have by a national and unanimous consent, (as it were) attributed this power
to have a maine stroke in their negotiation and traffic, and wherein their
wealth is found principally to consist.

In sundry parts of Africa, they use for their small coins a kind Moneys of
shells in Tombuto.
of shells as current amongst them, though their greatest payments be made
either in sand of gold, which they term Tiburin, or in Ingot. The same is the
use this day also in the kingdom of Tombuto, and other adjoining Countries.

In other places of that Continent, they use Iron for their coin, Of Iron in
Massa.
their smallest pieces being an ounce weight; and this is seen practiced in
Massa, and other kingdoms also thereabouts.

In the kingdom of Congo is taken up along the Sea-shoare, great store of
shell-fishes, differing from the former used in Tombuto, called Of Lumaches in
Congo.
Lumaches, which they distinguish male and female, the shell whereof is there
accounted a coin, and wherewith they use to buy both silver and gold, but with
silver or gold either in mass or coin, can they not buy any other thing
needful whatsoever.

In Melinda, they have little balls of glass, in manner of our red beads,
which come to them from Cambaia, and other places, Of Glass beads in Melinda.
and these are their coins and moneys; and with them gold is neither found to
be of account nor esteem.

In some places of Cathaie, their money is a kind of paper stamped, Of Salt and
Paper in Cathay.
and in some other Salt baked into small cakes, for the excellent use and
scarcity thereof, passes current as coins amongst them.

In Pegu their money is called Ganza, and is made of copper and lead, which
every man may at his pleasure both coin and siampe Of Gansa in Pegu.
that is able; for gold and silver is accounted as a Merchandise amongst them.

In Bengala their small money is a fruit resembling the Almond, Of Almonds in
Bengala.
which passes current from man to man in traffic. And in the Island Sumatra,
it has been observed, that the sculls of their slain Of sculls of dead men in
Sumatra.
enemies was accounted their greatest treasure, with which they buy and barter;
and he is the richest man that has the greatest number thereof in his house.
And lastly, in many places of India they use pepper and Cocos nuts in liew of
money; and the same passes Of pepper and Cocos in India.
current for coin in many places of India: and to conclude, it may be observed
throughout this MAP of COMMERCE, that though silver and gold is not the metal
generally in use for the coining and stamping of money throughout all the
world; yet these other things specified, carry with them in matter of commerce
in these places the like efficacy and power.

To proceed then, Budelius, Varro and sundry Authors writing Moneys called by
3. several names.
upon the original of moneys, and upon the excellency of this predominant
point of traffic; affirm that all coins in the general have been
nominated by their several and distinct names. 1. Moneta, 2. Nummus, 3.
Pecunia; the reasons given thereof are Moneta.
these: First, Moneta is said to have taken that name, and is derived a
Monendo, which is to admonish and warn the people of the name of the prince,
vel Nummi nota, and of such a sign or mark impressed thereupon, thereby
alluding to the saying of CHRIST, Matthew 22. Where the Pharisees brought him a
penny, he thereupon demanding whose image and superscription that was? and they
answered Caesar's; then said he unto them, give therefore to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto GOD the things that are GODS.

Secondly, Nummus is said to take its name as some will have it a Numerando vel
Nomine, of the name of the Prince stamped upon Nummus.
it, as a Duccat is said from Ducatus, or as some say from Numa Pompilius the
Roman King, who is said to be the first that 1900. years past, commanded
moneys to be made, whereof ever since after his name every piece of money is
called Nummus; or again, as some hold, it is derived from Nomos, which
signifies a Law, and implies as much as such a Prince, or such a common
wealth has ordained money, from whom it has taken a certain price and value.

Thirdly, Pecunia is derived a Pecude. of cattle, sheep, and Oxen; Pecunia.
wherein was said to consist the wealth of the ancients, and whereon the figure
thereof was stamped; and is construed to be all manner of living Creatures,
wanting the form of Man: and some hold that the name of money signifies, not
only money numbered or told, but also all things that are contained in the
World; as well moveable as immovable, liquid as solid; and in general all
things whatsoever men have upon the earth.

From these three names and kinds grew first amongst the Romans a particular
distinction, and nomination of the quality of the species, as they were current
in worth and esteem amongst them: for they had then in use certain moneys of
copper, as well as the others of silver and gold: and because every piece of the
silver was in value ten pieces of the copper, it was called Denarius; Denarij.
and because every piece of gold was worth 10. pieces of silver, the same was
also called Denarius; and thus for distinction sake, other Nations in their
coins in after ages followed their example; and our English moneys came to
have the apellation of starling, and to be distinguished into pounds, shillings
and pence, as some say from the esterlins that were in times past the masters
of our minte, and the refiners of our coins, which yet holds this name, and
by Esterlin money of England.
which the same is known throughout all Europe. But to conclude this Chapter,
however coins and moneys came at first to have their original and names, and
however the same came to be distinguished, and of what metal soever the same
is in these days found to be made of and framed; yet when once the same is
allowed by the public authority of the Prince and Sovereign Magistrate, it is
held a capital crime in all Coins debased or altered is a capital crime.
Countries, either todeface, mend, alter, or any ways to debase the same; and
therefore most justly (the circumstances considered) do the coins of Princes
current in all their Countries challenge a principal part and interest in the
Universal commerce of the World.

CHAP. VI.
Of weights in general used in Merchandising, and mentioned in this MAP of
COMMERCE.

THE next principal point handled in this MAP of COMMERCE, is the Weights in
general of all Of Weights in general.
Kingdoms, and known Cities of trade, by the invention whereof (as by
measures) a true mean was found out, to give every man his own; for all
worldly things are found to be governd by it and measure; but most especially
the same has a great prerogative in all contracts and bargains, where either
buying or selling is either used or practiced, which indeed is the fundamental
part of the Worlds Commerce and traffic; for thereby are all commutations
regulated, all accounts framed; and all profit and loss in trade found out and
distinguished: It is also one of the standard of all Kingdoms, Cities and
Provinces, and therefore as well as measures carries with it the approbation and
authority of the sovereign Magistrate, and therefore either to falsify, add
or detract therefrom, is accounted a capital crime, and worthy severest
punishment.

Now for their sorts; These weights are observed to vary and differ Differences
of Weights in all Countries.
in all Countries, as well as in sundry Mart and principal Cities; though
otherwise oftentimes neighbors yet are herein discrepant, and not seldom it
is seen, (as in this Map shall be made evident) that several sorts of weights
are found to weigh several sorts of commodities, in one and the self same
place, City and Country; as in England where it is observed, that raw silk is
weighed by the pound of 24. ounces, and other commodities by the pound of 16.
ounces: and in Aleppo some commodities is weighed by the Rotolo of 680. drams,
some by a of 700. drams; and some by. of 720. drams. And as these weights are
found to vary in respect of their greatness, so are they found to differ in
respect of The greatest denomination.
their denomination; for some Countries use to weigh their commodities by
hundreds, some by quintalls, some by centiners, talents, thousands, weighes,
shipponds, chargos, lisponds, roves, stones, bahars, mands, candils, peculls,
and the like.

A second denomination is again produced out of this, as a Second denomination.
lesser weight, whereof the former is composed; and is also found in use for
weighing in sundry places, as pounds, man's, batmans, rotolos, minas, lodoros,
oaks, cattees, barotes, seares, wesnoes and the like.

A third sort again are found to be in use, whereof these latter are composed
and in use, in the custom of weighing; and which are of another denomination,
and lesser in quantity, as Ownces, Third denomination.
whereof sometimes 12 14 16 20 24 and 30. do make according to the custom of
the place the pound weight, and then again have a subdivision into drams,
scruples, obolos, carats and grains; so that the greater contains the lesser
in parts, which also is observed Least denomination.
to differ according to the proportion of the first and greatest; for the
Cantar, which commonly is observed to be the greatest weight, is so termed, as
being the hundred of hundreds, and consists Hundreds, etc.
sometimes of 100 li. just, though sometimes of hundreds, of 112 l. of 120 l.
of 125 l. 128 l. and 132 l.

The Weigh and Cargo are in like manner found likewise to vary Cargos, etc.
in many places, and to consist sometimes of 163 l. of 181 l. of 200. and 300
l. to a weigh, and Cargo or charge.

The Shipond also consists sometimes of 300 l. sometimes again Shipond, etc.
of 320. 340. and 400 l. the Shipond.

The Lispond also is found to consist sometimes of 15 l. of 16 l. Lispond, etc.
and 20 l. to the Lispond.

Roves are noted likewise to be in some places 10 l. 20 l, 25 l. Roves, etc.
and 30 l. and sometimes 40 l. to the Rove.

Stones are noted also to consist of 6 l. 8 l. 10 l. 14 l. 16 l. 20 l. Stone,
etc.
21 l. 24 l. 32 l. and 40 l. to the Stone, still altering according to the
custom of the place.

Rotolos are also noted to vary and to consist sometimes of 400. Rotolos, etc.
drams, sometime of 600 dr. 680 dr. 700 dr, and 720 drams, according to the
custom of the place, and according to the custom in use of the commodity.

In all which the Merchant must not be ignorant, that intends to The Merchant
must be versed in all weights.
make either an use, or reap a benefit by this MAP OF COMMERCE: for all
weights must be to him (in regard of his skill and judgment) as one weight;
knowing readily how to make his calculations in all contracts; how the one
weight does advance of the other, or what the one may want of the other, making
his account of concordancie allowing or deducting, where he finds the
discrepancie arising by an overplus or by a want either in the one or in the
other.

Now for the manner of weighing in general (so far forth as Two manners of
vveighing in use.
ever I have observed) has been noted to have been done by two several
ways; that is, either by a Beam, or by a Romano or stalier: the weight by
Beam I hold the best and justest performed By Beam.
with leaden, brass or iron weights, provided the said Beam be good and even
both empty and laden with one equal weight; and this is seen to be the
common custom of weighing in England, Netherlands, and in many other places
and Countries.

The weight by stalier which is used in Turkey, Barbary and Italy and sundry
other Countries, I hold not so sure; for thereupon is By Stalier.
marked all the number of weights that may be weighed thereby, which by the
help of a small counterpoise removed to several stations, supplies sometimes
the place of a pound, and sometimes the place of 100 pound, wherein is
oftentimes found great deceit, which by the buyer and seller is carefully and
heedfully in those places to be both prevented and avoided.

Now if with a Beam one would abbreviate a long labor with To abbreviate the
labor of vveighing.
small time and pains, and weigh much with few weights, his weights must be
made by an augmentation doubled, as by pieces of 1 lib. 2 lib. 4 lib. 8 lib. 16
lib. 32 lib. and 64 lib. making in all 127 lib. with which all sums under
that number may be comprehended and weighed, and some exercised in great
affairs, by single weights tripled have gone further and procured 1 l. 3 l. 9
l. 27 l. 81 l. etc. and thereby with little labor have performed very weighty
and great business: but I leave this to the ingenious, and to him that shall
fancy this method and manner of weighing.

In all Cities then and places of traffic there is found a weight Waights
authorized by the Magistrate.
(as I said) authorized by the Magistrate, which to alter or diminish is ever
held a capital crime: this weight thus settled in every place and City of
trade, is reputed the Standerd of the place, by which as well the inhabitants
as strangers do make their bargains and contracts, and without which many
bargains cannot be made and perfited, and therefore partly to avoid scruple
and doubt, and partly to do justice to all men, and partly to decide all
controversies incident in weighing, there is in the most eminent Cities a
public Weigh-house set up and appointed, where Weigh-house.
every man may repair unto either for necessity of weighing, or trial of his
weights, and which is authorized by the Prince as a rule for all men that shall
have occasion to make use thereof in the said places, serving sometimes as the
beam whereby his customs and duties are paid him; the Master, Overseer or
Weigher being ever sworn and deputed to do justice and right in his Weigher
svvorn.
weighing, not only between man and man, but (if need be) between the Prince
and the Subject.

This Weight accounted thus the common and received Standerd By which weights
the weight of this book is calculated.
of Cities and Countries, is it, upon which (as near as I could possible) I
have in all these following places made my observations, and from thence raised
not only the agreement thereof, with other neighboring places and Cities, but
also with that which we call our haberdebois weight of England, wherein with
all industry I have labored to find out the truth and certainty thereof,
which (as subject to error by reason of the diversity) I must refer to the
future trial of the better experienced, concluding this point with a way and
method invented by unequal weights to accord the weights of any two known
places or Cities, which A way to accord the weight of any two places.
briefly is thus performed.

Prepare a balance as exactly made as is possible, that a very little thing
may cause them to incline one way or other; likewise prepare of the one place,
the just pound, the half pound, the the the 1/16 the 1/32 the 1/64 the 1/128
and the 1/125 part of that pound, if it be possible, until you judge it to be
sufficient; then take the just pound weight of the other place, and put it into
one of the Scales of the Balance, and in the other Scale, put such waights as
may justly counterpoise the pound weight of that place; as for example:

Say that the half the the and the 1/256 part of the pound of the first place
do justly counterpoise the pound weight of the other place; then by
consequence it follows, that 128 li. 64 li. 32 li. and 1 li. that is in all
255 li. of the first place, do justly weigh 256 li. of the other place.
Again, say that the 1 li. the 1/226 1/512 of the first place, do justly
counterpoise the pound weight of the other; then I infer thereby that 512.
64. 2. and 1. that is in all 579 li. of the first place do justly weigh 512
li. of the other place; by which the calculation may be made both to the
hundred and to the pound, therefore the further search and consideration
thereof, I willingly here omit, and refer the same to the curiofitie of the
more ingenuous.

CHAP. VII.
Of Accounts and Account-keeping in general, observed in this MAP of COMMERCE.

ALL rational negotiators, and traders in general will Accounts necessary in
the Map of Commerce.
grant, that this Map of Commerce would appear to be very imperfect, if it
should want the due rules and observations whereby accounts are in all Cities
of commerce ordered and kept, which though found in themselves to vary in
several Kingdoms, and places, as having oftentimes a dependency, and
sometimes concurrency with the coins and moneys of each kingdom; yet in all
places they are not found to have the like agreement together. Some Countries
being observed to keep their accounts, and the denomination thereof in
imaginary coins, such as neither that Country nor place has either proper
coin or money, that has any affinity therewith, Accounts kept diversely in
diverse Cities and Countries.
as by daily practice is seen used in Venice by the duccat of lire 6; in
Florence by the Crown of gold of lire 7; and as in England it is used in those
ancient accounts, kept in some offices for the revenews of the Crown by the
name of Marks, of which we find not at this day any proper coin or money in
use. Again, it is seen by experience, that one and the self same place,
affoordeth several denominations in their accounts, and diverse ways are used
in one and the self same City and Country therein; as in some Cities of
Italy, some are observed to keep their accounts in lire, soldi, and denari;
and some again in the same place in Crowns, or scudi, soldi and denari; as
the like in England is noted, some as before observing their rules of accounts
in marks, and pence, and some, and those the most usual and common, in
pounds, shillings, and pence, starling; the which is necessarily both duly to
be learned, and truly to be known, and understood, by such as shall have
occasion to make use of, and exercise the art of Merchandising, and this Map
of Commerce.

Now for the method used in keeping these accounts, every The method used in
Accounts is diverse.
Country and Nation are observed to frame to themselves, ways means and
rules, whereby the same is performed and perfitted, and have for the most part
every Country a peculiar form by themselves. The general known method and
best form is by the laudable and excellent way of Debtor and Creditor, first
invented in Italy, and now generally practiced by most part of the The best is
by way of Debtor and Creditor.
eminent Merchants of Europe, received for the most absolute, best, and truest
method of accounts that hitherto has been found out and invented, which here
to set down would challenge a Volume by it self; yet such is the necessity
of this knowledge, that every Merchant should by the rules of his profession,
be well versed and seen therein; the grounds whereof being universally known
and daily taught, I refer to my good friends, Master Raphe Handson, and
Master Valentin Markham, who are both excellent, and excellently learned
therein; concluding this place with 4. principal rules required, and not to be
omitted by such Four rules required in an Accountant.
as have to do, and practice accounts in Merchandising.

First, it is required that in his account-keeping, he write all and singular
the passages thereof, and thereto belonging, with all circumstances 1 To write
all, and all circumstances.
of time, price, and other conditions, in every bargain, contract, adventure,
receipt of goods, sales, etc. in which though there should afterward appear an
error, either by disorderly charging, or by over or under charging, yet it
will easily at a second view be both corrected and amended.

Secondly, It is required that he never come behind hand with 2 Not to suffer
his accounts to outrun him.
his accounts, by letting the same run overlong, for being daily finished the
trouble will be nothing, but being a while neglected, a man is still found to
be the loather and loather to go in hand therewith, and thus growing more
loath every day than other, when necessity constrains him, either he is
enforced to mumble them up to his own prejudice, or to cast them off, and to
neglect them altogether to his own shame and undoing.

Thirdly, It is required, that he keep them, just, true, and perfect, and not
to falsify any parcel, matter, or thing, nor yet interline 3 To keep them
true and perfect
or shuffle one matter with another, but to set every thing (either
appertaining to himself, or to any other) plainly, directly, and orderly down.

Lastly, It is required, that he be well skild in the art of Arithmetique That
he be a good Arithmetician.
and numbering, which indeed is the principal step to this art of
accounting, and the first degree of this Map of Commerce, without which
knowledge, let none dare to entitle himself a Merchant, nor expect a benefit
from this Work. For the skill whereof I refer the learner, to the judicious,
and excellent Arithmeticians of this City, and so proceed to the next general
point of Commerce, which is Measure.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Measures in general used in Merchandising, and comprehended in this MAP of
COMMERCE.

THE next material point here handled, is the Measures Of Measures in general.
in general, used in all Kingdoms and known Cities of trade, by means
whereof a certain way and method was found out and invented to distinguish and
order by rule the length and breadth of all commodities measurable, especially
accustomed in all manner of fabrics, either linen, woollen, silks or other
stuffes; and this is observed also (as in weights,) to have a special
prerogative in many bargains and contracts, where either buying or selling of
things measurable is subsistent and in use; being granted to be a fundamental
point of all the traffic and commerce of the Universe; for thereby as by
weights many commutations are regulated, many accounts are framed, and profit
and loss is also thereby found out and distinguished: It is also estimated to
be one of the standards of Kingdoms and Cities; and therefore (as well as
weights) carries with it the approbation and authority of the Sovereign
Magistrate; and therefore to add or detract therefrom, is ever in all
Countries held punishable, and accounted a capital crime.

The measures of length are found so diversely to vary, that every False measure
is punishable by the Magistrate.
City and Province is noted almost to have as well a distinct measure as a
distinct weight, which in themselves oftentimes are found much to differ; and
some particular Cities are observed by custom to have diverse measures, for
diverse sorts of commodities, as Diverse Countries have diverse Measure
it is seen practiced by example in the City of London, where the yard is
accounted the common measure for cloth of woollen, and silk etc. the elle
accounted the common measure for linen, and the goad for frizes, cottens and
the like, which in many other Countries is also observable. And as for measures
in the general, It is a received opinion that the first measure that was to
this end invented was the cubit, agreeing as some imagine with the half elle,
the which was divided into 4. parts or quarters, and every quarter Cain the
first inventor of Weights and Measures, Josephus.
into 4. inches; peradventure this was in those times a general rule to all
Nations: but time and traffic have since given to every Country a particular
measure, and therewith a peculiar law of measuring, which contains a succinct
length by it self; which at this day we see practiced through most parts of
the known World in several ways: and thus diversity of places gave also
diversity of names to their measures, such as are the ell yard, goad, fathom,
cane, alne, brace, pico, stick, palm, vare, covado, and the like.

But Invention by the help and asistance of time, growing Measures of solid
bodies.
more perfect and absolute, and finding that neither weight nor yet this
measure could extend it self to all commodities used in and by the way of
merchandise; the art of measuring of solid bodies became to be hence produced,
as we see it in use in the measuring of timber, stones and such like
commodities: neither yet was commerce satisfied herewith; for the ingenious
Merchant found it still defective, and therefore to have it yet more perfect,
invented the art of concave measures, that should serve as well for dry as for
liquid commodities, as it is seen practiced at this day for grain, rice and
such like commodities; and for oils, wines, waters, liquors and such like
commodities, setting by this way by art and invention, in Measures of dry and
liquid commodities.
most of these commodities, a concordance of measure with weight, as in other
commodities was set a concordance of weight with measure: but forasmuch as this
knowledge in the general is of it self too capacious and large to be
particularly handled, as the subject required, I have been therefore
constrained to confine my self to measures of length; only as being the most
necessary part of this MAP of COMMERCE, yet so as I have not omitted the rest
where they have fallen within the compass of my observation; and if I have
therein been found defective, the vastness of the subject may plead my excuse.

He then that intends by way of traffic to make use of this tract, must
as well be skild in measures, (as I have observed) he All measures to the
Merchants must be as one Measure.
ought to be in weights; for he must not only readily know his own measure as
it stands, and is found to be in it self in use, but also the measure of that
place whereto he bends his trade and negotiation, allowing or deducting by
addition or substraction where the overplus or want does challenge a part, to
make a due proportion of both, and be so well versed therein, as that all
measures may be to him as one measure, by a true calculation of the length or
the shortness thereof.

Again it is found by the observation of Merchants, that in all Countries and
well governed Cities, there is for the reiglement All Cities of trade have
sworn and public Measures.
of things measurable, instituted a public measurer, authorized by the
Sovereign Magistrate, who is sworn to decide all controversies that happen in
and about the Art of measuring; to whose honesty and faith is entrusted this
public measure, and to which all Merchants and traders may in time of need and
difference repair and have recourse unto, and by which in many places An
Instrument to find out the agreement of Measures in any ^wo Cities.


it is seen that Princes do receive their duty of customs upon commodities
measurable; and by this common, known and received public measure, I have made
my observation in all places, and as near as I could, not only rectified the
same in the agreement thereof with other neighboring places and Countries, but
also with our own use in England: and therefore to conclude this point, I have
inserted the form of an Instrument here following, easy to be made, and
purposely invented to accord the measures of any two known places or Countries,
whether they be else, vares, yards, canes or any other measure whatsoever.

First then learn the order and custom of measuring of all those sorts of
commodities in both the places which you would inquire after, then prepare a
smooth straight board, plate or such like, and draw upon the same a straight
line of the length of the measure in one of the places with his allowance of
measuring, either an inch or shaftnet or such like; which for example I will
demonstrate in the Figure following, A B. Frst then divide the line A B into 4.
equal parts, which is CDE, and divide the quarter of A C into 250. equal
parts, and number them from 10. to 10. upwards, making the print C the 750.
part; for the number of parts contained in the other three empty quarters:

Then mark upon the line A B the length of the measure of the other place,
with his allowance, which is for example from B to F being just in the 900.
parts; therefore 900. of those measures in the first place, make just 1000. of
those measures in the other place: but if the measure of the other place be
longer then the measure of the first place, as for example, if it were from B
to G, then take the distance of A G with a compass, and set the one foot in C,
and extend the other toward A, which for example does come to rest in F, being
150. parts from C; therefore then 1150. measures of the one place makes just
1000. of the other, by which you may calculate to a lesser proportion; and this
is as much as I conceive needful to insert concerning the knowledge of
measures in general, and proceed to the next, which is the knowledge in
general of commodities used by the way of Merchandising.

CHAP. IX.
Of Commodities in general used by the way of Merchandise, and of the
knowledge thereof.

HAving spoken of Cities of trade in general as they Commodities in general
used in Merchandising, and the knowledge thereof.
are distinguished in these days; and of the Customs more or less that are
imposed (by Princes in all Cities where trade is practiced) upon all
commodities used as Merchandise, by such as negotiate and use traffic and of
the moneys and current Coins whereby this trade is driven, with the weights
and Measures whereby the same is distinguished and regulated: the next thing to
be handled in order is the Commodities and Wares themselves, wherewith this
Commerce is maintained and practiced in every City and Country comprised in
this MAP; which is the proper thing upon which the said duties are paid, and
for which the said moneys are seen to be given in Exchange, by the way of
buying and selling.

All Commodities then that are used as Merchandises by traders All commodities
are either natural or artificial.
and Merchants may properly be distinguished into two kinds; and are either
natural or artificial commodities; natural commodities I call such as the
Earth or Creatures, either with or without the labor and industry of man does
naturally produce of themselves: Natural commodities.
of which kinds are wines, oils, cottons, wools, fruit, grain, raw silk,
spices, druggs, jems, gold, silver and the like.

Artificial commodities I call such as are either wrought or perfited
Artificial commodities.
by Art or Mystery, of which kind are all fabriques of either woollen, linen,
silk, and also the commodities of all manual crafts, this day seen practiced
through the world in sundry Countries, within the compass of which two sorts
may all wares and all things used as commodities be comprised.

Again, both the natural and artificial commodities may be distinguished
into two other sorts and kinds, which are either such as are staple and lasting
commodities, or impairing and decaying commodities.

The staple and lasting commodities I call such as endure at all Staple
commodities.
times and continue for ever in their true estate and first condition of
goodness, never decaying, nor never losing their virtue and quality: and of
this kind are jems, gold, silver, copper, brass, lead, iron, steel, and the
like.

The impairing and decaying commodities I call such as are either De^ying (...).
subject to corruption, or to leakage, and do lose and decay either by long
lying, or by keeping, as are the fruits of the Earth, corn, wines, oils,
currens, figgs, fish, and the like.

The infinite variety of which passes any one man's judgment perfectly to know
and distinguish, because that Nature and Art in all Countries and places brings
into the world such change and diversity, in place, time, use and quality in
all professions, that it were a work endless to set down the natures,
conditions and properties thereof; therefore it has contented me in all
Countries and Cities here collected, to nominate only the commodities that the
places are observed to afford, either natural or artificial, either staple or
perishable, wherewith Merchants are found to negociate, and upon which it is
found that a custom is imposed by Princes, and by them satisfied accordingly.

And yet forasmuch as many of these commodities herein named and found
throughout the world, may seem strange to some not well versed in the general
knowledge thereof; and yet this knowledge so necessary to all that profess
Merchandising; I hold it not improper here, not only to add a word or two,
conducing to this so needful a skill; but also to the preservation and true
keeping thereof in their prime goodness and beauty.

He that intends then by his pen to teach the theorique of this mysterious
part of Commerce must needs come short of his aim: I hope I may therefore be
well excused if I appear defective herein; for I know it is practice and daily
use that makes a man skilled in this Art; and many lets and impediments appear
daily in many men, that hinder the true attainement thereof: for it must needs
be granted that he that is imperfect in any one natural sense, or wants those
helps that nature affords to perfect minds, must neither be a Merchant, nor yet
addict himself to this knowledge: for any one sense being either depraved or
defective in part or in whole, will enforce him to commit (against his will and
mind) many errors, and constrain him to take the bad for good, or (at least
wise) the bad as soon as the good; and sometimes (as we say) chalk for cheese,
or one thing for another: for experience tells us that all commodities are not
learned by one sense All commodities are known by the senses.
alone, though otherwise never so perfect; nor yet by two, but sometimes by
three, sometimes by four, and sometimes by all: and yet this Art is now a days
come to that height, (I may say) to that height of cunning, that all these are
little enough too.

But in the general it must be granted that the eye above all the rest of the
senses, still claims an especial interest and prerogative herein, and must
ever be admitted as one of the chiefest that must still accompany the rest in
this distinction, and therefore many things are oftentimes found saleable that
are pleasing thereto; and in some commodities the same is noted to have the
whole stroke, and only to give the judgment, as in all manner of colors,
and such like things depending thereupon.

Some are noted again to require the sense of feeling to be assistfull to the
eye, as where the hand is of necessity to be employed, as is seen in cloth and
such commodities. Some require the sense of hearing, as where the ear gives a
help to the eye, as is seen in some mettalls, mineralls and such like: and some
again require the sense of smelling, as where the nose helps the eye, as is
seen in some drugges, perfumes and the like; and lastly, some requires the
sense of tasting, as where the palate gives the help, as is seen in spices,
wines, oils, and many such commodities, where it is to be noted A principal
part of Merchandise consists in the knowledge of commodities.
that in this knowledge does consist much of the Art of Merchandising, a
principal part of which profession is properly to know and learn the same; and
therefore a Merchants judgment must no^ be limited within the compass of any
one particular trade or Vocation: for herein must his mystery, skill and art
exceed all other, as requiring by necessity a more general knowledge then any
other tradesman; from whom there can be expected no more, then a skill in those
commodities they challenge a property or right by trade unto; or as
appertaining particularly to their peculiar profession and calling.

This is manifested in many tradesmen, as in the goldsmith, whose knowledge is
confined in silver and gold, and in the goodness, finenesse A Merchant must be
seen in all commodities,
and quality thereof: In the Ieweler, whose knowledge is confined in Iems and
precious stones; in the Clothiers to their clothing, in the Druggesters to
their drugges, in the Grocer to his spices; and so generally in all others: But
the Merchant whose judgment must be larger, must have skill in all, and have a
general inspection in every part and member of each of them, as being only
branches of his unlimited knowledge; which is not confinable to commodities and
wares of value and consequence only, but also to the wares of the meanest
artificer; so that in this point his art may be compared to the Poets, whose
excellency must consist in a coursory judgment in all sciences, and to be
learned in all professions, the difference being that the Merchants skill, must
be real, solid and substantial, and the Poets may be fained and poetical.

Therefore both the natural and artificial commodities must be comprehended
within the circuit of his judgment, and into all And in all trades.
trades he ought to have a general insight, as with the fisherman, he must
dive into the deep, and know all sorts of merchantable fish, as ling, codde,
haberdine, herings, pilchards, salmon, eeles, how caugh^ and how preserved, and
the proper season for the same.

With the Husbandman and labourer, he must have insight in the Harvest of the
Earth, and know all commodities that the same is found naturally to afford for
Merchandise, as all manner of corn, grain or pulse; the vintages for all
manner of wines, the recoltoes for all manner of oils, cottens, currants,
figs, reasons, and other fruit of the Earth, how and when the same is
gathered, and how and by what means the same is kept and preserved: with the
shepherd to know all manner of wools, with the woodman to know all manner of
timber, and all circumstances thereto belonging; and to conclude, his skill and
inspection must be such, that it extend it self from the commodities belonging
to the meanest artificer, to the commodities belonging to the most eminet
shopkeeper, which I neither know, nor yet am able in all necessary points to
learn; but specially so much of this knowledge must not be omitted as comes
within the compass of that place, wherein and whereunto the Merchant resideth
or bends his trade and adventures. A Merchant must know the value of all
commodities, and all other circumstances thereof.


Neither yet must his knowledge rest it self here upon the consideration of
the mere goodness of commodities, but must also extend it self to the
consideration of the true worth and value thereof, both in the price and in the
esteem; and also know how the same is both requested and spent, and how
imported, and how exported, either for use or for ornament, from one Country
and place to another; together with the due circumstances of times and seasons,
when this vent or sale presents, and when the same is out of use and not
demanded: also when signs of plenty does offer it self, and when of
scarsitie, when of rising and when of falling; what commodities in themselves
naturally are friends, and sympathise in the Shipping and will endure packing,
binding, and ftowidge together; and which again have a secret antipathie, and
will perish and consume each other; all which circumstances I have at large
handled in a tract which I have called the Merchants Magazin, which I may
hereafter publish, if I find this my labor prove acceptable to Merchants.
Merchants should reduce this knowledge of commodities to profit.


Moreover, all Merchants endeavoring to obtain this exquisitnes, should not be
satisfied with a naked skill and knowledge in these commodities thus belonging
to other men's professions, but their maine scope and aim should be to make
this knowledge and skill profitable and beneficial unto them, as by exporting
the superfluous commodities of one Country at the plentiful season of either
harvest, recolto or vintage to another place or Kingdom, where either nature,
scarsitie, the curiosity, pride, sloth or necessity of the Inhabitants
challenges a supply or stand in need of, which must be done with many advised
circumstances. First, in that consideration must be had as well to the place as
to the time, as well in the importation as in the exportation; and to the
property and fitnes of both the place and time; for all commodities are not
transportable at all seasons, nor yet every season fit for every commodity;
some commodities requires winter and cold seasons for transportations, and some
again requires summer and warmer wether, and in the fitnes of the place, a
judicious eye is to be had, and the same to be done with a great deal of
providence and circumspection, observing well the nature and property of the
place, whither the same is to be imported, and whence exported, and not as that
Dutch Merchant is said unfitly to have done, that carried fish to Rome at
Easter, or shooe-hornes and hats to Constantinople, or as we commonly say
coals to New Castle, where great quantities are daily dug up and vented
thence to all parts of the World.

And for as much as Merchants find not at all times, a present Merchants should
know how to preserve all commodities.
vent and sale for their commodities, according to their mind, and to a
contented profit, therefore their knowledge must yet extend it self so far,
as that they know how the same is both to be preserved and kept, from either
spoiling or perishing; for experience shows, that almost every several
commodity does demand almost a several and different way of preservation and
keeping, that the same may continue and hold its prime virtue, worth, and
goodness, both in color, substance, and beauty; and also know what may be
opposite thereto, and incident either to spoil, hurt, harm, or prejudice it:
for first some commodities are observed to be best preserved dry, as is seen
in some sorts of Spices, Drugges, Sugars, raw silk, and such like, and these
require a dry, close, warehouse or magazin for stowedge thereof; some are found
to be best preserved by lying close without air or vent, as some wines, some
fruits, and such like; and some are observed to be best preserved by moisture
and no air, as Tobacco, Civet, Musk, Verdigrace, and such like; and so in
some other commodities, which do also differ in respect of the place; some
commodities requiring low and close Celleredge, and some high and airy
warehouses, etc. all which things are considerable in the housing and keeping
of wares, and commodities, and necessary to be known, least that by ignorance
a damage be sustained in staying for a Market, or a fit or more proper season
for the sale and vent thereof.

Neither is it sufficient that a Merchant do know how to preserve Merchants
should know how to better their commodities.
his wares and Commodities in their first splendour, goodness, and virtue, but
their skill must extend, if possible, to give it new vigor, life, strength and
beauty, being either by casualtie or time, dead or faded, dying or perishing,
which though in some commodities it may (in some sort) be performed, yet in all
commodities it is a matter not only unprobable, but utterly impossible to be
in any manner of ways effected; for this only secret, if any where it were to
be learned, would prove a most profitable knowledge, and worth the learning,
and a mystery that would too soon enrich tradesmen and Merchants. Yet some
such there be their Artsmasters, who before they will throw away their goods,
when either they are in part decaying, or totally perishing, will try many
ways and conclusions to rectify the defaults and defects thereof; sometimes
by commixtures, compositions and helps, adding excellent good to the very
worst, or sweet to sour, or one color to another; as is imagined is too
oftentimes practiced by the art of the Vintner, in his old perished or palled
wines. Others again by changing the Objects, turning one die into another, as
it is conceived is daily practiced by Mercers, and others, by new dying of
spotted stuffes and silks: many such ways being practiced, which the
ingenious head and hand of the Artsman has found out, and invented, to save,
preserve, maintain, and sometimes to restore a commodity that is wasting and
perishing, which I refer to those that are more skillful therein.

Now the last point resting to conclude this Chapter, is to show How a Merchant
may have knowledge in all commodities.
briefly how this knowledge first spoken of in commodities may be gained and
acquired, which doubtless is best done by experience, the true mother of
knowledge; and this experience is best gotten by often viewing the same, and
heedfully marking the quality and properties thereof, and especially the best
and principal of each sort, that a man would be expert in; to which end, it is
ever good to procure and keep patterns, and samples, and thereby so to imprint
the very Idea thereof in a man's mind, that at sight of the like or equal, the
same may instantly be known and discerned, and the sooner to obtain this
knowledge, a man that would learn must be very inquisitive of men of
experience that are able to instruct in the commodities required, and learn
from such what is the principal notes requisite thereunto, either in their
colors, goodness, substance, virtue, taste, seeing, or feeling; and what he
has Merchants to write down their observations upon commodities.
thus learned and gained, to take order never to forget, by committing the same
to writing, and therewith to note, the signs and marks of the goodness and
badnesse of all those commodities that a man does either deal in, or would
learn to know, and to make this knowledge the more complete, to note down
therewith all manner of charges incident thereto, and that grow in that place
upon the same, with the ordinary price which there it does commonly bear and
hold; and though these notes should either by have or misinformation be at the
first rude, and undigested, or though many should prove frivolous, and to
little purpose, it matters not much; the one sort may soon be better ordered,
and the other may as easily be rejected; his better knowledge and a little
consideration may amend both these defects, my reason for the same is, that the
use and custom of noting in this manner, will make a man (especially young
beginners) more skillful and ready in this knowledge in a year, than he that
takes only a bare, idle, and superficial view, shall be in his whole life
time; for it must needs be granted, that it both perfecteth skill, and helps
memory, which is the only means hereto, and by graving deeper impressions in
a man's mind, enforce him will he, nill he, to a more considerate and judicious
observation, and marking thereof; when as he has thus absolutely tied himself
to a necessity of setting down every commodity, and each particular
circumstance in this manner thereto belonging. And this being as much as I
think needful to insert, concerning this point in general; I will proceed to
the next and last, which is of Exchanges practiced amongst Merchants in the art
of Merchandising.

CHAP. X.
Of Exchanges in general, used by Merchants in this MAP of COMMERCE.

THE next and last general point handled in this Map Exchanges in general
practiced by Merchants in the Map of Commerce.
of Commerce, is Exchanges, which is observed to be the most mysterious part of
the art of merchandising and traffic, being not only necessary for the
knowledge of all Merchants, but also fit and useful for such as negociate the
public affairs of Princes, and for such as sit at the stern and government
of the Commonwealth.

The necessity and commodiousnesse of these exchanges in all The necessity and
commodiousnes of Exchanges.
traffic is doubtless very great, it having found in all Countries hitherto,
such a general allowance and approbation, and having for so many years stood
uncontrouled, and is still preserved in its pristine splendour and integrity,
shows evidently that at first the same was invented, and devised to a most
excellent use and end, it being observed, that as money was devised, and first
invented of the best, and purest metals, to avoid the chargeable and
troublesome carriage of commodities in trade, from one place to another; so was
Exchanges of moneys, first also devised and found out to avoid the danger and
adventure thereof, and the chargeable and troublesome carriage of the same from
one City or Country, to another.

I conceive it will not be material for me in this place to reckon The
excellency, etc. of a bill of Exchange.
up the diverse manner of exchanges, that have been of old in use, and as yet
are practiced amongst traders and Merchants, throughout the world, nor yet here
insert the form of a bill of exchange, which in it self is accounted so noble
and excellent a specialtie, that it carries with it not only a kind of
commanding power to pay, but is accordingly observed, satisfied, and
discharged; though directed from the servant to the Master. Such a high esteem
being ever had to the quality thereof, that the proceedings and ceremonies
used therein, are both singular and extraordinary, and are not subject to any
prescription by Law or otherwise, but subsisting merely of a reverend custom,
used and solemnized in and about the same. Neither yet will I here mention, the
formalities and peculiar rites and customs that is only found to appertain
thereunto, either in the punctual presentment, intimation, acceptance,
protest and return, that is requisite, and necessary, and thereto belonging;
for it is to be understood, that he that does take upon him, the title of a
Merchant, and intends to make use of this Map, ought not to be ignorant in
all the particular circumstances of place and time, either of presentment, of
payment, of ^w protests in default, and therewith know the common rates
go^rning, the causes of rising, the signs of falling of the said prizes, which
I here willingly omit, reserving the same to a more fit oc^sion in the end of
this Tract.

I have noted then the first use of this exchanging, and the excel^ncie The
mystery of exchanges reduced to profitable principalls.
thereof, being preserved in times past in its true integrity ^d realitie; but
those honest and innocent ends are vanished ^ith those innocent and honest
days of our forefathers; for since ^rade by a more general and universal
Commerce and concurren^ie of Nations, being grown to that height and
perfection that ^ow it is, this fair and candid manner and use of exchanging,
and the most excellent commodities thereof, is in part given over; ^or the
subtlety of these times has made an art and mystery there^f, which being
reduced into heads and principals, has proved (...) many places so profitable
and beneficial to the studious therein, ^at it is now a received opinion, that
the excellency thereof ex^eeds the art of Merchandising it self, and what
inventions and ^eights to enrich themselves, their policies have brought to the
^iew of the world, I leave to the censure of Malines and others, that have at
large discoursed thereof, and described the same.

But where the ancient custom of Exchanges is still preserved and maintained
in its true and moderate use, and the crafts and ^buses thereof taken away and
purged, it then appears to be most ^xcellent, useful, commodious, and
beneficial, as well to Kingdoms and Cities in general, as to private traders
and Merchants in ^articular.

I have observed before that all waights and measures should be All Coins
brought into one by Exchanges.
^o the Merchant, as one and the self same weight and measure, ^bating or
allowing, as the difference of the place requires. ^o by this knowledge of
exchanging should all Princes coins be ^rought into one and the self same
quality, and paritie, and be ^o him, as one and the self same coin; for if
the allay or Stan^ard of one Princes moneys, be finer or better, than the
coins and ^oneys used in that place where the Merchant resideth, and his
^onsequently courser or baser, the allowance given by exchange, ^ither in time,
in price, or in both, makes up that disparitie, and ^etles thus a paritie
between them, in drawing down the one which is the finer, or raising up the
other, which is the baser, to an even scantling, time and price giving the
allowance to rectify both the one and the other, in equality and true value.

But so far forth is this to be understood, that this is truly seen
practiced where a course of quiet traffic is settled between two Kingdoms
and Nations, continuing in amity and firm peace together: But where Princes
either by the necessity of wars, or accidental great disbursements, have
occasion, or do use to inhance the current rates of their moneys in their
payments, or decrying them in the receipts, and that moneys by that either
casual or constant course, become either more plentiful or more scarce then
ordinary, then these rules of paritie holds not so justly; yet ever so as
having in it is self a predominant power over the sudden affairs of Princes in
matters of moneys, and with The Exchanger rectifieth the disorders of Mints,
and the necessity of Princes.
all expedition possible rectifying by a common knowledge and consent of
Exchangers and Bankers, the error or necessity of Princes and their mints (who
indeed are the Sovereigns of all coins and moneys) so that though the
Exchanger be not called to the Princes Counsel, nor yet admitted to give his
opinion and verdict, either in his mint, or in the allay of his current moneys;
nor yet to his Proclamations and Decrees in the settling or rectifying of the
goodness or current value thereof; yet the overruling part or Balance is in
his hand, and he orders (by an invisible mystery of a visible Exchange) the
allay, value, debasement or inhancement thereof, with due allowances,
circumstances, places and times being rightly considered, such as the necessity
of the Country, the plenty or scarcity of moneys, or other such like
accidents may admit; regulating by this means tacitly in his Closet, the
disorders committed by mints, and the oversights which the great affairs of
Princes necessities plunge them in: and thus erecting to himself and others of
his profession a certain Rule and public Balance, that shall serve as an
equal Parr and Standerd of all Princes coins whatsoever; thereby (as with a
Touchstone) taking the true valuation thereof; distinguishing still the
finenesse and coursnesse according to the true worth and real goodness,
altering and changing the price and rate thereof, as time, place and occasion
may admit and give consent thereunto.

It now remains that I should show this true Parr of Exchanges, How to find
out the Parr of Exchanges.
and how it may be found out and discerned in all Exchanges, experience has
made it evident to all the learned in this Art, that the true Royal Exchange
for moneys by bills of Exchanges, is fairly and substantially grounded upon the
weight, fines, and valuation of the moneys of each several Country, according
to the Parr which by Bankers is understood to be value for value, as the truth
thereof is seen in our Exchanges in England, which has its ground upon the
weight and fines of our starlin English moneys, the weight and fines of each
other Country according to their several Standerds, proportionable in the
valuation, being truly and justly made, giving also thereby the price of the
Exchange, in and for every place according to the denomination of the money,
and by which all Exchanges are or should be in themselves framed, cast up and
calculated: but besides this real Parr of Exchange, there is also a Merchants
Parr, which in due place I shall declare.

These Exchanges then in the general property thereof, do much differ both
in the name and in the proportion between the gold and the silver observed in
most Countries, and that to set down the Parr of Exchanges exactly, we are to
examine and compare, not only our own weight (as is aforesaid) with the
weight of other Countries; but also the fines of our sterling Standerds with
the fines of the several Standerds of the Coins of other Countries; and if
we be found not to differ with them in the proportion between the gold and
silver, then may our Exchanges run at one and the same price and rate, both for
gold and silver, taking the denomination according to the valuation of the
moneys of each Country; and hereby shall we find how much fine silver or gold
our own pound sterling contains, and what quantity of other moneys either of
France, Italy, Germany, Low Countries, Eastland and elsewhere, we are to have
in exchange to countervaile the same, in the like weight and finenesse
answerable to ours, be it by the pound, doller, duccat, crown, or any other
imaginary or real Coin, giving always a value for value, and receiving the
like, which is called by Exchangers (as I said before) the Parr; the which
should in all Exchanges be so particularly known and considered, that as money
is publica mensura, or the public measure within the Realm between man and
man, so should Exchanges thus made for these moneys, be the public measure
between us and foreign Countries, for all commodities either bought or sold,
which therefore necessarily requires a certainty in the calculation of this
Parr aforesaid, admitting nevertheless (as I said before) an advantage upon
the same upon good ground and just occasion on either side.

But as the price of Exchanges is at this day seen to be at the only The price
of the Exchanges at the disposal of the Exchanger.
and sole disposal of the Exchanger and Merchant, and that the same carries
with it a predominancie in the buying and selling of their commodities as is
observed especially beyond the Seas, so ought they carefully and circumspectly
to consider the true nature thereof, and not only look upon the present
object, which is to know how the price of the Exchange goes at the time when
they have occasion to deal therewith, but also truly to consider the Reality
of this Parr, as is aforesaid, and as it is in it self really found to be, for
it is observed both here in England, and abroad elsewhere beyond Seas, that
those who altogether do practice this exchanging, and deal for moneys by
exchange, have this observation therein; for they being Exchangers indeed, know
perfectly the weight and fines both of our English and of foreign coins, and
comparing the same together, make thereby to themselves the true calculation of
the Par aforesaid, wherein they are not directed by the current valuation of
coins, which is often seen to be inconstant and uncertain; nor by the
tolleration of moneys, either here or beyond the Seas, going sometimes and in
some places current above the said valuation, and this indeed is one of the
most mysterious parts that is included in this Art of Exchanging, which the
Merchant ought considerately to learn and distinguish. And concluding here all
further observations and circumstances practiced in the general Exchanges
amongst Merchants, I refer the Reader, for what is here purposely omitted, to
the end of this Tract, where I have inserted what I have conceived to be
further needful hereunto.

HAving then thus briefly run over the general Heads upon The particulars
observed in this Map of Commerce.
which I have grounded this MAPP OF COMMERCE and Trade, and noted first the
division of the world, according to the received opinion of modern Authors,
and showed how the same is generally bounded, and how distinguished into
Empires, Kingdoms, Provinces and Islands, and how again these Countries
contain certain eminent and principal Cities and Towns, both maritime and
Inland, which for their situation, opulence and concourse of Merchants, do
merit the name of the great and famous places of Commerce and traffic in the
world: And having therein observed the commodities either naturally there
growing or artificially there produced, whereby trade is in the said places
both maintained and preserved; and therewithal noted the general duty of
Customs and Imposts leavied upon the said Commodities by the authority of
Princes, and settled in all the said traffiquing Cities, and collected in
certain public places from thence termed Custome-houses, and then showed the
coins current in those several Cities and Kingdoms with the original and
present kinds thereof in sundry Countries, and then the real and imaginary
denomination of species, wherein Merchants are observed to keep their accounts
in all the said places, with the weights and measures there extant and in use:
and lastly the manner how the Par and prices of all Exchanges in the said
places are settled, ordered, continued and maintained:

I will now proceed to the particulars thereof, making my entrance into
AMERICA, as fu^thest from us, and as least known to us, and first survey the
Trade thereof, according to my proposed Method in this universal MAP OF
COMMERCE: And from thence coasting through Africa, Asia and Europe, conclude my
Pilgrimage, and finish my MAP in the desired Port of the CITY of LONDON.

AMERICA AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF.



OF AMERICA AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF.
CHAP. XI.
THIS body then contained in this universal America and the Provinces thereof.
Map, or (as now I may term it) this World, is by Geographers divided (as I
said before) into 4. parts, Europe, Africa, Asia and America; which last was
altogether unknown to the ancients, and being of a large extent, the modern
have divided it, some into two, some into three parts, Mexicana, Peruana,
Magellanica, and each of these parts are found to contain several Provinces
and Kingdoms, the which I will only superficially look over, thereby the
better to come to the Towns of traffic, situated in those Provinces and
Kingdoms; upon which my method and present intentions will enforce me the
longer to insist upon: and because this last mentioned, parts America as last
discovered, is least known unto us, and the least frequented by our Nation; I
think it not improper there to begin to delineate my MAP of COMMERCE,
borrowing herein the liberty of those navigators that publish their Cards,
leaving unperfect to the view of all men those places, lands and harbors,
which have not been fully discovered and found out; and thence sailing
homewards by Africa and Asia into Europe, gathering in each Country as I pass
more variety of colors to adorn and beautify this Treatise, and so at last
to close my whole labors, and finish my MAP within the circumference of
London, as better known unto us, and as being better versed in their several
manner of negotiation.

This new World then called by us America, and now adays passing by the name
of the west Indies; being West in respect of its Situation, and India in
respect of its wealth, was at first discovered by Christopher Columbus a
Genoes, at the charges of Ferdinando, and Isabella King and Queen of Castilia,
after 63. days sail from Sivil. Then secondly by Americus Vespatius a
Florentine, at the charges of Emanuel King of Portugal: and thirdly, by John
Cabbot a Venetian, at the charges of Henry the seventh King of England, the
first and last had their adventures of discovering of some Islands only in this
part; and Americus of the Maine continent, and thereby gained the honor of
giving name to that vast circuit of Earth, which since by sundry others have
been more exactly discovered, as by our Contrymen Drake, Candish, Frobusher,
Davies, Willowby, Burrows, and others as desiring to share with the first
discoverers in the riches and wealth which thence spread it self over all the
other parts of the World.

This America then or more properly in honor of the first discoverer Columba,
bounded as I mentioned before, is found by the Spaniard, (who challenges all
this large territory) for their own by conquest, to be divided into 2. parts,
Mexicana, and Peruana, of which briefly.

CHAP. XII.
Of MEXICANA, and the Provinces thereof.

MExicana contains the northern tract of America, and comprehends these
distinct Provinces. Mexicana and the Provinces thereof.


1 Mexico. 2 Quivira. 3 Nocaragua. 4 Iucutan. 5 Florida. 6 Virginia. 7
Nurembega. 8 Nova francia. 9 Corterialis. 10 Estotilandia.
Mexico gives name to half America, now known by the name of nova Hispania,
whence the Kings of Spain style themselves Hispaniarum Reges; it was very
populous before the arrival of the Mexico.
Spaniards, who in 17. years slew 6. millions of the Inhabitants, rosting
some, cutting off the members, and putting out the eyes of others, and casting
them living to be devoured of wild beasts; to which place now is found no trade
nor commerce by any Nation, save only to the subjects of this King, and to
such only as are known for natural borne Spaniards, though at first the same
was granted by Isabella to the natives of Castile only, and Andalusia; but now
indifferently to all.

The commodities that this Country is found to afford for Merchandise
Commodities of Mexico.
is principally gold and silver mines, sugar, tobacco, ginger, tallow, hides,
and some spices not known to our ancestors till the discovery thereof; and
amongst others not to be forgotten that admirable tree called Metle, which by
them is planted and dressed Metle an admirable tree.
as we do our Vines, having 40. kinds of leaves serving to several uses, for
when they are tender they make of them conserves, paper, flax, mantles, matts,
shoes, girdles and cordage: on these leaves grow certain hard prickles so
strong and sharp, that they use them instead of sawes: from the root of this
tree comes a juice, like unto sirrop, which being sodde becomes honey, if
purified becomes sugar; or otherwise thereof is made both wine and vinegar:
the rind roasted heals hurts and sores, and from the topboughes issues a
gum which is an excellent Antidote against poison.

This Country is divided into 4. divisions, the first is nova Galicia, St.
Michael.
the chief Town thereof is called Saint Michael a Colonie of the Spaniards.
The second is Mechuacan, one of the best Countries of new Spain abounding in
mulberry trees, silk, honey, wax, and store of fish of all kinds; the
principal Town is Sinsonso, and the chief Havens are at Saint Anthonies, and
at Saint James; or Sinsons.
as the Spaniards called it Saint Iago. The third Province is Gustacan, the
chief City is Ilascalan, yielding for beauty and state Ilascalan.
precedencie to Mexico, and none other in all these parts, the principal part
is Uillarico, a wealthy Town, as the place through which all the traffic of
old and new Spain does pass. The City of Mexico
fourth is Mexico, wherein that famous City of Mexico is seated: now the seat
of the Spanish Uiceroy and Archbishop of new Spain, this City is said to be
situated in a Lake upon certain Islands, as Uenice does, every where
interlaced with the pleasant currents of fresh and Sea waters, and carries a
face of more civil government then any other in America, though nothing, if
compared with any in Europe: the Lake is said to be 50. Miles in compass; on
whose banks are found many pleasant Towns and houses: also it is said that 50.
thousand Wherryes are seen here continually plying, and affords such quantity
of fish that the same is worth 20000. Crowns yearly. The City of Mexico it
self is 6. Miles in compass, containing 6000. houses of Spaniards, and 6000.
of Indians: it has also a Printing House, a Mint and an University; and some
Churches of note that beautify the same: it was vanquished by Fernando Cortes
in Anno 1521. with an Army 100000. Americans, only 900. Spaniards, 80. horse,
17. pieces of small ordinance; in 13. Brigantins and 6000. Wherries, most of
the Americans were of Ilascalan, who were ever adversaries to the Mexicans; for
which cause that City does enjoy many immunities to this day; and to conclude,
according to the opinion of an English traveller, whose relation I herein
follow; Four things are here remarkable for beauty, their apparel, their
women, their horses and their sticats: and thus much shall serve of Mexico.

The second Province is Quivira, seated on the most western Quivira 2.
parts of America, in which are two Provinces, Cibola taking its name from the
chief City subdued by Francisco Vasques, in Anno 1540. and Nova Albion
discoverd by that famous Seaman Sir Francis Drake An. 1585. and by him so
called: the chief commodities and riches of this Count^ey is kine, some men
being owners of 40. thousand, and these serve to the Inhabitants here, as we
say of our ale to drunkards in England, meat, drink and cloth and more too;
for first the hides yield them houses, or to say more properly the covering of
them, their bones, bodkins, their hair thread, their sinews ropes, their
horns, maws and bladders, vessels, their dung fire, their calfe-skins budgets
to draw and keep water, their blood for drink; and lastly their flesh for
meat, etc.

The third is Nicaragua, being South-east from Mexico, with which it agrees in
nature both of soil and Inhabitants, and accounted Nicaragua 3.
for its pleasantness, Mahomets paradise, having trees in An admirable tree.
great abundance, of that strange nature, that a branch touched by the hand of
any man, withers presently. The chief City is Nova Grenada, and Lea a
Bishops Sea. The commodities thereof are, honey, wax, cotton, and bal^am in
great abundance; it is extreme Nova Grenada.
hot, and therefore not to be traveld by day, but by night: their winter
begins in May, and from thence raineth for six months; the other six very
fair and dry; and the day and night being here of equal length.

The fourth is Iucatan, and was discovered in Anno 1517. which in the language
of the place, signifies, What say you? which Iucatan 4.
was the answer the Inhabitants gave the Spaniards that first demanded of them
the name of their Country; and since by this means retains that name by the
Spaniards. The chiefest City is Campechio, whence comes that wood so well
known in Europe; also here is the Island called by the Spanyard, Santo Crux,
wherein Campechio.
is a City of that name well fortified by them.

The fifth is Florida, discovered by the English, under the conduct of
Sebastian Cabbot, Anno 1467. then possessed by the Spaniards Florida 5.
in Anno 1527. and called Florida; afterward the French got footing here in
Anno 1562; but the Spaniards unwilling the French should be eyewitnesses of
their rich booty, waged war with them so long, that there was not a man left
on either side to maintain the quarrel; and then was Florida again in 1567
abandoned: the Spaniards now hold here three strong Forts, St. James, St.
Philip, and St. Augustine; which last was taken and burnt by Sir Francis Drake
1586. which since is repaired, and that is all the Spaniards hold here at this
day; desiring (as it seems) neither to plant further himself, nor suffer
other to do it.

The sixth is Virginia, wherein is said to be rich Veins of Allom, Virginia 6.
Pitch, Tar, Rosen, Turpentine, Cedar, Grapes, Oils, plenty of Sweet
Gummes, Dies, Timber trees, Mines of Iron and Copper, and abundance of Frait,
Fishes, Beasts, and Foul; it was discovered at the charges of Sir Walter
Rawleigh in Anno 1584; and in honor of our Virgin Queen, called Virginia. The
chief Town is called James Town, and of late days the northern part of
this Uirginia, being b^tter discovered than the other, is called New England,
full of good new Towns and Forts; whither many persons discontented with the
form of our Ecclesiastical Government, are (said to be) the principal
Planters, and is likely in a short time to prove a happy and flourishing
Plantation.

The seventh is Terra Corterialis; on the South whereof runs Corterialis 7.
that famous river of Caneda, rising out of the hill Hombuedo, running nine
hundred miles, and found navigable for eight hundred thereof; this Country was
discovered by Gasper Corteralis a Portugal in Anno 1500. and affords only
some rich skins and furs for commodities and Merchandise. The chief Town
thereof is Breast, Cabomarso, and others of little note.

The eighth is Nurembega, and the chief Town carries that Nurembega 8.
name, in possession of the French; other things remarkable I find not
observable therein.

The ninth is Nova Francia, discovered by Jacques Cartier, a Nova Francia 9.
Frenchman, in Anno 1534. inhabited besides the Natives, with some few
Frenchmen. The chief Towns are Canada, and next Sanguinai, seated both upon
two rivers so called, affording only some skins and furs, especially Bevers,
which thence by the French are transported into Europe.

The last and tenth is Estotiland, called by us New Foundland; by the English
discovered in Anno 1527. who imposed the names Estotiland 10.
upon the Capes and Rivers which now they hold, where some have gone to plant,
but the cold has been found to be too extreme for the English constitution;
but in the Summer season the Seas here are found to abound with Fish in such
abundance, that a man may take in an hours space a hundred great Fishes, which
being opened, salted and dried upon the rocks and braches, Fishing in the New
found land.
are hence transported to all parts of Europe; and known in England by the
name of New-land fish; in French by the name of Morleux; in Italy, Bacalio;
and in Spain, Abadeses: five hundred sail great and small do from England
yearly sail to this coast, and to a place called the Bank, a sand of 15 in 20
fadome deep, thirty leagues off of this Coast; and these depart from our
Coast about the end of February, and arriving there about the middle of
April, unrigge their ships, set up boothes and cabanets on the shore in
diverse creekes and harbors, and there with fishing provisions and salt, being
their fishing in Shallops and Boats, continue it till September, and in this
time do not only catch as many fish as will lade their ships, but also as
many as will lade vessels of greater burdens, that in the Summer come hither
from England and other parts, to buy up the same, and purposely to transport it
for Spain, Italy, and other Countries: and this fishing ended and the cold
beginning, they leave their stations and booths and repairing aboard their
ships, lade their fish, and rigging their vessels, return to their native
homes, where these fishermen winter, and then become husbandmen; so that their
lives may be compared to the Otter, which is spent half on land, and half in
Sea.

This fishing is found to be wonderful beneficial to our western parts of
England, whose Inhabitants confiding upon the constancy of the yearly fishing
upon this Coast, it is usual with them to sell the said fish either by tale or
by the hundred weight in England by contract, before they either depart their
homes, or before the said fish be caught, at profitable rates; and when their
Summer is once spent, and that the cold approaches, and that the fish
begins to leave the Coast, they return contented to their Families; where
oftentimes in Winter they merrily spend, what thus in Summer they have
painfully fisht for.

Other notes of trading, worthy observations, at my there-being in my younger
days, I observed not. The Waights and Coins of England passing there current
amongst the English, and the price of fish once generally Cut at their fishing
Stales, does afterward in liew of Coin, by way of Commutation, all that year
pass current for all needful Commodities, and is esteemed as a valuable
consideration amongst them from one man to another: and thus much for the
Provinces and Cities of Mexicana.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Peruana, and the Provinces thereof.

PERUANA contains the Southern part of America, ^eruana and the Provinces
thereof.
and is tied to Mexicana by the Straight of Darien, being ten miles broad; some
hold the Spaniards did once intend to cut this Straight through, and make it
navigable, and thereby shorten the way to the South Sea, China, Molluccos, but
hitherto we hear not that the same is any way attempted; this Part does
comprehend by the computation of the Spaniards, whose relation in this vast
Country I must follow, five distinct Provinces.

1 Castella Aurea. 2 Guiana. 3 Peru. 4 Brasilia. 5 Chile; of each briefly.
Castella Aurea, is the first, and was so termed by the Spaniards Castella
Aurea.
at its discovery, for the abundance of gold found therein, besides which it is
admirably stored with silver, spices, and some drugges; it is divided into
four Provinces, which are first Castella del Oro, situated in the very
Isthmus, and is not populous, by reason of the unhealthfulnesse of the air,
proceeding from the many standing pooles found therein: the chief Cities are
Nombre de Dios on the East, and Panama on the West side thereof, both built by
Didacus Nombre de Dios.
Niq^esa the discoverer; which since for their unhealthfull situation, were
removed by the King of Spaines command, by Petro Aria, then Viceroy; through
which two Towns comes all the rich traffic that is betwixt Spain and
Peru; for whatsoever commodities comes out of Peru, is unladen at Panama,
carried Panama.
by land to Nombre de Dios, and thence shipped for Spain, and what commodity
comes from Spain is landed at Nombre de Dios, is carried by land to Panama, and
so laden for Peru.

If I should silently pass over the attempt of one John Ocknam Ocknams brave
attempt.
a follower of Sir Francis Drake, in his Worlds incompassement in this place, I
should much wrong the honor due to so much worth: this man as Mr. Hackluit
has it, with 70. companions, in a creek a little above these Towns, drew on
shore his Bark, covered the same with boughs and leaves, and so leaving it
marched over with his company, guyded by some negroes, until he came to a
River which ran into the South Sea, which by the relation and Mercator his
Maps, may be Tomobonda, or the Creek Uentura, where he cut down timber, built
him a freggat, entered the South Seas, went to the I Will of pearls, lay there 10.
days, and there intercepted in two Spanish Ships 60000. pound weight of gold,
and 200000. pound weight of silver in ingots, with diverse other rich
commodities; and after that returned safely again to the main land, where
rowing up the same stream where his frigate was built, he was discovered by
some feathers plucked from certain soul they had killed for their provision,
which swam upon the River down the current; and though by this means he was
taken, and returned not into his Country, nor yet his hidden Vessel; yet it
is an adventure that deserves a remembrance from all such as are lovers of
their Countries honor, and it is held in admiration by the Spanish writers
that have made mention thereof.

Andalusia Nova is the second; the chief Cities are Santa Margarita, and Santa
Sperita. An^alusia Nova.


Nova Grenada is the third, the chief City is Iungia, a pleasant Nova Grenada.
and strong Town directly seated under the Equator; then next is St. Foy an
Archbishops Sea and a Court of Justice.

Cartaghena is the fourth, accounted a fruitful soil; but therein is found a
tree, that whosoever touches does hardly escape poisoning: Cartaghena.
the chief City is Cartagena; which our Country man Sr Francis Drake, in An.
1585. surprised; where besides inestimable sums of moneys, he took with him
from hence 240. pieces of Ordinance.

Guiana is the second Province, directly situated under the Equinoctial
Guiana, second Province.
line, and is the fruitfullest part of Peruana: the Inhabitants in winter time
dw^ling in trees, for fear of inundations, on which they built man pretty
Uilages and artificial mansions: it is watered with two goodly Rivers; theone
has the name of Orinoque or rather Raliana, borrowing the same from Sr Walter
Raughlie, who first of all to any purpose, made a plenary survey of this
Country, with the commodities and situation thereof in An. 1595. and found
this River navigable for great Ships of burden 1000. miles, and for Boats and
Pinaces 2000. miles. The other River is called Orellana, or the Amasons,
discovered 1543. the which is found navigable 6000. miles, and 200. miles broad
at the entrance into the Sea.

The chief City of this Country (and if Spanish writers may Manoa the golden
City.
herein be believed the chiefest City of the World) is here found and called
Manoa, or as Diego Ordas the discoverer calls it, el Dorado, or the golden,
from the abundance of gold, both in coin, plate, armor, and other furniture,
which he there saw. This discoverer or traveller, (for by that name the truth
of his wondrous relation may be the better considered) is said to have entered
into the City at noone, and to have traveled all that day, and the next also
until night through the streets hereof, before he came to the Kings Palace,
which peradventure was the policy of those people; as I have seen it to be in
Constantinople in An. 1621. when as the Duke of Avarascah coming with a great
train in Embassy from the King of Poland to Soltan Osman the then great
Turk, after his unfortunate expedition to Poland, caused him and his whole
train to be lead a whole afternoon through the most eminent streets of that
City, when he first entered the same, and so to his appointed lodging, whereas
an hours easy walk to him that had known the direct way, would easily have
served the turn; perchance imagining this a fit way to demonstrate to the
Ambassador the beauty and vastnes of that City, together with his own greatness
in ostentation, and to recover that honor and repute which he had a little
before lost by the insolency and cowardice of his Soldiers in his said
expedition thither.

The third Province is Peru, which above all others in America Peru the third
Province.
abounds in gold and silver, the mine whereof in diverse places is better stored
with metals than with Earth: the chief City whereof is St. Michael, the first
colony the Spaniards placed here, and fortified by Piscaro a famous Spanish
captain, who subdued the Country, took the King thereof prisoner, and had for
a ransom for his liberty and life a house piled upon all sides with refined
gold and silver, in estimation about ten millions, which when he had received,
most perfidiuosly contrary to his oath and promise slew him: by which appears
the wonderful riches of this Country. Besides which the soil is luxurient in
all manner of grain, fortunate in the civility of her Inhabitants, frequencie
of Cities, and salabrity of air; and abundantly stored with that herb
Tobacco, from hence brought first into England by Sr. Francis Drakes mariners
in An. 1585. In this Country also is now found that famous River called of
Plate, being 150. Rio de la plata.
miles broad at the Embosheur, and above 2000. miles long: and on this stream
is found certain fig trees; the part toward the River bearing fruit in
winter, and the other part thereof toward the land bearing fruit in summer.

Brasilia is the fourth, affording a soil fat by nature, and always
flourishing, yielding great store of sugars, and wonderful rich in Brasilia
the 4. Province.
mines; and hence our red wood which is hereused by dyers called brasile does
come: the trees whereof are found of that bigness, that whole families live in
an arm of one of them, every tree being as populous as many of our Country
Villages, which is the reason that few Cities are found in this Country, yet
along the Sea coast some Cities are of late built by the Spaniards, and by them
fortified where the Dutch have lately got some footing, and taken Todos los
santos, and thence marched to Fernand buck, whence that wood comes so well
known to diers by that name, where report says they are now settled and daily
get ground in that continent.

The fifth is Chilo, taking its name as some would have it, from the Chilo the
5. Province.
exceeding cold there found, so that the Rivers are here observed to run in the
day, but by night to stand still, or at leastwise to move very slowly: this
Country boasts of 5. or 6. Towns inhabited by Spaniards, the Town called
the Imperial being a colony of the Spaniards is found to be the principal.

This Country bordereth upon the straights of Magelan, through which Sr.
Francis Drake passed in his Worlds incompassement; many of the ports and baies
herein owing him that honor due to this adventure, for the names they now are
known by: which voyage finished by him in 2.. years, as the relation of Diego
Nunio his Pilot testifies, made profit to himself and Merchants of London his
partners and fellow adventurers, according to an account made up at his return,
all charges paid and discharged which I have seen subscribed under his own
hand 47 li. for one pound; so that he who adventured with him in this voyage
100. li. had 4700. li. for the same, by which may be gathered the benefit that
redounded thereby; though accompanied with many rubbes, delays and dangers.
Having thus run over the maine continent of this Worlds division, let us see
what Islands of note belong thereunto.

First in the South Seas are found the Islands of Solomon 18. in number, and
imagined by the discoverer in An. 1567. to be the Isles of Solomon.
land of Ophir, to which Solomon sent for his gold; but in this he was
deceived: the next are the Islands of thieves of no account, therefore I pass
over them, and in the next place peruse the Islands in the Virginian Ocean; the
first worthy of mention is Margarita, deficient both in corn, grass, trees
and water; yet the abundance of precious stones here found makes some amends
for these defects, from whence the name of Margarita is imposed on it.
Margarita.


The next is Trinidado discovered by Columbus in An. 1497. being famoused for
the best Tobacco, which by some Nations carries Trinidado.
the name of this Island.

The next are the Isles of Bacaloes lying against the influx of Caneda, Bacaloes.
and owe the first discovery to Sebastian Cabot 1447. by some termed Terra
Nova, well known for the great quantity of fish taken on this coast, as I have
noted in the passage of that part of America.

The next is the Island of Beriquen, the North part affording plenty of gold,
and the South part of vital provisions; the Cities here Beriquen.
are St John's, built and inhabited by the Spaniards 1527 and Porto Rico ruind
by Henry Earl of Cumberland 1597. and whose walls was then first mounted by
my deceased Uncle Captain Tho. Roberts, to whose worth and valor I owe here
this remembrance.

The next is Iamaica once very populous, insomuch that the Iamaica.
Spaniards here slew 60000. living souls, and the women beholding their
cruelty, did kill their Children before they had given them life, that the
issues of their bodies might not serve so cruel a Nation. The Towns of note
are Crestana and Sivil, acknowledging Columbus for its first discoverer.

The next is Cuba, made known by Columbus his second Navigation, it abounds
with ginger, cassia, masticke, aloes, cynamon, Cuba.
sugar; the earth producing brass, of excellent perfection, but the gold
somewhat drossie: here is the famous Road Havana, a staple of Indian and
Spanish merchandise, and where the King of Spaines Navy rides till the time of
the year, and the convenience of the wind join together to waft them
homeward.

The next is the Lucay Islands 400. in number, who glory in the matchless
beauty of their Women, and mourn for the loss of a million Lucay.
of the Inhabitants murdered by the bloodthirsty Spaniards at the first
discovery thereof.

Hispaniola is the next, now lamenting the loss of three millions of her
Inhabitants, butchered by her new Spanish Masters, enjoying a Hispaniola.
temperate air, a fertile soil, rich mines, amber and sugars; it excels
all other the Islands of these Seas, especially in three prerogatives; first, in
the finenesse of the gold, which is here dug more pure and unmixed;
secondly, in the increase of the sugar cane, which here is found oftentimes in
one cane to fill up twenty and sometimes thirty measures of liquour; thirdly,
in the goodness ^f the soil for tillage, the corn here yielding an hundred
fold, and in sixteen days, herbs and roots are found to ripen and to ^e fit
for meat; this fertility is ascribed to four rivers running East, West,
North, and South, and all four springing from one mountain standing in the
very center of this Island; the chief Towns here is Saint Dominico, ransackt
by Sir Francis Drake 1585. Besides which Islands inhabited by Spaniards, there
are belonging to this division of the world, some that are inhabited by the
English, as the Barbadas, Barmudas, and others, in which certain Barbadas,
Barmudas.
Colonies of English have planted themselves, which is found agree^ble with the
English constitution, and being well fortified and peopled, may in time prove
maine instruments of sharing with ^he Spanyard in his American Dominions. And
thus briefly stands ^he present state of this new found climate, least
acquainted to our Nation, and only subject to the will and power of the
Spanish Scepter, who challenges the soveraigntie and rule of this vast
Country, the trade whereof is only permitted to his subjects, and debarred
from all others; save what is obtained by force or strength, and purchased by
Colonies planted where the Spanyard is neither known nor seated.

To give here a small touch of the traffic of this new world, is The trade of
America by the Spaniards.
the principal scope of my intention, but being shut up from the eyes of all
strangers, we must be content till time produce it more apparently to live in
ignorance: true it is that the Coun^rey abounding in Mines of silver and gold,
and the soil rich in ^ringing forth all fruits, that from Spain have been
hither tran^planted, adds every day an increase to their present traffic,
^he special matter here sought out for is gold and silver, the load^one that
attracts all Merchants to adventure hither: and in their Mines the Inhabitants
are set continually to work, living poore^y, and undergoing thus the
punishment of their ignorance and pu^llanimitie, suffering themselves to be so
easily overcome and so ^asely subjected; out of which Mines the King has the
part of ^ll extracted, which in the Emperor Charles the fifths time amounted
but to five hundred thousand Crowns of gold yearly, but since it has been
found that the Kings of Spain have had thence sometimes ten, sometimes
fifteen, and sometimes seaventeene millions of gold yearly. The Merchants
carry thither Spanish wines, woolen and linen cloth, and other merchandises of
Europe, and (if report may gain credit) do make returns thence above one
hundred profit for another, in spices, sugars, some drugges, and in gold and
silver ingotts in great abundance, as well for the accounts of private
merchants, as for the account of the King himself; so that it does appear in
the Records kept in the Custom House of Sivill, that in these seventy-foure
years last past, there has come from this India into Spain two hundred and
sixty millions of gold, which has been the moover of all those broils and
wars that have been set afoot in Europe by the Kings of Spain, it being
affirmed without contradiction, that by means thereof, Philip the second
during his reign, did spend more than all his predecessors, being in number
sixty-two that have reigned before him in this Kingdom since they shook off
the Roman yoke; for he alone spent more than an hundred millions that came out
of this India.

This Country also gives employment to many ships of great burden, to carry
their sugars, ginger, cottons, fernandbucke, and such other commodities that
are here sound daily to increase by the industry of the Spanyard, which by
good government may come in time to a great height, and had not the sword of
these bloudsuckers ended so many millions of lives in so short a time, trade
might have seen a larger harvest, and a more profitable crop by their
industry and labor.

It will not be further useful for me to insist upon other particulars of
traffic in this Continent in matter of coins, of waights and measures; for
in all these they follow the rules observed in Sivill, where the rendevous of
those ships are made, that go and come into these parts; and so leaving this
new discovered Division of the World, I will cross the maine Ocean, and with a
somewhat better Survay, I will observe the needful occurrents of trade in
AFRICA, my second part of this Model, and of the World.

AFRICA, AND THE PROVINCES AND CITIES OF TRADE THEREOF.

AFRICAE DESCRIPTIO


OF AFRICA, AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF.
CHAP. XIV.
AFRICA I make to be my second division Africa and the Provinces thereof.
of the world, which is found to be a Peninsula, almost encompassed round,
having the red Sea on the East, the Atlantique Ocean on the West, the Southern
Ocean on the South, and the mediteranean on the North; and where the Sea is
defective to make it a complete Island, there is a little Isthmus of twenty
leagues that tyeth it to Asia, which sundry Princes in former ages intended to
trench through, to have the benefit of both those Seas united, but have
desisted as finding the Sea in the red Sea gulf to be higher than the land of
Egypt, by nature all flat, level, and plain, and so might thereby overflow
and drown all Egypt.

Africa is at this day usually divided into eight parts, which Divided into
eight parts.
are; 1 Barbary. 2 Numidia. 3 Libya. 4 Negrita. 5 Ethiopia Interior. 6
Ethiopia Exterior. 7 Egypt, and 8 The Islands thereof.


And first Barbary is now divided into four Kingdoms, which Barbary 1.
are, first, Tunes; second, Argier; third, Fesse; and fourth, Morocco: the
commodities these Countries send abroad, I shall speak of when I come to these
particular places.

CHAP. XV.
Of TUNES and the Trade thereof.

THE Kingdom of Tunes contains sundry Cities of Tunes and the trade thereof.
trade, the principal being the city of Tunes it self, then Bona, Biserta,
Tripolis, and Africa, and here was seated that famous City of Carthage, who
contended Bona. Biserta. Tripolis. Africa.
with Rome for the mastery of all the world, and challenged the prioritie in
Africa as queen and supreme Lady thereof, now only seen in her ruins, and
known by her vast extent, and from whose ashes sprung up Tunes the abovesaid,
seated upon a Lake six miles distant from the Sea; the Port commanded by the
Fort of Golletta, and at this day acknowledging the great Turk for their
Protector, who every three years does Golletta.
send hither a Bashaw to command; but the chief rule appertains to the Die or
Governor, chosen and elected by the natives of this Kingdom. This Kingdom is
much bettered and enriched by the labor of those Moors which by thousands
were banished from Moros franc^s or Granatines.
Spain, who have here built many Cities, and Temples, according to their
superstitious use, planted Vines, Oranges, Lemons, Figs, Dates, Almonds and
Olives, and thereby have both much peopled and profited this whole Country;
and where in Anno 1619. and 1620. in two several voyages, at my residents
there I observed in trade these things.

Their coins used in trade is here commonly most current the Coins current in
Tunes.
Spanish both silver and gold; the Riall of Spanish is accounted 46 aspers,
the. of 4/4 23 aspers, the 11, and the Pistolet of Spain commonly by them
termed the scudo, is 64 aspers, but these rise and fall according to the
plenty and scarsitie thereof: silver coins of their own I have not observed
any stamped amongst them, save the asper spoken of before, eighty whereof makes
a sultany, chicquin, or hangar duccat, which is the common piece of gold known
passable through all Africa and Asia, and through all the Dominions of the
Grand Signeor: and these coins pass thus current in Tripolis, Barbaria, in
Africa, Vna, Biserta, and other maritime parts along the coast.

Their common weight is a cantar, or 100 li. being about two Waights of the
Kingdom of Tunes.
pound bigger than our 112 li. of England, so that their pound weight has been
found to make near 16 ounces Troy, and produces in Lighorne the common scale
of passage from Christendom 150 li.

This cantar cont. 100 Rotolos or li. each Rotolo is divided into 16 ounces,
and each ounce into eight tamins, and hereby is waighed all sorts of
commodities, except silver, gold, pearl, etc. which are waighed by a carrot
weight and mitigals, as I shall show in another place more convenient.

Their common measure of length is a pico cont. 27 inches English, Measures of
Tunes.
by which all silks and woolen are measured, and called the pico turkisco, but
the Morisco pico, is an inch less and qt 26 inches, by which all Linnens is
only sold, and no other commodity.

Their liquid measure is a Mettor, which in oils makes about 32 li. English,
and accounting 7 li. to a gallon is four gallons and 2 li. by which is sold
honey, wines, and such like liquid commodities.

Their accounts by Merchants are kept by dollers and aspers, and by some in
sultanies and aspers, as being the proper coins and Accounts in Tunes.
species of that kingdom.

The commodities of this Kingdom, are excellent horses, wax, Commodities of
Tunes.
honey, raw and salted hides, corrall taken up at Bona on the coast where the
Genoes and Marselians have built them forts and scales for trade and commerce
with the Inhabitants, to this purpose spunges, dates, almonds, rice, oil, hard
soape, Christian captives of all kinds and Nations.

The customs paid usually is ten per cent. upon all commodities Customs of
Tunes.
entering, for so much only as is landed and sold, accounted upon the real
value sold, and what is not sold may be at all times shipped without payment of
any custom or duty whatsoever: a Broaker being appointed by the Dye of the
City to attend the Merchants actions, who keeps a register of the sales
made, according to which the said ten per centum is paid by the Merchant
seller. The City of Tripoly distinguished of Barbary Tripoly in Barbary.
is found upon this coast, and to agree with Tunes in waights, measures, and
coins: and thus much shall serve to have said of Tunes in Numidia.

CHAP. XVI.
Of ARGIER, and the trade thereof.

ARGIER contains only two Towns of note, Tremesin once the principal of a
Kingdom, and Argier and the trade thereof. Tremesin.
Argier the principal now of this Country, not found to be very spacious in
its self, but strong and of late much fortified, enriched not only by the
labor of the Moors banished out of Spain, but also by the spoils of many
Merchants of all nations, brought thither as the retreat and receptacle of all
Turkish and Moorish Pirates, which do much infest the mediterranean Seas, and
of late years have found the way out of the Straights of Giblatar into the
Canary Islands, and into sundry other Countries bordering upon the Ocean. In it
are accounted eighty thousand souls, the most part of them living by Piracies.
Merchandising is not much in use in this City, yet some of the Inhabitants are
found to detest this common ill gotten gain, by piracie and theft, and these
are observed to maintain some trade with other nations along the coast. What
points necessary thereto according as I noted there in 1619. I shall here set
down: and first their commodities vented thence to foreign parts, are such as
follows.

The commodities this Kingdom affords is, Barbary horses, Estridge feathers,
honey, wax, reisins, figs, dates, oils, almonds, castile Commodities of
Argier.
soap, brass, copper, and some drugges: and lastly, excellent piraticall
Rascals in great quantity, and poor miserable Christian captives of all
Nations too too many, God give them comfort, patience, and release in due time,
if it be his blessed will.

Their coins passing current here in trade is the Double, which is Coins of
Argier.
accounted to hold correspondencie in value with the English shilling, or
rather two Spanish Rialls single.

Four doubles is 1 (...), called there an Osian.

Five doubles and 35 aspers is a pistolet of Spain.

Seven doubles is accounted a sultany or Chequin, the common piece of gold
found current in all Barbary.

Fifty aspers is accounted to make a double; and these are the usual coins
passable in all this coast belonging to this Kingdom.

The 100 li. or Rotolos here is 120 li. English, so that their 84 li. W^ights
of Argier.
makes 100 li. sutle, and 94 li. or Rotolos is 112 li. English, according to
the custom of Valentia in Spain, from whence it is conceived they have drawn
this original of Waights: they are observed to have two several maights, the
proportion being 10 li. of the small making, 6 li. of the gross.

But here sundry commodities are found to be weighed by sundry Cantars, as
iron, lead, yarne, and all wools are weighed by a Cantar of 150 Rotolos of the
Rotolos above specified.

Reisins, figgs, butter, honey, dates, oil, soape by the Cantor of 166 Rotolos
abovesaid.

Almonds, cheese, cottons by the Cantar of 110 Rotolos.

Brass, copper, wax and all druggs by the Cantar of 100 Rotolos.

And Flax is weighed by the Cantar to contain 200 Rotolos.

Gold, silver, pearls and jems are weighed by the mitigall, which is worth
there 9. doubles, and is 72 gr. English: and the soltany, checquin or hungar
weighes 52 gr. English, being accounted equal to Angel gold and worth in
England in circa 3 l. 11 shill. per ounce, Troy weight, or thereabouts.

They use in Algier two picos or measures, the Turkish and Morisco, Measures of
length.
the Morisco pico being the measure of the Country, and ^s of the Turkish, by
which is sold all linen only.

The Turkish pico is divided into 16 parts, and every (...) part is called a
Robo, and is 131/192 part of an English yard, which with the al^owance of an
ynch according to our custom in England, has been found to make 1. picos
turkisco and by which all silk stuffes and woollens are sold in this place.

Their dry measure is called a Tarry, which heaped up, as they Dry measures.
use it, is 5 gallons English, and so has it been found to produce ^n corn,
salt and some such commodities.

They keep their account in doubles and osians, and some in sol^anies Accounts
in Argier.
and aspers, the coins of Barbary, 4 doubles making an ossian, and 50 aspers
making a double.

Their customs are here 10 per cent. as in Tunis, and paid upon Customs of
Argier.
^he commodity according to the value sold, and permission given to ^and, and
if not sold, to be shipped again free of all duties (as I said before) in the
Kingdom of Tunis. And it is to be noted, a Ship ^ntring here and anchoring,
must either land her sails or her ^udder for prevention of running away
without license, which ^ust be obtained in Duano, which is the common assembly
of ^he Bashaw, who is Commander for the grand Seignior and of the Clearing of a
S^p in Argier.
^rincipall Moors of the Kingdom and City, and then paying ^hese duties with
license she is dismissed, viz to the Kaiffa 28 dou^les, to the Alamine 31 do.
to the captain Anchoredge 15 do. to the Bashaw, 8 do. to his Chiouse 4 do. to
his Almin, 8 do. to his Chouse, 4 do. to the Bashaw sorman, 2 do. to the
Druggerman, 8 do. to the Sackagie 8 do. to the Consols duty, 42 do. which in
all make 162 doubles: And so much shall serve for Argier; now I sail along the
Coast, and observe some Maritime Towns of note there seated.

CHAP. XVII.
Of ORAN, and the Trade thereof.

ORAN is seated upon this Shore also, and of late in possession of the
Spaniards, whose immunities to such Oran and the Trade thereof.
as come hither to reside have made the place noted for some traffic,
especially for the commodities of this Country, which hence are transported
into Spain and Portugal, such as are horses, wax, and some years corn in a
great measure, as I have noted before.

The coins current of Barbary, and which pass currently here, Coins of Oran.
are those indifferently named before, and the coins of the opposite shoares
of Spain.

It is found they have here four several weights: First a quintar of 5 roves
of 20 l. to a rove which is 100 l. or Rotolos: Secondly, The Weights in use in
Oran.
a quintar of spices of 4 roves of 25 l. per rove which is 100 Rotolos:
Thirdly, a quintar for corn, every quintar being only 6 Rotolos, and lastly a
quintar for cottonwool, every quintar being 15 Rotolos, the 100 l. of London
makes in the first 90 Rotolos; in the second 133. Rotolos; in the third for
corn 48 Rotolos; and in the last 58 Rotolos.

The Measures of ORON are found to be principally two, the one being the pico
Morisco, the proper measure of the Country Measures of Oran.
agreeing with the measure of Argier, before mentioned, and the other the Vare
of Spain here used in cloth, silk, and such like, by the Spaniards.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of VNA, and the Trade thereof.

VNA is also seated upon this coast, and depends for the most part in matter
of trade, upon the inland Inhabitants; Una and the Trade thereof.
affording for transportation the common commodities of Barbary, and by reason
of the situation little known to our nation, therefore I shall the more
briefly pass over the same.

The coins before mentioned are here current, only with little alteration, as
also the same is found to be in Bona (anciently Hippona Coins of Vna.
the seat of Saint Augustine that learned Father) in Cola, Tabara^ha, Bugia,
Constantine, and other towns of trade upon this coast, therefore I will omit
the repetition thereof, having all a reference in trade one to the other.

But in weights they much differ; for here is found in use three Waights of
Unia.
several quintals composed of one l. or Rotolo, one for cotton wool, another
for spices, and the third for corn; thus agreeing with London.

The 100 l. of London makes 63 Rotolos for weight of wool.

The 100 l. of London makes 72 Rotolos for weight of spices.

The 100 l. of London makes 91 Rotolos in the weight of corn.

All which is to be observed by him that trades into this port, in the sale of
these and the like commodities.

The measure of length is here the pico Morisco, which generally Measures of
Vnia.
^s used in all commodities and contains 26 inches English in circa.

CHAP. XIX.
The trade in general of ARGIER and TVNIS.

THough these two Kingdoms of TVNIS and ARGIER The general trade of Argier
and Tunes.
do afford many fair Towns according to the manner of this Country, yet it
is not found that the same does produce many Merchants of quality or of great
consideration; This tract of land is found at present to belong to three
several inhabitants, the Moors as propriators, enjoy the principal part; and
these are found within themselves to acknowledge several Sovereigns, which
not seldom are at variance, sometimes amongst themselves, sometimes with their
neighbors, and because of the liberty given here for entertainment and
protection to all nations, not only these Towns do harbor Levents which we
call Pirates, and they call natural Turks, but also Christians of all
Countries which hence with robberies infest these adjoining Mediterranean Seas,
and joining themselves with the abovesaid Levents, make up a dissolute and
resolute company of Sea-farers and Pirates; and because these are not sufficient
to work any matters of moment alone to make their strength the greater, and
their force the stronger, there is of their own accord added thereto the
Tagarins, a poor, desperate and naked rascality, and the Spanish Moors, or
Moorish Spaniards of late years banished from the Kingdom of Spain, who
willingly some in purse and some in person undertake these designs to be
revenged of their banishment from their native Countries, their case herein
being most miserable; for whilst they lived in Spain they were accounted for
Moors, and now being amongst the Moors are still doubted as Christians.

These last and some others inhabitants of these Cities of Tunis and Argier,
do still profess more civility then the common sort, and have some relics
of that honesty left them which peradventure they brought with them hither out
of Europe; and these are only they that in these Cities profess
Merchandising, and are found to use some trade along this coast from one part
to another, and so to Marselia and Lighorne, Towns seated on the Christian
opposite shore inioying many privileges and immunities for Merchants of what
nation soever.

The Spaniards inhabiting in this coast in sundry good and well fortified
Towns, are the second that here bear sway; the Country for some certain
miles in circuit overawed by their garrisons pay them contribution; and it is
supposed that the charges in maintaining these exceeds the gain yielded
thereby, and here is but little trade found.

The third sort I account the Genois and the French nations, who upon this
coast by permission of the State, do pay certain yearly pensions, for
admission of trade, and have built themselves Fortresses and Castles for the
defense of their estates and persons; and shipping; and these are now found the
only Merchants inhabiting this coast: here they have their scales for the
corrall fishing; for honey, wax, corn, hides, horses, spunges and many other
commodities, which the Country men willingly for love of their Spanish plate
do bring them in, and here traffic is made upon good terms and sure guard,
buying and selling as they list to inhance or debase the commodities they
either buy or sell: by which a great gain is yearly made unto them.

And this is as much as I conceive necessary in this point of Mercantile
traffic in these two Kingdoms and Cities of Tunis and Argier: but there is
here a piraticall Trade also much practiced by the people of these two places
who set out Vessels in partnerships The piraticall trade of Tunes and Argier.
and shares for to take Prizes or Gonimas as they term them, which is ever
performed by all manner of advantages without faith or promise either kept or
regarded, which spoils have been so great, and their booties so beneficial,
that the desperate spirits of many of sundry nations have come hither in hope
to raise by rapine and theft what else by honest courses they could not
elsewhere compass: their manner of setting forth these Ships is upon a small
cost and done with little charge, considering the frugality in diet used in
these Countries, and their division at their return is commonly allotted, (as
I observed in these parts when for some time I abode amongst them) for the
body of the Vessel for the Victuallers and setters out, and for the Captain
and his company; and this is truly and exactly made in species and kind, for
they hardly admit a commodity taken or slaves captivated to be sold at the
Market, and the divident to be made in money: but they (as I have often seen)
will divide it in kind, as if a bag of pepper, then by dishfulls, or a piece
of cloth or linen, then by proportional shares, according to their gross
capacity, which custom I understand is since by their better judgment
rectified, and Merchants Ships warned by their losses of latter days, go
better armed, manned and provided; and seeing their prizes come in thinner, they
are more provident in their division, though more venturous in their thefts.
Argeer in this kind has been able to set out near 300. sail little and great
in those times, now not a quarter so many: and Tunes then had 20. in 31. good
sail, now it has not a dozen; so that I may conclude their trade decreaseth
and daily diminishes, which GOD of his goodness grant it may still do, to the
Merchants comfort and the mariners joy: and thus leaving these two piraticall
Kingdoms and Cities, with this Maritime coast, I come in the next place to the
famous Kingdoms of FESSE and MOROCCO.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Kingdom of FESSE and the Provinces thereof.

FESSE is divided into 7. Provinces, which borrows Fesse and the Provinces
thereof.
their names from the Towns seated therein; the first is Ham lisnon, seated in
the mountainous part of this Kingdom; the second is Seuta, now in possession
of the Spaniard, having a Town of this name strongly by them fortified; the
third is Tanger, a City also fortified and belonging likewise to them; the
fourth is Mehenes; the fifth Arguer; the sixth is Alcaser, (near to which the
three Kings, Sebastian of Portugal, Mahomet of Fesse, and Abdelmelech of
Morocco, competitors for this Kingdom were slain in one day, together with
many others of eminent quality; and Stukley that famous infamous english rebel
in Anno 1578) and seventh FESSE the Metropolis, which for its greatness merits a
more serious consideration.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the City FESSE and the Trade thereof.

THis City bears this name of Fesse from the abundance of gold, (as writers
record) that was found in City of Fesse and the Trade thereof.
digging the foundation thereof; it is beautified with many goodly buildings
both public and private; it is divided by the River Sahu into three parts,
containing in all 82000. households, having 700. mosces or Temples, 50. of them
being adorned with pillars of alablaster and Jasper; and one seated in the
heart of the City called Carucen is the most sumptuous, containing a mile in
compass, in breadth containing 17. arches, in length 120. and borne up by two
thousand five hundred white marble pillars, under the chiefest arch (where the
Tribunal is kept) hangs a most huge lamp of silver, encompassed with 110.
lesser; under every the other arches hang also very great lamps in each of
which burn 150. lights: it has 31. gates great and high; the roof is 150.
yards long and 80. yards broad, and round about are diverse porches containing
40. yards in length, and 30. in breadth, under which are the public storehouses
of the Town: about the walls are pulpits of diverse sorts, wherein the Masters
of their Law read to the people such things as they imagine appertain to
their salvation: the revenewes thereof in Anno 1526. was 200. duccats a day of
old rent accounted 100. li. sterlin; until the late civil wars it was a
City of great traffic, and many Merchants of diverse Nations resorted hither,
and were allowed a public meeting place for their Commerce, and lodging for
their residence, being in form of a Court or Exchange, enclosed with a strong
wall, with 12. gates, and limited with 15. streets for several Nations to meet
for their business, and for the laying up of their commodities; and every
night for security of their goods and persons the same was kept guarded at the
Cities charge, resembling the Besistens or Canes now in use in Turkey and other
southern Countries.

There is here also diverse Colleges where the sciences are taught, amongst
which Madorac is the chief, and accounted for one of the excellentest pieces
for workmanship in all Barbary: it has 3. cloisters of admirable beauty,
supported with 8. square Pillars of diverse colors; the roof curiously carved,
and the Arches of Mosaique of gold and asore; the gates are of brass fair
wrought, and the doors of the private chambers of inlaide work: it is
recorded that this College did cost the founder King Abuchenen 480. thousand
sultanies in gold, which is in English money 192. thousand pound; which would
hardly in these days were it now to be built perform the twentieth part
thereof, and this was not above 150. years past, and about that time Henry the
seventh King of England did build that sumptuous Chapel in Westminster; which
as I have been informed, did in those days cost 7448. li. and let it be judged
by artists how much more would build the fellow of it in these our days.

They have also here for the commodity and pleasure of the Citizens 600.
Conduits, from whence almost every house is served with water; besides what
goes to their religious use^, at the entries of their Temples and Mosces: but
I have dwelt too long in surveying this City, I will now see what commodities
and merchandise this Kingdom affords.

The commodities found in general, as well in the Kingdom of Commodities in
the Kingdom of Fesse.
Fess as of Morocco and found transportable for merchandise, is fruits of all
kinds, such as is principally of dates, almonds, figs, refins, olives; also
honey, wax, gold, and sundry sorts of hides and skins, especially that
excellent sort of cordovante from this Kingdom of Morocco called Maroquins,
famoused throughout Spain, France, and Italy; also corn, horses, woolls,
whereof the Inhabitants are observed of late days to make some cloth: here is
also found for Merchandise fabricated here some sorts of stuffes of silks, as
sattins, taffetaes, and some sorts of linen much in use in this Country, made
partly of Cotton and partly of Flax, and diverse other commodities.

The moneys of this Kingdom, and generally of all the Kingdom Moneys of Fesse
and Morocco.
of Moroco is the Sheriff or Duccat in gold deriving the name thereof from the
Sheriffs, who within these few years made conquest of these Kingdoms under
pretext and color of the sanctity of their Religion, and is accounted to be
about ten sh. starling money, divided into 8. parts, and esteemed each part,
which may be compared to be about 14. d. in 15. d. starling.

They keep their accounts in these places by duccats, or old sheriffs Accounts
in Fesse and Moroco.
now almost out of use divided into 8. parts, accounted in common value, but
12. d. every, though worth more, as above is declared.

Their weight here is two, one used in all ordinary commodities which is the
Rotolo, containing() ounces or drams, it having been Weights in Fesse.
found by observation that the 100. li. haberdupois London has made here 64.
Rotolo, and 100. Rotolos is here a Cintar. The second weight is here the
Mitigall, used in the weighing of silver, gold, pearl, musk and the like,
agreeing with the mitigall used in Argier and Tunes spoken of before.

The common measure for length is here the Covado, 12. whereof is accounted to
a Cane: and it has been observed by Barbary Measures in Fesse.
Merchants hither trading, that the 100. yards of London make here about 181.
to 182. covadoes. Customs of Fesse and Morocco.


The customs of Fesse and Morocco are paid at the entrance thereinto, as is
likewise due at the entrance of any other the Cities of this Kingdom, and is
by the subjects natives upon all commodities paid two in the hundred, and by
all strangers ten in the hundred collected for what is sold or landed without
leave, for exportation again if once landed; which causes diverse of our
Merchants bound for those parts to make their Ships their shops, and
consequently land so much of their commodities as they imagine the Market will
vent, and no more. But because the Kingdom of Morocco obeys the same rules
in matters of trade, I will speak a word of that place likewise, and then
survey the trade of them both together as they are known now to us, to be as
it were but one, though indeed different Kingdoms.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Kingdom of MOROCCO and the Provinces thereof.

THE Kingdom of Morocco once of great splendour is now divided into 6.
Provinces, the first Tangovista, Morocco and the Provinces thereof.
having a Town also of that name: Fisidet is the second which gives name
likewise to a Province; the third is Massa the principal of a Province
abounding in Amber. Alarach is the 4th fortified and kept by the only garrison
of this Country. The 5. is Taradant, in times past the second in this
Kingdom, and the principal for traffic, ruind by the late wars, whereunto
yet the resort is commonly made by many English and French for commerce. The 6.
and last is Morocco the Metropolis, of which a word according to my intended
method.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the City MOROCCO and the Trade thereof.

MOROCCO is the chief City of this Kingdom, and in times past was accounted
the Metropolis of all City of Morocco and the trade thereof.
Barbary, as once containing one hundred thousand households, but now inferior
to Fesse in beauty, spaciousness and populousness: it is strongly walled
about, and within adorned with many private and public edifices, the chief
being the Castle or Arsenall, and the Churches, or Mosces; one whereof is
bigger, though not so beautiful as that of Fesse, seated in the midst of the
City and built by Hali their King, augmented by 50. fadome in spaciousness by
Abdull mumen and Man^or his son with many exquisite Pillars brought from
Spain, he ^lso covered the same with lead, and made a cesterne of the same
greatness as this Temple was to receive the rain water that ^ame therefrom;
besides which he made therein a Tower of Masonry in form of the Roman
Colossus, equal in height to the famous Tower in Bolonia, which being ascended
the Hills of Asaffi, being 130. miles distant, may be easily discerned. The
Castle is also very large and strong, of the bigness of a reasonable Town, in
the midst whereof is a Temple, which has a Tower, whereon is fixed a spindle
of Iron passing through three great round Globes made of pure gold, and
weighing 130. thousand Barbary ducats, which is 58500. li. starlin, which
diverse Kings have gone about to take down and convert into money; but have all
desisted, by reason of some strange misfortune that have been inflicted on
them, so that the common people imagine they are kept by a guard of spirits.

They have here also a Burse for Merchants, which is now taken ^p by artisens,
the late civil wars having eclipsed the glory of the famous trade that was
seated in this Country, which in its former splendor was found to have
several streets for several artsmen, and no one artsman permitted to make his
abiding but amongst those of his own profession.

The commodities of this kingdom are the same as in the kingdom Commodities
of Morocco.
of Fesse, spoken of before, save that the same abounds more in sugars,
especially in Taradant, where diverse Merchants are found to reside purposely
for that commodity, from whence it is exported into other Regions.

The coins current is also the Sherif common with Fesse, and all Coins of
Morocco.
these parts of Barbary, and by some called the duccat of gold, having eight
divisions or parts, esteemed to be about nine shillings and four pence
sterling, each (...) worth fourteen pence sterling. They are found here to
have two several quintalls, one that does Waights of Morocco.
accord with the quintall of Fesse, specified formerly, and the other which
does agree with the quintall of Sivill, which may be seen there more at large
in this ensuing Tract, and there it may be observed, how the same does agree
with the weight of London, and other places; besides which it is observable,
that sundry commodities are waighed by this quintall, yet comprehending more or
less Rotolos, according to the custom in sale of that commodity which the
Merchants must learn to know.

The measure of length here is also covado, agreeing with that of Measure of
Morocco.
Fesse, as you shall find in the Chapter before touched.

The customs of Morocco is the same as specified in the kingdom Customs of
Morocco.
of Fesse, at thentrado 2 per cent. by the subject and 10 per cent. by the
Merchant stranger: But the civil wars has given a period to that famous
traffic here maintained by the Barbary Merchants of London, which from this
kingdom had its original, and which flourished in the days of Queen
Elizabeth; the faction, dissension, and banding for this kingdom and Fesse,
overthrew that company, from whose ashes and dissolution, arose the society
Barbary Merchants.
of merchants trading into the levant Seas, known by the name of the Turkey
Company, which now we find to be grown to that height, that (without
comparison) it is the most flourishing and most beneficial Company to the
Commonwealth of any in England The original of the Turkey and East India
Company.
of all other whatsoever; into whose Patent was at first inserted the Eastern
Indies, as only proper to their navigation, which within few years after
being by the way of Turkey better discovered, and gathering thereby new
strength, it was in the beginning of King James Reign incorporated a society
by it self, and for encouragement to adventurers in consideration of the
length of the voyage, and of the great charges and dangers incident thereto, it
was permitted that all men of what quality and profession soever, might be
adventurers therein, and be admitted thereunto, contrary to the custom and
privilege of the Turkey, and said Barbary Company, and of all other Societies
of Merchants, who admit not any to be a member thereof, but such as are mere
Merchants, and none others.

The trade of these Countries by reason of their discontent is almost come now
to nothing, every Town and Province for the The trade general of Barbary.
most part acknowledging a several sovereign; and where peace and unity is
wanting, trade must decay. Some good ports these two Kingdoms are found to
enjoy for traffic, as Tituan within the Straights, Tanger and Seuta at the
Straights mouth, Larache, Maxinara, Sali the old and new, a second Argier, and
sure receptacle for Pirates, lately reduced to better conformity with the
English subjects by the valor of some English, under the fortunate and happy
conduct of Captain William Rainsborough, to whose worth I owe this particular
remembrance; Assaffe, Mogador, and Santa Crux, with some others; and lastly,
Taradant the only Mart of all these Countries, seated Taradant.
upon the River of Sues, in a spacious plain between the Mountain Atlas and
the Sea, abounding with sugar, and all other kind of provision, the good regard
and continual abode that Mahumet Xeriffe, one of their late Sovereigns made
in this place, has greatly augmented and ennobled this Town; the observations
upon the present trade thereof, I am constrained by reason of my ignorance, to
refer to another hand.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Numidia, and Libya, and the Provinces thereof.

NUmidia has on the East Egypt, on the West the Atlantique Of Numidia and
Libya.
Ocean, on the North Atlas, on the South Libya: It will not be material to
relate the Provinces, for in them are found but few Towns, by reason of the
yearly progress of the Inhabitants from place to ^ce in families and tribes;
the Country abounding in Dates, (...) food here of man and beast.

Libya has on the East Nilus, on the West the Atlantique Ocean, Libya.
(...) the North Numidia, and on the South the land of Negroes; the ^untry
altogether sandy, barren, and a desert, the inhabitants together heathenish,
and therefore not worthy the conversa^n of a civil Merchant, or the residence
of any commerce.

CHAP. XXV.
Of NEGRITA, or the Land of Negroes, and the trade thereof.

THIS land of Blackamores has on the East Ethiopia superior, on the West the
Atlanticke Ocean, on the Negrita and the trade thereof.
North Libya, on the South Manicongo; in this tract of ground is accounted
twenty-five Kingdoms or Provinces, through which runs the famous Ri^r of
Niger or Sanega, in whose overflowing consists the ^elfare of the
Inhabitants; even as in Egypt it does by the in^dation of Nylus, for this (as
that) increases for forty days, ^d decreaseth for forty days more, during
which time the In^abitants sail over the whole Land in Boats and Barges.

This whole Tract principally now acknowledges 3. Sove^aignes, which is the
Kingdom of Tombutu, the Kingdom of Born^o, and the Kingdom of Goago; each
Kingdom giving name to a City the principal residence of the Kings. The City
of Tombutu Tombut^.
^yeth beyond the River of Sanega or Niger, wherein is found a ^rade driven by
many French, Dutch and English Merchants; the manner thereof, and the matter
wherewith I shall hereafter as well as I can particularise. Four hundred miles
from Tombut is the City of Goaga, wherein are found eminent Merchants (...)
(...) Gaogo. Borne^.
and sumptuous merchandise of all sorts. Borneo is the third, the Inhabitants
whereof are better versed in breeding of cattle, than in the art of Commerce,
and better read in Mars than Mercury. The commodities of these Countries, are
corn, sugars, cattle, horse, rice, fruits, gold in sand which they term Siga
and we Tibur; Commodities thereof.
and also in Ingotts without sovereign stamp or character, and is
distinguished by its finenesse and goodness, which the Inhabitants by way of
exchange do barter with their neighbors, and other foreign Nations, against
cloths, linen, callicoes, Basins (...) (...), iron-worke, sword blades,
hand-guns, glasses, beads, etc. such (...) and principally against salt, which
of all other commodities this country is most defective in, and in some places
affords not, and therefore pays for it at an excessive dear price to
strangers. The trade of all this tract such as it is now in these days known
to our Nation, is comprised along the Sea coast, which the Portugals by
reason The trade of Giney and Benin, and the golden coast.
of their former plantation here, and rich commerce, have entitled the golden
coast, and we in common appellation, term the trade of the coast of Genin and
Benin, two of the principal Provinces maritime that are found included within
the circuits of these three beforementioned Kingdoms: which trade that it may
be a little the better understood, I shall more particularly survey, according
to the observations made by some hands thereon.

In the beginning and discovery of this Maritime coast, (for The Portugalls the
first traders into Giney and Benin.
thereto I intend to apply the trade of this Country) the Portugals were the
first that ranged this shore, and had some small knowledge of their commodities
and of the manner of trading with them, who partly by fair means, and partly
by constraint got footing in this Sea coast, building Forts in some, and
^risons and Factories in others, which then was found (...) (...) and
beneficial to that Country, that it is conceived the only thing (as what
will not gold attract) drew them to search (...) the Maritime coast of this
tract all along to Cape bona esperansa, ^d so consequently thereby into the
East Indies: fair quarter and courteous usage being then perceived in these
Forts and Towns thus subjected to the Portugalls, drew the Inhabitants and
Countrymen to a fair and ordinary commutation and exchanging of commodities
with them, which according to the then custom of that Kingdom was maintained
by Factors appointed for the Kings private account in every Port and Town, as
if he intended to make the profits of Merchandising to defraie the charges of
his Conquest and Garrison, furnishing them with salt, iron, tin, copper,
basins, knives, cloth, linen, and other European commodities; receiving in
exchange partly the commodities proper for their nourishment, such as was
cattle, corn, rice, and the like; and principally commodities beneficial, as
gold it self in great abundance, both (...) sand and ingots melted, which
gave a quickening and life to the ^rther discoveries of those Countries and
continuance of the ^de, which is found there maintained to this day, though in
far ^ser manner. The English and other nations afterward defi^s Who showed
the way to the English and others.
to share in this rich trade, sailed within a short time likewise ^ther; and
because they had not such places and Forts for their ^arehouses, and the
protection of their persons and goods, there^re would not, or else might not
with safety land their commodi^es without danger of the falsehood of the
Portugalls or treache^e of the Inhabitants: therefore at first sailing hither
were com^eld to anchor along the coast nearest to the best Towns, and of
^reatest concourse, and signify to the Inhabitants the commodi^es they had
brought to utter, drew at length by their fair de^eanour and courteous usage
the Moors to come aboard their ^hips, and bring their gold with them; the
manner of which trade ^as being different from any other Country) I shall
briefly set ^wne. In the morning betimes, having for the most part then ^e wind
of off the shore, and calm weather, the Moors come a^oord in The manner of
the usual trade of Giney and Benin.
their Conoes and Scuts to traffic, some for themselves and some which they
call Tolkens or factors for others, who carry ^t their girdles a purse, wherein
small clo^ts or papers containing ^ometimes 10. several men's gold are wrapped
and laid up; which though it should be of one and the same weight and goodness,
they ^otwithstanding readily distinguish, and having made their bar^ers for
cloth, linens or the like, at noone return with the Sea-turne, ^r as they call
it the brise again to the shore; and besides their ^argaines covenanted, these
factors have some small thing for themselves as the reward of their pains by
way of brokidge or ^ctoridge, which they called by the name of Dachio. But in
pro^esse of time the Netherlanders frequenting this coast, and well ac^uainted
with the manner of this English traffic; and coming in^o the same parts where
the English traded and were known, were ^e first that spoiled this golden
trade, partly by their sinister dea^ng, The^ undermining tricks of the Dutch
in the trade of Giney and Benin.
and partly by their undermining and fraudulent tricks; for ^ey coming to an
achor together with the English to sell their ^mmodities, and finding that the
English vented more wares, and ^ad a larger traffic by the concourse of the
native Merchants ^om ashoare, with these Tolkens above mentioned, then they
had, ^ired these pilots, boatmen and Tolkens (that were thus employed, ^o carry
their passengers and Merchants aboard,) underhand to carry them aboard of their
Dutch ships, and not aboard the English, and so to trade with them only; which
the English at last perceiving and smelling out their craft, were by the same
craft compelled to prevent the same; so that by this means the one out vying
the other, these fellows for their good will and brokeidge have by this means
drawn the duty, or rather courtefie of Datchio to 6. in 7. per cent. to the
prejudice of all traders upon this coast: but this rested not here, for this
dealing drew on a greater inconvenience in their trade, for when the Flemmings
had first bin the authors of this ill custom or courtesy of Dachio to these
Boatmen and Tolkens, which necessarily were by all succeeding European
Merchants to be imitated, or their voyage lost, and their commodities remain
unsold: It was found that many Merchants Moors inland men coming to the Sea
side to buy wares of them, bringing great store of gold with them for
traffic, and having diverse slaves, some 20. some 30. and some more according
to their means and trade, to carry back those wares that they thus bought on
shipboard, and these Moorish Merchants taking their lodgings in the houses of
these Tolkens and using to acquaint them with their full commissions and
intents, and then receiving of them their gold repaired aboard the Ships to
trade and barter; and if the Moorish Merchant were not skild in the Portugal
tongue; these Tolkens would presently tell the Flemmings and desire them not to
speak Morisco to them, because their Merchants were such as dwell far within
the land; thereby giving them to understand that they meant by this watchword
to deceive him, and afterward to share those so ill gotten purchases amongst
them: and it did nor does not seldom fall out, but that the Merchant Moore,
not accustomed to the Sea, lies Sea-sick aboard all the whilst the knavish
Tolken makes his bargain for him with the crafty Dutch, conniving at the
Flemmings great inhansed prizes of his commodities, to draw the greater gain
and more gold from the Moore; whom sometimes he cozens by stealing some of his
gold, and putting it into his mouth, ears or otherwise; which the Moore
finding by the scale and weight to want, adds some more knavery thereto by
blowing into the Christians scale and balance to make it weight; and when all
these his intended bargains are finished, and the Moore again landed, the
Tolkens and Boatsmen return again aboard to divide the cozened profit and ill
gotten gain between them, wherein it may be imagined that the Flemming for
his part of the knavery and connivance must have a share of the gains, which
has proved such a hinderance and detriment to the English and other Christians
that trade upon this coast, that unless they also connive at the Tolkens
villainy and deceit as the Dutch do, their voyage will be lost and their
commodities to their prejudice remain unsold; this is in brief the manner of
their trade, the means now follow.

As for their customs due to the Kings and Sovereigns upon Customs of the
golden coast of Geney and Benin.
this coast, it is found to vary in diverse Ports and Havens, and only paid by
inhabitant in case the Christian bring not his goods ashore to sell, every
Haven having a peculiar Officer, and every Merchant that comes with an intent
to buy wares at a Port Town, pays a tole or small custom for his person,
though he buy nothing; and that no deceit may be used in the collector, there
is ^er a son or some near kinsman of that Prince, joined in au^ority with
the said collector or customer; and if the Merchant ^y any commodities aboard a
Ship for less then two ounces of ^ld at a time, then he must compound with the
customer for the ^stome as he can at his pleasure, as that which is the
customers own ^ofit, fee and wages: but if he buy above two ounces of gold
which ^hey call a Benda, then the custom is an Angel of gold for every Bne^a,
as I am given to understand.

I have showed that coins acknowledging any Soveraignetie by The coins current
in Giney and Benin.
^ampis not here in use, but gold passeable either in Sands or Ingots according
to the finesse and goodness is the current coin passeable, which our
Merchants very well distinguish by 24. artificial needles ^ade by allay of
mettalls, from the lowest sort of gold to the finest ^f 24. Carrets fine,
having exact rules for the valuation thereof, ^ccordingly as the same is found
either in finesse or coursenesse: neither use they any money, or any kind of
minted coin wherewith ^o pay each other; but when any commodity is bought, the
payment thereof is made with gold, and that likewise by weight; and it must be
a very small parcel that has not some kind of weight to distinguish and weigh
it withal, and they pay each other with four square pieces of gold, weighing
some a grain, and some half a grain; and about Mina a castle of the
Portugalls, they pay each other with Kacorawns, which is gold drawn out into
wier, and cut afterward into small pieces for all trivial commodities; and in
Kacorawns.
other places with little pieces of iron of a finger in length, with some
Character stamped thereon; and in some places they have not the art of melting
their gold, but sell it or rather pay it one to another in sand by weight,
according as they shall agree both in the value and in the quantity.

The weights are made of copper of diverse sorts, and have little The weights of
Giney and Benin.
round copper scales, like a hollow Orange pill for gold.

A Benda is the greatest weight, which weighs 2. ounces.

A Benda-offa is half a Benda, and is an ounce.

Asseva is two pesos and a half.

Egebba is two pesos, and accounted half an ounce or the fourth part of a
Benda.

Seron is accounted for one peso and a half.

Eusanno is accounted a peso.

Quienta is three quarters of a peso.

Each Peso is held a loote.

Media taba is a quarter of a peso.

Agiraque is half a peso, so that by those that have made the trial of their
weights with ours, they have found them to be in every pound Troy a peso and
half in every pound hevier then our Troy pound used in England, and this
weight is the rule for their gold in passing for commodities: where note that
all Countries have not in this and other these large coast moneys current of
mettle as we have in Christendom, for in some parts of Ethiopia their money
is pepper, in Tombotu, and about the river Niger their money is cockles Coins
of many parts of this co^st.
or shellfish, in Azanah their money is porcellette, in Bengala porceletta and
mettle together, as in China they use porcolette for money, and in some other
places of India, paper stamped with the Kings seal passes current for money,
and in some places the barks of certain trees called Gelsamora, and in Congo
and many places of these Countries Lumach, and in Angela, beads of glass, and
such like in many other places.

Their Measure for length in cloth or other commodities, is a Measures of the
Geney and Benin.
Iactam, which is accounted with us 12 foot or two fadome which they cut the
one from the other, and in that sort sell their linen the one to the other;
and those two fathom by trial of the Dutch make a storke and three quarters,
but in woollen they never measure above pieces of one handful broad, which
they so cut off and use for girdles which they wear about their middles, and
sell it among themselves in this manner in these pieces abovesaid, and use no
other kind of measure save one which they call a Paw, which is 1. d. English.

The Inhabitants of this coast at the first trading here of the Portugals,
were very rude and ignorant, and were easily beguiled in all the commodities
which they sold them; and not only took in good part the badnesse of the ware
they received, but were also deceived in their measure; the Portugals by these
means putting off their rotten linnens, rusty knives, broken and patched
basins, pieced kettles, and such like, and these at what measure, value, weight
and quantity they pleased for their gold: but the times are now altered, and
they by their usual sufferings in this kind by the Portugals, made the more
wary, provident and circumspect in their traffic with the English, French
and Dutch: so that in those commodities which they buy or barter, either for
their own use, or for Merchandise, they are found to have as good judgment in
them as the sellers themselves.

Their ignorance in trade may be judged by their ignorance in accompting Their
m^nner of accounting.
and reckoning, for when they have past the number of Ten they rehearse so many
words one after another for one number, that they are so puzzled and combred
therewith, that they cannot tell how to get out, and so sit buzzing so long,
till at last they have lost their tale, and forgot their number, and so are
forced to begin to tell again: but since they began to trade with the English,
and were to reckon above the number of Ten, for they use no more amongst them,
they reckon on till they come to Ten, and then take one of their fingers into
their hands, and then tell to Ten again; and then take another finger into
their hand, and so proceed till they have both their hands full, which in all
makes one ^undred; then they mark that up, and then begin again to tell ^s
at the first, and use the same order as before.

To conclude this traffic, and to leave this coast, I hear not ^hatin these
days the English frequenting that coast, or that the ^rench or Dutch make any
great benefit thereby: for the present ^ubtilty of the inhabitants, perceiving
how their gold is sought ^eagerly after by them and all Nations, can now a
days set such (...) rate thereon by this their manner of Exchange and barter,
and that by being so often beguiled by others, they are now grown ^more wary
and circumspect in their bargainings, and are as ready ^o beguile the beguilers
as to be beguiled themselves; for they ^ooke now narrowly both to their
measure and the goodness of their commodity; and though at first they knew no
distinction of Christians, but took the Portugals and all white men to be of
one Nation; yet since they know each Nation, and are acquainted with their
particular manners and manner of dealing, having ever hitherto from the
beginning found the fairest and squarest Trade with the English, therefore when
they come, they are the best welcome to them, and speed best of any other
Nations whatsoever with them.

I willingly omit here to speak of the Sugar-trade, and of the Sugar trade.
plenty of Sugarcanes growing upon this Coast; the King of Por^ugall here in
certain places farming the sole Trade thereof to certain his own Subjects
with a strict proviso, that the same be sold to none other but to his own
subjects, and that provision to be sent only for Lixborne to gain a great
Custom thereby ^mposed thereon, therefore the Portugal being here the only
^uyer and ingrosser, the inhabitants must and are enforced to ^ll only to
them, and at what reasonable rate they best can agree upon; and this restraint
of this commodity has drawn the Dutch to build and fortify in some places
upon this Coast, as now of late they have done at Mina opposite to the
Spaniard, where they are at continual variance, the river only parting them.

CHAP. XXVI.
Ethiopia superior and inferior and the Provinces thereof.

EThiopia the superior is known to us by the name of Abasine, and
comprehends many large Provinces Ethiopia superior.
and Kingdoms, and contains the Springs of three famous rivers, Abas,
Totiasis and Nilus arising out of the lake Zembre, being for the most part
Christians, and commanded by that so much renowned Emperor Prester John,
affording for commodities to the neighbor regions, rice, barley, Commodities
of Ethiopia superior.
pease, sugars, minerals of all sorts, goats, sheep, and oxen, but because
these Towns of these Provinces are for the most part in land, they afford no
great matter of trade, and as little known to our nation, I willingly omit
them.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Ethiopia inferior, and the Provinces thereof.

EThiopia inferior, has the red Sea on the East, the Ethiopian Ethiopia
inferior.
Ocean on the West, the land of Negro's on the North, and the southern Ocean
on the South, commonly divided into these parts, Aian, Zanbar, Monomotapa,
Caffaria, Monicongo.

In Aian, are upon the Sea coasts these three Cities much frequented Aian.
by Merchanrs, Arar, Zeila, Borbera, the second of which was sacked by the
Portugals in Anno 1516, and is found to abound with flesh, honey, wax, corn,
gold, Ivory and cattle; especially Commodities of Aian.
sheep in plenty.

Zanibar contains 15 Towns that gives names to 15 several (...). Quiloa.
Mosambique. Soffolla.
Kingdoms, the chief for trade is Quiloa where the Portugals have Forts built
and fortified Anno 1509. Mosambique also forti^ (...) them, Soffola which for
the abundance of yvorie and gold is conceived to be the land of Ophir to which
Solomon sent by his three years Voyage.

Monomotapa contains also sundry Provinces environed almost Monomotapa.
round with waters, and abounding with mines of gold, accounted to contain
above 2000, the principal being three, Monica, M^nica.
Boro and Quitiana; which yields not any commodity else save Boro Quitiana.
Elephants teeth.
^lephants teeth, to procure which, it is supposed 5000 are yearly ^aine in
these Kingdoms.

Caffaria has nothing famous in it, save that famous and no^d Caffaria. C^pe
Bonae Spei.
headland Cape bona speranza, discovered by the Portugals in ^nno 1497.

Manicongo was discovered by the Portugals 1486, and by them Manicongo.
^hen converted to the popish Religion, which the Inhabitants soon ^orsooke,
as peradventure seeing that that Religion was made the ^loake of their
conquest, yielding yearly 30000 slaves in sale to the ^ortugals, which they
carry to Brasile to work in their silver Mines; of the trade of the principal
of these it is fit I should in ^his place more particularly handle.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Mosambique and the Trade thereof.

THe Sea coast affording the prime places of traffic Mosambique and the trade
thereof.
known to our Countrymen in this large tract of land before mentioned, and
especially from cape bona esperanze, to the entrance of the red Sea, which now
comes to be handled, it will not be fitting I should wholly omit the Trade
thereof, before I have better surveighed ^he same, together with those Towns
of Traffic as are found to ^e there most eminent, and therewith relate the
manner how and ^he matter whereof this trade is here maintained and preserved;
(...) will then include the trade of this whole Coast under the title of
Mosambique, as being the principal town of negotiation found ^longst this
shore, having Soffalla on the one side thereof, and ^uiloa on the other side:
all which being fortified by the Portu^als the first Christian discoverers
thereof give yet that liberty and freedom to the Country inhabitants and
others to exercise ^he same that would, and considering their manner of
traffic, ^t is seen plentifully stored both with the native commodities of
the coast it self, and of the inland Countries; there are here found the
Towns of Cuama, Sena, Macava, Brava, Melinda, and others along this shore,
seated some on the coast of Abex, and some on the coast of Melinde, but Quiloa
for the commodiousnesse of the River, and the passage into the maine Continent,
having but a short cut into the Lake of Zaflan, in which there arises a great
River, that runs into Nilus, and so to Cairo, and therefore the same is
accounted the principal City for eminency and concourse of people, though for
traffic this and the rest give place (if the Spanish Relations be true) to
Mosambique, wherein is found the first Fortress that was built by the
Portugalls on this coast and Seas.

Mosambique then is not only the name of an Island, but also of a Kingdom,
seated between Monomotapa and Quiloa; the Island is found to have a pretty
Town seated upon it, and together with the Islands of Saint George, and Saint
Jacob, makes a large, fair, and secure haven for ships of the greatest
burden, fit to receive and harbor all vessels, that come and go, both to and
from India to Christendom; and although this Island nor Kingdom are not very
great, yet they are very rich, and most abounding of all the Countries of this
coast of Mosambique; the Island whereon the Town is situated, is inhabited now
by two manner of people, Christians and Mahometans; the Christians account
themselves Portugalls, or of the Portugal race, who are the keepers of a
strong Castle seated therein, from whence also all other their Castles and
Forts seated in this Tract are supplied with their necessaries; especially
Soffala, where the richest mine of Soffa^*
gold of all this coast lies, and there the Portugal ships do use to harbor
in winter time, when they are not able to sail either backward or forward
otherwise to accomplish their desired voyage; and there likewise the Indian
ships are accustomed to take in victuals and fresh water, and by the only
discovery of this place, the Portugalls first found out the way to India; for
here they met with Pilots that were able to instruct them in the manner of the
navigation of these Seas, and were expert in the maritime coasts thereof; they
have no sweet water in the Town, nor in the Castle, though it be imagined to
be the strongest in India, but have many cesternes round about it, wherein a
years provision of water is ever found, which they fetch from the continent
from a place called Cabasar. The Captain of this Castle is The Capt^ine of
Mos^mbique the greatest Merchant.
still found to be the greatest Merchant here, for he keeps a Factor in
Soffala, and another in Quiloa, and yearly sends barks for trade along the
coast, who commonly for some good service performed, ha^h this place and
command assignd him for three years, which is conceived to be worth to him 400
thousand duccats, and afterward he is to go into India, and upon his own
charge to serve there at the command of the Viceroy for the King of Portugal
other three years, and then may depart for Spain if he please, besides whom
none may hence trade for India, but the Inhabitants Portugalls, and who are
also enjoined to be married men, for such as are unmarried may not stay here by
a special priviled^e from the King, granted to those that inhabit here, to the
end ^at the Island should be peopled, and thereby kept safegua^ed and
maintained, and for this immunitie they are only bo^ in ^me of need to defend
the Castle, and are accounted as the Garrison thereof, though it is found that
the Governor and his family only lies therein, and the Townsmen by turns,
having the warding and watching thereof committed to their charge and trust.

Their navigation is hence into India but once a year, which Navigation of
India.
is in the month of April, and continues till the midst of September,
because that throughout the whole Country of India, they must sail with
Monsons, which are certain current constant winds, which have a settled course
of blowing throughout the year, whereby they make their account to go and
come from the one place to the other, and in thirty days they may sail from
Mosambique to India, and they are then forced to stay in India till the month
of August, when as then the wind or Monson comes again, to serve them for
Mosambique and this coast, in every which year the Captain abovesaid has
ever a Ship for his own account going and coming into India.

As for the commodities which this Country and coast is found Commodities of
the coast of Mosambique.
principally to afford to the Merchant for transportation, it is chiefly gold,
for near Soffalla is a very rich Mine, and within the land, the famous Mine of
Angola, the richest in the world, is said to be seated, besides the rich mines
of Monomotapa, wherein a River running thereby is found sands of gold in great
plenty, which is accounted the finest and best, and called by the Portugalls,
Botongorn Oroempo. The King of Portugal having ever a special Factor resident
in Mosambique, trading for his account, keeping correspondence with other his
Factors, and sending merchandise from one place to another; for by this means
the Kings The Kings of Portugal great Merchants.
of Portugal, the first Navigators into these parts, so far honored
merchandising, that they held it no disparagement to raise thus some estate the
better to perform and accomplish these long and chargeable Navigations, and
hence it grew that they bringing these Indian commodities into Europe, for
their own account did by commissioners contract with private Merchants for the
same in Lixborne, and other places; which hence from this authority were
termed Regal Contracts. The other commodities Regal Contracts.
of this Country, besides Gold in sand, and Ingotts, are, Ambergrise, Ebonwood,
Ivorie, Elephants teeth, and many slaves both men and women, which hence are
carried principally to India, as being reputed the strongest Moors (...) all
the East Countries, and are put throughout India to the hardest labor and
loathsomest drudgerie.

In order here according to my intended method, for the explanation Coins,
measures, and vvaights in Mosambique and the coast.
of the trade of this place and Country, I should lay down the Coins current
here, and their valuation, their measures of length, and their waights used in
merchandising; but because that by the collection I have made, and the
observation that I have noted, the Portugalls at their first conquest here,
brought with them their own species and coins, as also their own waights and
measures, as a testimony of their Regalitie and Soveraigntie, and that the
particulars thereof shall be more at large showed in its due place, when I come
to handle the trade of Lixborne, from whence the same had its original, I
shall to avoid needless repetition, desire the Reader to be referred
thereunto, and so leaving this large coast with this slender Survey, I shall
proceed to what does rest behind of Africa, which is better known unto us,
and wherewith our Nation is more familiarly acquainted.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of EGYPT, and the Provinces thereof.

EGYPT on the East is bounded with the red Sea, on the West with Cyrene, on the
North with the Egypt and the trade thereof.
mediterranean Sea, and on the South with Habasia: this Country is watered by
the fruitful River Nilus, which for the more benefit of the spreading plains
Nilus.
divides it self into seven channels, and begins about the fifteenth of June
to rise and swell above his banks, and for forty days does so continue, and
within forty days again collecteth it self into its own limits: all the
Towns here are seated on the tops of hills, which during this flood appears
to the strangers like Islands; intercourse and commerce being all this time
preserved by boats, skiffs, and lighters, instead of camells and horses;. this
river is in length 3000 miles, and when it is found not to swell, it portendeth
some fatal accident either to Country or Sovereign.

In this Country are found these famous Towns for traffic, Alexandria, built
by Alexander the Great, the most eminent Seaport Alexandria.
of all Egypt, and whither before the discovery of the Indies was the Scale
of all those commodities which since we find to come thence, and then most
frequented by the Uenetians, who had almost the sole trade of the commodities
of India and Egypt in their own hands, and from them dispersed and
transported through Europe, and who to this day yet keep a Consul there for
the protection of their Merchants.

The next is Damiata, seated at the entrance of one of the channels of Nilus,
the command whereof cost much blood in the Damiata.
days of those wars in the Holy land by the Western Christians.

The next is Sues, a haven of consequence standing at the north Suesa.
end of the red Sea, wherein the great Turk keeps a Station for his Galleys,
commonly built in Cairo, and afterward carried thi^her by Camells to command
his Dominions in those parts.

The next is Rossetta, seated on the principal channel of Nilus, Rossetta.
and in a triangle from the two abovenamed Cities of Alexandria and Cairo,
serving for a Scale for both.

The last and most principal is Cairo, the chief of this Country, Cairo.
containing 18000 streets, and each street being every night locked up and
barred, which makes the City impregnable, of which more hereafter. I find
some Authors to have left for a remembrance behind them, a touch of the trade
of this Country in The trade of Egypt in times past settled in Alexandria.
times past practiced by the commodiousnesse of the red Seas, which enters
into the heart of this Country, and because that Galuano relates the
beginning, continuance, and period of this trade, I will briefly follow his
words. Ptol: Philadelphus then 277 years before the Incarnation, was the first
that gave beginning, and set afoot this Navigation, bringing the spices,
drugges, and commodities of Arabia and India through the red Sea into Egypt to
the port of Alexandria, where the Venetians as then the only famous Merchants
of Christendom, brought up the same, and were the first that this way
dispersed it through Europe, Africa and Asia. Casir being then the principal
haven Town in the red Sea, whence their voyage to India was set forth and
begun, Casir in the red Sea.
and where the same afterward was ended, and from thence by land these
commodities were conveyed to Coptus, a town now Coptus.
altogether inhabited by Iacobite Christians, and so thence down the River
Nile to Alexandria in the mediterranean Sea, by which traffic this City
became so rich and eminent, that the Customehouse there yielded to Ptol:
Aalates 7 millions of gold: and afterward when the Romans came to be Lords of
Egypt, they found it to yield them fifteen millions. These last augmented
this trade, and sent into India every year by the testimony of Pliny an
hundred and twenty sail of ships, whose lading was outward bound worth 120000
Crowns, and it produced in profit at the return homeward, for every Crown, a
hundred. But when the Vandalls, Lombards, Goths and Moors had rent asunder
the Roman Empire, all commerce in these parts between these Nations began to
cease, but when the inconvenience and discommoditie thereof was sensibly
discerned and perceived, it was begun again and set afoot anew by other
Princes that coveted this rich trade, conveying the Indian commodities
afterward with great difficulty, partly by land, and partly by water to Capha
in the black Sea, And removed first to Caffa in the Euxine Sea.
as then belonging to the Genoes; but this by reason of the long way and
dangerous passage, being found too tedious and prejudicial, Trade (which is
ever found to have a secret Genious and hidden course of it self) was removed,
for these and other causes to Trabesond, which was then conceived the fittest
Mart Town, Then to Trabesond, sarmacand etc.
then Sarmachand in Zagethai had it, where the Indian, Persian and Turkish
Merchants met to barter, their commodities; the Turks thence conveying the
same to Damasco, Baruti and Aleppo, from which last place the Venetians again
transported these commodities to Venice, making that City thereby the common
Emporium of Christendom; and lastly in Anno 1300, the Soltans of Egypt
restored the passage by the red Sea, and the Venetians resetled their Factors
in Alexandria, which continued for two hundred years, until the Portugalls,
Spaniards, English, and lastly the Dutch, found a new way by the back side of
Africa, to convey the same to their own homes, whereby the great trade which
the Egyptians, and principally the Venetians had to themselves for many
years, came thus to nothing, and the traffic of Alexandria and red Sea
thereby is now decayed, and become altogether unfrequented, as at this day we
find it, subsisting only by the native commodities thereof, in which nature it
is fittest I should now survay the same.

CHAP. XXX.
Of ALEXANDRIA, and the Trade thereof.

ALEXANDRIA is said to be built by Alexander Alexandria and the trade thereof.
the great, and was called by the Turks the lords thereof Scanderia, and which
in the Nicene counsel was ordained to be one of the four patriarchall Cities;
it is yet the fairest and best maritime port of this whole Country, and has
yet some relics of that trade it erst enjoyed, as I have noted before; and
because it is the principal of this region for Merchandising, I hold it proper
to comprehend under this Chapter the greater part of the trade Universally of
Egypt and the neighboring Cities.

The commodities of Egypt, besides what comes hither out of Arabia, Persia and
India, is rice, corn, flax, hemp, honey, wax, balsome, Commodities of Egypt.
dates, some drugges, and some few spices, and in especial it yields
abundance of Palmetrees, which is of very strange properties, for they are
found to grow in couples, male and female, both The excellency of the
Palm Tree.
thrust forth cods full of seed, but the female is only fruitful, and that
not except growing by the male, and having his seed mixed with hers; the pith
of these trees are excellent meat: of the branches they make necessary uses in
their houses; of the leaves baskets, mats and fannes, of the outward husk of
the codde; cordage, of the inward brushes; the fruit is like a fig, serving
the Inhabitants sometimes dried in the su nne as bread, and green as meat: and
finally it is said to yield whatsoever is necessary to the life of man.

The weights in use in Cairo, Alexandria, and generally through^ut Weight of
Alexandria.
all Egypt for trade are found to be of 4. sorts, the first is the ^eight
called the quintar of Zera, the second the quintar Forfor; ^e third the quintar
Zaidin, and the fourth the quintar Mina; which because of their former great
trade with Venice, I will first ^ompare with the weights of that City, and
then apply the same to ^he weight of our own Country.

One quintar of Zera has been found to make of Venetia gross 1 Zera.
200. li. and sutle 312. li. and in London 212. li. haber.

One quintar of Forfori has been observed to make in Venice 2 Forfori.
140. li. subtle and gross 87. li. and in London 93. li. haber.

One quintar Zaidin, has made by observation in Venetia 127. 3 Zaidin.
^i. gross, and 200. li. subtle, and in London 134. li. haberdepois.

One quintar Mina, proper only to Alexandria, has made in 4 Mina.
Venetia 250. li. subtle, 155. li. gross, and in London 167. li. haberde^ois.
Whereas note that the first three quintars are accounted by Rotolos, but the
quintar of minas contains in Alexandria 20. ounces to the Mina, and in Cairo
16 ounces to the Mina: And also observe that amber, musk, and some other fine
commodities are sold by a Metalico or dram, and also by the Peso, whereof 1
is a Metalico; 50. Metalicoes is here a mark in gold or silver weight, and 42.
Metalico our English mark weight of 8. ounces Troy. Again note that

One Rotolo Zerai makes Venetia subtle 3. li. 1. ounces.

One Rotolo forfori makes Venetia subtle 1. li. 5. ounces.

One Rotolo Zaidin makes Venetia subtle 2. li. gross 1. li. 3 oun.

One Mina makes in Venetia subtle 2 li. and gross 1 li.

Now let us observe how these weights are found to accord one with another, and
so with Venetia.

One quintar Zera, which is the general quintar of Egypt makes (...).
quintars and 16. Rotolos of forfori in Alexandria.

Again, one quintar Zerai makes one quintar and 56. Rotolos of Zaidni, and
makes 120. Minas of Alexandria.

One Rotolo Zera makes 2. Rotolo 1 ounce and (...) forfori.

Again, one Rotolo Zeri makes 1 Rot. 6 9/25 ounces of Zaidin.

One quintar forfori makes 46. Rot. 3 ounces Zerai,

And one quintar forfori makes 20. Rot. 11 23/27 ounces Zaidni.

One quintar forfori makes 55. minas,

And one Rotolo forfori makes 111. oun. Zerai, and 6 oun. Zaidin.

One quintar Zaidin makes 64. Rot. 2 ounces of Zerai.

One quintar Zaidin makes one quintar 28. Rot. 5 oun. forfori.

One quintar Zaiden makes 76. minas 11 ounces.

One Rotolo Zaidin makes 7 7/10 ounces Zera,

And again, one Rot. Zaidin makes one Rot. 4 ounces Forfori,

And one Rotolo Zaidin makes one and 3 quarters ounces minas.

One quintar minas makes one quintar 2 Rotolos forfori,

And one quintar minas makes one quintar 30. Rotolos Zaidin.

And one Mina makes ten ounces Zera:

And again, one Mina makes one Rot. 9 ounces forfori.

And lastly, one Mina makes one Rot. three ounces Zaidin.

The variety of these weights will excuse this tedious repetition, which I was
enforced to perform for the better understanding of the same; and for the
shortening of my present survey of the trade of Egypt: I will here reduce not
only the weights abovenamed, Weights of Egypt and sundry Cities in Barbary,
to the 100. l. haberdepoise.
but also the weights of some of the principal Cities of traffic upon this
coast to the 100. li. subtle haberdepois of London, which has been observed to
make by:

Zera quintar -- 48 Rot. In Cairo and all Egypt. Forfori quintar -- 108 Rot.
Zaidin quintar -- 75 Rot. Minas quintar -- 54 Rot. Iripoli suria -- 25 Rot.
whereof 100. makes a quintar. Achria -- 17 Rot. the 100. makes a quintar
Tamperan. Aleppo common -- 21 Rot. the 100. whereof is a quintar. Tripoli
Barbary -- 62 Rot. the 100. where of is a quintar. Oran common with -- 91 Rot.
the quintar is 5. Roves of 20. Rot. Oran for spices -- 133 Rot. the quintar is
4. Roves. Oran for corn -- 48 Rot. each quintar 6. Rotolos. Oran for cotton --
59 Rot. each qui^tar 15. Rot. Una in Barbary -- 63 Rot. for cotton wools. Una
-- 72 Rot. for spices. Una -- 90 Rot. for corn. Fras -- 153 Rot. the quintar
is 100.. Baruti -- 20 Rot. the quintar is 100. Rot. Argier -- Thunes -- Cathaio
-- 84 Rot. the quintar is 100. Rot. Cyprus -- 19 Rot. Famagosto 4. per cent.
more. Suus in Barbary -- 90 Rot. 100. Rot. to a quintar.

When I come to handle those particular places, I shall do the same more
exact, for the better satisfaction of the reader. Measures in Egypt.


The measures of length in Cairo, Alexandria, and in general through Egypt is
found to be of two sorts, the one the pico Barb^ resco, or proper measure of
the Country, serving for cloth, linen and other commodities, being 25 inches
English: The other the pico Turchesco, serving for silks, cloth of gold, and
fine stuffes, which is 22. inches English, and with Venetia they are found to
render, viz.

100. braces of silk in Venetia, makes here Barbaresco pico 116.

100. braces of cloth in Venetia, makes here Barbaresco 124..

But I have found some observations that have noted that the 100. yards of
London have made here and in these others Cities in Barbary thus, in 100 yards
(...) London ^ave made (...) Alexandria -- 165. pic. Baruti -- 148. pic.
Tripoli Barbariae -- 165. pic. Damasco -- 148. pic. Bugia -- 210. pic. Tripolia
Suria -- 149. pic. Rama -- 151. pic. Tangir -- Bursa in Natolia -- 150. pic.
Amano -- 133. pic. Sidon -- 151. pic. Gira -- 165. pic. Salonica -- 145. pic.
Achria -- 151. pic. Aleppo -- 133. pic. Argier -- Thunes -- Oran -- Bona --
Morocco -- 181. cov. Una --



And forasmuch as Cairo is the Metropolis of Egypt, it will be ^oper I should
travel thither and survey a little the present trade ^d estate thereof, before
I leave this COMMERCE.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of CAIRO and the Trade thereof.

I Willingly omit the present trade of Rosetto, Damietta and some others of
lesser note comprehended within Cairo and the trade thereof.
the limits of Egypt, and also (here pass over to a fitter place) the present
trade of Sues in the red Sea, till I come to survey that gulf and the
neighboring ^ownes of Zebit, Mecca, Aden and others, and now content my ^lfe
to consider the present state of the place and condition of ^affique of Cairo,
and it is found at this day under the scepter of the ^and signior.

Cairo is then commonly reputed to be one of the greatest and ^st famous Cities
of the world called by the Arabians el Cahair, ^ted in a beautiful plain
near the Mountain Mucatun, and ^out 2. miles distant from the famous River of
Nilus, environed Misraim.
^th stately walls, and fortified with Iron Gates, having therein any fair,
large and long streets, where are seen placed by ^emselves each trade and
occupation, and some streets wholly ^autified with Colleges for the studious,
palaces for the honorable, ^emples for the religious, and Caens or Burses for
the Merchants ^d negociators; the principal of which is called Caen Haleli,
for^erly the residence only of Persia Merchants, now admitting of ^ther
nations, built in manner of a Kings Palace, having three ^ories one above
another; the lower only containing ware^ouses for the keeping of heavy and
bulkie commodities, the ^iddlemost for spices, perfumes, and richer
Merchandise, and the uppermost for lodgings for those Merchants that have their
warehouses therein: near which, and round about the same the richest
shopkeepers are found to have their dwelling; and where in times past the
principal Merchants of Christendom had a place of residence appointed for
their factors and agents.

This City is surrounded with sundry large and spacious Suburbs, which is
peculiar to sundry Artizans and Artists, the principal Suburbs is called
Bullach, distant 2. miles from the walls of the City, and stretching it self
along the banks of the River of Nile, beautified with many fair buildings,
and is now the common residence of the principal Merchants of this City: and
here are all such commodities landed, as either comes out of the mediterranean
Sea by any the channells of Nilus up this River, or out of Arabia or other
Countries down this stream; here lies all the Vessels moored, either to lade
or unlade; and here do the Officers reside, which receive the customs of all
goods coming by water from either Damieta, Roscett a, or Alexandria, which in
it self is but small, the principal custom and duty being paid by these
Merchants, and collected by the agents of the customers at these Maritime ports
abovesaid: but those commodities that come out of the firm land do here pay
the said entire customs as shall be mentioned hereafter.

This City is inhabited by six sorts of Merchants, each of them trading by so
many distinct ways; the native Egyptian I reckon Merchants of 6. sorts in
Cairo.
the first ever accounted expert Merchants, but never adventuring out of his
own Country, who buy from other foreign Nations their commodities in gross,
and supply the necessities of their own Country by retaile. The Arabian or
Moore is the next, here esteemed 2.
the greatest and most eminent Merchants; for these are they who are found to
furnish all Egypt with the spices and Iems of India, and the drugges of
Arabia, importing the same by camells and dromedaries from Goa, Ormus, Aden,
Zebit, Dangula, Mecca, and other places from and about the red sea: and in
return thereof exporting hence the drugs of Egypt, and such other commodities
as are brought hither by those Nations neighboring, principally upon and about
the mediterranean sea. The principal commodities accounted and fittest for
them is the excellent gold of this Country called the Solianies and sheraffie,
which Egypt in great plenty affords. The third sort of Merchants I account
the (...)
Christians of Europe, as principally the French and Venetians, who have here
their consuls and viceconsuls for the preservation of their trade, and
protection of their Nation, by certain capitulations agreed uponbetween their
sovereigns and the grand signior in Constantinople, paying such duties and
customs to his Officers here as their said capitulation do nominate; and
these thus furnish Egypt with leventine commodities, and generally with all
the af bricks and wares of the growth of Europe; and these carry hence in
returns these commodities brought hither both out of Arabia ^d India, and the
native commodities of this Country. The 4.
^urkes I account the next, whose Emperor swayeth the scepter (...) this rich
Country, and who in respect of their easy customs ^ape a peculiar benefit by
the trade of this place; but the most ^inent of them residing far hence and
in Constantinople, and ^eir adventure proving dangerous and hazardable by
reason of ^e incursions of the Malta and Florentine Galleys, joining there^o
the dull temper of that Nation generally in matter of Com^erce, and the ill
success their grand Galons have of late years ^ad, does much divert their
minds from any eager pursuit of that ^o rich a traffic. The Jews here
resident I account the fifth, who ^y reason of their general knowledge in
trade, and their general 5.
^orrespondence in all these Countries beforementioned, partake of all the
Commerce and traffic practiced by these several persons; for from Venice,
Constantinople, Ormus, Goa, and other eminent places of traffic they are
found to adventure and to have adventures; they travel and return with the
Arabian into India and Arabia, they traffic here both in gross and retaile;
and besides their subtilty in driving of bargains and making of contracts
between man and man as brokers, they are here found to be of all professions,
and are the professors of all Arts. The last which I reckon in this roll is
the Armenian, Grecian and Coptie, 6.
all Christians, who in their ways set the wheel of trade on work, by being
some shopkeepers, some artificers, and some Merchants, principally trading by
Caravans to and from Aleppo, Damascus, Amman and Baruti, and in the commodities
of those Countries of Armenia, Georgia and Persia, they carry the principal
sway and stroke, all which considered, what does the place want to make it
absolute but only what it has lost? which is the vast trade of India, which
of late years the Portugalls, English and Flemming has deprived them of; for
which I leave them to sorrow for, as for a thing past remedy.

The commodities that this Country and place principally afordeth to these
Merchants, whereby their commerce is now preserved Commodities of grand Cairo
and Egypt.
to them is flax, and all sorts of pulse, abounding in the Province of Sahid,
where the Pharoah's resided, fruits, rice, balsome, etc. abounding in Eriffia,
where the Ptolomies resided; cottons, sugars, and some drugges, etc. abounding
in Marrema, where the Romans and Grecians resided; and all these annually
foretold by the inundation of the River Nilus, discerned by a pillar seated in
the Island Michias opposite to the City of Cairo, beginning ever to increase
about the 15. June, so continuing 40. days increasing, and 40. days
decreasing as I said before; the height of the increase giving assured
testimony of that years abundance and plenty, at the end whereof a solemn
seven days feast is kept to Nilus, in which it is oftentimes seen the
Egyptian to sp end as much in jolity as with great pain and industry he has
gathered the whole year before with penury; out of this plenty and abundance
is yearly drawn for revenue of this Kingdom three millions of sheraffies,
Revenewes of Egypt.
in value 8. sbil. starling a piece, the one whereof is now adays sent to the
grandsignior (by land and Caravan for fear of surprizall at Sea by the
Florentine or Maltagallies;) the second million is spent in the pay of the
Militiae and Soldery of this Country: and the third redounds to the benefit of
the Bassa, here resident for the grand signior for the maintenance of his own
Court and dependants.

Their principal parts for traffic in the mediterranean Sea is Alexandria,
as before I noted, accounted a free port for friend or enemy; the harbor
commanded by a Castle, and the entrance guyded by an eminent watchtower to
give light to sailors: the customs of which place is formed by Jews at 20.
thousand Medins, per diem 30. Medins accounted for a Royal of eight Spanish,
which here may be valued 5. sh. starling, the which by the year may amount to
55. thousand pound starling, all goods entering here pays the custom in
species, or compounded for at 10. in the hundred, Customs of Alexandria.
only moneys entering pay but one and half per cent: but outward all
commodities pays 11. per cent. but this is to be accounted the Soldanes
custom, and called the great custom: the other customs raised here is as
much, or very near as much more, as he shall find to his cost that tradeth
into these parts, whereto for better trial I will refer him.

Now for the trade in general of Cairo, the Merchants thereof are found at
this day in some sort to have the relics of that former Merchants of Cairo.
great trade which they lost out of the red Sea; for hence they send by
Caravans sundry European commodities thither, especially at the time when the
yearly caravan departs hence for Mecca, and Medina Talnabi, the Sepulcher of
their false Prophet Mahomet, which arriving at Sues in the red Sea, is there
found to have a general dispersion, some going for the City of Assuan, which
is commodiously seated upon their river Nile, and upon the borders of the
Kingdom of Nubia, which hence fits it self with the commodities both of Asia
and Europe, and is equally distant between Cairo and the City of Suachen or
Suasuem, once the principal port of this Kingdom, situated on the red Sea,
but now in the subjection of the great Emperor of the Abassins: from which is
commodious navigation to Brava, Melinda, Quiloa, and other places along the
coast of Abex and Mosambique, as I have mentioned before. And because it is the
principal Town of trading on Africa side in the red Sea, I hold it here
worthy a better and more serious survey.

CHAP. XXXII.
SVACHEN, on the red Sea, and the trade thereof.

SVACHEN is one of the richest Cities of the Orient, Suachen on the Red Sea,
and the trade thereof.
situated within the Arabique Gulf in the coast of Ethiopia sub Aegypto, and
amongst all the famous Cities of trade in the Orient; this is accounted equal,
if not superior to them in four things; the first in Suachen famous for 4
excellencies needful in trade.
^he goodness and security of the Haven; the second in the faci^tie and good
service for lading and unlading of ships; the third ^n the traffic with
very strange and remote people and Coun^ries, and of diverse behaviors; the
fourch in the strength and ^cituation of the City; as for the goodness and
security of the Port, Nature has so made it, that it is defended from all
storms whatsoever; the Haven is capacious and large, of smooth tides, the
ground good, and able in circuit to hold 300 great sail of burden, with water
at all times, from six to twelve fadome; the Ships are laden round about the
whole circumference of the City, casting only a planke into the Merchants
warehouses where their wares are kept; and the Galleys fastening themselves to
the stones and doors of their houses, set their prowes over the streets, and
by them as by bridges they are commodiously laden or unladen; and secondly, as
touching the traffic and navigation thereof, few Cities can in these parts be
compared with ^t, for this City is found to have traffic with all India
intra and extra Gangem, that is, Cambaia, Tanacerim, Pegu, Mallacca, and with
the Arabique, with Judea Cairo and Alexandria, as I said above, and with all
Ethiopia and the land of Abexi; from whence ^t gathers great abundance of
gold and Ivorie: thirdly, for the ^cituation of it, for it is such as if nature
had framed it purposely for a Royal Mart, for it is an Island round in form,
encompassed with many sholds and flats, for defense of the Port and the City,
occupying and taking up the whole body of the Island, so that it may as
properly be termed an Island of a City, as a City in an Island; for there is no
one foot of wast ground upon the whole Island, but is employed in housing and
Magazins: the manner of trade here, as far as I have gathered is thus:

It is now the principal port Town in these Seas belonging to Prester Iean,
from whose Court called Dombia, it is twenty-five days journey by Caravan, and
the concourse of Merchants are here so great, that twenty caravans are yearly
found to set out hence toward several parts of the neighboring Regions.

The commodities they carry are all kind of Indian clothing, and Commodities
of Suachen.
also of our English commodities, as Broad clothes, kersies, lead and tin;
likewise Velvets, Damaskes, Sattins, Taffettaes, and all other sorts of silk
stuffes; their colors more desired are reds, greens, violets, murries, and
other light colors.

Their measure is called a ( --) about half a yard, and cloth Measures of
Suachen.
that is worth in Suachen 4 Rialls of 8/8 is there worth 8 Rialls, and the
price of kersies is half the price of Broad-cloth; Uelvets of China is here
worth 10 (...) the said measure, and Italian Velvets are much more worth, but
not so profitable to the Merchants as being much dearer; Sattins of Florence
are worth 10 (...) Damaskes of the best sort worth from 8 to 10 8/8 Taffetta's
3 (...) and all colors well sold, excepting yellow and black, which are out
of use in these Countries.

Their weight is the Rotolo, which is about 16 ounces haberdepois, Waights of
Suachen.
the Rotolo is four Wakies, and 360 rotoloes makes here a weight called a
Bahar.

The commodities here abounding are these; Civet in great quantity, and worth
a R 8/8 a wakia, Elephants teeth also plenty, worth thirty R 8/8 the Bahar,
Wax worth 1 R 8/8 the 100 rotolo's; Gold worth 60 R 8/8 the rotolo, Tynn worth
1 8/8 the rotolo, and lead much more; but the Turks will not suffer any to be
brought hither through his Dominions, for they hold it a conterabanda
commodity: from Grand Cairo there goes always in August a great Caravan for
these parts, and likewise another in November, and the commodities they carry
thence is broad clothes, kersies, velvets, sattins, damaskes, and silks of all
sorts, and from Cairo to Dombia this way is fifty days travel by Caravan,
and no more, which hence is easily performed.

Now for as much as I find not on the Arabian side of the red Sea any other
Town of eminence in trade besides this, and that from cape guarda fue along
the coast, I find none other worthy my detention, I will hence sail down to
the bottom of this Gulf, and willingly pass by in silence the famous Port
Town of () the place conceived where the Israelites passed on dry foot over,
or rather through this Sea, when they were pursued by their envious enemies the
Egyptians, who therein found their death the reward of their hatred; and
perusing the same survay the now famous Port of Sues, the present station of
the Grand Signeors Fleet, that aweth this Sea, and the neighboring Regions
thereof.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of SVES, and the trade thereof.

SVES is now the relics of that ancient Heroes, to Sues in the Red Sea.
which place Cleopatra carried her Galleys by land after the defeat of Mark
Anthony her beloved, accounted fifteen leagues from the nearest branch of
Nilus running to Cairo, it is strengthened by a strong late fortification raised
by the Turks, not only for the defense of the Town, but in defense of those
his Galleys here kept to command these Seas, and his maritime coasts on both
^des the gulf; and here it was that several Egyptian Soltans intended to
dig a channel, and thereby join the commodity of this Sea to the
Mediterranean, but all of them desisting ere the work was brought to
perfection, the relics whereof in many places remains yet to be seen, the
divine providence having given bounds to Seas which the wit and power of man,
though Princes, cannot transpose or alter. This place would long since have
given way to the envy of time by decay and ruin, had it not been for that
relic of trade which is here preserved by a few inhabiting Merchants, and the
station for the great Turks Galleys, which he is enforced to build on the
Medi^erranean Sea, for want here of wood and fit materials, and thence convay
the same hither by camells and dromedaries in several ^eeces, where afterward
they are set up and accordingly imploy^d, sometimes mastering the Portugalls,
and other Kings his ^eighbours, and sometimes again being by them mastered,
ac^ording to the fortune of war; other subject of trade I find not ^ere
material, therefore in silence pass it over. And having ^hus then briefly run
through the principal places of trade, comprised within the limits of Egypt,
and noted the concordancie of the waights and measures used commonly throughout
this whole Country, both with Venice the former great traders hither, and with
ours in England, before I come to the Coins current of this Country, it will
not be unproper I should insert a concordancie of the waights of this place
with some other neighboring Countries, according as I have gathered them out
of the works of Alexander de Pasi, a Venetian Merchant, which here for many
years resided.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Egypt weight compared with the waights of sundry other Countries.

I Have noted before how that in Egypt is used four several waights proper
to several sorts of commodities; Egypt weight compared with the waights of
sundry other Countries.
the cantar forfori is used in several sorts of spices coming from Cairo; the
cantar zero is the greatest and most common in use for all such commodities as
are sold here by Christian Merchants; the cantar laidin is The several
commodities waighed by the several waights in Egypt.
only used in flax, hemp, etc. and the last is the cantar mina, most used in
Damietta, for cloves, maces, cinnamon, musk, and some sorts of spices; the
observations made thereon, with some other eminent Cities, are these:

A cantar of Tripoli in Siria is thus found to accord with Egypt. Egypt
waights compared with Tripoli in S^ria.


A cantar forfori is, in Tripoli 1 cantar 24 Rotolos.

A cantar laidin is in Tripoli -- -- 33 Rotolos.

A cantar Zeroi is in Tripoli -- -- 52 Rotolos.

A cantar mena is in Tripoli -- -- 42 Rotolos.

And note that from Egypt is sent to Tripoli in Suria, some spices, sugars,
rice, casia, salt, etc. and from Tripoli is sent to Egypt white soape, dates,
and some other commodities.

The weight of Cyprus is thus observed with Egypt.

The cantar of Cyprus makes in Egypt 5 cantar: 20 rotol. forfor. Egypt
waights compared with Cyprus.
2 cantar: 30 rotol. zoroi. and the cantar forfori is in Cyprus 19 Rotolo.

A cantar laidin is in Cyprus 26 rotolos.

A cantar zoroi is in Cyprus 42 rotolos.

A hundred Mino is in Cyprus 33 rotolos.

And note that from Egypt is brought to Cyprus, some spices, casia, rice,
flax, salt, fish, and some other goods, and from Cyprus is brought to Egypt,
honey, melasso, sugars, cottons, chamblets, grograms, and some other commodities.

Rhodes is thus found to accord with Egypt. Egypt waights compared with
Rhodes.


The cantar forfori is in Rhodes 18 Rotolos.

The cantar laidin is in Rhodes 25 Rotolos.

The hundred mino is in Rhodes 32 Rotolos.

The cantar of Rhodes is in Egypt 2 cantar 56 Rot. Zeroi.

And note that Rhodes sends to Egypt, honey, wax, oils, reisins, ^d some
fruits, and from Egypt is sent to Rhodes, some spices, cas^, sugars, rice,
Cowhides, flax and salted fish.

Egypt is thus found to agree in weight with Scio and Smyrna. Egypt weights
compared with Scio and Smyrna.


The cantar of Scio is in Egypt 1 cantar 11 Rotolos forfori.

The cantar Zeroi is in Scio 1 cantar 95 Rotolos.

The cantar forfori is in Scio 89 Rotolos.

The cantar laiden is in Scio 1 cant. 24 Rotolos.

And note that from Scio is sent for Egypt wax, honey, figs, ma^icke, white
soape, cottons; and from Egypt to Scio and Smyrna is sent ^ssia, rice, flax,
sugar and sugar candid, ^xe and buffolo hides, salted ^h, etc.

Egypt with Candie is thus found to accord in weight. Egypt weights compared
with Candia.


The 1000 li. gross of Candia makes 3 Cantar 63 Rotol. Zero.

The 1000 li. sotile of Candia makes 3 Cant. 57 Rot. Zero.

The Cantar Zeroi makes Candia sotile 274 li.

The Cantar forfori makes in Candia sotile 125 li.

The Cantar laidin makes in Candia gross 115 li.

The hundred of Meno makes in Candia sotile 220 li.

And note that from Candia is sent to Egypt honey, wax, cheese, ^andia wines
and some other commodities: And from Egypt is sent (...) Candia some spices,
rice, cassia, sugar candid, flax, and some other ^ommodities.

Egypt is found thus to accord with Cania. Egypt weights compared with Cania.


The 1000 li. gross of Cania is in Egypt 6 cantar 33 in 35. Ze.

The cantar Zero is in Cania sotile 278 li.

The cantar forfori is in Cania is sotile 127 in 128 li.

The cantar laidin is in Cania gross 100 li.

The hundred mina is in Cania sotile 221 li. in 223 li.

And note that the commodities transported for merchandise are ^e same as is
above rehearsed in Candia.

Egypt is found thus to accord in weights with Brussia in Natolia. Egypt
weights compared with Brussia, Natolia.


The cantar Zera is in Brussia 1 Canar 77 Rotolos.

The cantar forfori is in Brussia 82 Rot.

The cantar laidin is in Brussia 1 Cantar 14 Rot.

The hundred Meno is in Brussia 1 Cantar 42 Rotolos.

And note that from Brussia is sent to Egypt wax, honey, carpet ^lke, sivet
and other commodities: and from Egypt those commodi^ies mentioned heretofore.

Egypt is found thus to accord with Constantinople in weights. Egypt weights
compared with Constantinople.


The cantar Zera is in Constantinople 1 Cantar 77 Rotolos.

The cantar forfori is in Constantinople 82 Rot.

The cantar laidin is in Constantinople 1 cantar 14 Rot.

The hundred of Meno is in Constantinople 1 cantar, 42 Rotolos.

And note that the commodities accord with the precedent of Brussia. Egypt
weights compared with Corfu.


Egypt is found thus to accord with the Island of Corfu.

The 1000 li. sotile corfu is in Egypt 4 cant. 27. Rot. Zero.

The cantar forfori is in corfu sotile 108 li.

The cantar laiden is in corfu sotile 150 li. gross 126 li.

The hundred meno is in corfu sotile 187 li.

The cantar zero is in corfu sotile 234. li.

And note that from Egypt to corfu and the parts adjoining is sent Cassia,
pepper, cloves, cynamon, and some other spices, sugars, rice, flax, ox and
buffello hides, and other commodities of Egypt, and from Corfu is sent to
Egypt, wax, honey, etc.

Egypt is found to accord with Rhagusa in Slavonia. Egypt weight compared
with Rhagusa in Slavonia.


The cantar forfori is in Rhagusa 120 li.

The cantar laiden is in Rhagusa 166 li.

The cantor Zero is in Rhagusa 163 li.

The hundred of Mena is in Rhagusa 208 li.

The commodities are the same as above mentioned in Corfu. Egypt weight
compared with Catarro in Dalmatia.


Egypt is found in weight to agree thus with Catarro.

The cantar forfori is in Catarro 108 li.

The cantor Zero is in Catarro 234 li.

The cantar laiden is in Catarro 150 li. gross 126 li.

The cantar Meno is in Catarro 187 li.

and note that the commodities are the same, as is mentiond in Corfu.

Egypt is found to agree with Spollato thus in weight. Egypt weights compared
with Spollato in Istria.


The cantar forfori is in Spollato 144 li. sotile.

The cantarlaidin is in spollato sotile 200 li. gross, 126 li.

The cantar Zero is in spollato sotile 312 li. in 316 li.

The hundred Meno is sotile spollato 250 li.

Note the commodities are the same mentioned in Corfu and gulf Venetia.

Egypt is found in weight thus to agree with Ancona. Egypt weight compared
with Ancona.


The cantar zera is in Ancona 268 li.

The cantar forfori is in Ancona 124 li.

The cantar laidin is in Ancona 172 li.

The hundred meno is in Ancona 215 li.

And note that the commodities of Egypt are nominated before, and from Ancona
is sent to Egypt white soape, oils, nuts and the common commodities of the
Kingdom of Naples.

Egypt is found in weight to agree with Apulia thus, Egypt weights compared
with Apulia.


The cantar of Zero is in Apulia 1 Cant. 7 Rot.

The cantar forfori is in Apulia 48 Rot. or 155 li.

The cantar laiden is in Apulia 68 Rot. or 188 li.

The hundred Meno is in Apulia 85 Rot. or 235 li.

These weights are found in this manner also to agree with Naples, and has the
commodities transportable for merchandise, as is mentioned before in Ancona.

Egypt is found in weight thus to agree with Sicilia. Egypt weights compared
with Sicilia.


The cantar forfori is in Sicilia 55 Rotolos or 138. li.

The cantar forfori is in Sicilia 1 cantar 29 Rot. or 300 li.

The cantar laidin is in Sicilia 77 Rot. or 192 li.

The hundred meno is in Sicilia 96 Rot. or 240 li.

And note that from Sicilia is sent to Egypt, Mellassus of sugars, ^uts,
cheese and brimstone pumicestones: and from Egypt is sent to Si^ilia the
commodities abovenamed of Egypt.

Egypt is found to agree with Tunes and Tripoli in Barbary thus,

The cantar of Tunes is 1 cantar 17 Rotolos forfori. Egypt weight compared
with Tunes and Tripoli in Barbary.


The cantar forfori is in Tunes and Tripoli 85 Rotolos.

The cantar laiden is in Tunes and Tripoli 1 cantar 19 Rot.

The cantar zero is in Tunes and Tripoli 1 cantar 84 Rot.

The hundred Meno is in Tunes and Tripoli 1 Cantar 47 Rot.

And from Egypt is sent to Tunes and Tripolis, some sorts of spices, as
pepper, cloves, cinnamon, cassia, Benjamin, musk, ambergreece, civet, storax,
camphora, flax, and such like. It rests yet to make the knowledge of these
several weights in themselves perfect; that I should show what commodities are
weighed by each of them, and afterward show in brief how they are found to
accord with other principal places of traffic not here above mentioned.

The cantar forfori is the weight wherewith in Egypt Merchants The agreement
of the Cantar forfori with other Countries.
do buy and sell pepper, ginger and green ginger, lache, red and white
sandall, incense, myrrh, zedoaria, gum arabicke, semensie, asafetida,
mirabolans, indico, sugars of all sorts, s^l armoniaque, Elephants teeth and
the like: agreeing thus with other Countries of trade.

Cantar forfori, that is 100 Rotolos is in Rodes -- 17 Rotolos. Cyprus -- 18
Rotolos. Petras -- 108 li. Salonica -- 109 li. Zara -- 116 li. Fiume -- 140 li.
Ancona -- 120 li. Riconati -- 123 li. Pesaro -- 124 li. Arminio -- 116 li.
Lanfano -- 123 li. Apulia -- 132 li. Acquilla -- 124 li.


The Cantar forfori of Egypt, is in Sicilia -- 134 li. which are 54 Rotolos.
Calabria -- 131 li. which are 47 Rot. Naples -- 121 li. which are 47 Rot. Roma
-- 117 li. Florence -- 112 li. now all one. Pisa -- 124. li. Genoa sotile --
133 li. Lucca -- 123 li. Bollonia -- 116 li. Millan -- -- -129 li. Cremona --
-- 132 li. Piedmont -- -- 129 li. Geneva -- 88 li. Lions -- -- 98 li. Avignon
-- -- 102 li. Barselona -- -- 98 li. Majorca -- 100 li. Marselia -- 105 li.
Valencia -- -- 120 li. Sivil -- -- 90 li. Lixborne -- -- 79 li. Bona and Bugia
-- 83 Rotol. London -- -- -81 li. Bridges -- -- 92 li.


The weight called Meno is accounted by the hundred and not The agreement of
the Cantar me^ with other Countries.
by the Cantar which is also peculiar to some commodities only and thereby is
weighed cloves, maces and fust of cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon, cubube, long
pepper, aloes epatica, boras, in past and in gain, cardamon, spiknard, costus
sweet and bitter, sarcacole, ammoniac, oppoponax, storax, calamit, turbit,
spodium, ermodotili, mumia, be^in, laccia, euforbio, lignum aloes, rubarbe,
manna, and other such like are sold by this weight, the hundred whereof, make
of the cantar forfori 180 Rotolos, and makes in

The 100 Rot. meno does make in Venetia soteli -- 250 li. Petrasse -- -- 184
li. Corfu -- 187 li. Rome -- -- -211 li. Ricante -- -- 220 li. Lanfano -- -215.
li. Acquila -- -- 223. li. Fermo -- -- 223. li. Rhagusa -- -208 li. Piedmont --
229 li. Savoy -- -- 157. li. Avignon -- 181 li. Marselia -- -187 li. Majorca --
-179 Granado -- 148 li. Sivill -- -- -158 li. Lixborne -- 142 li. Tunes -- --
148 li. Salerno -- 235 li. Ancona -- 215 li. Pesaro -- 220 li. Bollonia -- 208
li. Florence -- 219 li. Millan -- 229 l i Cremona -- 232 li. Genoa -- 238 li.
Verona -- 225 li. Geneva -- 157 li. Lions -- 175 li. Paris -- 169 li. Barcelona
-- 178 li. Valencia -- 208 li. Cades -- 164 li. Tripol. barb. -- 148 li. London
-- 166 li. In Flanders-173 li.


The next is the Cantar Zero by which is sold Cassia and not any The agreement
of cantar Zero with other Countries.
other spice, also tin, lead, brass and some other commodities the which is
found to make in

The cantar Zero does make in Venetia gro. -- 200 li. Venetia soteli -- 316 li.
Salonica -- 177. Rot. Petrasse -- -- 140 li. Fiume -- 312 li. Pulia -- -- 108
li. Lansano -- -268. li. Ricante -- -- 275 li. Pesaro -- -- 275 Barcelona --
219 li. Majorca -- 223 Valencia -- 227. li. Sivill -- -- 198 li. Lixborne --
250 li. Tunes -- -- -- 186 Bome -- 266 li. Ancona -- 268 li. Florence -- -- 273
li. Genoa -- -- 297 li. Lucca -- -- 276 li. Millan -- 287 li. Sicilia -- -- 120
li. Piedmont -- 287 li. Marselia -- -231 li. Cades -- -- 200 li. London -- --
223 li. Flanders -- 215 li. Tripol. barb. -- 116. Granado -- 178.


And this is as much as I have collected concerning the several weights of
Egypt used constantly in Cairo, Alexandria, Damietta and other the principal
places of that Country which by reason of the diversity as being fourefold
have proved the more tedious and intricate; wherein if error be found by the
trial of him that shall have cause to make an experiment, I shall (I hope)
find the more favorable construction of this my pains taken, wishing that I
could have thus enlarged my self in the measures of these Countries and the
agreement thereof with the other places beforenamed, wherein (being defective)
I must crave to refer the Reader to him that is herein better acquainted, and
therefore next to the coins current.

The coins current of this Country are in traffic of Merchandise, Coins
current in Egypt.
partly foreign, and partly domestique; the foreign is the Spanish Riall of
eight, which they call here the piastre and doller and worth in common 80 and
sometimes 90 aspers, which is the domestique coin of this Country, and the
Maidin which is the common silver coin of all the grand Seigniors Dominions.
Three a. or aspers make a Maidin, and 30 maidins makes a Doller, the gold
coins here is the soltany, sheriff and chequine all of one value little
differing, accounted 8 shil. sterling; but rising and falling in aspers
according to the plenty and scarcity of gold.

Their accounts are here diversely kept, the inhabitants for the The accompt^
kept in Egypt.
most part accounting by aspers and maidins, three aspers being a maidin, and
some Christians by dollers and aspers 80 aspers to a doller, and some by
duccats of Pargo accounting that 3 duccats of Venice make one duccat of Pargo;
besides which, there is also in use an Italian duccat 10 per cent less.

The customs of Alexandria, Damietta and Rosetta is 10 per cent. The customs
of Alexandria Damietta and Egypt.
as I noted before upon all Commodities inward and outward, and paid in kind or
species, but upon moneys brought in it is only per cent. and very strictly
looked into and exacted; but the Bashaw governing here for the grand Signieur,
being ever a principal man, and far remote from the imperial Port of
Constantinople, lays in many towns of this Kingdom what custom he please;
and though it be held now to be but 10 per cent. which is the old and ancient
custom of Egypt, yet the Merchant that tradeth here shall find ere his goods
be sold and the moneys in his purse accounting the consoledge and other duties
to be above 22 or 23 per cent. the place being much subject to anuenus and
mangaries, and the Custom House being farmed to Jews, add thereto the
greatest deceit they can possible to raise the daily customs of the place,
Alexandria it self paying in this manner 20 thousand medines a day by farm,
which at the rate of 30 medins to a Riall of (...) Spanish, and the Riall of
(...) accounted at 5 shillings sterling, amounts to 54750. li. per annum.
54750 li.


I should in the next place survey the general trade of Egypt as it is
observed and found to be at this day: but by reason I have in many places of
the beforementioned Chapters particulary handled the principal parts thereof,
and noted the most eminent nations that at this present do hither traffic, I
shall the more willingly pass over the same in silence, and only now observe
that besides the French and Uenetians, not any other European Christians are
found here to traffic, and the English have given over all Trade into this
Country, by reason they are furnished with all the commodities that this place
did formerly yield, at the first hand from India, and what else they want,
being commodities either of Arabia or Egypt, they furnish themselves from
Aleppo where many English are resident: But here are found Consuls for both the
Venetians and French Nations, which continue still some Trade hither, as indeed
more proper for them wanting the Trade of India which the English enjoy, of
which I have made mention before, and therefore leaving Egypt, and with it the
firm land. I shall take leave now to view the Islands that belong to Africa, by
modern Cosmographers.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Island Madagascar.

I Find belonging to Africa many Islands, which are Madagascar.
found to afford many notable commodities for Merchandise, which for brevities
sake I will only touch, that the Factor may know whence those commodities do
come which are found amongst us. Madagascar, otherwise called the Island St.
Lawrence, giving name Otherwise St. Lawrence.
^o a Town the principal of that Island was discovered by the ^ortugals, Anno
1506: the Inhabitants willingly permit no man ^o land upon their Country for
traffic sake; it yields cloves, ^inger, and some silver, to the Inhabitants
own use; but not ^or exportation, and their moneys in use are the glass
beads of Cambaia, which in Merchandise and barter currantly pass amongst them.

CHAP. XXXVI.
ZOCOTARA Island.

THe Island of Zocotara lies in the mouth of the red Zocotara.
Sea, 10 degrees North from the Equator, wherein the Portugals have fortified
two Towns for traffic, it is replenished with drugges for Physic, and
especially, with that so excellent and well ^nowne in Christendom, by the name
of Aloes Zocatrina which ^s sold there by a quintall which (by observation)
makes in En^land, 93. li.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Island of Saint Thomas.

SAint Thomas Island lies just under the Equinoctial St. Thomas.
Line; the prime City is Povoasan, inhabited principally by Portugals and
Negro's, abounding only in Sugar, which here grows in Canes, and are made so
that yearly 50 great Ships are here laden with that Commodity for Spain and
Portugal, whereto I am not able to add any other material point of Trade,
because of my ignorance therein.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the Islands of the Canaries, and Trade thereof.

THese Islands are seven in number, and under the command Canari^.
of the Spaniard formerly called the Fortunate Islands. They abound in Sugars,
whereof great quantity of Marmalet and other conserves are made; in Birds,
which hereof take their names, excellent in singing; in Wines which hence are
known by these Islands names, excellent in taste; and in Woad found excellent
for Dying.

To these Islands is now found and practiced some small trade by The Trade
thereof.
the English; to which place they import some seys, serges, bays, linnens, and
such like, and export thence Woad, and Sugars and Wines of the growth of these
Islands which last is vented thence into England and Holland above two thousand
Tons yearly, to the great enriching of the Inhabitants.

Their weights, measures, and coins are altogether concurrent Weights,
Measures, etc. concur with Sivill.
with the weights, measures, and coins current in Sivill, to which place it
was annexed by the Spaniards the first discoverers therefore I shall not need
to say ought here further thereof.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Assores, commonly Tercera Islands.

FHe Tercera Islands were first discovered by the Flemmings Island Assores called
Terceras.
and a while bare their names; upon which is placed the Meridian line, dividing
the East from the West part of the world; it only abounds in Oad or Woad
used by Diers, and is now in the hands of the Spaniards, and in special use to
them in their voyage to the East or West Indies, and affording them for
refreshment good water, and store of goats flesh. Other matter of Trade it
affords not, therefore this shall serve to have said of the Islands, willingly
omitting the Hesperides, the Gorgades, the Princes Islands; and others of lesser
moment, and proceed in my MAP to view the Trade of ASIA, somewhat better
known to us then AFRICA.

ASIA, AND THE PROVINCES AND CITIES OF TRADE THEREOF.



OF ASIA, AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF.
CHAP. XL.
Of ASIA, and the Provinces thereof.

ASIA, The third division of the World, ASIA.
is separated from EVROPE by the Egean Propontis, and Euxine Sea, by Paulus
Maeotis, Tanais, Duina, and from AFRICA by the red Sea, and the Egyptian
^stmus, as I remembered in the beginning of this Work. Five notable things have
made this Country famous, and Five notable things in Asia.
have given it the garland of supremacy over all the other parts of the World.
first, the Creation of Mankind: Secondly, the Birth of our Savi^ur; his
Miracles wrought, and place of his sufferance: Thirdly, the Actions memorized
by the holy Penmen of the Old and New Testament: Fourthly, the famous
Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assirians, Persians, and Medes: And fifthly,
being the common Mother of us all, from whence innumerable troops of men
issued to people the other parts of the unhabited World, of which see other
Authors further at large.

The principal Regions of ASIA, are

1. Anatolia. 2. Syria. 3. Palestina. 4. Armenia. 5. Arabia. 6. Media. 7.
Assiria. 8. Mesopotamia. 9. Chaldea. 10. Persia. 11. Parthia. 12. Tartaria. 13.
China. 14. India. 15. The Islands thereof.
And of these in brief according to my first intention.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Anatolia, or Natolia in general.

ANatolia is limited on the East with the River Euphrates, Anatolia.
on the West with Thracius Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Egean; on
the North with Pontus Euxinus, on the South with the Rhodian and Lician Seas.
In this Country was anciently accounted 4000 Cities and Towns, those seven
famous amongst the rest to whom Saint John dedicated his Revelation; but now
the ruins of them are hardly to be seen, and the Provinces that are found in
this Region are these. First, Cilicia: secondly, Pamphylia: thirdly, Lycia:
fourthly, Caria: fifthly, Ionia: sixthly, Lydia: seventhly, Molis: eighthly,
Phrygia minor: ninthly, Phrygia major: tenthly, Bithynia: eleventhly, Pontus:
twelfthly, Paphlagonia: thirteenthly, Galatia: fourteenthly, Cappadocia:
fifteenthly, Licaonia: sixteenthly, Pisidia, and Armenia minor. Of these in
order.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Cilicia, and the Cities thereof.

CIlicia is not found at this day to have any Town of Cil^cia and the Cities
thereof.
note or consequence in it, save Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great, and
to distinguish it from Alexandria in Egypt, is named Alexandretta, now known to
us by the name of Scanderone, a famous Haven town, Scanderone, or Alexandretta
serving for the scale to Aleppo, for ^ll such shipping as come thither, either
out of the Ocean or Mediterranean, and where the English, French and Venetians
have their Vice-consuls to protect ^eir Merchants goods and Ships, and where
all Merchandise are ^ther landed or laden that go to or from Aleppo, of which
it ^ill be more proper that I enlarge, when I come to speak of A^ppo which is
seated in Siria, as I shall show hereafter.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Pamphilia, Licia, and Caria.

ALl these have not any thing now worthy note in them, Pamphilia, Lycia, and
Caria.
conducing to Trade and Merchandising, save the abundance of those goats upon
whom grows that wool whereof is made the Chamlets and Grograms of which I ^all
have cause to speak more at large, when I come to treat of ^e Trade of Angora,
and in the interim it is to be noted that ^ese Provinces having lost their
former names, are now known ^o us by the name of Caramania, and are at this
present under the ^ommand of the grand Seignior.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of Ionia, and the Cities thereof.

IOnia is the next Province, wherein is that ancient Ionia and the Cities
thereof. Ephesus.
famous City of Ephesus much ruined from its ancient recorded beauty, famous
for the direction of an Epistle by Saint Paul to the inhabitants hereof: famous
also for the Temple of Diana: and lastly, famous for the burial of S. John the
Evan^elist, who went here alive into the grave. But this City is now be^ome a
poor village, and retains no monument of her pride ^at I could find in Anno
1624 but a porch of a Grecian Church of ^lack Marble, wherein is excellently
engraven the life of our Sa^iour Christ, much admired by all Artists.

But now the only City of Trade in this Province is Smyrna, one Smyrna.
of the places that strove for the birth of Homer, and wherein was found one of
those Churches whereto S. John dedicated his Revelation, seated in the bottom
of a Bay or Gulf, known to our Seamen by the name of the gulf of Smyrna; and
where there is a Consul resident for the English, as also for the French and
Vene^ians to protect their Merchants and Trade, where in Anno 1619 ^n matter of
traffic, I noted these things.

CHAP. XLV.
Of SMYRNA and the trade thereof.

THE principal trade of this City was within these Smyrna, and the trade
thereof.
few years transported hither from the Island Scio, where the consulls
abovesaid had their residents, and from thence are entitled Consulls of Scio
and Smyrna, but by reason that scale both for sales and investments had then a
dependencie upon this, it was found more proper and less chargeable to remove
their abode and warehouses hither, and by that means this became the
principal Port, the goodness of the harbor much furthering the same, being
both under the command of the Grand Signior, and within these later years much
enriched by the trade of English, French, and Venetians.

The commodities that are found here to abound, and that are Commodities of
Smyrna.
hence transported into other Countries of Christendom, are cotton woolls,
which in great plenty grow in the adjoining plains of this City; also Galls
for Diers, aniseeds, cordovants, wax, cotton and grogram yarne, cute, carpets,
grograms, mohers, chamblets, and some fruits and drugges, raw Persia silk is
likewise hither brought by land from Persia; and all other commodities found in
Turkey or of that growth is here to be had, and the commodities here vented
from England are Clothes of Suffolk and Gloucester, kersies of Yorkshire and
Hampshire, lead, tin, callicoes, pepper, Indico, and other spices, which
within these late years we had formerly from this and other places of Turkey,
and which now by the commodity of the East India trade and navigation, we
carry to them; and from Venice is brought some clothp aper, silks, velvets,
etc. and from France some few clothes and paper, etc.

The coins current of Smyrna are those of Constantinople, and The coins of
Smyrna and accounts.
generally those of all that Empire, which I shall show when I treat of that
City, and for that cause here omit it, and their accounts they also keep here
in the same nature with them, and therefore refer you to that place in both
these particulars.

The waights of Smyrna and Scio, for they agree both in one, Weights usual of
Smyrna
is the quintar, which contains 100 Rotolo's, or 42 Oaks, and every oak
being 400 drams, and every Lodoro being 176 drams, and the pound haberdepois
has been found to be 148 drams, and the quintall of 42 oaks abovesaid, which
produces 119 li. English, but in many commodities it is found to answer but
117 li. so that ^irca 9^ drams is 1 ounce English haberdepois.

They have here in use two measures, one for linen and ano^r Measures of
Smyrna and Scio.
for woolen, but because they nearly agree with Constantino^ I will refer the
same to that place.

The customs paid by the English here and throughout all Tur^ Customs of
Smyrna and Scio by the English.
by virtue of their Capitulations with the great Turk, is only ^ree per
centum; and oftentimes the custom house of Scio and of ^yrna is in one man's
hands, and though by their Capitula^ns it is so agreed, that those goods that
have once paid custom ^one port, should not pay any more being thence exported
to ^y other place of his Dominions, and that commands have been ^anted to that
end by the grand Signior at several times; yet the ^stice of that Country is
so defective in this particular, that the ^mmodities landed in Smyrna, and
paying there three per centum, ^d afterward transported to Constantinople, pay
there again ano^er three per centum, or compound with the customer, which
^metimes is done at 1 per centum, and sometimes at less: note By Venetians and
French.
^at here as in all parts of Turkey the Venetians French and Dutch ^y five per
cent. two per cent. more than the English, which is ^ounded upon their
capitulations with the Emperor.

The port charges of clearing a Ship in Smyrna is paid in com^odities Port
charges of a Ship.
of our Country, and was to that end thus at first regula^d; but since
converted into payment by money, as to the cadie ^o is to have five pico of
Venice cloth, and a bundle of cony-skins ^r a vest, which in the infancy of our
English trade was here ^und to be much requested.

The cadies servant to have 3 pico english cloth.

The cadies caya to have 3 pico of ditto.

The cadies scrivan to have a chicquine in gold.

The cadies pages to have 2 dollers.

The Mosur Bashaw to have 1 pico cloth.

The cadies Ianisaries to have a chicquine.

All which charges amount in circas to 68 dollers.

To conclude, the trade of this port it is most noted for the a^ndance of
cottons which hence is transported to England, France, ^olland, and Italy,
estimated yearly to be about 20000 quintall, and found here to grow in the
adjoining plains, which they do ^w as we do Corn, the stalk being no
bigger than that of ^heat, but stronger and tougher, bearing a head, round and
bear^ed and hard as a stone, which when it is ripe it breaks and is ^livered
of a soft white bombast or cotton, mixed with seed, which ^ey separate with an
instrument, selling the wool, but reser^ng the seed for the next harvest; see
more of this trade in Cy^us and Constantinople, to which I refer the inquirer.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of Lydia, Eolis, Phrygia minor and major.

ON the Northeast of Ionia is Lidya, famous only for the Lydia, Eolis, Phrygia.
two rivers, Castrus abounding with swannes, and Meander with windings, from
hence termed meanders; and if some Authors may be worthy of credit, the natives
were anciently the first known men that gave beginning to Merchandise, and
exercised buying and The first Merchants.
selling, and proved the original of the Tuscans, whose supreme Duke
continues the same to this day, and is one of the greatest and most eminent
Merchants in the world.

In Eolis are seated the two Misia Provinces, which hold not any thing note
worthy.

In Phrygia minor, is not found any thing at present worthy i^ Minor.
trade to stay the course of my pen; it affords the place where the ancient
and famous City of Troy was seated, which cost the Troyes ruins, ruined.
Grecians ten years siege to take it, with the loss of 860000 of the Trojans,
and 666000 of the Grecians, but in Anno 1620, I hardly saw the relics of this
mighty fabrique, though I traced it for many miles, and gave care to all the
ridiculous fables of those poor Grecians that inhabit thereabouts in many
villages which lie within the compass of her ancient walls, from mount Id^ to
the River Scamander, now only a brook not two foot deep; so that, what Ovid
said of old I found by experience verefied, I a^ seges est ubi Tr^ia fuit, etc.
Neither

In Phrygia major, does not remain any thing note worthy, Major. Gordion.
save a remembrance that Gordion the seat of Gordius was here found in
Alexanders time, who cut that knot with his sword which he saw he could not
otherwise undo; also Midium the seat of Midas, whose covetous petition was
granted by Bacchus, Midium.
to convert all into gold that he handled, and so had like to have eaten gold
for meat, had not his after wit mastered his covetous appetite, and made him
to his repentance see his error, and acknowledge it; and falling again to a
second oversight in judgment, as the first was an error in desire, he
preferred Pans pipe before Apolloes harp, and was rewarded for his small skill
in music with a comely pair of Asses ears: also in this Province stood
Colosso, to whom Saint Paul writ one of his Epistles; and Pesinus, where the
goddess Sybile was worshipped, which being brought (...).
into Rome, would not stir further than the entrance of the river Tyber,
which the Romans much wondered, because the dominion of the world was prophesied
to that City that had the custody thereof; but the vestall Claudias girdle
performed that which all the strength of Rome could not, and she halled up
both the Ship and goddess, to the wonder of the Citizens at that time, and of
all the world ever since, though Far greater miracles are found to be
reported of that City, and the holy inhabitants thereof at this day, if the
said reports might gain that credit now as this miracle then did.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of BITHINIA and the Cities thereof.

ON the North side of the Phrygias is seated Bithinia, Bithinia and the Cities
thereof.
which is famoused first for the victory of Alexander against the Persians, of
whom he slew 20000; secondly, for mount Stella, where Pompey overthrew
Mithridates, and Tamberlain with 800000 Tartarians, encountered Baiaset with
500000, where 20000 lost their lives, and Baiaset in his pride of heart taken
and ^end up in an iron cage, against whose bars he beat out his brains:
thirdly, for Nice, where the first general Counsel was held Anno 31^ to
repel the Arian heresy; and fourthly, Calcedon, where the fourth general
Counsel was assembled to repel the Nestorian heresy, where yet in Anno 1620,
the Inhabitants do show to strangers the place of this assembly by tradition
in manner of an ovall circle built purposely for this occasion; and lastly,
here is Bursa by some Prusa, the seat of the Ottoman Kings in Asia till they
gained Adrianople in Europe, which was done by Mahomet the first: of the trade
thereof a word in my passage.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of BURSIA in BITHINIA, and the Trade thereof.

BURSIA seated in the bottom of a Bay known to the Turk by the name of the
Gulf of Bursia, being Bursia and the trade thereof.
a fair City and anciently the seat of the Mahumetane Kings, is now inhabited
by Turks, Jews and Greeks; who by reason of their neighborhood, and in the
way from Smyrna to Constantinople for land travelers is found to have some
Merchants of quality, and affords quantity of Persia commodities, as brought
hither from Eusdrom and other bordering Towns of Armenia and Persia,
principally occasioned by the immunities that have been granted by several
Princes that have here resided, to the inhabitants thereof: but because the
Venetians are found at present to be the prime traders hither, it will not be
amiss that for the weights and measures of the place we should be ruled by
their observations which thence may easily be reduced to ours.

Their commodities afforded to foreign Countries are the same Commodities of
Bursia.
as Constantinople, only some fabriques I have seen to have been in my time
there made of silks by Moors that have been banished out of Spain, and come
hither to reside, as damaskes, taffetas and stripped stuffes, and such like; also
commodities which the earth has produced, as aniseeds, galls and sugars.

Their coins are the same current in Constantinople.

100 Rotolos makes Venice sotile 176 li. and Venice gross 112 li. Coins and
Weights of Bursia.


The Ocha of Bursia is Venice sotile 4 li.

The Rot. of Bursia is Venice sotile 9 ounc. and gross 1 li. 1 o^. 1 li.

The 100 drams makes sotile Venetia 1 li. which is 72 metalichi.

The 100 Kilats of Turkey makes in Venetia 87 Kill. gold weight 7 metalich make
oun. 1 gold weight in Venetia.

And by the English the same is observed to be within 2 per cent. to agree with
the weight of Constantinople, as shall be showed hereafter.

There are found here several picos which with the brace of Venetia is found
thus to agree. Measures of Bursia.


Braces 100 of cloth* scarlet and fine cloth makes 108 picoes cloth here.

Braces 100 of course cloth common makes 114 picos in Bursia.

Braces 100 of cloth of gold makes in Bursia 102 picos.

Braces 1000 of linens is found to make in Bursia 772 picos.

And this is noted to be a greater pico than the rest: but by the observation
of some English they find only 2 picoes, one for cloth and the other for
grograms, and do agree with those of Constantinople.

There is no custom due upon goods in Bursia, it being accounted an Inland
Town; but if sent thence to Smyrna or to Constantinople, Customs of Bursia.
and exported out of the grand signior's dominions, it is liaable to a custom,
according to the capitulations or privilege granted to that Nation that
transporteth the same: but if those commodities bought in Bursia being carried
to Smyrna or Constantinople and there sold, it pays no customs but a small
duty for registering, and quitting at the custome-houses of both the said
places, as has been practiced by diverse Merchants. In this Town of late
years some English have resided, and do find a fair and friendly quarter
with the inhabitants; but they are accounted as subfactors to those resident in
Constantinople and Smyrna, therefore I shall not need to say further of this
place.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of PONTUS, and the Cities thereof.

ON the North side of Bithinia is Pontus, wherein is Pontus.
found the ruins of Tom^s to which Ovid was banished, and Pithius where
Chrysostom lived in exile: here also ruled Mithridates, who for 40. years
withstood the Romans, not more excellent in War then lear^ing and memory,
who spoke 22. languages, and invented that ^unterpoyson from him named
Mithridate; and who at last by the ^bellion of his son and the valor of L.
Sylla, Lucullus and ^ompey was vanquished; the last of which erected a pillar
upon a Pompeys Pillar.
^mall Island at the entrance of the black or Euxine Sea, which at ^is day is
known by his name, and showed by the inhabitants to ^rangers as a trophey of
his Victories in these parts.

CHAP. L.
Of PAPHLAGONIA and GALATIA and the Cities thereof.

IN Paphlagonia I find not any City notable for trade* Paphlagonia and Galatia.
nor other thing note worthy: and as for Galatia, it is observed that to the
people of this Province did Saint Paul dedicate one of his Epistles; and here
is also sea^d the City of Ancira, now commonly Angora, famous for the ^finite
store of grograms, moheires and chamblets* that are made Angora.
^ere and frabricated, and from hence transported to Constantino^e, being 16
days journey distant; and to Aleppo having a like re^otenes; and from thence
again exported into all the Countries ^f Europe.

In this place the Venetians have a factorie to provide them the said
commodities, and the English in imitation thereof about 1624. did first send
thither two factors from Constantinople, to furnish themselves with these
commodities at the first hand: but some of the yarne called hence grograme
yarne, (and not camels hair as some Grograms trade.
^ainely conceive) being lately brought into England, ingenious workmen were
here found that invented therewith Tames, and many other stuffes, to the great
decay and prejudice of the Grograme trade of this Country, and of such as
lived thereupon in Angora; whereupon the inhabitants in Anno 1630. petitioned
the Duana of Constantinople, that this yarne might not be exported out of the
Kingdom until it were put into work, and made into stuffes, which was
granted them; but the farmers of the grand signiors customs at Constantinople
conniving thereat, and suffering the same to be exported, paying double
custom, which is 6. per cent. and so it continued till 1634. at what time a
second stricter prohibition with confiscation was proclaimed and nearly looked
into, so that what quantity is now found to come thence is by indirect means,
and not otherwise, if possible thereby a gain to give life to the grogram
trade and the makers thereof in these parts.

There was of late years an offer made by the Venetian Ambassador resident at
Constantinople to export 500. of the goats that bear this wool to Venetia,
thereby in time to bring this commodity in request in their signorie; but the
Turks perceiving their drift denied the same, least his subjects and Country
might futurely be deprived of the benefit of so excellent a commodity, had our
ancestors foreseen the like discommodity that would have insued by the
exportation of English sheep into Spain, it may be conceived it would never
have been in those days permitted.

The weights and measures of this place are the same as are found in
Constantinople, the grograme pico having from this Town its original, Weights
and Measures of Angora.
and is the proper pico of this Country and City; whereby all grograms,
moheires and chamblets are measured and sold throughout all Turkey, and is in
grograms found in England to answer proportionally as 24 pico, being a piece
of ordnary grograms to make 16. yards London: for their moneys and accounts
they are found to be the same as in Constantinople, vide there.

CHAP. LI.
Of CAPPADOCIA and the Cities thereof.

ON the East side of Galatia is Cappadocia, the chief City is Erzyrum,
situate on the confines of Armenia, Cappadocia.
being held the randevous for the Turkish Militia in their expeditions to
Persia; and the place where when the war is ended they are dismissed; here is
the entrance into the dominions of the grand signior, and though wars happen
between the Turks and the Persians, yet these barbarous Nations are so
careful of Merchants and the preservation of commerce, that the Merchants of
both Countries, though otherwise the Provinces be at variance, may here enter
and transport their merchandise into one another Country, paying a ^all
custom as acknowledgment to the Prince, carrying a Tesca^ ^or certificate
thereof with them to such other places whither ^ey go, which in it self
protects their goods and persons from ^nger or confiscation, or other duties*
so that it is an ordinary ^ing to see Persia Merchants with great estates in
Aleppo and ^nstantinople in the hottest of the wars between their two
So^eraignes, to the shame, and contrary to the custom of many Chri^an Princes,
who first prey upon the Merchants that inhabit their ^ountries, making a war
upon their estates and persons, before ^ey meddle with or happily hardly publish
their intentions to ^eir Sovereigns; the ancient Tibarenean custom being now
out ^use in Christendom, who are said never to wage war against any ^emie; but
they faithfully certified them beforehand both of the ^me and place of their
intent and fight; and as it may be conjectu^d, gave first a fair dismission to
the subjects of their enemies, and ^onsequently to their Merchants.

Here is also Amasia, where the grand signiors eldest son is seen (...) abide
after his circumcision, till the time of his Fathers death, Amasia,
^d the beginning of his reign: And Trabesond, formerly an Im^riall seat, now
a small City seated upon the Euxine or black Sea, Trabesond.
^aving a reasonable good harbor, and where the grand signior ^aintaineth
certain Galleys to scour these coasts: here is found ^great trade in summer
for fish, which to me did much resemble ^e English herring, which they take
upon this coast in good quan^ty, and is by the inhabitants, who are for the
most part Armeni^s pickled and salted, and so preserved and sent into Caffa,
Con^antinople and other parts. Their manner of salting, and the mat^er
wherewith is likewise as strange; for the Country affording ^ot our common
known bay salt, there is a Mountain within Mineral Salt.
^me leagues of the City, out of which with ease they dig a ^one, to the eye
appearing black and no way transparent; but ^eaten in marble morters with them
in use, it becomes very ^hite, and is found to preserve all Meats as well as
salt de bay, and ^r merchandise is carried thence to Constantinople and other
^ountries, and sold in the stone unbeaten by the Rotolo, Oache or ^intar.

In this Country did inhabit the Amazonian Viragoes, Pen^esilea one of their
Queens, came with her troops to assist the ^rojans, and long after Thalestris
another of their Queens came ^o Hyrcania to be Alexanders bedfellow, having
now no memory extant of this feminine government.

CHAP. LII.
Of LICONIA, PISIDIA and ARMENIA minor.

IN Liconia is found the City of Iconium, the regal seat of the Aladine
Saltans, the ruin of Lystra where Timothy Liconia. Pisidia. Armenia.
was borne, and where Paul and Barnabas healing a criple were adored for
Mercury and Jupiter.

In Pisidia was the famous battle fought between Cyrus and Artaxerxes, where
Cyrus lost his life and the victory; and out of which Xenophon made that
notable retreit with his Grecians, in despite of 20000. which followed him at
the heels.

In Armenia minor is seated the Mountain Ararate, on whose Ararate.
top the Arc is said to rest after the deluge. And thus much shall serve to
have said of Natolia which in general for merchandise does yield these
commodities, galls, carpets, oils, wines, cottons, wools and cotton yarne,
grograms, grograme yarne, sheep wools, hides r^ Commodities of Anatolia.
and salted, and dry Cordivants, aniseeds, goats wool, soape, silk, comi^
seed, muscadins, cute, resins etc. and thus much in general of Natolia, which
ere I leave, a Word of Trapesond.

CHAP. LIII.
Of TRAPESOND and the Trade thereof.

TRapesond formerly the seat of an Empire, now a Trabesond.
Province of the grand signior is inhabited by Jews, and Greeks, but
principally by Armenians; the coins are those common with all Turkey.

There is found in Trapesond in use two weights, one for spices, Weights in
Trabesond.
drugges and fine commodities, which is the same with the weight of (...),
which they here brought into use in their great trade into this City from
Gallata Caffa and other places subject in those days to their government; the
other for gross commodities, is the Rotolo, 100 whereof is the Cantar,
agreeing with that common Rotolo of Constantinople, vide there more.

Their common measure is a Pico agreeing near with Constantinople, Measures in
Trabesond.
making about 26 inches English.

CHAP. LIIII.
Of SYRIA in general and the part thereof.

SYria has on the East Euphrates, on the West the mediterranean Sea; on the
South Palestine, on the North Sil^cia, Syria.
watered with Euphrates, which anciently passed through the garden of Eden; and
having its sourse in the Mountains of Armenia, running at this day by
Euphrates. ^abylon or Bagdate, disgorgeth it self into the Persian Sea, and
O^tis which arising on Mount Libanus saluteth the walls of Silu^, and
disi^bogeth in the mediterranean, and is divided into 3 Pro^nces, viz.
Phenicia, Celosyria and Sirophaenicia, of which in order.

CHAP. LV.
Of Phenicia and the Cities thereof.

IN Phoenicia is seated the City of Ptolemais, or Acr^, Phaenicia and the
Cities thereof.
or Acon, famous for so many Christian Armies that have in times past besieged
it, and which likewise added fame to our Kings Richard ceur de lion, and Edward
the first, in which place the Venetians and French have some trade for wax,
hides, corn, ^ke; and therefore following the observations made by them in
^atter of weights and measures, I find the same to be thus accorded.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Acria commonly S. ^ohn de Acria, and the Trade thereof.

ACria being seated in the bottom of the mediterranean, and now struggling with
its own ruins, has yet Acria and the trade thereof.
by reason of its small but commodious harbor some trade maintained by the
French, but principally by Venetians; who in small vessels coast these parts,
and pick up some of the Asian commodities out of these Villages and Towns
bordering upon the Sea coasts, as both in this place, Tripoly, Sidon, etc. the
agreements of their weights and measures observed by Venetians, I will insert.

The cantar of Acria commonly called by them the cantar Tambaran Weights of
Acria.
makes sotile in Venice 900 li. which produces in England 603 li.

Rotolo 1 makes sotle pounds in Venetia 9 li.

Braces 100 of cloth of gold and silk is in Acria 108 pic. Braces 100 Measures
of Acria.
of cloth woollen of Venetia is in Acria 115 Picos.

Their coins is generally the same with all the Dominions of Coins.
the grand signior, which I shall declare coming to treat of Constantinople
the Metropolis of that Empire, and of Aleppo the principal City of trade in
this Country, therefore shall not need here to insist further thereupon.

CHAP. LVII.
Of SIDON and the trade thereof.

SIDON is now limited within a narrower compass Sidon.
than its ancient bounds, commanded by the Emir or Prince of the Drusians, the
offspring of Christians, but now hardly professing any religion at all; it i^
^eated upon the same shore as Acria, and where the Fench and Venetians
maintain consulls, and is better known to us then Acria: and where by their
means all western Christians find (...) reasonable favorable protection in
their trade.

The Country does principally abound in corn, which some Commodities* of
Sidon.
years is hence distributed and dispersed to Marselia, Lighor^ and other parts
of Christendom, with galls, woolls, wax, etc.

Their coins are principally Rialls of (...) Spanish and Chicquins in Coins
common in Sidon
gold, the Riall accounted for 72 aspers, and the chickquine 108 aspers, but
the valuation alters according to the occasions of the state and course of
traffic, therefore no great confidence can be given thereunto.

Their waights is the dram and Rotolo current in these parts of Weights of
Sidon.
Asia, 650 drams, making the Rotol. 4 li. 5 ounces English.

Rotolo 100 is their cantar qt 433 li. English.

Rotolo 1 is accounted to make there also 12 ounces.

Rotolos 110 makes Rotolos 100 common in Aleppo.

Rotolos 115 makes Rotolos 100 common in Cyprus.

Their measures (...) (...) -- -- -- Measures of Sidon.


In this tract lies the place where Tire was seated, now devou^ by the
incroaching Sea, of whose ancient traffic see the 66 ^pter; and also Sarepta,
where Elias who had formerly lived in ^ount Carmell nigh adjoining, was
sustained in a famine by a ^dow whose son he raised from death: other matters
of con^ence have not fallen out within my reading happened in this ^uit, therefore
hence I will travail to the next Province.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of Syrophoenicia and the Cities thereof.

SYrophoenicia has been better beautified with Cities than now it is, the
wars of Princes and time has Syrophoenicia.
given a period to many, of which Antioch was famous both for being the
Metropolis of all Syria, and the place where the Disciples of our Savior were
first cal^ Christians, now nothing but the ruins to be seen upon those ^ge
plains, which does lead from Alexandretra to Aleppo; it ^prehendeth the famous
City of Baruti, which deserves a re^d for the present trade thereof.

CHAP. LIX.
Of BARUTI, and the trade thereof.

BARVTI formerly called Iulia Felix, is a famous Mart Town, yet much inferior
in trade to what it Baruti and the trade thereof.
has formerly been; near this town is that noted Valley where it is said
Saint George by killing of a Dragon delivered the Kings daughter, in memorial
^ereof there was a Castle and Oratory here built and conse^ed to him, and whose
name it bore, whose ruins do yet ap^re, if the Inhabitants may be believed;
it is now the common ^age for all those Caravans that travel from Aleppo,
Damasco (...) Jerusalem to Cairo and Mecca, and thereby made a place of ^t
concourse of Merchants. It is subject to the grand Signior, Coins current in
Baruti.
(...) therefore his coins in silver and gold are the current coins ^reof,
partaking of those that are current in the neighboring ^untries, as all
bordering Towns are found to be. The English ^ve no scale or residence here,
but the Venetians who pry with ^re industry into these parts, find here a
profitable traffic, ^erefore in the waights and measures thereof we must
sail by ^eir observations.

The cantar containing 100 Rotolos of Baruti makes s^tle Venetia Weights of
Baruti.
weight 750 li. and of gross 475. li. and of English 502 li. The Rotolo makes
Venetia s^le 7 li. gross 4 li. 9 ounces, English 5 li. the cantar or 100
Rotolos of Baruti is in Aleppo 96 Rotolos, the common weight and 90 Rotolos of
silk weight.

Measures of Baruti is the pico, 100 whereof makes in Venetia Measures of
Baruti.
86 Braces, and the 100 Braces of Venetia of woolen cloth makes in Baruti 112
or 113 pico's, which is in England() yards.

The Town of Amano lies also in this Syrophoenicia, and is Amano and the
trade thereof.
found to be a Town of great trade and confluence of Merchants of Arabia,
Persia, and Turkey; but because I find the waights and measures thereof to
accord with the same that are found in use in Aleppo, and their coins the
common current coins of Turkey, I shall refer the Reader to Aleppo, and the
trade thereof.

CHAP. LX.
Of CELOSYRIA and the Cities thereof.

CELOSYRIA does not now afford many Cities Celosyria.
of note, Hieropolis was here famous for the Temple and worship of the Syrian
goddess; but now Damascus is the principal scale and City of this Province,
which requires for the trade thereof a longer discourse, than my information
can guide me, how ever what I have gathered I shall here willingly insert.

CHAP. LXI.
Of DAMASCUS and the Trade thereof.

DAMASCUS is so pleasantly seated, that the impostor Damascus and trade thereof.
Mahomet would never enter into it, least forgetting by the ravishing pleasures
of the place, the business (as he said) he was sent for, and make this his
Paradise; it is seated in a very fruitful soil, bearing grapes all the year
long, and girt with curious and odoriferous Gardens; being also famous, first,
for her founders, who were Abraham's servants; secondly, for the Temple of
Zacharias; and thirdly, for the conversion of Paul, who here first preached,
and escaping the traps of his enemies, was let down the walls of the house by
a basket. And in matter of trade it still continues a place where all
commodities of Turkey, Arabia, and India are brought in^ where Caravans of
th^se Nations do pass through, going (...) Constantinople, Bagdat, and
Aleppo, to Egypt, Mecha or India, (...) so again back.

The current coins of this City is those common with all Syria, Coins of
Damsco.
^ppo being the principal, where you may see further for the ^eys of the place.

The Damasco cantar is in Venetia sotile 600 li. gross 380. li. which Weights
of Damasco.
^aberdepois 402 li. yet observed to make in some commodities ^6 li. English,
so that by the said Venetian calculation which I ^e by (because of their
residence there, and their great traf^e thither) 100 li. gross Venetia should
render 26 Rotolos, and (...) 100 li. sotile 16 Rotolos Damascino Rotolo. 1.
makes Venice sotile (...) gross 3 li. 9 ounces; Peso 100 Damascino are (...)
66 (...) so^ Venice 1 li. metallichi 100 damas: gives in Venetia silver weight
^ ounces; Killats 100 Damasco gives silver weight in Venetia 90 (...): Killats
100 damasco gives by spice weight in Venetia 106 (...): ^tar 7 of damasco gives
in Rhodes cantar one, cantar one damasco ^es in Genoa 550 li.

Measures of length is the pico, which is accounted about 27 (...), Measures of
Damasco.
agreeing thus with other places.

Pico 100 damasco, makes Venetia measure of cloth 87 brac; makes in Genoa 24
Canes of 10 palms every Cane. makes in Flor^ce ^4 (...) Canes.

Braces 100 of cloth in Venetia gives here 11^ (...). 100 of silk Venetia
gives here 106 pic^.

Pico one Damasco make scarsly Brace of Venetia.

The commodities coming hence are cottons of Syria, Saffron, Commodities of
Damasco.
^le, excellent blades for swords and knives, wrought and raw silks (...) the
growth of this Country, oil, ^oney, wax, (...), Almonds, ^es, some drugges,
rice, which here are noted plentiful, besides (...) commodities here found and
hither brought from other Re^ns, which I need not here nominate.

There is used in Damascus in the buying and selling of diverse (...) upon all
commodities in Da^.
^modities a certain Tare and allowance to be given, over and a^e the weight,
from the buyer to the seller, most especially ^actised in bargains of spices
and drugges, which as I find them ^served by others, I think good here to
show; as in

Ginger 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Myrrh 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Maces 5 per cent. 105
Sugar candid 5 per cent. 105 To. Cinnamon 5 per cent. 105 Wor^seed 5 per cent.
105 Rot. Cloves 5 per cent. 105 Zedoaria 5 per cent. 105 Indico 5 per cent. 105
Spiknard 5 per cent. 105 Gallingall 5 per cent. 105 Mirabolans 5 per cent. 105
Nutmeggs 5 per cent. 105 Aloes epatica 5 per cent. 105 Lack 5 per cent. 105
Cardamom 5 per cent. 105 Long pepper 5 per cent. 105 Turbit 5 per cent. 105
Cutchenele 5 per cent. 105 Silk 10 per cent. 110 Greeneginger 0 per cent. 000
Ambergreece 10 per cent. 110 Sugars 0 per cent. 000 And many others which the
Merchant must learn.

All these commodities are found to have these certain Tares, besides the
bags, canisters, boxes, churles, and the like, by the custom and practice of
the place, and for as much as this City is an inland Town, wherein a Bashaw
is found to command for the grand Signior; there is here a custom imposed upon
all goods entering and issuing to forrainers and Merchant strangers 3 per cent.
which is paid in money and not in the same species, according to the customs
of Alexandria before specified.

And to conclude the trade of this place, I will insert an old observation
Agreement of the weight of Damasco with other places of trade.
fallen into my hands, made upon the waights here and the agreement thereof with
other Countries, the certainty whereof I will refer to trial.

The cantar of Damasco making as I said before 100 Rotolos, makes in

The cantar of Damasco by observatio^ has made in Alexandria 428 Rot. forfori.
Constantinople 341 Rot. Venice sotil: 600 li. Ditto gross: 380 li. Ancona - 517
li. Florence -- 525 li. Rhagusa -- 500 li. Naples -- 566 li. Sicilia -- 576 li.
Idem -- 203 Rot. Millan - 552 li. Genoa -- 570 li. Valentia - 400 li.


The Rot. Damas: is in Valentia 4 li. 11 ounces, and 1 li. Ual. is 120 drams.
The agreement of the Rotolo of Damasco with some other places.
in Genoa 5 li. 8 ounces, - 1 li. Genoa is 105 dra: here. in Millan 56 ounces,
- 1 li. Millan is 208 drams. in Sicilia 59 ounces. in Naples 5 li. 6 (...)
ounces, - and 1 li. Naples is in Rhagusa 5 li. - and 1 li. Rhagusa. in Florence
5 li. 3 ounces, - and 1 li. Florence is 112 dr.


The truth of these observations I must leave to the trial of the more expert,
and give you a touch, what I have gathered in the matter of agreement of
measures of length.

100 Braces of cloth in Florence have made in Damasco 99 picos. The agreement
of the pico of Damascus with some other places.


100 pico of Damasco have made in Naples 28 canes.

100 pocos of Damasco have made in Sicilia 28 canes.

100 picos of Damasco has made in Millan 87 braces.

10 Canes of silk in Genoa has made in Damasco 37 pico.

100 pico of Damascus have made in Venice of cloth 87 braces.

100 braces of Venice silk have made in Damasco 106 picos.

And for as much as the English, French, and Dutch are not found at present to
have any trade hither, and that the Venetians are the only western Christian
Merchants that here reside, and have here a Consul for the protection of them
and their trade and goods, it will fit me best to borrow some of their
observations, and observe the trade they now drive to this City.

The commodities which the Venetians then carry hither for merchandise, The
trade of the Uenetians to Damasco.
are woolen clothes, honey, almonds, tynne, quicksilver, lead, lattin wier,
iron wier, lattin plates, brimston, allom, wax, mastique, corrall, saffron,
Flemish beads and bracelets, crystal looking glasses, linen of diverse sorts,
course canvas, some few furs, sugars of Cyprus, writing paper, velvets,
taffeta's, damaskes and sattins, some Norimberge wares, corrall, beads, and
many such European commodities.

The commodities that they find here to make returns of, are these, Raw silk
of this Countries growth, and of Persia Ardasse and lege, Belledine, Tripoli,
Bodovin, Baias and others; also some spices and some drugges, as Ginger,
Cloves, Maces, Sandoll, Incense, Myrrh, Nutmegs, Indico, Gallingall, long
Pepper, Mirabolans, Ammoniac, Aloes Epatica, Cardamon, Turbit, sanguis
dragonis, Sugar candid, Wormseed, Zedoaria, Spignard, Cynamon, Tutia, Cottons,
and some cotton yarne, Benjamin, Assafetida, Manna, Camphir, Cassia, and the
like, of which some are found to be sold by the cantar of Damasco, and some by
the Rotolo: also observe

That Musk, Ambergreece and pearl is sold by the metalico, which is 1 dram,
and Sivet is sold by a weight called Ongia, being 10 drams, which makes 6
metalicos, which makes sotile in Venice 1 ounce 1 sacc: and 5 caratts.

The Rotolo is accounted here 600 drams, but lege and ardasse is here sold by a
Rotolo of 680 drams, which is 7 li. sotile Venice, but Damasco silk and all
silk of the growth of the Country is sold by the Rotolo of the place of 600
drams.

These notes the Venetians have made upon their weights and measures.

1 Cantar Damasco is sotile Venice 600 li. and gross 380 li.

1 Rot: Damasco is sotile 6 li. and gross 3 li. 9 ounces.

100 Drams Damasco is 66 metigall sotile Venice 1 li. and of the silver weight
in Venice 10 ounces and 5 Caratts.

100 Drams makes silver weight in Venice 12 Marc. 6 ounces and.

100 Mitigal Damasco is in Venice 15 ounces and 5 Caratts.

100 Carat damasco is silver weight in Venice 91 Carat.

1 dram damascin is 24 carat damascin, the which 24 carat is one Miticall
damascino. Again e contra

The 1000 li. gross in Venice makes in Damasco 263 Rotolos.

The 1000 li. sotile in Venice is in damasco 166 Rotolos.

So that the 100 li. gross is 26 Rotol. damascine, and the 100 li. sotile is
16 (...) Rotol. damascine.

As for the measure of Damasco, there is but one here in use, and Measures of
Damasco.
is common to all commodities, both linen, silk, and woolen, which is the
pico, which by the calculation of the Venetians I find thus, 100 pico in
Damasco is in Venice cloth measure braces 87, thereby (...) estimating the said
pico to be almost of brace Venetian.

100 Braces of cloth in Venice make in Damasco 111 in 112 pico.

100 Braces of silk in Venice makes in Damasco 106 in 107 pico; and how they
agree with the measures of England and other places I have showed before,
therefore leaving Damasco trade to the judgment of the better experienced, and
finding the Caravan of Aleppo ready to depart, I am called thither, where by
the way observing some relics not here worth mentioning, and where arriving
you shall find in the next leaf what I have there observed in the matter and
manner of the trade thereof.

CHAP. LXII.
Of Aleppo, and the Trade thereof.

ALeppo, called in the 2. Sam. 8. 3. Aram sobab, is now Aleppo and the trade
thereof.
the most famous City in all the grand Signiors Dominions, for the wonderful
confluence of Merchants of all Nations and Countries, that come hither to
traffi^e: It is pleasantly seated upon a Plain, in the midst whereof does rise
a small hill, whereupon is built a strong Castle that commands the whole City;
it has in it many Canes for lodgings and warehouses for Merchants, which
resembling small Forts being shut with iron gates, defend the Merchants, and
their goods from all wrong or theft; their streets are shut with doors every
night at each end, in the manner of Cairo, and thereby every street becomes a
defensible place by it self.

There are of all Eastern, Southern, and Western Nations Merchants found
therein, many of which enjoy several immunities and privileges, granted them
by their particul^ ^lations from the grand Signior who is Lord hereof: the
English, Venetians, and French, are found to be great Traders hither, each
bringing hither their native commodities, and here exchange them for Arabian,
Persian and Indian drugges, jems, spices, and such like commodities, ^ongst
which the English are most eminent, by reason that they ^t only furnish this
City with the native commodities of En^and; but also with such as come to them
from India and Persia (...) Sea, and which in former days were from hence
brought in^ England.

This City is seated about 100 English miles from the Sea, A^ndretta or
Scanderone being the Sea Port and Road whereto Scanderone.
^ll shipping, either out of the Ocean or Mediteranean come to ^de and unlade
their goods, and are hence transported by Ca^els to Aleppo; which scale was
formerly in Tripoli, which is a ^ore commodious Port, and nearer in distance;
but the way be^g found more craggy, rugged, and dangerous, by reason of the
^solencie of the Arabians, it was by all Christians disused, and ^y consent the
same was here settled.

The commodities which are found in this City, are commonly Commodities of
Aleppo.
^ll the commodities of Asia and Africa, as spices of all sorts, drugs ^f all
sorts, silks of Persia, jems of India, spices of Arabia, and the ^ommon
commodities proper to the Country, as Grograms, grogram yarne, galls,
Cottons, and cotton yarne, silk of Tripoli, Bacai, Bedovine, and Damasco, and
other sorts in great quantity.

The Weights used here in particular, is the dra^ and Rotolo, as in Weights of
Aleppo.
most parts of Turkey; but the Rotolo is found in many commodities to differ in
drams, according to the custom in weight of the place and commodity.

The Cantar is also found to disagree in Rotolo, according to the common and
usual weight of commodities, which I will declare thereby to show first how
they accord with England and other places of trrade, and then how they agree
amongst themselves:

And first silk of Persia is sold by the wesno, which is 30 ne^her, and (...)
ne^her is 120 grains, and every grain is 30 drams, by which account the wesno
amounts ^o 3600 drams, and (...) make a cole.

But the common weight better known to us is the Rotolo, which of ardesse and
lege is 680 drams, of (...) 700 drams, and so changing in other sorts of
commodities, which the Factor is to take notice of.

The Rotolo is also divided into 12 ounces, and ounce 1 is drams 60, drams 3600
is accounted a wesno.

Drams 2400 is a botman, which is the weight by which silk is sold in
Constantinople, and makes there 6 oaks.

Cantar (...) is Rotolos 100, making near 481 li. haberdepois.

Rotolo 1 is haberdepois 4, 13 ounces accounted and found sometimes 4 li. 14
ounces; so that 112 li. haberdepois, is found hereby to be Rotolos 22, ounces 8.

Rotolos 100 common weight, is 494 li. 8 ounces haberdepois which is above 4
li. 15 ounces, and so is sometimes found to produce in some commodities.

A wesno of silver is 100 drams, which is 68 lire of Venetia, and it is found
that 11 (...), (...) full weight, makes a wesno of silver here.

Silver, gold, jems, etc, are sold by the mitigall, which is 1 drams, which is
carat 24 English, or grains 96.

Wesno's of Aleppo are in buying of silk thus reduced into Rotolos Wesnos
reduced into Rotolos in Aleppo.
and drams following.

Wesno 1 is Rotolos 5 drams 200.
5 26 320 10 52 650 20 105 600 30 158 560 40 ^11 520 50 264 480 60 317 440 70
370 400 80 423 360 90 476 320 100 529 280

Which may be enlarged to a greater number, having purposely here inserted
the same for the benefit of the ignorant, and learner.

Now for as much as the Venetians have been accounted the first Christian
Traders into this City, let us observe the agreements Aleppo with Venetia.
in weights of this place and Venetia.

Cantar 1 makes sotile Venetia 720 li. gross. 456 li. which this way reduced to
English weight, is 482 li. haberdepois.

Rotol. 1 Venetia sotile li. 7, ounces 2, sache 2 2/4 gross. li. 4, ounce. 6.

Gross Venetia 1000 li. i^ i^ Aleppo cantar 2, Rot. 19.

Solite Venetia 1000 li. (...) in Aleppo, cantar 1, Rot. 40; so that 100 li.
gross. is Rotol. 21 and 100 li. ^ile is 14 Rotolos.

Cantar 1 has produced in Florence 660 li.

Now it will be necessary to note some observations upon commodities weighed in
Aleppo, with the ^res and allowances by Aleppo notes of weighing.
custom of the place given to the buyer.

All sorts of Indico is sold by the C^le, which is 27 Rotolo of 720 drams,
churles 2, makes a chest, allowing in account 327 li. to Indico.
a churl of neat Indico, and there is allowed to the buyer 3 ounces per churl
for dust, and 3 ounces for single shire, and 6 ounces for double.

Silk of all sorts has allowance for heads of skeins if course, Silks.
(...) in 130 drams per wesno; if fine 60 drams notwithstanding.

Musk being bought by the mitigall, out of the Cod gives no al^wance, Musk.
in the Cod 20 per cent.

Druggs of the growth of this Country, are sold by the Rotolo Druggs.
(...) 720 drams, and pays no custom; but of the growth of foreign ^rts, by
Rotolo of 600 drams, and pays great custom, as are ^mphire, aloes, Socotrina.

Silk also of these Countries as Damascus, Tripoli, Bacas, gives Silk of
Damasco.
^o allowance in tare being clean silk.

Oppion is sold drams 110 for 100 drams, the 10 drams being al^wed for tare in
that commodity.

Spices of all sorts are sold by the Rotolo of 720 drams, and if the Spices.
^me be ungarbled, the allowance is 132 for 100; but if garbled, ^10 for 100
notwithstanding, as in cloves, maces, cynamon, etc.

Galls have allowance for dust 2 per cent. and briefly observe Galls.
^ese commodities give these tares to the buyer, Aloes epaticum with ^e skin,
and aloes socotrina, asaphetida with the skin, Bedillio gives ^0 in. 120:
Cinnamon, Cubebus, Casa fistula, Oculus Inde, Galbanum, Spices.
Maces, Oppion, Rubarb, Manna, etc. 10 per 100; Camphora, Lig^um Aloes,
Nutmegs, etc. 5 per 105.

Note, that forasmuch as no English Merchants are permitted ^o trade into
Turkey but the levant company, and that this company ^re incorporated by
especial privileges in London by the favor of his Majesty of England, the
orders of that company by the traders hither to other the Ports of Turkey is
to be observed, according to their established acts and ordinances, whereto I
refer the inquirer for further information.

The Coins current of Aleppo is the same common with all the Coins of Aleppo.
dominions of the great Turk; the passable here is

The Soltanie is medines 80, aspers 120, sh. 16.

The Lion doller, med. 50, asp. 80, sh. 10.

The Duccat, med. 40, asp. 60, sh. 7.

Rialls of 8/8 have passed 6 per cent. better then lion dollers, and 1. 8/8
has passed for a soltanie: but this rule holds not in these days, for the
wars and troubles of that Country have altered these observations.

Shes. 1 is medin. 5, or aspers 8, and the med. 1 (...) shes.

But these rules following are more certain and found true.

. 8/8 is found to weigh 424 grains the single Rot. 26 gr.

The Crown or single pistolet found to weigh 53 grains.

The Solianie, hungar, or chequine to weigh 54 grains.

And the Mitigall is found to weigh 72 grains.

Their accounts are kept as by a common consent throughout Accounts in Aleppo.
the principal places of traffic in Turkey in dollors and aspers; the dollor
containing 80 as. at what rate otherwise soever the same do pass amongst all
Christians that are Merchants, and here resident; yet it is found that the
account of the Country (as proper to the revenewes and treasure of the grand
signior, and practiced by the receivers of his estate) is kept in aspers,
wherein they account to thousands, ten thousand and hundred thousand aspers,
and so by a cargo or load of aspers which they account to be 100 thousand
aspers, and at 80 aspers per dol. amount to 1250 dollers, o^ 312 li. 10 shil.
starling.

There is found in Aleppo but one measure or pico which is 27 Measures in
Aleppo.
inches English or of a yard, and is the same for linen and woollen, and does
agree with the Venetian brace, used there in cloth of gold and silk; and the
100 braces of cloth in Venetia is found to render here 106 picos.

There is also a pico found for grograms, chamblets and Moheres, but this is
the proper pico of Angera the staple of that commodity, and is found to be but
2 inches English incirca less, as I have more at large noted in that place.

As for the customs of this place they are as in Constantinople, for the
English nation 3 per cent. with some innovations crept i^ C^stomes in Aleppo.
by the corruption of customers and forraigners which here are found to be
Jews; and which in this point are loath to derogate from the common manner of
almost all customers and forraigners in the World: but the last agreement
between Mustafa, Aga the customer and the consul of the English was thus,

Kerfies rated at medines 14 (...) per piece, at 3 per cent. Broad clothes
rated at medines 120 per cloth at 3 per cent. Come skins the bundle 50 skins at
14 dol. Tynne rated at 55 Rot. per chest and 3^ dol. is 157 dol. Indico at
medines 587 per chest. Galls at 12 dol. per Rot. Silk at medins 6 per Rot.
Grograms the balle at 33 dol. Fillades per quintall at 33 dol. Cotton wool per
cent -- 33 dol. Quilts at 50 dol. per ball. Botanos at ball 80 dol. Cordovants
at ball 8 dol. Turmericke at medins 80 per Rot. Gumdragan^ at ball 60 dol.
Note that all spice as nut^egges, cloves, mace and Cynamon pays 21 per cent.
but to be rated at 14 per cent. less then the same cost as being commodities
of India properly,

Nut^egges valued at medines -- 60. Cloves per Rot. at -- 160. Maces per Rot.
at -- 220. Cynamon per Rotolo at -- 90
Pepper owes but half custom, and therefore rate it at less ^hen it cost,
and then pay 21 per cent.

Before I leave this place, it will be needful that I do more The general
Trade of Aleppo surveyed in its particular colors.
^articularly survey the body of the great trade which is deen ex^rcised here
at this day; and first for the trade of the English as the most eminent, it is
found that this place does yearly vent about ^6000 English clothes of several
sorts, about 600 quintalls of tynne, some furs, kerfies and other English
commodities, besides 100 The English the prime traders to Aleppo.
thousand rialls of 8/8 brought yearly hither by them in ready mo^eys to be
invested in raw silk, drugges, and other commodities of this Country: they
have here to this end a consul, who is intitu^ed of Syria and Cyprus, who has
here the pre-eminence of all other Christian consulls resident; and in returns
of this estate carry ^ence great quantity of raw Persia silk termed and known
to us by the name of Ardasse and Lege, and also Bedovin Castravan, Bele^in,
Baias, and other sort of the growth of this Country; also they carry hence
great quantities of galls of Tocat, some drugges of Arabia, great quantity of
grogram yarne and grograms, cottons and cotton yarne, and other commodities of
this place, which investments were formerly in a large nature in drugges,
spices and Iems, which ^ow the English furnish themselves at the first ^and
from India, etc. and though otherwise thus their returns are thereby shortened,
yet having a greater part of their returns in these sorts of silks above
said, it has herein found a fair enlargement for the abatement made in
spices. The scale of this City is Alexandretta as I noted before, commonly
Scanderone, whereto all ships Scanderone.
come that have business hither; and here likewise the English have a factorie
entitled a vice consul for the effecting and preservation of their affairs
here, and for the landing or lading of all goods coming in or going out from
this City; and where also to the same end the Venetians and French have
likewise their particular vice consulls to manage the public trade of their
several Nations.

The Venetians I account the next Merchants of consequence The Venetians the
s^ond.
here resident, who bring hither great quantity of cloths Venice making, and
others of several sorts, some German commodities, as lattin plates, wier,
shaven lattin, steel, iron, silks wrought, as sattins, damasces, velvets,
taffetas, paper, and some ri^lls of eight and Uenetian chiequens in gold, with
crystal looking glasses, quicksilver and other commodities. And hence in
returns thereof export silks raw of all sorts, cotton wool and cotton yarne,
grograms, moheires, chamblets, sundry sorts of drugges, spices, jems, and
galls, indico and other such.

The French are the next of note that trade hither, having to The French the
third.
that end also a consul in Aleppo, and a vice consul in Alexandretia, and who
carry hither some few clothes of Languedocke, and of rialls of plate a great
quantity, which every small Bark is found to bring hither from Marselia the
only French port hither trading, in return whereof they used some years past
to carry hence abundance of raw silk of all sorts, to the imports sometimes of
600 in 800 bales upon a vessel: but this their trade by sundry losses
occasioned is now decayed, and their ships are only laden with galls,
cotton woolls, cotton yarne, grograms, some drugges, spices, callicoes, and
such.

These are then the only 3 Christian nations that have any trade of moment
here, the trade driven here by the Dutch not worthy consideration; besides
which this Town is found to be the great magazin of all Persia, India and
Arabia commodities; the Merchants whereof come hither in great troops and
caravans, with their Camels laden with the rich wares of those several
Countries, and make their returns in the commodities of Europe abovenamed,
which they buy and barter with the English, French and Venetians, which here
have their residence as aforesaid. To conclude then the trade of this place,
and to omit nothing that I have judged proper for the demonstration thereof, I
will insert the observations made here by experience in the weights and
measures of this place, with the weights and measures of some other places of
trade in the elevante.

It is before noted that in Aleppo there is but one quintar accounted The
agreement of the cantar of Aleppo with other places.
as the common cantar of the place, by which all commodities are both bought
and sold; yet it is to be noted withal, that from this quintar is many other
cantars derived, varying according to the custom practiced in the weight of
some special commodities, as I have before likewise noted: now this cantar
consists of 100 Rotolos; the common Rotolo here which is also accounted 600
drams, though as I have there observed, several commodities are weighed by a
several Rotolo, some consisting of 600, some 680, some 700, and some 720
drams: therefore to explain this point it has been observed that the common
cantar of Aleppo containing 100 Rotolos, and each Rotolo containing 600 drams
have made in these Countries following:

The 100 Rotolo of 680 drammes is
In Naples -- 633 li. -- 6 li. 8 ounces. Uenetia sotile -- 720 li. -- 7 li. 2
ounces 2 sach. Uenetia gross-456 li. -- 4 li. 9 oun. Florence -- 626 li. -- 6
li. 3 oun. Gotile sotile -- 624 li. -- 6 li. 10 oun. Sicilia -- 691 li. -- 6
li. 10 (...) oun. Millan -- 662 li. -- 6 li. 7 ounces.
I have noted the measure here in general for all commodities to The agreement
of the 100 picoes of Aleppo with other places.
be the pico in Cloth, the 100 picoes has been found thus to concord with
other Countries.

100 pico have made in Uenice cloth -- 94 braces. In Uenice silk -- 100
braces. In ^lorence -- 107 braces. In Genoa -- 28 Canes. In Millan -- 81
braces. Sicilia -- 31 Canes 1 palm.
And thus much is what I conceive needful to have (...) ^ning the trade of
this famous City of Aleppo.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of TRIPOLIS and the Trade thereof.

THE next and last of note in this Country is Tripolis, Tripolis in Syria and
the Trade thereof.
and to distinguish it from that in Barbary commonly called (in Syria) it has
in former times been a fair Town, and enjoyed a fair and commodious harbor;
now ruined, and has (as I said before) of late days been accounted for the
Port and Scale of Aleppo, where our Ships ever la^ed and unladen, but since
their removal to Scanderone it is of little commerce: some Venetians are here
found to reside, and who pick out hence some small wade with the inhabitants
of the Country, who afford^ them silk ^re growing, some cotton yarne and
cotton wool, some drugges, corn and other commodities.

Their weight agrees with that of Damasco, which is Rotolo 100 and is a C^ntar
d^scino, which is Venetia sotile li. 600, gross 380 li. Weights of Tripoli.
which this way should be English li. 402. but it has been found to yield 416
li haberdepois, drams 52 is an ounce.

Ounces 12 is a Rotolo which has been found to be 4 li. 2 ounc. of
haberdepois, and ounces 8 is an oak, which has been observed to make out 42
li. haberdepois.

Their measure being a Pico is somewhat less then 27 inches Measures of
Tripoli.
English.

Their moneys is generally the same with all Turkey, but thus accounted --
Coins in Tripolis.


Aspers 2 is a medin. Aspers 40 is Rot. (...). Aspers 160 is a Rot. (...).
Aspers 140. is a dollor lion. Aspers 240 is a sultany.
And thus much shall serve for Tripoly in Syria.

CHAP. LXIV.
Of PALESTINE and the Cities thereof.

THE next Country in order is Palestina, having on Palestine.
the East Euphrates, on the West the Mediterranean Sea; on the North Phenicia,
and on the South Arabia; this Country has so often changed its name that it
has bin called by 6 several names, 1 Canaan, 2 the land of promise, (...)
Israel, 4 Judea, 5 Palestina, and lastly the holy land; and now divided into 4
parts, Galilea, Judea, Idumea and Samaria.

In Galilea is not found any City either of note nor trading, Galilea.
though in times past it was famous for many, as Bethsaida the birth place of
Peter, Andrew and Philip; and Nazareth second to none, where the Virgin Mary
was saluted with those joyful tidings by an Angel: in this Country arises
the two spring heads of Iord^, Ior and Dan, of which two that united River does
derive Jordan.
its name.

Neither does Samaria now afford any City of commerce, though many notable
places were there found in the flourishing days of Samaria.
the Israelites.

Idumea is also destitute of trading, though it have the commodious Sea Por^
I^ppa in it, where our Western Pilgrims are seen Idumea.
to land and foot it to Jerusalem; where also in times past Jonah took shipping
to fly to Tarsus, and where Peter lying in the house of one Simon a Tanner, was
in a vision taught the conversion of the Gentiles: here also was Gasa where the
Persians did hord up in the greatness of their Empire the customs and tributes
of their western dominions: take what I find in trade here worthy observation.

CHAP. LXV.
Of Gasa and the Trade thereof.

GASA has been more famous and beautiful then Gasa and the Trade thereof.
now it is, and renowned through Europe both for a good Sea Port and a good
defense to the western Christians in their wars here against the Saladin and
Soldans of Egypt, and for a good seat of trade; but all these good things
were too good for those Nations that have since been Masters thereof: for the
goodness of the Port is ^oyled by rubbish, the goodness of the walls ruined by
the wars, ^d the goodness of the scale in trade decayed by the neighbou^g Towns
situated upon this coast. It is seated in the bot^me of all the mediterranean
Sea, and sees yet a little trade by the ^nefit of a creek capable to receive
small vessels, wherein the ^enetians and French pick out some trade with their
ready mo^ey: it is a station common to those caravans that by land travel ^om
Damasco, Aleppo or Constantinople to Ca^o, and so back (...); and these
caravans keeping their settled times of progress ^d regresse, are the cause of
some traffic here maintained: the ^arrennesse of the neighboring deser^s
drive some hither to in^bit, which makes the Town to be better people then
other^ise it happily would be, thereby enlarging the commerce of the ^lace.
What observations therein I have learned I must acknow^dge due to the
endeavors of a Venetian Merchant who much ^equented these parts, which is The
commodities of this City are Commodities of Gasa.
^ose proper of the Country, and as the place partaketh as a con^e Town of
Egypt and Judea, so it must be understood that it ^oth participate of the
commodities for merch (...) proper to ^oth of them, as cottons, cotton yarne,
silks, some drugges, some spices, and the like.

The coins here current I need not nominate, neither yet the Coins of Gasa.
manner of keeping of Merchants accounts here; for as seated in the dominions
of the grand signior; the coins and accounts are the same common with
Constantinople and other parts of Turkey.

The weight of Gasa is found to be only one, composed of the Weights of Gasa.
Rotolo, and 100 Rotolos making their cantar; which cantar by the said
observations make in Venetia 800 li. sotile, and the 1000 li. gro. ^n Venetia
has made here 191 Rot. and the 1000 li. sotile Venetia has made here 125
Rotolos: but because I find a Country man of our own to have made a differing
observation from this in the point of weight, which is, that the cantar of Gasa
will make in London 536 li. haberdepois; I will leave the experiment to that
hand that shall have cause to make a further trial.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of TYRUS, and the ancient Trade thereof.

TYRUS lies also in this Tract, or to say more properly and more truly did
once lie in this Tract, Of Tyrus and the ancient Trade thereof.
which for its great splendour in traffic in time past deserves here the
commemoration thereof* which I will insert as I find it noted by the Prophet
Ezech^ in chap. 26 and 27; the greatness and amplitude o^ which trade now
ruind and altogether desolate, serving for example to all eminent Cities of
traffic, that the Merchants Inhabitants of those places forget not GOD the
giver of that plenty and abundance; nor yet abuse the same to their own
destruction* as is showed there it was to the Tyrians. Tyrus then in the heig^
of its greatness is recorded to have a very great trade, and so large that it
served for a general mart to all the World, and that all Nations were
furnished with their merchandise and commodities thence, which wonderfully
enriched the City and increased the power of the citizens; so that she is there
termed the strong and renowned City of the Sea, and which was mightily
inhabited by Se^ men and Merchants, whose power and greatness in Navigation
and trade is described by many particulars in that Chapter; as first that her
Ship timber was of the Fur trees of Hermon hill, and the Masts thereof was of
cedar, and brought from Libanon, and the Oars thereof were of the oaks of
Bashan; the Sails thereof was fine imbroidered linen brought from Egypt, and
the covering^ (or as Seamen term it their awneings) were of blew silk and
purple, brought from the Isles of Elishah: their mariners were the Inhabitants
of Sidon and Arvad, and their Ship-masters and Pilots were the wisest of the
City, and their Carpenters, shipwrights and Calkers were the ancients of Gebal,
and the wise men thereof; and all the Ships of the Sea with their Mariners
negotiated in her in the traffic of merchandise. Now those that traded hither
and were the Merchants thereof, and the commodities for which they traded is
also recorded there, for the Merchants of Tarshish brought hither to the Faires
all rich commodities, as silver, iron, tynne, lead: The Merchants of Grecia,
Italy and Cappadocia furnished it with slaves for labor, and with all manner
of vessels of brass. The Merchants of Togarmah brought hither to her Marts
Horses and Mules for carriage. The Merchants of Dedan brought Unicornes horns
and Elephants teeth. The Merchants of Aram brought to her Faires emerald,
coral, pearls, fine linen, and purple imbroidered works. The Merchants of
Israel brought honey, ^lme, oil and wheat. The Merchants of Damasco brought
wines, ^ols, and multitude of other rich wares. The Merchants of Dan ^d Iavan
brought iron work, cassia, calamus. The Merchants of ^rabia furnished it with
cattle. Of Sheba and Ramah with spices ^d precious stones and gold: and to
conclude, all the nations of ^ose regions were accounted the Merchants that did
traffic ^ither with all the riches of their several Countries, and furni^ed
the same with the best of their Seamen, and the principal of ^eir Ships for
navigation: but the Holy Prophet in liew of their ^en greatness, prophesied
their future misery; instead of their ^en riches prophesied their future
poverty, which is there recor^ed to have fallen deservedly upon this City and
their inhabitants ^r glorying in their own strength and opulence, and for
deri^ing of the holy City of Jerusalem, by rejoicing at the visitation and fall
which GOD had been pleased to afflict her withal; (...) that many years past
the said prophecy has bin in her fulfilled, ^s now we see it in these days
to be; for many nations has ^sen up against it, and the waves of the Seas has
devoured it; the ^iches thereof are robbed, and the merchandise thereof are
spoy^ed: the nations that have known the splendour of it are risen up ^n
astonishment at it, the waters has covered it, and in fine the ^ame is brought
to nothing, and shall never hereafter have a bee^ng, which is fully
accomplished in every particular: therefore ^et each flourishing City of trade,
and every Merchant exercising ^raffique take warning by their ruin and
desolation, and by their ^ust and faithful dealing and upright conversation
endeavor to divert the wrath of GOD from the Cities of their habitations; and
having the sin of the Tyrians ever in remembrance, they may thereby hope to
avoid their punishment.

Now as for the Country of Judea, I find not that it affords any eminent City
of trade in these our days, though otherwise it be famous in Scripture in
times past, both for the City of Bethleem, where our Savior CHRIST was borne,
and where it was found the innocents did suffer for him ere he suffered for
them; and also for the City of Ierico, destroyed by the sounding of rams
horns; Ierico.
and lastly for Jerusalem the City of the Lord, built by Melchisedec Prince and
Priest of Salem, in the Country of the Jebusites; but Jerusalem.
since that time having been layen wast diverse times, and having again found
new reedifiers, is now of little consequence: here was that most magnificent
Temple built by Solomon, and the famous Temple of the Sepulcher built by Helena
daughter to Coilus a British King, and mother to Constantine the Great; the
ruins thereof is yet much resorted unto both by Protestants and Papists,
though for sundry ends; which place affords now not any trade to any nation
save to the Jews, who farm of the grand signior this abovesaid Temple at
80000 sultanies yearly, and every pilgrim or other Christian entering, must
pay 9 sultanies to the said farmers for admittance; so that the posterity of
those Jews make an unrighteous gain and traffic by his death, whom
unrighteously their forefathers occasioned to die.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of ARMENIA and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

ARMENIA has on the East Media, and the Caspian Sea, on the West Euphrates and
the Euxi^ Armenia.
Sea, on the North Tartarie, on the South Mesopotamia; the whole Country is
divided into three Provinces; first, Colchis; secondly, Georgia; thirdly,
Turcomania.

Colchis lies on the Euxine Sea, the Inhabitants thereof being Christians;
hence did Jason in the days of old steal the golden Colchis.
fleece; and here is also seen the ruins of that famous City Dioscuria,
where by reason of the many foreign Merchants from all Dioscuria.
Countries that here frequented, three hundred languages was commonly spoken
and practiced.

Neither can I find in Georgia, erst called Iberia, any City of note for
trading. Turcomania being also as barren in this kind. Georgia.
It is observed by sundry Authors that out of this Province is derived
Turcomania.
the Name and Original of the Turks, who here had their offspring, and who
within these three hundred years last past have made themselves potent by
their Armies, and to the ruin of many Kingdoms, the present Grand Signior
Sultan Amurath, who The kingdoms under the Turk.
in Anno 1623, at my being in Constantinople was proclaimed Emperor of that
Nation, has under his Dominions and command in chief as Sovereign all these
Countries; first in Europe he has Dacia, Grecia, all the Aegean Islands, and
Taurica Chersonesus; in Asia he has the Provinces before already described;
also Arabia, Syria, Media, Mesopotamia, Rhodes, Cyprus, and other Islands; and
lastly, in Africa he has Egypt and the Kingdom of Tunes and Argier, and many
others of lesser consequence: and thus leaving Armenia, my next step is to
Arabia, which comes now to be handled.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Of ARABIA and the Provinces thereof.

ARABIA is bounded on the East with the Persian gulf, Arabia.
on the West with the red Sea, on the North with Mesopotamia and Palestina, on
the South with the Ocean; the Inhabitants are extremely addicted to theft, this
^ade being found to be the best part of their maintenance, the ^ountry is
divided into three parts, Arabia deserta, Petrosa, and Fe^x. Deserta.
Arabia deserta is the place where the people of Israel wandered ^or forty
years under the command of Moses; the most eminent City of this Province is
Bolsora, whereto by reason that it serves Bolsora.
^or through-fare from Arabia to Aleppo, and Damascus, is found a City of
great concourse of many Merchants, and which does ^rincipally consist more upon
the commodities brought hither from other Countries, as of India, and other
parts of Arabia, then of any found here to be transported into other Countries;
the ^urther trade thereof by reason of my ignorance I omit.

This Country by reason of the theevish lives of the Inhabitants and the
general barrenness and infertilitie thereof some Authors have observed in
the course of their trade and merchandising, that the sandy Deserts are the
Seas of the Arabian Merchants, the wild arabs their pirates, and their Camells
their ships, usually carrying 600 li. for an ordinary burden, and so we
find them to do in the carriage of our goods and wares from Scanderone to
Aleppo, and so back again, a Camells load being accounted ten Cloths
Suffolk, which by statute weigh 640 li. which with the packing may be 700 li.
or else two barrels or Chests of Tynne found to be incirca 600 li. and so in
other commodities.

In Arabia Petrosa I find not any City of trading: Esion Gebor Petrosa.
on the coasts of the red Sea, where Salomons Navy kept station before the
setting out and at their return from Ophir, was once a famous place, and of
great traffic, though now it lies buried in its own ruins.

In Arabia faelix, Merchants should be better welcome were Faelix.
the Inhabitants so beneficial to their traffic as their commodities might
be made, for it is esteemed the richest and pleasantest part of all Arabia, and
indeed of all Asia, abounding with Gold, pearls, Balsam, Myrrh, Frankincense,
and many other precious drugges.

Here is those two notably noted Towns of Medina and Mecha, Medina Talnabi and
Mecha.
the one the birth place, the other the burying place of Mahomet (who in his
younger years was a Merchant, and in his elder a cunning impostor) where
Christians are forbidden to enter, lea^ they should see (as some Authors
allege) the absurdities of the Mahumetane adoration of their great Prophets
Sepulcher, whose body enclosed in an iron chest, is said by an Adamant to be
drawn up to the roof of the Temple where it hangs; but herein many of them
are and have been for a long time deceived, for (...) self and other
Merchants that have for some term of time resided in Turkey, and specially in
Constantinople, know by experience that the grand Signior does yearly send a
Carpet or rather tombecloth of green Velvet to cover the said Sepulcher, the
old being then taken away and accounted the fees and vailes of their Priests
and clergy men that attend thereon, who cut the same into several small
pieces, and sell it to the superstitious at extreme rates for precious
relics; the Tomb it self being seated in a Temple built in Mecha, of no
great magnificence or beauty, save the cost daily bestowed thereupon in Lamps
of silver and gold, wherein is Balsam and other such rich odours, ointments and
oils continually burned, and is seated on the firm ground and not in the
air, is above is said, and enclosed within an iron grate, wherein some by
favor are permitted to enter, from some of whom I have had this relation, and
is by diverse Turks that I have known and that have seen it and reported it
to be so, and no otherwise: this large circuit of ground has not affoorded me
much matter of trade worthy observation that hitherto has come to my hands;
the most pertinent and eminent places are Mocha, the Seaport of the said Mecha
abovenamed, and Adam, both on the red Sea; of the trade whereof a word, so
far forth as I have gathered, and then I will conclude.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of MOCHA, and the trade thereof.

MOcha, or Muchi as some name it, is seated in the red Sea, almost opposite to
Zuachen that famous City of M^cha, and the trade thereof.
trade on the African shore, and serves as the Port and scale to Meccha, the
birth place of Mahomet the famous Prophet of these Countrymen, much here
resorted unto by Turks, Moors, Arabians, and other Nations professing this
superstitious religion; it is frequented by diverse Merchants, especially
Arabians and Egyptians that take it in their way to Aden, Ormus, India, or the
like; and also much frequented by Mahumetane Pilgrims, who in blind devotion
come this way to Meccha to pay their vows to their ungodly Patron.

It is subject to the grand Signior, and acknowledges his coins Coins in
Mocha.
^r the current in this place in matter of trade, which is the asper ^mmon with
all Turkey.

Whereof 60 is here accounted for a Riall of (...) Spanish.

An hundred is accounted for a Soltanie, chiquine or sheriff.

The common gold here current 8 sh. sterling.

Their weights here used partake also somewhat of the common Weights in Mocha.
^eight in appellation used throughout all Turkey, which is the ^am, 10 whereof
is accounted here an ounce.

14 Ounces is a Rotolo. 24 Rotol. is a fracello, which is 25 li. 12 ounces
English. 15 Fracellos makes a cantar, or as they term it, 1 Bahar, making
English incirca, 386 li.
The Measures here is the pico, accounted incirca 26 inches Measures in Mocha.
^nglish, other notes have not fallen into my hand of this place, ^erefore hence
I will bend my course to Aden.

CHAP. LXX.
Of ADEN, and the Trade thereof.

ADen is the strongest and fairest Town of Arabia foelix, Aden, and the Trade
thereof.
situated in a valley and encompassed most part with hills of marble, upon
which it is conceived it never raineth; it lies on the North side of the
entrance of the red Sea, reaching 60 miles further inwards then the opposite
cape Guardefu; it is fortified with 5 strong Castles, kept by Garrisons, and
within late years surprised by the Bashaw of Egypt, for the grand Signior, in
whose obedience it now quietly remains by the death and slaughter of the
natural Sovereign thereof: it is now by the industry of man from a firm land
become an Island, and yet commanded by a strong Castle, the residence of the
Governor seated on an adjoining hill.

It is accounted to have 6000 houses in it, inhabited by sundry Nations; or
more properly a miscelanie of Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, Arabians, and
Turks which here do reside for the benefit of that great trade and commerce
that is exercised in this City. The Portugals had once got the possession
thereof, and were masters of it for some few years; but finding the charge of
the Garrison to exceed the benefit afforded by the trade and neighboring
confines, they willingly surrendered the place to a Moore; who paying them for
some years certain tribute, they seated as a Sovereign to command the same,
who ruled here till the Turks became to be masters thereof.

This City is now the principal Magazine for the commodities of Persia,
India, and Arabia, and affording naturally great store of Druggs, as Myrrh,
Balsame, Manna, and many sorts of spices: The heat of this place is so
excessive in the day time, that all the bargains and contracts made here
amongst Merchants, is done by night, as the cool^st season to effect the same.

Now for the coins here current, the weights and measures here in use and
other needful further observations of the trade of this place, I am enforced
to be silent in, and refer the same to the more experienced, to be hereafter
added, as occasion shall serve heereunto.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldea, and the Cities thereof.

ASsyria has on the East Media, on the West Mesopotamia, Assyria, Mesopotamia,
and Chaldea.
on the North Armenia minor, on the South a part of Persia; in which I find no
City at present of any note: here is seen to this day the ruins of that
Ni^iveh whose walls were of three days journey in compass about, one hundred
foot high, and thirty foot broad, and beautified with 1500 Towers of 200 foot
high; through which ran the famous River of Euphrates, and to which place was
Jonas sent to preach; here being 120000 persons found so ignorant in the
things of God, that they are said in Scripture not to know the right hand from
the left.

In Mesopotamia is seated Caramit a famous Town and Bashawlike Mesopotamia.
of the grand Signior whose commerce is unknown unto us by reason of its
situation; in Genesis 12 it is called Padan Haran, and is the place where
Abraham dwelt after he had left Vr; and in this Country was Abraham borne, and
to which place he sent his servant to choose a wife for his son Isaac; and
here in some Authors opinion, (which in this description I followed, did
Paradise stand. Paradise.


In Chaldea we find many Cities to have been of old; and amongst Chaldea.
others Babel, famous for the confusion of Languages that here happened in
building that stupendous Edifice which was raised 5164 paces high, and who had
its basis and circumference equal to that height; it is now much lessened of
its ancient greatness, and from Babel it became first Babylon, and now Bagdat,
Babylon, now Bagdate.
a Bashawlike of the grand Signior, through which runs the River Euphrates,
which is in part the cause of her present traffic which daily is found to be
maintained by the help of Aleppo, where is kept (by the intercourse of
Merchants, and the commodity of Caravans, and intelligence of Pigeons carrying
letters) a neighborlike commerce; Bagdate oftentimes venting into the land,
what Aleppo does receive by Seas.

CHAP. LXXII.
Of BABYLON, now BAGDATE, and the Trade thereof.

BAbylon, now Bagdate, was at first founded by Nimrod, Babylon, and the trade
thereof.
but never finished till that warlike Semiramis took it in hand whose walls
were 60 miles in circuit, 200 foot high, and 75 foot broad, seated upon the
River Euphrates, in those days a fair and beautiful City, now having almost
lost all that splendour and glory it then justly boasted of: Many famous
accidents have here happened; here died Alexander the great, after which his
body lay eight days ere his ambitious Captains could have leisure to give it
a fitting burial; here it is also said that when this place was taken by
Zopyrus the Macedonian with his Grecians, it was full three days ere one part
thereof took notice of the conquest, since which it has been subject to
several sovereigns, and it is at this day a Town of very great traffic,
between which and Aleppo are many Caravans found to travel with many 1000
Camels laden with sundry commodities, the rich commodities of India brought
from Ormus by Sea to Balsara, seated as the maritime Port of the City in the
Persian Gulf, and so up the River Euphrates hither, and hence to Aleppo,
Damasco, and other Countries, which again returnes-them in exchange the
commodities of Turkey, Egypt, and Europe.

In this Country, and generally through many parts of Turkey, ^igeons Letter,
or news Carriers.
they have a custom to give advice of their affairs by pigeons, which serve
Merchants here for Posts; and hereby the English are found in Aleppo to have
advice from Alexandretta, which is accounted 100 miles, in 24 hours, and
hereby the Caravans here travailing give from time to time advice of their
journeys and success, which is done in this manner: when the hen dove sits
and has young, they take the cock pigeon and put him into a cage, whom (when
he is by the Caravan carried a days journey off) they set at liberty, and he
straight flies home to his mate; when by degrees they are thus perfectly
taught: the Carriers and Merchants on any accident fasten a letter about one of
their necks, and they being freed without any stay hasten to the place from
whence they were brought, and such as at home do watch their return, (clime
their hole and take away their Letter) are certified of the mind of their
friends, or any other tidings, after a very speedy manner.

The commodities of this place, are the common commodities before Comm^dities
of Babylon.
nominated in Aleppo, and their coins current, are the same that are found
throughout Turkey, as subject to one and the same Sovereign; but the coins of
Persia are found here likewise to pass current for their value, and so does
also their gold without Coins of Babylon.
exception; it being a received custom in Trade, that frontier Towns of Trade
admit the coins of the bordering Inhabitants and Regions.

The weights of Babylon known amongst us is the dram, mitigall, Rotolo, and
Cantar. Weights of Babylon.


Their Rotolo has been observed to make 1 li. 10 ounces English, and our 112
li. English has made here 68 Rotolos.

Their measure in length common in this place is the pico found to be by
trial about 27 inches English. Measures in Babylon.


To conclude this Countries relation; from hence came the 3 Wise men called of
the East, who worshipped Christ and presented him with gifts, and the
inhabitants hereof are said to be the first inventers of Astronomic and
Astrology; and therefore hence have all such the title of Chaldeans, and for
other matter of trade, here is only found the famous Town of Mosull, situated
on the River Euphrates, abounding with Forests of Galls, so much required and
requested by diverse throughout the world: and now to MEDIA.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of MEDIA, and the Provinces thereof.

MEdia is limited on the East with Parthia; on the West Media and the Cities
thereof.
with Armenia, on the South with Persia, and on the North with the Caspian Sea;
being absolutely the greatest Sea of all others that has no commerce with the
Ocean, by some called the Hircanian Sea, and by some the Sea Bacchu, of a Town
of that name thereon bordering.

The chief Cities of this Country is Sultania, famous for the Sultania.
fair Mosque in the East; Sumachia, the strongest of all the rest, taken by
the Turks in Anno 1578, and now the seat of a Turkish Bashaw; Eres, Ardovile,
Shervan, Bacchu, and some others; and lastly, the most eminent Tauris, of the
trade hereof see hereafter.

Likewise in this Tract is comprehended the Province of Albania, Tauris.
now Zairia, little beholding to the industry or labor of the Husbandman, yet
of its own accord yielding for one sowing, most times two, and sometimes three
reapings: the chief City is Caucasiae Portae, built hard upon the hill
Caucasus, one of the best fortified Towns of the East, now called Derbent, a
strong Derbent.
City environed with two walls, and fortified with iron Gates; yet
nevertheless taken it was by the grand Signior in his last wars against the
Persians, under whose command it now remains, being now accounted one of the
keys of this kingdom, and the common entrance into Persia; and lastly in this
Country Phidon an Argive in Anno mundi 3146 is said to find out the use of
weights and measures; which knowledge and concordance by this Tract I covet to
obtain.

And to conclude, a word of the Trade of this Country in the The Weight of
Derbent is the Moon, which is 3 li. 11 ounces Venice sotile.
general; I find that the Moscovia company were the first that sought the
knowledge thereof in these parts; for upon their discovery of Moscovia, they
traded down the River Volga to Astracan, and thence in Barks sailed with their
English commodities to Bacchu, Derbent, and other places on the Caspian Sea,
and since some of the East India Company have more narrowly traced it, and have
observed the same more particular: the principal commodities proceeding hence
is the raw silk made at Gilan, Zahaspa, Rastiguan, Chiulfall, and others, now
known unto us by the name of Persia, Ardasse, and Lege silks, and from this
last the dealers in silk here are throughout Asia commonly termed Chiulfallins.

CHAP. LXXIIII.
Of TAURIS and the trade thereof.

TAuris, is the Metropolis of Media, and the summer seats of the Persian
Sophies containing 16 miles in Tauris and the trade thereof.
compass, and including 100 thousand Inhabitants; it has within late years
been three times conquered by the Turks, and has as often again returned to
the Persians, under whom now it rests: first, by Selimus, then, by Soliman
the magnificent, and lastly, by Osman General to Amurath the third; it is now
in the possession of the Persian, and strongly fortified, and seated in a cold,
yet wholesome Country, the Inhabitants more addicted to the making of silk,
than to the sword; distant six days journey from the Caspian Sea; and indeed
encompassed by several great Towns of note, whose manual labors are
famoused over the world, as first Eres, whence came the fine silk called the
Mamodean, now out of use; then Gilan abounding with lege silk; Sumachia,
abounding in excellent carpets, Gilan and Bilan. Sumachia. Arasse.
whereto the people wholly addict themselves; then Arasse, the most eminent and
opulent City in the trade of merchandise throughout all Servania, partly by
the abundant growth of silk there nourished, and hence called Arasse, vulgarly
Ardasse (2000 sums yearly going hence to Aleppo in Syria) and partly by the
growth thereof; Galls, cottons, wool, allom, some spices, drugges, and sundry
other commodities; so that to make this place the happy scale of merchandise,
Nature having played her part, there wants only peace between the Kings of
Persia and Turkey, which at present is denied them: the further manner of trade
of that place, I am constrained for want of due information to omit, and
refer what I have thereof collected to PERSIA.

CHAP. LXXV.
Of PERSIA and the Provinces thereof.

PERSIA is bounded on the East with the River Indus, Persia and the Provinces
thereof.
on the West with Tygris and the Persian gulf, on the North with the Caspian
Sea, and the River Oxus, and on the South with the maine Ocean, the people are
much addicted to hospitality and poetry; in their complements lordly, in their
apparel fantastical, in their expenses magnificent, and in their lives
lovers of learning, nobility, and peace.

This Empire contains these several Provinces.
1 Persis. 2 Sussiana. 3 Caramania. 4 Gedrosia. 5 Drangiania. 6 Arica. 7
Arachosia. 8 Parapomisus. 9 Saccha. 10 Hircania. 11 Ormus.
Of all which in brief, and no further than may concern my present purpose.

In Persis now called Far, having the gulf of Persia to the South Persis Far.
limit, Caramania for the East, Susiana for the West, and Media for the North,
was seated Persepolis the ancient seat of this Empire, which Alexander at the
request of his Curtisan Lays commanded to be set on fire, but afterward
repenting him of so great a folly and so unworthy an act, he reedified it,
though yet now having lost much of its former beauty, and giving place to the
famous City of Casbin, the residence of the present Sophies brought hither
from Tauris by Sophie Tamas.

The commodities that this Country is in general found to afford Commodities
of Persi^.
for merchandise, is silks of all sorts, raw growing plentifully in 1 Bilan, 2
Gilan, and 3 Aras, some precious stones, many sorts of drugges, wrought silks,
Chamblets, Carpets, shashes, callico's, and many excellent Arms used in war
both for horse and man, which is here so well tempered in the framing and
making (with some virtuous simples) that it makes it both hard and excellent
for use, and preserves the same clean from any rust or perishing.

CHAP. LXXVI.
Of CASBIN and the trade thereof.

CASBIN is now accounted the Metropolis of Persia, Casbin and the trade thereof.
and sometimes the residence of the Sophies, hither removed from Tauris, as I
said before, it is accounted a days journey about on horseback, well walled
and fortified with a strong Fort, and beautified with two fair Straglios; the
walls whereof are made of red marble, and paved with Mosacque work; the
chief street hereof is called the attimidan, in figure apiece, each angle
being mile in length, encompassed with scaffolds for the people to sit and
behold the King and his Nobles at their exercises of shooting, riding, running,
and the like; this City is seated in a goodly fertile plain of three or four
days journeys in length, which is furnished with near two thousand Villages
to supply the necessary uses thereof, which did much in rich this place before
the removal of the Persians Court to Hispahan, which is fourteen days
journey further into the East; three places herein do much adorn and
beautify Three excellencies in Casbin.
this place; first, the Attimidan aforesaid; secondly, the Kings palace, which
is so brave a fabrique, and so richly furnished, that Europe can hardly match
it; and lastly, the Bassars which are many in number, which are in the manner
of our Pawnes in London, where are to be sold all manner of Persia, India,
Turkey, Moscovian, and Arabia commodities, as all rich Iems, Jewels, drugges,
spices, silk Commodities of Cosbin.
wrought in Damaskes, Velvets, and raw, transported into other Countries; the
attimidan serving the Merchants for an Exchange or place of meeting, where
every day is seen a continual fair, where all manner of commodities is sold
both for back and belly; also Goldsmiths, Exchangers of moneys, and all other
professions, who come hither and display their commodities, as to some public
Mart. And the moneys and current coins here passable amongst Merchants, I
refer to the chief City of Persia, Hispahan, the present residence of the
Persian Monarch; and I am informed that the weights and measures thereof do
also agree therewith, so shall not need to enlarge my self further in that
particular.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Of BALSARA and the Trade thereof.

BALSARA lies in the bottom of the Persian gulf, Balsara and the trade
thereof.
and is seated on the mouth of the River Euphrates, serving as a Magazin for
all the commodities of Arabia, India, Turkey, and Persia, and as a through-fare
for all Merchants traveling from one of those Countries to another, but
especially for such as here take shipping to the I Will of Ormus, India, Arabia,
etc. This town was of late years subject to the Persian, but now in obedience
to the great Turk, and is the last of his Dominions this way: and here it is
observed that the water does ebb and flow, as with us in England, and in no
place else adjoining upon the Ocean Seas, the indraught may be imagined to be
the cause, as it is observed the like in Venice.

It has been noted in matter of trade here, that there is paid for every
sum of goods carried from Bagdat hither by water, six sehids, and from
Balsara to Bagdat two Medins per Wesnoe, and 100 Wesnoes from Balsara to Ormus,
cost carriage twenty Lairins, and the like back from Ormus to Balsara.

Hither always comes the Syria Caravans that are bound for India, and end
their land travel, and imbarke themselves and goods for the great Marts of
Ormus and Cambaia, and here returning they conclude their Sea navigation, and
begin their land peregrinations for Turkey, etc.

The customs payable at Balsara as the last port of the grand Signiors
Customs paid at Balsara.
Dominions, who conquered the same from the Persian in Anno 1550, is 1 in every
14 sehids for gross commodities, but it is 1 per 20 or 5 per cent. upon
Cloths, silks, and fine goods, but here is a tare of 3 in 10 Wesnoes allowed
both in spices, drugges, etc. for dust, and upon silks for waste, heads, and
the like.

The prices of commodities ruled some years past thus here. Prices of
commodities in Bilsara.


The Wesnoe of Maces is worth in Balsara 13 duccats.

The Wesnoe of Nutmeggs was worth 6 duccats.

The Wesnoe of soape was worth 15 seheds.

The Wesno of Almonds was 24 sehids.

The Wesno of Galls was worth 10 larins, and for this weight of Wesno, it is
found that 16 Wesnoes of Balsara make a Kintar of Aleppo common weight, but the
100 Wesnoes in the weight of silk of Rotol: 680 dr: in Aleppo makes silk Rot.
529 dr: 28.

The weight common here in the sale of commodities besides this Weights used in
Balsara.
Wesno, is the Maund which is 100 Rotolos, which has been observed to have
made 500 li. English, which is 5 li. a Rotolo, but I have met with an
observation upon this place made by some English that have traveld hither, that
the 112 li. has made 19 Maunds 2 Rotolos, which must be 5 li. 4 ounces
English; the difference I refer to be rectified by the better experienced.

Their measure is found to be about 26 inches English. Measures of Balsara.


To proceed to the next Province in Persia, it is Cusestan, situated Eastward
from Persia, called in Scripture Havilah, having in it Cusestan.
Susa, a City where sometimes the Persian Monarch abides in winter, as being
more Southerly than Ecbatana; and lastly Casan, of which a word.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Of CASAN and the Trade thereof.

CASAN is a principal fair and famous City in this Country, but much
troubled with excessive heat Casan and the trade thereof.
by reason of its situation in a pleasant and large plain; it consists
altogether of merchandising, and the greatest trade of all the inland Country
is found herein, and most especially frequented by Indian Merchants; the
Inhabitants are in general addicted to all curious manufactures, and
fabrickes, as in weaving of shashes, turbants, and girdles, in making also of
velvets, sattins, damaskes, curious and fine Ormusins, and Carpets; and indeed
it is accounted the very Magazin Commodities of Casan.
of all the Persian Cities, for these commodities; here is also to be sold all
manner of drugs, and spices, pearls, diamonds, Rubies, and turkeses, and all
sorts of silks, both raw and wrought, so that the Author (who in this
relation I follow) is verily persuaded that there is more silk yearly brought
into Casan, than there is of broad cloth brought into London. The civil
policy of this City is Policy of Casan.
also commendable, an idle person not being permitted to live amongst them, and
the children after six years old, are presently set to work; here being a Law
to the shame of Christendom, that every Inhabitant must yearly give up his
name to the Magistrate, therewith declaring how and in what manner he lives,
what art he exercises, and if he be found in a falsehood, he is beaten on the
fe^te, or else employed in some public slavery, to the example of others: and
for other notes of trading, see Hispahan in Parthia.

Caramania is the third Province, the chief Cities are Gadil, Cobin Caramania.
and Caraman, famous for the excellent fabrics here made of Cloth of gold, and
for the best Semiters in the world; and here it was that Alexander being
returned out of India, kept his Bacchanalian feasts.

In Gedrosia, Drangiana or Sigestan, Aria now Sablestan, Aracosia Gedrosia, etc.
now Cabull, Parapomisus, Saca and Hircania, I find not any thing worthy the
survey, therefore I willingly pass them over and close these Provinces with
the City of Sciras, which is comprehended in this tract.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Of SCIRAS, and the Trade thereof.

SCIRAS in times past Persepolis, built by Perseus, Sciras and the trade
thereof.
who gave the name of Persians to the Inhabitants, was for a long time the
seat Royal of this Empire, for which cause Alexander (as is before mentioned)
at the request of his Curtizan Lais, commanded it to be set on fire, but
afterward repenting him of so great an oversight, he reedified the same; it is
situated on the banks of the famous River Bindamir, which courseth through
the Kingdom of Persia Bindamir.
and Lar, and so emptieth it self into the Persian gulf, and stands just in
the road way which leads from Hispahan to Ormus; it shows yet many eminent
signs and monuments of its former glory, as two very great Gates twelve miles
distant asunder, showing what the circuit was in the time of the Monarchy;
also the ruins of a goodly Palace and Castle, built by Cyrus, having a
threefold wall, beautified with many spires and turrets; the first twenty-foure
foot high, the second forty-eight foot high, the last ninety foot high, all of
free stone, and formed in a square with twelve gates of brass on each angle,
with pales of brass set before them curiously wrought, testifying the
magnificence of the founder. It is now accounted one of the most famous Cities
of the East, both for traffic of Merchandise and for excellent armor and
furniture for war, which the Inhabitants here with wonderful cunning and art
do make of iron and steel, and the juice of certain herbs, of much more
notable temper and beauty, than are those which are made with us in Europe.

The coins here in use being proper to the whole Kingdom and the weights and
measures not found differing from the same used in Ormus, the prime port of
this whole Kingdom, I shall not need here further to insist thereupon, and
therefore from hence accompanying the Caravan, I in the next place survay the
said famous port of Ormus.

CHAP. LXXX.
Of ORMUS and the Trade thereof.

THE last Province of this Country is accounted to be Ormus and the trade
thereof.
the Island and Territories of Ormus, twelve miles from the Continent, small in
compass, and very barren, yet famous throughout the world for the great trade
there exercised by the Indians, Persians, and Arabians, and other Nations, the
King thereof some years past was a Mahumetan, and drew by the customs of this
City 140000 sheriffs yearly, since which it became tributarie to the
Portugalls, who fortified the same in Anno 1506, and for the excellency
thereof, the Arabians use to say proverbially:

Si terrarum Orbis, quaqua patet, annulus esset,
Illius Ormasium gemma decusque foret;
If all the world should be a Ring, the stone
And gemme thereof were Ormus I Will alone.
Since which time by the valor of our English East India Companies arms, this
Island has been reduced to the subjection of Ormus restored to the Persian by
the English valor.
the King of Persia, to whom it is now obedient, and still injoyeth the former
splendid trade to all the parts of the East; here are found the spices and
precious Iems of India, the tapestries, carpets, and shashes of Persia, the
grograms, mohers, and Chamblets of Turkey, the drugges of Arabia; and lastly,
the ^neys called the larins of Persia, which are here accounted as a great and
special Merchandise, all which be excellent helps to make this place a famous
Mart and Magazin of all Eastern commodities. Now the cause that in part
mooveth this great trade hither, and the great concourse of Merchants into this
Island, is that twice yearly there Orders of Caravans from Syria to Balsara.
comes a great company of people over land out of Syria, Aleppo, and other
those parts, which are called Caffiles or Caravans, with all the commodities of
the mediterranan Seas, which in their journeys observe this order; They have
first a captain, and certain hundreds of Ianisaries or Soldiers, which
convey and conduct the said Caffilla or Caravan until they come to Balsara,
from whence they travel by water to Ormus; and this twice yearly happens, in
April and in September, which constant times of their departure thence thus
known, their number is oftentimes augmented to 6000, in 10000 persons, with
their Mules, Camells and Dromedaries, passing by Babylon now Bagdat, and so to
Balsara as is abovesaid; and in this same nature they travel at certain set
times; in their return hence for Aleppo, carrying with them all manner of
Merchandise of this place, fitting either for Turkey, or the mediterranean Sea;
and in which Caravans all nations are found freely to travel, excepting the
King of Spaines subjects, which are very narrowly looked into, though
notwithstanding they are found oftentimes to pass in the names of Uenetians,
French, and other Nations, so that when these Caravans do come to Ormus,
against their coming there is general preparation made by all other Merchants
of that Country, for to have commodities in readiness to barter and exchange
with them. The Island it self is but small and barren, and composed only of a
salt rock, whereof their houses and walls are made; and in Summer it is found
so excessive hot, that the Inhabitants are forced to lie and sleep in wooden
Cesterns made for the purpose, full of water, and all naked both men and women
lying clean under water, their heads only excepted; yet have they no fresh
water in the Island, but what they fetch from other Islands in the Sea near
there adjoining, which they also keep in cesterns for their use, as is
accustomed in some part of Spain in Iarres, or as they term them in Tenajos.
At the last reduction of this Town to the Scepter of Persia by the aid of the
English, they had many immunities of trade granted them, and to be here free of
all custom, and withal to draw the one half of all the customs thereof; but
that good service was soon forgotten, and they have now only the honor of
the good service for their pains and reward, and nothing else.

To this City and Island, I must add the two only Seaports of consequence on
this coast, appertaining to the Crown of Persia, which are Iasques and
Gombrone, in which the English have Iasques. Gombrone.
their Factories and residencie, and is the place where their ships do lade
and unlade their burdens for this Kingdom, and where also the goods and
commodities bound for Hispahan, Casbin, Sciras, Casan, and Tauris, and
generally for the whole Empire are landed, and here laden upon camells,
dromedaries, and horses into those places; and because that I find that the
coins, measures and weights of this place do somewhat differ from them
passable and in use at Spahan and more within the land, I have thought it
needful here to insert the same, according as I have gathered them from those
that have frequented the places above mentioned, referring the Reader for what
is here omitted to Spahan it self, the Metropolis of this Empire in the
following Chapter.

The Coins then here in use and valuation are these:

1 Besse of copper is 4 Cosbeggs. Coins current in Gombrone and Iasques and
Ormus.
1 Shahee of silver is 2 Bessees, which is 4d starling or 10 cosbegs. 1 Mamothy
silver is 2 shahees which is 8d star. or 29 cosbegs. 1 Abashae of silver is 2
mamothies, which is 16 d star. or 40 cosb. 1 Asar of gold is 20 shahees or 6
shil. 8d. starling. 1 Toman of gold is 10 asars, which is 66 shil. 8d. star.
and this Toman is accounted 50 abashes or 2000 cosbeggs.
These are the general coins current throughout Persia; to these I must add
those in use in these parts above mentioned: The Riall of (...) Spanish is here
a commodity, and bought and sold, and the common estimation thereof is here
130 cosbegs or 13 shahees, and somewhat more, which accounted at 4d. per shahee
is little more than 4 shil. 4d. starling. Again, this Riall of eight passes
here for 5 la^rees, which larrees are 10d. star. and by this account the Riall
of (...) is 4 shil. 4d. starling.

1 Larree is 5 saddees, each saddee being not fully 2d. star. and each saddee
accounted here for 40 flosses; so that the larree is here 220 flosses, and
every. of (...) is here at Gombrone and Iasques 1155 flosses.

The common weight here and throughout Persia is the dram, 96 drams making 16
ounces haberdepois; so that 6 drams makes the Weights of Ormus, Gombrone and
Iasques.
said ounce, and 1200 drams being a maund shaw, or as we may call it the Kings
Maund, which has been found to make in England 12 li. haberdepois: In
weighing of silk, they observe the maund Tauris which is the maund shaw or 600
drams, and 5 Maund Tauris is accounted here for 1 maund of Sarrat, which by
this computation should make 3000 drams, or 500 li. haber: 36 maund shaws or 72
maunds Tauris is a load of silk, which is by the said calculation 43200 drams,
which is 7200 Ounces English making silk pounds 300 li. haberdepois, which is
about two coals of Aleppo of 46 Rotolos per peer.

Their measure in use here as throughout all Persia is not found much to vary,
they have in general two, which they term the Measures of Ormus, Iasques, and
Gombrone.
Coveda, the short and the long; the long coveda is somewhat longer than the
English yard, accounted by some 37 inches; and at Sciras and in some other
Cities it is found to be 38 inches, by which all cloths, kersies, and
outlandish manufacturies are sold by. The short Coveda is proper only for the
manufacturies of Persia, accounted to hold out 27 inches, and found agreeable
to the pic^ used in Constantinople and Aleppo. And thus leaving Ormus and the
said port Towns of Iasques and Combrone, I will hence travail to Parthia,
wherein I find Hispahan the Metropolis of Persia seated.

The next Country subject to the Crown of Persia is Parthia, bounded on the
East with Aria, on the West with Media, on the P^ia.
South with Caramania, and on the North with Hircania, and is now in the
Persian tongue called Erache.

The chief Cities that are found in this tract are Guerde, Irsdie, and last
Hispahan, formerly Hecatompyle, the residence of the present Sophie, and
accounted of that bigness, that the Persians hyperbolly call it, Half the
world; under which I will comprehend the general trade of Persia, so far
forth as I have found it observed.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Of HISPAHAN, and the Trade thereof.

HISPAHAN in times past was called Hecatompolis, Hispahan and the trade thereof.
or the City of 100 gates, which name it may well still retain, seeing that
the walls thereof contains a reasonable days journey on horseback, it is
now become the greatest City in all the Persian Dominions, and so much the
more populous and magnificent, as being the common residence of the Persian
Sophies; it is strong by situation, defended by a high wall, deep ditches,
and a good Castle; on the west side stand two stately Palaces or Seraglios, for
the King and his Women, far exceeding in state and magnificence all others
the proud buildings of this City. The walls are of red marble, and pargetted
with diverse colors, and all the Palace is paved with checkerd and fretted
work, and on the same is spread curious Carpets both of silk and gold; the
windows are of Alablaster, of white and other spotted marble; the posts and
wickets of massy Ivorie checkerd with glistering black Ebony, so curiously
wrought in winding knots, as may easilier stay than satisfy the eyes of the
wondering beholder; to which is added a pleasant Garden, wherein is seen a
thousand fountains, brooks and lesser rivolets; and also what may else be
wanting, to make it fit for so great a Monarch.

The Inhabitants of this City do all their affairs one horsbacke, both
public and private, going from place to place, they confer one with another
on horsbacke; and so do the Merchants buy and sell and negociate; the
difference here between the Gentlemen and the slave being, that the slave
never rides, nor the gentleman never goes on foot.

It is not questionable but that this City, the splendour of all Persia, the
continual residence of the Kings, and inhabited by so many eminent persons, as
always attend this Monarch, but that it is of great trade and concourse of
Merchants, and furnished not only with all the native commodities of Persia,
but also of those of Arabia, Turkey, India and China, hither brought in great
abundance to be exchanged for the native commodities of this place: and though
it want the commodiousnesse of the Sea, yet by Caravans it is supplied with all
those things that are conducible either to beauty, necessity, or ornament.
The Caspian Sea affoords it the commodities of Turkey, Russia, and Moscovia and
Iasques with Ormus; his two Seaports in India affoords it the commodities of
India and Arabia; all other commodities from either the Turk or Mogur is
supplied by Caravans Dromedaries and Camells: which has cost by late
observations in portage and carriage of commodities thus:

The carriage of 100 maunds of wares from Sciras to Hispahan Carriage of
Commodities by Caravans.
costeth 70 sehids, and from Spahan to Casan 60 sehids, from Hispahan to Ormus
by Scyras 120 sehids, and from Hispahan to Tauris 40 sehids.

The common commodities of Hispahan I have already nominated, and though all
commodities in general are subject to rise and fall in price amongst
Merchants, yet the maund of cotton is here Prices common of Commodities in
Spahan.
commonly at 12 sehids, the maund of Rice 7 Best, the maund of Dragant 2
Best, of Enapp 2 Best, of Non 3 Best, of Laghem 4 Best, of Anil 40
mamhodies, and the Cattee of sugar is worth 400 Tomans, which is () pound
English.

Their coins current in Hispahan, and generally throughout all the Kingdom of
the Sophie are of several sorts, partly of brass, partly of silver and partly
of gold. The principal whereof is the Coins current in Persia.
Toman, which formerly has been accounted to be worth 6 li. starling, since 4
li. and by reason of the late wars imbased, and worth now only 3 li. 6 s8. 8
d. at Sea side starling, and by some accounted 3 li. 12. sh. 6 d.

This Toman is worth 200 Saheds or Shahees, 14 or 15. 8/8 span. or 10 asures,
which have been accounted 4 li. star. a piece, a Mamothy of silver, is 2
Bestees of copper.

The Riall of (...) span. is here accounted for 13 Shahees, and 1 cosbeg or 5
lorins.

The lion dollor current in these parts is 10 Shahees, every Shahee is 4 d.
starling, or 50 deniers here in account.

A Rupias, which is the coin of the Mogull is abashees, 4 which is 2 sh. 3 d.
starling.

A Mamothy is 9 cosbegges or 32 doors, or 100 deniers.

A Bestee of copper is 4 cosbegges, or 20 deniers.

An Abaisce silver is 2 Mamothies, or 20 shahees, or 200 deniers.

A Chickeene of gold, sheriff or solton is 18 shahees, yet in some places of
Persia they pass for 20 shahees, and in some for 24 sha.

An asure of gold is 20 shahees, and 10 asures is a Tomano 3-6-8 d. st.

A Larin is 5 shahees, and in some places only 5 about 10 d. or 10 d.
starling, here 25 cosbeggs.

A Fonan is 9 Cupans. A mitigall is 3^ or 34 shahees.

A sadee is 40 flosses. A shahee is 10 cosbeggs.

A mitigall is 33, and in some places 34 shahees.

A Tanger is 12 pulls, which is shahees.

They here keep their accounts in sundry species and denominations, Accounts
kept in Persia.
some in Sheriffs, some in Spanish Rialls, and some in tomans, and some in
Shahees: The common account is thus distinguished.

The Abashee is 200 deniers, or 20 shahees. The Mamothy is 100 deniers, or 10
shahees. The Sadon 50 deniers, or 5 shahees: The Uiste is 20 deniers, or 2
shahees. The Cosbegge is 5 deniers.

And those that keep their account in shahees, only they reckon them to
hundred thousands, and hundred thousands, as the proper known coin of the
Country; and this manner has seemed the best to our English there resident,
which they account 60 shahees for 20 sh. starling.

The weights of Persia are subsistent of 3 sorts, of the Dram, the Weights
current in Persia.
Mitigall, and the Mand or Mandshaw:

The dram is the least, 100 whereof makes 66 mitigals.

The mitigall is the next, 100 whereof makes 150 drams.

The mand or mandeshaw is the greatest, and makes 1200 mitigals, or else 1800
drams; which has made by the observation of some Factors that have resided
there 14 li. 9 ounc. haberdepois.

The sum or cargo of silk is accounted here 36 Mandshaw, which accounted as
above, makes English 524 li. haberdepois, and is great pounds of 24 ounc.
incirca 350 li. But the east India company find it to be 300 great silk pounds
and no more by often trial: But it is to be noted that these mandshaws is
found to differ in many Provinces and Cities in Persia, and the bordering
Countries, and does differ in many commodities; but the mandeshaw common of
Persia is 1200 drams for silk.

The mandeshaw of Tauris is but 600 drams.

The mandeshaw of Syrrat is 5 maunds of tauris abovenamed.

The maund of hispahan is accounted one and half mand of Sira^, besides which
they have these weights in some places;

1 Dubba is counted 5 maunds.

1 Sherway is counted 50 maunds.

1 Rellaij is counted 7 maunds.

1 Maund is counted by observation pounds English.

In Tauris also before named, a City in times past of great trad^, in this
Country they have 2 Mands, the one of silk which has made by a Florentines
observation 5 li. Florence, and another for all other commodities; the 100
whereof has made there by the said observation 264. li. Florence.

The measures of length used in Persia is of 2 sorts, and both of Measures used
in Persia.
them called a Covedo; A long and A short:

The long accounted to be 37 inches English measure, agreeable to the pico of
Turkey. The short accounted to be 27

Thus is what I find observable in the particular trade of Persia, I will now
view it as it stands in the general parts thereof.

CHAP. LXXXII.
Of the Trade in general of PERSIA.

THE trade of PERSIA as it is found subsistent in The Trade in general of
Persia.
these days, consists more by an Inland then a maritime traffic; for if
the large extent of the Sophies dominions be well considered, and the
neighboring regions whereon it bordereth, it will be found that it wants
many things to make it eminent: It is plentifully supplied of commodities, and
those also of excellency, as of silver in great quantity, raw silk in
abundance, and of some drugges naturally grown: but when the industry of the
natives is surveyed, it will be soon discerned that the costly, rare and rich
carpets here made, the curious and fine cotton clothes here wrought; for their
tulbants, girdles, shashes, shireing and the like, interwoven with silk, and
not seldom with silver and gold; and the daily use thereof not only in PERSIA
it self, but throughout India, Arabia and Turkey; witness to the World the
ingeniousnesse of this Nation: the greatest want and impediment of trade that
they have here is of Seaports and Havens, of which they are much scanted; they
enjoyed once a large tract of land lying along the Caspian Sea, from Derbent on
the one side, bordering on the Turks, to Deristan on the other, bordering on
the Tartars; but of late days the same is much shortened, for the grand signior
has laid Tauris one of his metropolitan Cities for his limits, and the Tartar
has entered as far as Minerdon, so that he has only left him upon this Sea
the Ports of Gilan and Pismir, that are of any consequence, wherein much
trading is not exercised, by reason of the ill neighborhood of the Turks,
Muscovits and Tartarians, coasting the Caspian Sea. In the Persian gulf he did
i^joy the commodious and famous Town and Port of Balsara, taken from him by
the Turks about 60 years past, and Ormus in the entrance of that gulf is but
lately reduced to his scepter by Iasques and Combrone Ports belonging to the
Persian, and where the English resort to.
the valor of the English, though anciently belonging to his crown. The Ports
of Iasques and Combrone being the only two Sea ports he injoyes upon that
continent of any quality, to which and Ormus all the trade of PERSIA toward
India is observed to be driven, and to which the Portugalls, Dutch and English
resort unto for their silks, and others the rich commodities of PERSIA; and
where each of them have factories and residencie for the trade of this
Country: now on each side of PERSIA by land-ward he ^s environed by three
mighty and powerful Nations, with whom ^e is sometimes in wars and sometimes
in peace, the Mogulls Country and Tartar on the one side, and the Turks on
the other. For the trade thereof; It is observed that PERSIA yielding yearly
incirca 12000 coals of silk, which is the prime commodity of this Kingdom
growing principally and made at Gilan, Bilan, Mahmody and Araste, (which last
affords that sort of silk which we call vulgarily Ardasse,) the one third part
of which is conceived to be ^ented into Turkey, transported by Camels into
Aleppo, Damasco, Constantinople, Brussia in Natolia, and of late days to
Smyrna, and from thence conveyed for the most part into Europe, principally ^o
England, France and Italy, where the same is spent and consu^ed, in return of
which they have from Syria and those parts principally rialls of 8/8 Spanish,
some gold and some sorts of cloth, ^oollen and silk stuffes brought thither
out of Uenice, Marselia and London. Another third part of the said silk is
carried to and spent ^n Agria and the dominions of the Mogul, into Ormus,
Iasques, etc. and thence by the Indians and Arabians into Sarmacand, and other
the dominions of the great Tartar, and into Astracan and other the dominions of
the Moscovite, in return whereof they have the spices of India, the drugges of
Arabia, the rich furs of Russia, and the precious jems of Cathai, and other
the commodities of Tartaria; and the other third part is imagined to be spent
for their own use and clothing at home in their own Country, so that by
virtue of this sole commodity which this Country thus abundantly affords,
and which is so sought after by all other Nations, (and the curiosity and
luxury of this Nation in general) they have the commodities of all other
Countries in return thereof brought unto them. Diverse propositions have been
made, and diverse inventions proposed, and sundry treaties have been set on
foot, only to compass the sole trade of these silks of PERSIA, with the
Sophie himself, who challenges a property therein throughout his whole
dominions. The Dutch have more then once thrust at it, and to have it delivered
at Astracan, and so to be convaied against the stream of Uolga into Moscovia,
and so to Holland: but the sum and stock required was so vast to compass
and manage it, and the propositions and passage so difficult and dangerous,
that they gave it over with this opinion of the World, that they indevoured to
swim against too great a stream, and that they had some plot to set it afoote,
and never intended to go through with it, or otherwise were not able to
compass the same; since which the Duke of () has put on for a branch only
thereof: but when the account came to be made up, his means was too mean to
go through with that small proposed part he aimed at: and lastly the English
East India company, (as Merchants measuring their actions with the weight of
their purses) have more prosperously succeeded; and in Hispahan have contracted
with the Sophie for a round quantity, who have Merchant-like performed on their
parts the conditions agreed upon, so far to his good liking, that by his late
Ambassador in England, the whole yearly growth was tendered and offered to
them; but his ill performance in the lesser, made them question the like in the
greater; and therefore to their honor refused it. Now as concerning the lesser
parts of this Countries traffic, which consi^ts in the manufactories of this
Kingdom; I pass them over in silence as being of lesser consequence, and
hasten to Tartarie the next Country, bordering upon the Persians.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Of Tartarie and the Provinces thereof.

TARTARIE is bounded on the East with the eastern Tartaria.
Ocean, on the West with the Moscovia and Moldavia; on the North with the
frozen Ocean, on the South with the Caspian Sea, the hill Taurus, and the Wall
of China: it is divided into these Provinces, Procopensis Asiatica, Antiqua
Zagathai and Cathaia.

In Tartaria procopensis is found the ancient City of Crim the seat of the
Tartarianrulers, whence this Nation had their original Procopensis.
and name: also Oksacou the residence of the present Princes; and lastly Caffa
the only Seaport of consequence in these parts, of the trade whereof it will be
needful I should speak a word.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
Of CAFFA and the Trade thereof.

CAFFA anciently Theodosia, seated commodiously Caffa and the T^ade of it.
for traffic in the botome of the black sea, was by Mahomet the great taken
from the Genoes, and is the present scale for all commodities that pass by Sea
from Constantinople, Trabesond, Podolia, and Walachia by Danubius, and such
other places to Tartarie, Muscovia, etc. The Country affords great abundance
of cow hides, furs, wax, honey, and a kind of pickled fish much resembling
the English herring here caught upon this coast: also it sends to
Constantinople some butter sowed up in ox hides of all colors and sluttishly
made, which serves for provision there to the slaves, and the meanest sort of
people inhabiting that large City; also thence the grand signior has his
principal timber for the building of his Galleys, Ships, and such like other
provisions.

Caffa does in matters of Merchandise and trade retain still much of the
customs of the Genoes, to whom for a long time it was subject; and so does
Thana, Sorgat and other principal Cities bordering upon the black sea, which I
will in brief touch so far as I have gathered the same when I lived in
Turkey.

First then the coins of Caffa are the same as is current throughout Turkey,
save that the neighborhood of Tartaria and Moscovia Coins current in Caffa.
makes the coins of those places and Kingdoms likewise pass current there,
as it is found in all frontier Towns which borders upon two Nations, and that
are either free of themselves, or subject to other; therefore for the same I
will refer the Reader to the coins current in those bordering Countries.

Their weight is a Rotolo, 100 whereof makes a Cantar, which answers The weight
of Caffa.
in haberdepois weight to 70 li. English; which said Cantar is divided into
several divisions, according to the commodity bought or sold thereby; as
sometimes to Batmas, accounting 7 Batmas to a Cantar, and 12 Rotolos to a
Batma, and then the Cantar is but 90 Rotolos: and sometimes to Sommas and
Saggies, as 124 saggies makes a Somma, and 10 Somma's makes a Cantar of 100
Rotolos abovesaid; and silk is sold by this Somma, 20 Somma's to a draught,
which is 2 Cantars, and is English about 140 li. and in Venetia sotile weight
212 li. circa.

Their measure so far as I could learn is but one, which is the The Measures
of Caffa.
pico, the 100 whereof made in Venetia by trial of a friend silk braies 130,
and this pico is divided into 8 Rupps, as at Constantinople.

They have also a coin which is called a Somma, in which their Accounts in
Caffa.
accounts are kept, and to which other coins current are reduced; and the same
is divided to saggis, which they account by 45 saggis to a somma, and 4 sommes
to a soltany or checquin; and thus much shall serve for the trade of Caffa.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Of Astracan and the Trade thereof.

ASTRACAN is in Tartaria Asiatica, as I shall show hereafter, seated in the
Emboshure of the River Astracan and the Trade thereof.
Uolga, having 70 mouths and receives the trade of all the Caspian Sea, into
which the said River enters; it has a very great confluence of Merchants, who
by the benefit of that Sea have here a very great trade, Uolga bringing it all
the commodities of Moscovia, Russia and Tartaria and this Sea; the commodities
of Persia, Arabia and other Provinces abutting thereupon; it is situate in an
Island of 12 leagues compass, defended by a wooden Castle and earthen walls,
taken by the Moscovites in Anno 1552 from the Tartarians: it is all winter shut
up by the immeasurable cold, and all traffic over and upon this great stream
is performed on dry foot. The coins here current by reason of my ignorance I
must refer to the better experienced.

Their weights are here two, a gross for gross commodities, and a sotile for
fine commodities; the gross cantar has been observed to The Weights of
Astracan.
have in England yielded 268 li. the small cantar has made English 103 li. now
in both these cantars there is accounted 20 Rotolos to a libb, and 5 libbs to a
cantar, and 12 tochats to a Rotolo; which by the ingenious may easily be
reduced to the sotile English pound, therefore I pass it over and come in the
next place to the measures.

Their common measure is a pico, and the 100 thereof has made by observation
in Venetia 126 braces of cloth measure, which is in Measures of Astracan.
England about ( --) inches.

Corn and all other grain is sold by a measure called the Chistetto, which in
Venetia comes to make 8 (...) staios. Corn and


Wine and liquid commodities is sold by the but, which is 46 mistaties, and
which also renders in Venetia 3 Bigonso. Wine.


In Tartaria Asiatica there are few Cities; for the inhabitants by hords or
tribes travail with their substance from one place to Tartaria Asiatica
another; yet in this Tract is found Casan, and Astracan aforenamed, which is a
very great Town of commerce, considering these Regions, commodiously seated,
(as I said before) on the mouth of the River Volga, by which there is passage
found from the Caspian Sea in some seasons of the year up to Mosco, and by
which way (as I noted in the trade of Persia) some Merchants of Christendom
more then once intended to transport the silks, and other the riches of Persia
to Moscovia, and so to Europe; but the design proved dangerous and chargeable,
by reason of such potent Princes that border upon that River; and by reason
that the same must pass against the current stream, which in winter is not
found passable by reason of the frost, by which and other discouragements the
design was given over and fell to nothing.

In Tartary antiqua, I find not any thing worthy of note, nor yet Tartaria
antiqua.
City of import, the inhabitants living like vagabonds; only it affords
Rubarbe, which is so excellent in Physic by its proper Rubarbe.
nature, that the whole world is beholding to these Barbarians for the same as
a cure for many diseases.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Of Zagathai and Cathai, and the Provinces thereof.

ZAgathai contains sundry Provinces, and but few Cities; Zagathai.
the most famous is Sarmachand, which gave both Sarmacand.
cradle and grave to mighty Tamberlan, from whom the Great Moguls boast
themselves to be lineally descended.

But Cathai is esteemed the richest and civillest Kingdom of all Cathai.
Tartary, the which is furnished with sundry great and populous Cities,
especially Cambalu, the residence of the Great Cham, and Cambalu.
where Merchants of all Nations are found to reside and traffic to; as I
shall show hereafter.

This Country is found to abound with rice, grain, wool, hemp, Rubarbe,
corrall, and abundance of silks, both growing and Commodities of Cathai.
brought hither from China and other Countries amounting to two thousand Carts
yearly; the City is held to be 30 miles about in compass, and is replenished
with all Artsmen (Astrologers being here in great reputation) which may
(considering their number found here, being as some write 5000) be more
properly termed fortune tellers, or Gypsies; but these Countries resemble in
customs the Moscovite and Chinois, none being permitted to search into their
Cities and manners, except they come either as Ambassadors or Merchants; yet
what I have gathered of the trade of this Country, I will include under the
title of Cambalu, the principal City of this Empire.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
Of CAMBALV, and the Trade thereof.

CAmbalu, the Metropolis of Catai, as Samercand is of Zagathai, is seated on
the North-east border of this Cambalu, and the Trade thereof.
Country, containing both the old and the new City, through which does run the
famous River of Polisanga; it is accounted 28 miles in compass, or rather in
square, each angle containing 7 miles, and in every square is placed three
principal Gates which incloseth the Town with earthen walls or rampires of 10
paces in thicknes, and every Gate comprehending a sumptuous Palace, and every
angle having also an excellent Palace, where the Armours of the Garrison
Soldiers are kept, which is 1000 Soldiers at every Gate.

The Buildings are squared out proportionably, and every street is drawn out
to a line, so that every Gate yields a free prospect through the City to the
opposite Gate, be beautified on each side with stately edifices and houses for
the honorable of this Country.

In the midst of the City is a sumptuous Palace, wherein the grand Cham
resideth, with all his Queens and Children, and wherein is placed a Bell,
which is tolled at certain hours of the evening, after which may no man
stir out of doors, until the beginning of the day following; the largenes,
rarities, curiosity, and richnes of this palace, the partitions allowed his
Queens, and lodgings appointed for his Children, and their daily attendants,
and the order, beauty, and manner thereof, I willingly omit, as not pertinent
to my present purpose.

Without this City walls are accounted 12 suburbs of 3 in 4 miles long
adjoining to each of the aforesaid 12 gates, and here all Merchants, strangers,
and foreigners do abide, each nation having a several Cane or storehouse,
where they both lodge, and exercise their Merchandise and traffic one with
another, for the commodities of these several Countries, the confluence of
Merchants here cannot choose but be wonderful, seeing it is reported that the
City is so populous, that the Cham maintains 5000 Astrologers here daily,
besides many thousands of Soldiers both of horse and foot that 12000 horse is
accounted but as his ordinary and daily Guard; besides which, the near
neighborhood of Exendu, the principal place of the grand Cham, seated not
Exendu, and the largenes thereof.
many days journey far hence where Merchants are not permitted to enter, is
built in a four square figure, every side extending eight miles in length;
within this Quadrant is another, whose sides are six miles long; and within
that another of four miles square, which is accounted the very Palace it
self; and between which several walls are found walks, gardens, orchards,
fishponds, places for all manner of courtly and military exercises, and also
parkes, forests, and chases, for all manner of pleasures and game, and the
infinite number of attendants and servitours that of necessity is required to
wait upon so great a Prince, with the officers thereto belonging, cannot but
much increase the trade and commerce of this City and place.

As for the Trade of this City of Cambalu, and generally of all Tartaria, it
is observed, that the Country (though in a large tract) extending it self
upon the North Ocean; yet by reason of the long continued colds and frosts, the
Inhabitants have but little benefit thereof; however it may be conceived, that
the Moluccos, Iapans, and other Ilanders thereabouts in the season of the
year, have here a great traffic, and that hence these Tartarians are
furnished with the spices of India, the jems of Pegu, and Bengala, and
peradventure with other the druggs of Arabia: but upon the Caspian Sea, they
are the masters of many good Seaports, besides Astracan which of late they
have lost to the Moscovite, as Zahaspa Cosmi, Melmesuach, and others; by which
is conveyed to them the silks, tapestries, carpets, arms, and excellent
manufactures of Persia, and in the black Sea, besides Capha, now in subjection
to the Turks, they enjoy the brave Ports of Curaropo, Asow, and others,
serving to conveigh unto them the commodities of Turkey, Trabesond, Podolia,
Walacia, and other Countries bordering upon the famous rivers of Danubius.

Now for the other parts of this large Empire, it bordereth on the one side
with Moscovia, with whom it is now in peace, though not seldom at debate, from
whence by the benefit of traffic, which I find observed not to be of any
great consequence, they have rich furs and other the commodities of this
Country.

But where it bordereth upon China, which is for a very large extent of ground,
by some Authors accounted 400 leagues, the common report of the strict laws
and customs of that Nation (to debar entrance to all strangers) should
persuade me of little traffic that way; yet I find it observed by some late
travelers whose relation herein is questionable, that the City of Cambalu
receives yearly thence by way of traffic, 10000 carts laden with silks and
stuffes of the China fabrique; the truth thereof I refer to the censure of
the Reader.

As for the moneys current in this large Territory, I find it to Coins
current in Cambalu, and through Tartaria Of the bark of mulbery trees.
be diversely made, yet neither of gold nor of silver coined, but of the middle
bark of the Mulbery-tree, which being made firm, and cut into diverse and
round pieces great and little, they imprint the Kings mark thereupon, and from
this mean stuff, the Emperor causes a huge mass of moneys to be yearly
made at Cambalu, which suffices for his whole Empire, and no man under pain
of death may coin or spend any other money, or refuse it in all his Kingdoms
and Dominions; whereby it comes to pass, that Merchants often coming hither
from far and remote Countries, bring with them gold, silver, pearl, and
precious stones, and receive the Kings money for them; and because the same is
not current in their Country, they therewith buy in this Empire other the
commodities here found, which they carry hence away with them: the King also
pays his stipends, officers and armies with the said moneys, and buyeth
whatsoever else he needs with the same, so that no Prince in the world can
exceed him in treasure, which is at so easy a rate provided and procured.

Besides which, I find it observed in some parts of this large Country subject
to some subordinate Kings, in subjection to the Great Cham, that they use in
some places pieces of polisht corrall in Of corrall polished.
stead of money; and in others they have certain twiggs of gold, in lieu of
money, which is distinguished by weight into several parcels, without stamp or
Character, and this is accounted in matters of consequence: but they have a
lesser coin (if I may so term it) made of salt which they boil in coldrons
for a certain Of salt in loaves hardened.
time, which congealed they make into lumps, like our penny loaves, which being
made solid, is signed with the Princes stamp, and passes thus current amongst
them, and wherewith they provide themselves of all necessaries: in some others
I find also that they use purs^ane for money, and weighted pieces of gold; for
in some Countries of this Empire silver mines are not found, and they give in
proportion one ounce of gold for five ounces of silver; neither is it found
that in many places of this Country that they have the use of letters;
therefore the Merchants make their contracts and obligations in tallies of
wood, the half whereof the one keeps, and the other the other half, which
being afterward paid and satisfied, the said tallie is restored; not much
unlike the custom of tallies in England. And thus much shall serve to have
said of the trade in general of this Country, the strange customs, manners,
and forms of government hinder all further particular knowledge of Trade to
our European Merchants: therefore leaving thus this Empire and City, (contented
with this short survey) I proceed to India, of late years become somewhat
better known to Europe and our Nation.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
Of INDIA, and the Provinces thereof.

INdia is bounded on the East with China, on the West India, and the Provinces
thereof.
with the River Indus, on the North with Tartaria above mentioned, on the South
with the Ocean, taking his name of Indus, a famous River here running 1000
miles ere it meet the Ocean; it lay after the conquest thereof by Alexander the
Great for many years undiscovered, the Merchants only thereof were found to
bring their native commodities to Sarmacand, and Cambalu aforementioned, to
exchange against such commodities as those countries afforded, as to the common
Empories, and likewise to Ormus where they provided themselves of all Egyptian
and Arabian commodities: by which means knowledge was got of their countries;
but the great worth and wealth thereof was not fully known and discovered to
us till of late years, by the navigation first of the Portugalls, then of the
Dutch and English, this Country became better surveighed, finding that the
same afforded and abounded in all manner of minerals, (lead and copper only
excepted) Commodities of India.
with all manner of cattle (horse excepted;) with all manner of precious
stones, with all manner of spices, some druggs, and other commodities, as in
their particular Provinces shall be more particularly remembered.

The famous River Ganges runs through this Country, to Ganges.
which the Indians go in pilgrimage, as if the water washed in or drunk could
bring salvation to them: this divides India into two parts, called India intra
Gangem and India extra Gangem, both which include many large Provinces and
Kingdoms; and first India intra Gangem has 9 principal Kingdoms, which I
will briefly following some Authors opinion pass cursorily through.

First Narsinga, the chief City Maleaper or St. Thomas, where Narsinga. 1.
they hold the body of this Apostle was burnt, though the Spaniards hold his
body was found under I know not how many fathom of ground in Calamana, by
devout Friars, that after the religions receipt of the Sacrament of their wafer
god, dug for him and found it; vide Mafe Jesuit. The second is Malavar, and
the Malavar 2. Ballasia. 3. Cononor.
third Ballasia, in which are found 3 famous Mart Towns, Cochin and Calicute,
and Conanor: the last having a large and safe Haven commodious for the trade of
these Countries, distant from Calicute 30 miles, and Calicute distant from
Cochin 80 miles: Calicute by reason of its great concourse of Merchants is here
a famous Mart, and extends it self for 3 miles all along the shore,
principally affording to Christendom that sort of pepper taking its name hence
of Calicute pepper, also callicoes cloth, and the other sort of pepper of the
name of this Country of Malavar.

The fourth is Cambaia, a famous Kingdom, very rich and populous, the chief
City is also of the same name, and one of the richest 4 Cambaia.
of these Countries containing 800000 persons.

The fifth is Mandao, wherein is the City Mandao, being 30 miles in compass,
which held out a siege of 12 years against the Mogul, 5 Mandao.
who is King hereof, as likewise of those former Provinces named.

The sixth and seventh is Bengala and Aristan, where is found the Cities of
Cattigan and Satigan, and principally for trade that of Ben 6 Bengala.
gala, on the banks of a gulf known by that name; and Orissa inhabited 7
Aristan.
by Christians of St. Thomas so called, because he converted them.

The eighth is Canora, under command of the Mogull; the most famous Cities are
Ultabat, Lispor, Melinda, etc. 8 Canora.


The ninth is Dellia, the chief City being Dellie, the sometimes residence of
the great Mogull; the other famous Cities are Tremel, 9 Dellia
Fatabar, and Chesmer famous for the study here of Magiqu^: all these mighty
Provinces have been conquered by the Great Moguls forces within these 90
years, to the astonishment of all India.

India extra Gangem contains 12 potent Kingdoms, and all under command India
extra Began gem.
of the potent Kings of Barma, which cursorily I will also run over.

The first is Macin, famous for that sweet wood which this Country does
produce, called Aloes or lignum vitae, valued at its weight I Macin Lignum
Uitae.
in pure silver, serviceable only here for the pompous funerals of great
Princes; the chief City for trade is the said Macin.

The second is Aracan, wherein is the City of Ava, which 2 Aracan. Ava.
through the World is so famous for the abundance of gems.

The third is Camboia, famous for the City of Camboia, a place of great
traffic, which affords plenty of gold, silver, aloes, and many 3 Camboia.
other commodities of great worth.

The fourth is Cauchin China, abounds with the like commodities 4 ^auchin
China.
brought to Cauchin China, the chief City of this Kingdom, and much
frequented by Merchants of all Countries for Porcelane and China dishes here
made, and much in esteem and use in these Countries.

The fifth is Barma, made famous only within 60 years, for the Princes hereof
have vanquished all the former Kingdoms, and 5 Barma.
made them tributaries to this Kingdom and this Scepter.

The sixth is Siam, once the Lady of all India, now subject to Barma; the
principal Cities are Mollacia in compass 20 miles, a Town Siam
of great resort for Merchants, for the traffic of spices, and now in
subjection to the Portugals: the next is Siam, situate on the River Mean,
which every year overfloweth the Country for 120 miles: and lastly Odin, on
the River Cuipomo, on which 200000 boats are found daily to be set on work,
and contains 400000 families: and is now known the residende of that famous
and fortunate King of Barma beforementioned.

The seventh is Pegu, which gives name to a principal City, 7 Pegu.
having a rich soil and harberous Sea shore, the principal known Haven is
Mar^ban; and here is also Lasmin a City of great commerce. This Country has
suffered much by sword, pestilence and famine, within these late years, and is
now as the rest a Province of this a foresaid powerful King of Barma.

Now having thus survaid India in the general and in gross, as it is divided
into Kingdoms and Provinces, it will be requisite it should next be surveyed
in the particular, so far as it may concern our present purpose, which is
the commerce and trade thereof, so far forth as it is at this day known to
our Nation, wherein I could wish my experience better to show the particulars
thereof, in consideration of the large extent of ground that is comprised under
this name of India, stretching it self from Taurus to the Ocean one way, and
from China to Persia, which is near 4000 miles another way, at which place it
will be fittest for me to begin my trade, and see what may be observed therein.
Yet before I enter into this discovery, and give a particular relation of such
materials, wherewith trade is in it self practiced through this large tract
of Lands, Islands and Seas; and before I show the matter wherewith this trade is
in all this Country driven, it will not be improper I should also see who they
principally are that manage this trade, and to whom this great traffic
appertains, either as they are natives and here borne, or as they are
strangers and here are induced to reside, attracted thereto by the sole motive
of the great commerce and rich commodities found either naturally here growing,
or artificially here made and produced.

This Country then as I said before abounds in the general with all manner
of mineralls, copper and lead excepted; with all Commodities of India in
general.
sorts of cattle, Horses excepted, with all manner of spices, with many sorts
of drugges, cotton cloth, precious stones, etc. to which may be added the want
of Wine and Wheat that here they have, that so this Country might be
beholding in some sort to others, as others are for her commodities to this.
These being then the prime commodities wherewith trade is here maintained, I
will note the traders and native Merchants that are here resident, which
properly I may account to be of 5 several sorts, all acknowledging several
rites, religions and customs; and therefore partake of so many several forms
and manners in the mannaging of their affairs of merchandising. The Gentile
Merchants are the first, and are found of great eminency in some parts of this
Tract. The Merchants in general trading in India.
The natives Christians converted by the discipline of St. Thomas are the
second, who in many places are found to manage a great and ample trade through
this Country: the third are the Mahumetans, Persians and Tartarians,
especially since the great victories of the Mogur found here also of great
quality and estates. The 4th are the Jews, who live strag lingly dispersed
over and through all the parts of this Country, and in every Princes dominions
exercise the same. The 5th are Moors and Arabians, who some 200 years past,
seized on some Haven Towns here along this coast, driving the natives unto
the inland parts, and at this day are seen to be very great Merchants. The 6th
are the Portugals, who possessing some few Sea-townes commodious for traffic,
brag of the conquest of the whole Country, which they are in no more
possibility entirely to conquer and possess, then the French were to subdue
Spain when they were possessed of the Fort of Perpignan, or the English to be
Masters of France when they were only Sovereigns of Calis. And now to the
Cities of this Tract, where at this day is found a trade to be practiced, and
first of Diu.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
Of DIU and the trade thereof.

THE Town and Island of DIU lies about 20 Diu and the trade thereof.
Leagues from the famous River Indus, and not far distant from the firm
land; it is now subject to the Portugals, who have conquered both the Island and
Town from the King of Cambaia, and so fortified it, as it is conceived to be
now invincible. This Town has a very good and great Haven, and therein is
found a great concourse of Merchants of all Nations, as Turks, Persians,
Arabians, Armenians, and others of sundry Countries; and because of the
continual traffic thereof, it is accounted the best and most profitable
revenue the King of Spain has in all India, for that the Banians, Guserats,
Rumos and Persians, which traffic in Cambaie, and from thence to the red Sea
and Mecca, do both discharge their wares and take in their lading here at DIU,
by reason of the commodious situation thereof, as lying at the entrance of
Cambaia, and from DIU it is shipped and sent to Cmabaia, and so brought back
again to DIU.

The commodities of this place and this coast are first, fine cotton
Commodities of Diu, and that Coast.
linen of sundry sorts, which they call Ioryms, Sluyers, and Lamparads, and
which we call by the general name of callicoes, also Cocos oil, India nuts,
butter, pitch, tar, sugar candy, iron good store, and most excellent and
fair leather, which is artificially wrought with silks of all colors, both
flowers and personages; and which is in India much esteemed to lay upon beds
and tables, instead of carpets and coverlets: they make also here all sorts of
curious desks, cupboords, chests, boxes, standishes, and a thousand such like
devises in wood, gilded with variety of colors, wrought with imagery and
mother of pearl, which are carried hence throughout all India; but especially
to Goa and Cochin, against the time that the Portugal Ships come thither to
take in their lading to go homewards.

Other observations of the further trade of this place I refer to Goa, the
Metropolis of India in possession of the Portugals, to which all the other
forts possessed by the Portugals, in some sort have a reference in the matter
and manner of their trade.

CHAP. XC.
Of CAMBAIA and the Trade thereof.

CAMBAIA the principal City of the Kingdom so Of Cambaia and the trade
thereof.
called, is a fair and large City, and contained some years past 800000
persons; it is seated on the imbosure of the famous River Indus, and there the
River inlargeth it self to a great breadth, till it come to the Isles of Vacas,
having the Island of Diu on the one side, and the Cities of Deman and Surrate on
the other: it is absolutely the greatest City of trade in these parts, and
therein is a Factorie seated for the traffic in these Countries of the
English and Dutch East India Companies: here is also found great concurrencie
of Merchants as well of Christians, as of Persians, Arabians, and Armenians,
but the natives which are called the Gusarates and Banians, are esteemed the
greatest and most politic Merchants of all India, and held in subtlety
equal with any Nation under the Sun.

The commodities for traffic that this Country either naturally Commodities
of Cambaia.
affoordeth, or is artificially here fabricated, is corn, rice, and such
grain, Butter and Oil, wherewith for their abundance they furnish all the
Countries round about them; also great quantity of cotton linens are here
made, which we term callicoes of all sorts, called by them Canequins,
Boffettas, Iarins, Cautares, and others of sundry kinds of making, from the
very coursest wherewith they make their sails for shipping, to the finest,
which are by us known by the name of Calico Lawnes; also here are made sundry
fine carpets called Alcatiffes and Banquies; also many sorts of coverlets,
called Codorins; also many manufactures of wood carved and imbellisht, some
with mother of pearl, and some with silver and such like; also here are found
sundry sorts of precious stones, as Spinalls, Rubies, Granads, Iacints,
Amatists, Chrysolits, Amber, Agats, Jasper; also sundry drugges, as Opium,
Camphora, Bangue and sandallwood, sugars, and lastly and principally Anil or
Indico is here growing prepared and made ready, and from hence carried
throughout the whole world: the principal places in this Country affoording
the same is, Bianny, Fetterbarre, Sherkis, Lahore, and other places thereabouts.

To this place I should add the famous Port of Surrat and Baroche, Surrat and
Baroche, and the trade thereof.
being as is Cambaia under subjection of the great Mogull, and seated in this
tract, which because in matters of traffic I do not find to vary from the
former, I willingly omit, and therefore comprehend them under this Chapter and
title, proceeding to the current coins weights and measures found in use and
practiced in these Cities, as in subjection to one and the same Prince, who is
sovereign thereof.

The ancient current and general coin of this Country is the Coins of
Cambaia and Moguls Country.
Mahmudy, stamped by that famous King Mahmood in the first conquest of these
Countries, which was accounted for ( --) Res of Portugal, and by the English
there resident estimated 12 d. starling. But the Grand Mogull being the last
Conqueror, prohibited the said coins of Mahumdis, and therefore at this day
they are found very scarce, yet most frequent in Gussurat. The most current
coin now throughout his Territories being the Ruppie, of which there are
diverse sorts, which are,

The Casanna Ruppia which is the common Ruppia worth in India mahomudy, and
estimated incirca 2 s. 3d starling.

The Iacquerree Ruppie, 5 of which make 6 Casanna Ruppies.

The soway Ruppie -- 4 whereof makes 5 Casanna Ruppies.

The Hondee Ruppie of equal value with the Casanna Ruppie abovesaid; and in
these last do the Merchants of Gusurat keep their accounts: Besides which
they have for smaller coins current Accounts kept in Surrat and Cambaia.
these:

The Pice, accounting 34 to the mamodie, which is 10 d. starling.

The shahee accounted to be 10 Pices or 10 Cosbeggs.

And some there are that keep their accounts in Mahomodis, accounting 2
mahomdy to be one Hondee or Cassanna Ruppie, being thus esteemed for 2 shil. 6
d. star. as 2 Ruppies are accounted for 1 (...) Spanish, though indeed not
found always of that value, for the Ruppie is here observed with the right of
a Princes coin, and the R. (...) for a merchandise or commodity, rising and
falling: the said Ruppia in Agra is found to pass for 84 pices; but this is
thus most current in Amadever, Lahore, and other the places where the
Christians of Europe and others do provide and buy their Indico, etc. and
there two of the said Ruppias make in ordinary payment for Merchandise 1 (...)
of Spanish.

There is generally found throughout the Dominions of the Weights in Camba^a,
Surrat, Agria, and the Mog^lis Dominions.
great Mogull two several weights; the one proper to silk, and the other for
all merchandise besides, and both of these have their foundation upon a weight
of copper called as the coin aforesaid the Pice.

A Pice in silk is accounted 5 mitigalls.

A mitigall is () a pice is about 13 d. 10 Troy.

A pice of silk is also accounted for 2 Tolls, 1 Toll is 12 masses.

A sear of which there is a small and great; the small sear is ordinarily
used in silk and accounted 30 Tolls.

Now for the common weight for all other commodities, I will begin with the
sear which varies here in several parts of this Country.

A sear of Surrat is 18 pices weight of copper money, which is 13 ounces haber.

A sear of Agra called the sear Acoberg, is 30 pices, which is 22 ounces
haber.

A sear of Agra called the sear Ianquery is 36 Pices, being the common sear
of all India, and double the Surrat sear, which is 26 (...) ounces.

A sear of Puttana and Ganges is 37 Pices, and those that have made a strict
calculation, have found that 22 common pices makes 16 ounces haberdepois.

They have also in use in these Countries two Maunds.

A maund small of surrat is 40 seares of surrat, and the said maund is 33 li.
haber.

But they have for some commodities another maund in Surrat about 27 li. haberd.

A candil of Surrat Cambaia etc. is 20 of the said maunds.

Seares 40 make a small maund of 33 li. English.

Seares 40 great make a great maund of 54 (...) li. English, and some have
observed it to be 55 li. English; and this is the maund of Agria.

In Amadever this differenee is found in the said weight. Amadever.


A maund is 40 sear, which is 18 pices and 33 li. English.

And the 100 maunds of Amadever is 63 maunds of Agria.

For gold, silver, musk, civet, Besor-stone they have another weight which
they call the Toll, being 12 masses, and is 7d. 16 grain Troy weight in
England, as has been observed both by the English and Portugal Merchants.

It is not to be questioned but that this so large tract of Country must admit
of more diversity of weights, which I am enforced to pass over in silence by
reason of my ignorance, and refer what is here omitted to the better
experienced.

There is used in these parts two common measures, and both called Me^sures in
Camba^a, Surrat, Agria, and M^s C^trey.
a Covado, a short and long covado.

The short covado of Surrat, Cambaia, etc. used in the sales of many
commodities, as linen and silk, is 27 inches English.

The long covado of Surrat used for woolen cloth is 35 inches.

But in Agra, Lahore, Dilly, Brampore, etc. the ordinary and common covado is
found to hold 32 inches, and called in some places of this Country Elahy.

At Puttana they have a covado of 38 inches, and by the observation of some, it
has been found that 1 covado of Puttana is 5 covados of Agra, which makes 4
yards English.

And note that in all the Moguls Country they use no concave measures for any
grain or liquid commodities, but sell the same by weight, in the same nature
as they do all ponderous and massy commodities.

They measure their ground and days journeys by a measure which they call a
Corso, which is one thousand five hundred geometrical paces, and is accounted
in common estimation of our late travelers a mile and a half English.

In this tract and belonging to this Prince are many famous Towns of trade,
the chiefest is Lahore, famous for the Indico there growing, and prepared; and
for that admirable high way Iabore.
to Agria of twenty days journeys, beset on each side with mulberry-trees,
and whence there departs yearly above twelve thousand Camells laden with
spices to Hispahan, which are brought hither from India.

The next principal town is Amadabar, famous in these parts for the great
trade and excellent situation thereof, and as being Amadabar.
the most eminent City of the Guserats. Neither is Tutta here to Tutta.
be forgotten, though an Inland Town, yet seated on the famous River of Indus,
and having dependancie and belonging thereunto; and that excellent Port of
Lowribander, three Lowribander.
days journey distant from it, on the shore commonly entitled the Coast of
Sindie, wherein it has been observed by our European Navigators, that Ships
may safely ride without harm receiving by the worms, which does much hurt in
SURRAT, and all along the coast of India.

CHAP. XCI.
Of GOA, and the Trade thereof.

GOa, is the Metropolis of India, I mean of those that are Goa, and the trade
thereof.
under the command of the Portugal or Spaniard, where the Viceroy, Archbishop,
and the King his Consul, and Chancery do reside; here is also the Staple of
all India commodities, whereto Merchants of Ara^ia, Armenia, Persia, Cambaia,
Pengala, Pegu, Siam, Mallacca, Iava, Mollucco, China, and of sundry other
Countries do resort: It is ^eated in an Island of three miles circuit, but is
but little distant from the firm land; the Port is capacious of good ships,
but if they exceed 200 Tons they unlade short of the Town at a place called
Bardes, well built with fair houses both public and pri^ate, after the
Portugal manner, and has in it many Cloisters, Churches, and Frieries; but is
not fortified with any walls, but the contrived and continued buildings of the
houses, serves both for defense and enclosure: in the heart of the City is a
Street called ^he Leilon, where a daily assembly is made from 7 to 9 in the
mor^ing, not only of Merchants from all parts, but also of gentry; and during
the said hours the said Street is replenished with all commodities and
merchandise from all the aforenamed Kingdoms, ^et forth in manner of our
Faires in England; which daily is thus practiced, and wherein the rich
commodities of those Countries ^re vented and put to sale; besides which, there
are particular Streets where the native Indians do dwell together, being found
to be here great Merchants, and for the most part inhabit near together,
especially such as are found to be of one and the same Art and Profession,
being bound by the strict laws of this Country, every man to marry within his
own and the same Trade, and to bring up likewise their children in their own
and the same Profession; which law (being strictly observed) gives great
perfection to all Arts here practiced: their Winter begins here the last of
April, continuing till September, and is called Winter, not for the cold, but
for the continual raines that are found all this time; the rest of the time is
accounted Summer, which ^s without rain, and the pleasantest of all other
seasons upon this Coast.

The commodities natural of this place is not observeable, the Com^es o^ Goa.
^land small, and the firm land plentiful in Palme-trees, cocus, and the
like: the City is the common Staple for all India commodities, brought hither
by others, and here bartered and exchanged for other; but of it self not
affording any of note or consequence.

They have here two sorts of moneys, a good, and a bad, and therefore in all
contracts they are as well to bargain for the money Coins curt^nt in Goa.
that is to be received, as for the commodity that is to be sold: but because
this place is neighboured with sundry great Nations that traffic hither; it
will be fit I should enlarge my self a little further on this subject.

The common moneys here current is called the Pardaus Xeraphin, coined here,
and worth 300 Res of Portugal, and is as much as three testons, which is
English money about four shillings six pence sterling.

One Pardau is five tang as, which is an imaginary coin, and is in both sorts
of the coins in use, as accounting five tang as bad money, being the same in
worth as four tang as of good money.

One tang as is worth four good ventins, and five bad ventins, a coin also
imaginary, and not real, and is worth seaventy five basarucos.

A vintin is worth 15 bad basarucos, and 18 good basarucos, which is the lowest
and smallest coin here in use.

Three basarucos is worth two Res of Portugal money, and by this account, the
Pardu sheraphin is worth 375 basarucos: and these are all the proper coins of
Goa: the other here current are

The Persia larins is a coin of very fine filver, and worth 110 basarucos.

The Pagode of gold worth about 10 tang as, is eight shillings sterling.

The venetiander of gold, worth two pardaus sheraphin.

The St. Thomas of gold, worth 8 tang as.

The Riall of (...) called Pardaus de reales, worth commonly 440 Res of
Portugal; but these and the larins of Persia may here be accounted for
commodities, rising and falling in price, as the occasions of Merchants enforce
them.

But note that all moneys are here paid and received by the hands of Sheraffs,
as is the manner in Turkey and other Eastern Countries, Sheraffs.
who make good the loss and damage either in tale or goodness for a small
consideration, and by the Portugals termed Cernidors.

The weights common in Goa, and along the coast of India, that is subject to
the Crown of Spain, are diverse; the usual known Weights of Goa.
is as in Portugal the quintall and the rove; and this is most in use for all
European commodities.

But they have in use another proper, for honey, sugar, butter, which is called
the maund, being 12 li. of the weight above mentioned.

Another proper only to pepper, and other such Indian spices, they have, which
they call the Bahar, accounted 3 quintals and a half of Portugal weight,
which by reason of the near concordancie that it has with the hundred of
London, I shall not need to say any thing further thereof.

The measure of length is the same as is used in Lixborne.

The measure of grain, rice, and such like commodities is called a Measures of
Goa.
Medida, being about a spanne high, and half a finger broad, 24 whereof is
accounted a mand.

Mands 20, is accounted one candil, which is about 14 bushels Eng. and by this
measure they account their tunnage in shipping; yet it is found, that some sort
of rice is here sold by the fardo, being round bundles wrapped straw, and bound
about with cords, and these should weigh by the custom of the place 3 maunds.

There is upon this coast a great trade in use for pearls, which The order how
they fish, and trade for Pearls.
because it is of great moment in this and other places of India; it will be
fit I should show the manner thereof.

The fishing for pearls begins yearly in March and April, and continues
but 50 days; but yet they fish not always in one place every year, but
change their places by certain appointed and settled orders amongst the
principal that have the oversight thereof.

Now when the time of this fishing draws near, then they send very good
diverse that go purposely to discover where the greatest heaps of oysters are
under water, and on the shore opposite to that place, there they set up and
plant a village with houses, and a Bazaro or market place, of stone and other
materials, which stands as long as the fishing time lasts, and is for that
time furnished with all things necessary, which now and then happens to be
near unto places inhabited, and now and then a far off, according to the place
appointed for that years fishing.

The fishermen themselves are for the most part Christians, natives of that
Country; neither is any other debarred from this fishing that will, paying a
certain tribute or acknowledgement to the King of Spain, and to the Jesuits
who have sundry Churches upon that coast: now during the said fishing, there
are always maintained three or four fasts or galliots armed to defend the
fishers from injuries and Rovers. The order of which fishing is observed to be
thus.

There are commonly three or four barks, and their companies that make
consortship together, much resembling our English pilot-boates, having eight or
ten men in a boat, and in the morning they go out together from the shore,
and anchor in 15 or 18 fathom water, which is the ordinary depths of this
whole coast; and being thus moored to their Anchor, they cast a rope into the
Sea, and at the end of that rope usually make fast a great stone, and then they
have in readiness a Diver, who has his nose and his ears well stopped and
anointed with oil, and a basket fastened about his neck, or under his left
arm; then he sinketh down by the said rope to the bottom of the Sea, and as
fast as he can he fills the said basket, and being full, he then shakes the
rope, and his fellows that hold the other end, and are in their Bark,
instantly hale him up with his filled basket, and in this wise they go one by
one until they have laden their said boat with Oysters; and in the evening
returning a shore to the village, every company makes their own heap or
mount of Oysters by themselves, one distant from another in such wise, that
there is seen a great long row of mounts or heaps of Oysters, which remain
untouched until such time as the fishing be ended; and at the end whereof
every company sits down about their mount or heap, and fall to opening of
them, which they may easily do, because that then they be both dry, dead, and
brittle; and if every Oyster should prove to have pearls in them, it would
prove a very good purchase unto them: but many are found to have no pearls at
all in them; therefore when their fishing is done, they then perceive whether
their said fishing and gathering proves good or bad.

Now there are certain men expert in the choice and distinction of Pearls,
which here they call Chittini, which set and make the price of Pearls,
according to their carracts, each carract being four grains, and these with
an instrument of copper having holes therein of several greatness serving to
distingush the sorts, to which also they consider their beauty and goodness, and
then thereof make 4 several sorts. The first sort be the round Pearls, which
they call aia or unia of Portugal, because the Portugals buy them: the second
sort which are not round, are called aia of Bengola: the third sort, which are
not so good as the second, they call aia of Canora, that is to say, the
Kingdom of Besnegar: the fourth and last, and indeed the worst sort, they call
aia of Cambaia: and thus the price being by the men set thereon, according to
their sorts, goodness, and greatness, there are Merchants of every Country which
are ready with their moneys in their hands to buy them; so that in few days,
all the said parcels are bought up, according to the said prizes set upon them
altering according to the carract, beauty, and shape thereof. And this is the
manner of the fishing, and dispersing of the Pearls throughout India, and
thence through the World, so far forth as I thought good to insert the same
in this place.

CHAP. XCII.
Of the Trade in general practiced along the Coast of INDIA.

THe Coast of India known in these Regions, is only The general Trade of the
Coast of India.
so accounted from the Islands called las Vachas, or from the Town of deman to
the Cape of Comorin, not above 200 miles in length, wherein besides the
Metropolis Goa, is found sundry others in subjection to the Crown of
Portugal; as first Daman to the North of Goa; then Basain, then Chaul, Dabull,
and then Goa: and to the Southward, which some call the coast of Mallubar,
they hold Romes, Onor; Barselor, Mangalor, Cananor, Calicut, Cranganor, Cochin,
Coulon, and cape de Comeri, which is accounted the last end of the Coast of
Mallabar and India, for the better understanding of the trade of these
Seaports, it will be needful I should somewhat more particularly survey the
same.

First then, it is to be understood that the Northern part of this Coast is
held the wholsomest and purest air for habitation, the principal places being
Daman, Basasen, and Chaul, which are found Daman. Basas^. Chaul.
in themselves to have good havens, whereto great traffic is maintained
throughout India; the Country hereabouts abounding in rice, pease, and other
grains, butter and oil of nuts, also cotton cloth great quantity, especially
Baroches, taking the name from a City of this coast; and in Chaul is found
very great concourse of Merchants and traffic to Ormus, Cambaia, Sinde,
Masquate, Bengala, having therein many rich Merchants, and ships of great
burden; and here is also made diverse kinds of silk stuffes, as grograms,
sattins, taffata's, and such like in such abundance, that India, and all other
places bordering, are served therewith, and beholding thereto, which brings a
great trade to the said City of Chaul; for they bring in the raw silk of
China, and being here spunne, woven, and wrought, carry it out again, and
distribute it throughout India, and the neighboring Countries; here also they
make fair and excellent wrought bedsteds, boxes, desks, stools, and other
wooden arts, which brings them great profit, and makes this place famous
throughout these parts.

As for the coast of Mallabar, Onor is of good esteem, where Coast of
Mallabar, and the trade thereof.
there is a great quantity of pepper yearly laden by the Portugals factors,
accounted the best and fullest berry in all India, the Country hereabouts
belonging to a Queen rich in pepper, who sells the said commodity only to
the Portugals; but receives her money 6 months beforehand, and at the season
delivers the said contracted pepper, which by the Portugals is housed in
their Fort, which (by her leave) they have here built, till their shipping
come to fetch it away, which is commonly but once a year.

Cananor is held the best fort they have upon all this coast, and Cananor.
does, abound with rice and pepper, and near the fort is a fair Town which
is plentifully stored with all the commodities of this coast and shore,
especially abounding in all manner of victuals and provision and masts for
ships of all sizes and sorts.

Calicut was once the most famous town of trade of all this shore, Calicut.
and gave name not only to the sorts of pepper that here grow, but also to
that sort of cotton cloth that was first hence transported for Europe; but the
Emperor the then Sovereign, being enemy to the King of Couchin, with whom
the Portugals at their first arivall here sided, and prosperd, by that means,
overthrew the great traffic of Calicut, and advanced the traffic of Cochin,
whose Cochin
Sovereign by means of the trade is now become a mighty and rich Prince in
this Country, the City of Cochin it self thereby so enlarged, enriched, and
so well inhabited by Portugals, who are in part the new Masters, by native
Mallabars and other Nations, and seated upon a pleasant River, and enjoying the
commodity of a good Channel and Haven; that it is accounted in these parts for
trade and concourse of Merchants the only second to Goa: here is laden yearly
great quantity of pepper, and a course sort of cynamon, vulgarly called de
Matte, nothing comparable to cynamon of Seylon accounted the best; and hither
come all the Portugal ships to lade homewards, after that they have unladen
their European commodities in Goa, which adds much to the trade of this City.
Two commodities hither imported do much enrich this place, 1 the great store of
silk that comes hither raw from China to be wrought, and next the great store
of sugar that comes from Bengala to be spent, for which the married citizens
are found to pay no custom to the King of Cochin, though for all others they
pay 4 per cent. but the stranger and unmarryed pay at Cochin nothing to the
King; but to the Portugal 8 per cent. And because The manner of the f^rming of
the pepper in India by the Portugals.
this great traffic for pepper is only peculiar to some private Merchants or
Farmers authorized by the Kings of Spain, it will not be unproper I should
here relate the manner thereof: It is to be understood then that the Kings of
Portugal, the first European traders into these parts, in all their
navigations and discoveries, ever added the benefit of commerce toward the
supportation of the expenses of their conquests; and having here built for
conveniencie of trade, and protection of their Merchants, and subjects many
Fortresses and Castles; they ever so settled them, that the commodiousnesse of
the Haven, Port or harbor, joined to the native commodities of the place,
might add means and fair inducements to make by traffic their conquests
profitable. This coast then being found to abound with pepper, a principal
commodity then requested in Europe, designed it to be converted to his peculiar
profit, by all the provident ways of a circumspect Merchant; but Princes that
will embrace all, sometimes graspe but a Chi cro^o abrazia ^oca strin^.
little; for the same could not be so profitably contrived, considering the
distance of way, length of time, and trust to be committed to factors,
Captains of Forts, and others; but he found himself to come far short of
his expectation in this point, whereupon he was advised to let out the same to
Farm, and contracted it at certain conditions to certain great and eminent
Merchants, who should stand in his place strongly and amply privileged, and
should enjoy a part of the gains for themselves, and yet bring the greatest
croppe of their labors into his coffers; hereupon it was first let out for
five years, the farmers and contracters binding themselves to send such a
stock to India in ready money, as would extend for 30 thousand quintalls of
pepper yearly, conceived to be in those days as much as all Europe could
annually vent in that commodity; but then the King was bound to send his Ships
to India to lade the same, in number five Ships of sufficient burden yearly;
the Farmers bearing the adventure both of their moneys outward, and of the said
pepper homeward, lading it in India into the said Ships at their own costs and
charges, all which brought into Portugal, they were to deliver to the King at
the price of 12 duccats per quintall, and what was either cast away, lost, or
taken, was to be borne by the Farmers; the King paying for no more then what
was thus fairly laid on land into his storehouse at Lixborne, neither yet
paid he ready money for the same, but paid them with their own money when the
pepper was sold; so that the King without disbursement or hazard, had and has
a certain great gain without the loss of a penny; in consideration whereof
the farmers have many great and strong immunities and privileges; as first,
that no man upon pain of death, of what estate or condition soever he be, may
any ways deal or trade in pepper but themselves, which is still strictly
observed; secondly, that they may not upon any occasion or necessity
whatsoever, diminish or lessen the said ordinary stock of money, nor the King
his said stint of shipping; neither hinder nor let them in any sort concerning
the lading thereof, which is also strictly looked into; for though the pepper
were for the Kings own person or proper account, yet must the Farmers pepper
be first laden; thirdly that the Uiceroy, and all other the Officers and
Captains in India shall give them all assistance, help and favor, with safe
keeping guarding and watching the same, with all other needful offices as
shall be by them required, for the safety and benefit of the said pepper:
fourthly, that The Ships of pepper depart from Co^n about the months of
December and Ianu^ry.
for the lading and providing thereof, the said Farmers may send their Factors
into India with their servants and assistants of what nation soever they be,
(English, French, and Spaniards only excepted) and that unto every place to
see the same laden and dispatched away: and in latter times it is observed that
they have also farmed of the King the ships and their fraightment, with large
conditions to build them, and make the provision of all necessaries for them,
and all at their own adventures; and if the Ship come safe home, they give the
King in lieu of license a certain sum of money for every Ship, and annually
do furnish these five Ships at their own charges: but for such Soldiers as
are appointed to go in them, they are bound to sail for the King and at his
charge, and have but only their meat and drink at the Farmers charges, the
officers and sailors being placed therein by the Kings admiralty, which the
Farmers may not once deny or refuse; so that the King adventureth nothing,
neither in pepper nor in Ships; but only if the Ships be cast away, he
loses the money that he should have, and otherwise gain by the farm of every
Ship, if it had returned safe; and the profit of the pepper that should have
been delivered him at a certain price, which is the cause now that the King
does not send out his Fleets to meet and waft them from the Flemish Islands, as
for long time he was accustomed to do; and the King is found so nearely to
look to this Farm, that he will not abate the Farmers a penny, how great
soever their losses happen otherwise to be: And thus much shall serve for Goa
and the trade of the Portugalls in India; now in the next place I will come to
the coast of Chormandel.

CHAP. XCIII.
Of MESULIPATAN and the Trade thereof, with the coast of CHORMANDEL.

THE Coast of Chormandel begins from the cape Negapatan to the Town of
Musulipatan, between which Musulipaton and the trade of the coast of Chormandel
said places is found a place called St. Thomas, where the Apostle Thomas is
said to have preached salvation to these Nations and whose Tomb is had still
in great reverence to this day amongst the native Christians of this Country:
besides which is found the Towns of Pettipoly and Armagow, where the English
of late have settled factories that have dependencie on the factory of
Mesulipatan; under which therefore I will include the trade of this coast.

Musulipatan by reason of the commodious situation, is the most eminent place
of trade of this coast, where the English have to that purpose planted a
factorie, both for providing and lading hence the commodities of this Country;
this place is seated on the same coast, or rather Istmus, as Goa is with the
Cities beforemen^ioned, which are seated to the eastward, as the coast of
Mallabar ^s to the westward: the pleasantness of the adjoining River ^unning
down from Bisnagar the Metropolis of this Country, and the goodness of the
Haven, with the wholesomenesse of the ^oile and the temperancie of the air,
adds much to the excel^encie of it in matter of trade and concurrencie of
Merchants; to which if we add the industry of the inhabitants, and the
fruit^ullnesse of the Country bearing many commodities naturally, it ^s not to
be reckned as the least or the worst part of trading in India.

From this place and coast then is found a great trade, to be driven into
Bengala, Pegu, Siam, Mallaca and to India, and the principal commodities that
this City is noted to be famous for, is those Commoditi^ of the cost of
Cormandel.
excellent fine cotton linen, made here in great abundance, and of all
colors, and interwoven with diverse sorts of loome works and flowers, very
fine and cunningly wrought, and therefore much worn in India, and better
esteemed there then silk, as indeed being both found finer and richer, and
used by the greatest women in those parts for their clothing, wherein is found
interlaced oftentimes threads of silver and gold, and diverse other rare
fabriques of cotton, etc.

The current usual coins in Mesulipatan, Armagon, Petipoli, Coins current in
Musu^ipatan and coast of Cormandel.
St. Thomas, and all along the coast is the Pagode of gold, and the Mahomody
and fanan of silver, and are thus valued.

A Pogode is worth 15 fanams, or in English 8 sh. starling.

A fanan is 9 cashee, or as some call them cupans about 6 d. star.

A Mamody is 32 pices, or as in some places they are called docres.

A riall of 8/2 Spanish is here 5 mamodies or 9 fanans, or 5 sh.

And 10 rialls 8/8 is here current for 6 and sometimes for 6 pagods.

And 10 R 8/8 are called in these parts a Sear incirca 50 sh. star. But in
Armagon it is observed they have this difference. Armagon.


Rialls of 8/8 11 are accounted for 8 pagods.

One pagode is accounted worth 20 fanams.

And 5 pagodes here are accounted but 4 in Mesulipatan.

The pagode by this account may be said to be in value about 8sh. starling
equivalent with the chequin of Uenice, or the sheriff of Egypt, or sultany of
Turkey, and the mamody accounted for 12 d. starling, and the fanans about 6 d.
or 7 d. per piece.

Their common weight used along this coast is the candil, which Weights current
in Mesulapa^ (...) co^ of Co^mandel.
in gross goods is most usual, accounted for 20 Maunds.

A Maund is 40 Sear or 22 Masses, or 26 li. 14 oun. English.

A Sear is 17 Kashee, which thus answers with England.

The sear is twofold, as the small sear is of 16 Mass, and found to be about
10 li. English, or as some observe it 10 (...) li. and the great sear is
accounted as above.

And the candil of 20 mands of 26 li. 14 ounc. haberdepois, brings it to be
English pound sotile 538 li. incirca.

But this finds some disagreement with the weight of Petipoli, for their candil
is 20 mands found to be but 26 li. English in all 520 li.

A mand is here counted for 5 Uisko 5 li. 3 ounc. English.

One Uisco (or as the Portugalls call it fisco) is accounted 8 seares, which is
found to be 10 ounc. haberdepois incirca.

Further observations I find not of the trade of Mesulapatan, saveing that the
governor of this City, having settled a trade with the English, and that they
should pay for custom 4 per cent. he afterward raised the same to 12 per
cent. till Anno 1614. one Floris, and other English surprised the chief
customer being the governors son, and brought him aboard their Ship then in
port, who thereupon came to a new composition restored the overplus taken, and
settled it for the future at the first agreed rate of 4 per cent. as now it
stands.

CHAP. XCIIII.
Of SATAGAN the Metropolis of Bengala, and the trade of that coast and the
River Ganges.

AT the ending of the coast of Coromandel, begins this coast of Bengala,
through the middle whereof Satagan and the trade of the coast of Bengala.
the famous River Ganges runs, making a large bay or Gulf, which carries the
name of the Gulf of Bengala: This Country is under the command of the great
Mogul; whose coins are here current; the holy and reverend opinion that the
Gentiles through all India have of this River, and the concourse of Pilgrims
thereto, for devotion sake, adds much to the traffic of Satagam, the chief
City of this Country, which is pleasantly seated on another fair and large
River, whose imbosure is not far distant from the imbosure of Ganges, and
upon which boats sail by the violence of the current a hundred miles in
fifteen hours without the help of sails or oars, and when the tide turns
it, is found to be so violent that the sailors are forced to make fast their
boats to certain trees fixed on the shore side, for they are not able to make
way against the stream and current thereof. At the entrance of this River is a
place called Butter, which the Inhabitants of the Country and Merchants there
do yearly build in form of a village, of straw, branches of trees, reeds, and
the like, and is of great largeness, to which they bring all manner of
merchandise, to meet the ships which at certain set times with the Monsoons
come hither for trade, who are not able to go higher for want of wa^er; and
when the ships are gone with the change of the Moun^oon, and that years
trading past, they then burn their said town and houses, and carry up their
goods and merchandise to the City ^f Satagan; whither also all small barks
and boats do go to ^ade and unlade.

It is observable that thirty or forty sail of great ships of Commodities
of the Coast of Bengala.
^undry Countries and Nations do here yearly at this time find ^ading; the
principal commodities of this place and the coast, being Rice here growing in
great abundance, cloth of cotton of infinite sorts, made here in great
quantity, Lacca good store, great plenty of sugars, Mirabolans both dried and
preserved, long pepper, Oil of Zerseline, and many other commodities; the
City in it self is a fair City, and abounding with rich Merchants that
trade to Pegu, Musulipatan, Sumatra, and sometimes to Cambaia, and the red Sea;
their time of traffic by reason of the heat is for the most part here by
night, and when they have once burned their town of Butter, as has been
noted, they then hire galliotts and boats, and there with transport their
commodities up the River from one Town to another, situated upon the same,
where every day is found in one or other a public fair and market, so that
their whole life is still in motion and agitation, providing in one place and
putting off in another, here buying and there selling.

The Portugalls are found to have some trade hither, but those that reside here
are not subject to much government, but make their will their law; only two
Forts they hold upon this coast, the one they call porto grande, the other
porto pequenom, whereto there is driven an orderly trade, and thereby that
Nation is kept within some order and discipline.

As for the coins current here, the weights and measures here in Weights and
measures of the coast of Bengala.
use, I must omit them by reason of my ignorance therein, and therefore shall
refer them to the better skilled.

Before I leave this coast, I must not forget a strange custom, not only here
much used, but also along the coast of Mallabar, and in many other parts of
India, which is thus, if a Debtor break Custom in India for Debtor^.
the day of payment with his Creditor, and oftentimes disappoynt him, then he
goes to the principal of the Bramenes, and receives of him a rod, with which
he approaches to the debtor, and making a circle about him, charge him in
the name of the King and the said Bramen, not to depart till he has satisfied
the debt, which if he do not, he must then starve in the place; for if he
depart, the King will cause him to be executed; and this is in use in many
parts of India, but especially where the Bramans are reverenced; it is daily
seen practiced amongst Merchants the natives of these places.

CHAP. XCV.
Of PEGU, and the coast thereof with the trade.

IN order having passed the coast and gulf of Bengala, the next in this tract,
is the Seacoast of Aracan, Peg^ Pegu and the trade of the coast thereof.
and Sian, stretching it self to the Island and Fort of Malacca, of which
according to the observations in trade, as I have collected, I will in brief
touch.

The first on this coast and shore is Aracan, situated upon the Aracan.
River of Cosnim, which passes through some part of Bengala, and enters into
that gulf at this City, by which commodious situation it is found
plentifully stored as well with the commodities of that Country, as the
natural commodities of the place it self.

The next is Macoa, seated upon one of the mouths of that great Macca.
and famous River Martaban, which by ten mouths issuing into the Sea, gives a
great supply to this Country of all the commodities that are found in India,
from whence this mighty River has its sourse.

The third is Pegu it self, giving name to the whole coast, seated in like
manner upon one of the said mouths, which as being Pegu.
the principal seat of the Princes of this Country, I will a little more
particularly survey.

The mavelous great tides, and violent current of this great River is not
here to be omitted as appertaining to trade, for it is River of Martaban.
found to be in it self so swift, the neither wind nor oar can make head or
way against it, and because it is found to keep: constant course of ebbing and
flowing, therefore in their sailing they still observe the tides thereof, and
when those tides are at highest, there are certain stations on the banks
whereto their boats galliots and barges are fastened, until the tide do again
serve their turn to proceed on their voyage: this one thing more I find
wonderful here, that these tides come not in by a constant continued pace or
measure, but come rushing in at the first with a great violence, with a hideous
noise and roaring, such as in some lesser sort is seen in the River of Roven,
and in our River of Severne in England.

As for the City of Pegu it self it is divided into two parts, in the one the
King and his Nobility resideth, lately built and richly beautified, and
therefore called the new Town; the other part inhabited only by Merchants,
Artificers, Seamen, and such like, and called the old Town; every house in
the old Town where Merchants do reside, has a place built strongly of brick
which as a warehouse serves his occasion, called by them Godon, espe^ally to
prevent firing, which this Town is much subject to by ^ason of the combustible
matter it is made of; the new Town (...) walled about and is a perfect square,
having twenty gates, five (...) each angle, ditched about and watered, wherein
many Crocodills ^re kept for the watch of the place by night; the walls are
beau^fied with many Turrets for sentinels gilded with gold; the streets ^re
very fair, straight as a line, and so broad as fifteen horsemen ^ay ride
abrest on both sides; at each man's door are set palm ^rees, which groveing
makes a fair show, and thereby all passen^ers may walk daily in the shadow
from one street to another, ^o prevent the extraordinary heat of the place and
climate: the greatest trade that is found at this day exercised in Pegu, is
from the coast of Cormandell with pintados, cotton cloth, and other bombasins
much in request here; but it is to be noted, that these Ships must depart
that coast by the sixth of September, and take the monsone wind, otherwise they
lose their voyage for that year: from Bengala also comes hither sundry
ships with cotton cloth and other such wearing commodities, which taking also
the season of the wind arriveth here when the Cormondel Ships are ready to
depart. The principal harbor or port where these Ships do ride is called
Cosmin, and is the place where the greatest Ships do Anchor to lade and
unlade their goods. From Mecca comes also sundry Ships laden with woolen
cloth, Damaskes, Velvets, and Chickens. From Mallacca comes many small Vessels
laden with pepper, sanders, Porcelan of China, Camphora, and other commodities.
From Sumatra comes also sundry Ships with pepper and other wares; all which
goods are very strictly looked into for the payment of the Kings customs at
landing, which is here paid in kind, and amounts unto twelve per cent. and
the King does hold it for a great affront to be wronged of a penny of it:
Rubies, Saphirs and Spinalls paying here no custom in or out, as being the
proper commodities of the Country.

For the effecting of the trade and commerce of this place, there is ordained
eight Broakers or Tareghes by the Kings authority, who are bound to sell and
vent all the goods and merchandise coming to Pegu, for all men's account of
what Nation soever they be, having two per cent. for their brokeredge, and are
liable to make good the debts they make, which no Merchant there resident can
avoid; for they will have the said two per cent. by the Kings authority
granted them, whether their help be taken or not.

In like manner, there are ordained certain Broakers for the buying of all the
commodities bought in Pegu, wherein is found amongst them such candid dealing,
that a stranger can hardly be wronged or abused, if he have but so much
discretion to provide such goods as may be proper for the Country whither he
sends them.

The commodities native of this place and Country are these, Gold, Silver,
Rubies, Saphirs, Spinalls dug at Caplan six days journey from Ava in this
Kingdom, great store of Benjamin, lo^ pepper, lead, lacca, Rice, Niperwine and
sugar; and many other commodities. The manner of their bargaining as being
contrary to the Strange man^r of buying (...) selling in ^gu.
custom and use in most parts of the world, is here worth observing; all their
bargains by their law must be made publicly and in open assemblies of and
before all standers by, who because they should yet not know, what is bidden or
demanded for any commodity, the Broakers either buyer or seller having seen
the commodity, and liking of it, puts his hand under a cloth and touches
the parties hand interessed, and by nipping, touching and pinching of certain
joints of each others hands, they know what is bidden and demanded without
words speaking, which these Broakers again with the other hand coverd in the
like manner, give notice of to the party who sets him on work, and either so
orders him to proceed to bid more or less, or else to give over: and after this
manner are all their contracts here made, and afterward by the said Broaker
registered accordingly in leaves of trees which with them is used as paper with
us.

And when any strangers and foreign Merchants arrive here, these Broakers are
bound by their place to provide them a house, Maids let out to serve both by
day and night service to Merchants.
Magazin, and lodging, whilst they here are resident, and when the house is
taken, the Governor of the Town sends to know how long time he intends to
stay with them, and withal appoints certain maids of the Town to go to
him, that out of them he may make choice of one whilst he remains there, and
then having chosen one to his mind, he contracts with her friends for her use
for the said time at an easy rate, which done he brings her to his house or
lodging, and she serves him willingly in all his affairs both by day and
night, as both his slave and wife; but then he must take care that during that
time he keeps not company with any other woman; for so he might incur a
great danger and peril of his life by the law of the Country. Now when the
time of his residence is expired, he pays the parents of the maid the price
agreed for, and departs quietly away, and she returns with credit to her
friends, being as well esteemed of as ever she was before; and if afterward
this maid chance to marry, though with the principallest of the Country, and
that the aforesaid stranger should again return hither to trade, he may
again demand his woman, and he shall have her by the law of the Country,
without the resistance of her husband, or any shame unto him, and she
remains by the stranger as long as he abides there, and he traveling from
thence, she goes home to her husband again, which amongst them is held for a
most sure and inviolable law and custom.

The coin current here and throughout all this coast is called Coins current
in Pegu.
Gansa, which is made of copper and lead, and is not the proper money of the
King, but every man may stamp it that will, and that is able, because it has
its just value in stuff and materials; there is much counterfeiting of this
coin, but it is soon discerned by the Broakers, tellers of money, who readily
spy it out, and therefore not passable, nor will not be taken by any; with this
money Gansa you may buy Gold, silver, Rubies, drugges, spices, and all
commodities; and no other money is current amongst them.

This Gansa goes by a weight called a Biso, and this name of Bise goes for
the account of the weight, and therefore a Bise of a Gansa is accounted by
strangers there trading R. (...) or 2 shil. 6. d. starling; and albeit that
gold and silver as all other commodities do rise and fall, yet this Bise never
alters in value or estimation. Every Bise makes a hundred Gansaes of weight,
and so it does come to pass that the number of the money is Bisa.

In this Country is also seated the Town of Martaven, a place Martavan.
of great traffic, and the last of this coast; the Inhabitants whereof are
wonderful expert in making of hard wax, which hence is dispersed throughout
India, and into many places of Europe; here is also made those great earthen
Iarrs or vessels which serve them to keep water, oil, or any other liquor,
and are much used in India, and aboard their ships in stead of caske,
barrells, and such vessels, and throughout all these Countries are called of
the name of the place Martavanas; and in some places by the Portugalls Tenajos.

CHAP. XCVI.
Of SIAM and the trade of the coast thereof.

Under the title of Siam I will comprehend the City of Of Siam and the trade
of the coast thereof.
Tenaserim, a famous town of traffic, and the Metropolis of a Kingdom; also
Pottana, another City on this coast, not far distant from Siam it self,
being a place where the English Merchants have a residence and hold a Factorie;
and lastly Siam as the principal, and as one upon whom the rest have a
dependencie, both in matter of government and trade. This City then of Siam
some years past (as appears by the relation of that worthy Merchant Raphe
Fitche, and others) was the prime of all these and the neighboring Regions;
but being for twenty-one months besieged by the King of Pegu, who after four
months march encompassed it with a million and four hundred thousand
Soldiers, and at length by means of treason and not of strength gained it,
drove the King thereof to that desperation that he poisoned himself with all
his wives and children; since which time it has obeyed several Princes and
been subject to sundry Masters, according to the The fortune of Sam and Pegu
various chance of war, and of this Country, which in one age is seen here
so diversely to alter into sundry shapes; for a petty King which now commands
one only Town or Province, in a few years comes to be a great Emperor over
several Kingdoms, and peradventure that that great Emperor who now commanded
so many several Nations, within few years after is glad to rule over a small
Province, City, or Island, which the Princes of Pegu and Siam have of late
years to their great grief found too true by experience.

This City of Siam is yet notwithstanding the former suffered calamity, a
place of great traffic, not only hence to Cauchinchina, Macau, Cantor,
Mallacca, Cambaia and the Islands, Sumatra, Borneo, Banda and others by Sea, but
also is much augmented by the inland trade thereof, partly to Martavan,
Tenaserim and others, which are seated on the same Land, but as seated on the
backeside thereof, and as enjoying thereby the commodity of another Sea, but
the same is found proper for trade by its own commodious situation, being on
the banks of that great and famous River Menan, which runs hither through
or rather thwarteth India, River Menan.
arising in the lake of Chiamay, as they term it, at least 22 degrees from
this City, where it issues into the Sea, and is here found about the month
of March so to overswell his banks, and the neighboring Country, that it
covers the earth for 120 miles in compass, and therefore the Inhabitants are
said to retire themselves during this inundation to the upper part of their
houses, so purposely made to avoid the inconveniencie of the waters, every
house then having a boat or frigate belonging thereto, by which means they
converse together and traffic, as on dry shore, till the said River return
to her wonted channel again.

The Kings of this Country as indeed of all these Regions, are for the most
part Merchants, who gave the English admittance to trade and residence here
about 1612; upon whom he bestowed also a fair house for their abode, and
warehouses to lay up their merchandise; where since for some years they have
continued, but of late years have left it off and discontinued, upon the
little benefit this scale and Country affoorded them.

The principal commodities of this City and coast, are cottonlinens of
several sorts, and that excellent wine or distilled liquour, called
Commodities of Siam and Pattana.
here by the name of Nipe, made of Cocos or India Nuts, and hence transported
into all parts of India, and the adjoining Regions: here is also great
quantity of Benjamin, and of lacc: wherewith the hard wax is made that is
brought hence into sundry parts of the World, also that costly wood called by
the Portugals palo dangula, and calamba, which being good, is weighed against
silver and gold; for rich perfumes, and the wood sapon used by dyers; also
here is Camphora in great plenty, Bezar stones and gold in some measure good
store; also here is found Diamonds, Nutmegs, and some other Spices, which the
Country of it self affords for the maintenance of the trade thereof.

The coins here current as I am informed are these following. Coins ^ant in
Siam, and the Coast.


The first is a Tail which is worth 4 Ticalls, or 17 shillings ten pence, or
eighteen shillings sterling.

A Ticall is accounted 4 mass, or 4 shil. 4 d. in circa sterling.

A mass is accounted 4 copans, about 13 d. sterling.

A copan is accounted 750 cashe, or 3 d. sterling.

A tail is 16 mass, and accounted worth 14 Rials of eight Spanish.

And 20 tail is a cattee worth 48 Rials of (...) Spanish.

And 1 tail of Siam is worth 2 tails of Iapan.

And note that in Pottana and elsewhere on this coast coins find little
alteration in current prizes and rates, except upon some extraordinary Coins
at Potana.
occasions, when some of these species are sought out, and provided by
Merchants to transport into other places where the same do turn them better to
benefit; and note that at Pottana,

A mass is as above worth 4 capans.

A capan worth 4 conderies.

A conderie is 100 cashe, which is 800 cashe, which is 50 more then at Siam as
is above mentioned.

The measures and weights are not come to my knowledge.

So leaving Sciam and the trade of this coast, I shall repair to Mallacca
inhabited and fortified by the Portugals, and of great consequence in these
parts.

CHAP. XCVII.
Of MALLACCA, and the Trade thereof.

MAllacca is the next Country to the aforenamed Siam, Mallacca, and the trade
the^ of.
seated between the Coasts of Siam and Pegu, upon the utmost bound of a long
tract of land, on which is found the City of Mallacca in obedience to the
Portugal, and conquered by them in 1511 and accounted the most profitable
command of all India next after Ormus, which of late they have lost, and of
Mosambique: it is commodiously seated on the River Gasa, which is here 10
miles broad, (as some write) and is accounted the Staple for all India and
China commodities, and has a very great traffic to China, Moluccos, Banda,
Iava, Sumatra, and all the Islands bordering thereabouts as also to Siam, Pegu,
Bengala, coast of cormandel, and other the parts of India, whereby many ships
are found daily to be employed, coming in and going out, there lading and
unlading, selling, buying, and bartering the commodities of these Countries
together; the Country affording of it self no commodities to preserve trade,
but all other Countries afford to this (by reason of its proper situation for
trade) their native commodities; a ship or two coming hither yearly from
Lixborne to traffic, which thence departs 30 days sooner then the rest,
for India, and is at her return found commonly the richest that frequent these
countries: and here it is observable in navigation that the monsons or trade
Monsons at Mallacca.
winds here continue West and North-west from the end of August to the end of
October, and in November begins the Northerly and North-easterly winds, which
blow till the beginning of April, and from May till the end of August, the
South and Southwest rule, according to which, the trader hither must direct his
trade and course, and take the proper season both for his coming and going.

When Albuquerke the vice-King of Portugal took this City, finding it
inhabited and frequented by Merchants of sundry Nations, he established
Magistrates for both the Ethnicks, Moors, and Christians, with appeal only
reserved to the highest Sovereign the conqueror: one remarkable passage in
this conquest, I cannot omit, which was, that an inhabitant of this place of
eminent note in this City, fighting naked in defense of himself and of his
native Country, was found to be wounded with many deep and wide wounds; but
on his arm he wore a chain whereto was fastened the bone of a Iavan beast,
called a Cabal, by virtue whereof, notwithstanding all those wounds which were
many and large, he lost not one drop of blood; but when that chain was taken
from him, his veins suddenly and at once emptied themselves both of blood and
life together: the riches and greatness of the place may by this particular
then happening be considered, whenas the Kings tenths in the sack thereof,
come to 200000 duccats of gold, the Soldiers and adventurers satisfied, besides
the concealed and pilfered booty, there found and shared by them.

The current coins are not as yet come to my knowledge; therefore Coins of the
City Mallacca.
I refer the same to the better experienced.

The weight here common in use, (as far forth as I have collected) Weights
used in Mallacca.
is the Cattee Bahar, and Pecull, wherein I find the observations made
hereupon to disagree; some making but one Bahar to be here in use, and some
two sorts of Bahars, as thus.

One Bahar to be 100 cattees of Malacca, and each Cattee to be 4 cattees of
cantar and Cauchinchina which is 21 li. English, which thus estimated, must be
590 li. English.

A second Bahar they account to be 200 cattees of Mallaija, which here are
302 China cattees, and thus estimated, the same should be 400 li. English.

Again, they have a weight called the Pecull, which is 100 cattees of China,
and makes 132 li. English; but if this observation be found true by trial,
the cattee must be more then 21 li. English, which I refer to the better
experienced, this is the late observation of some of our Merchants trading into
these parts; but by the observation of the Portugals I find the weight to be
thus.

In Mallacca they say are two sorts of weights used, a great and Weights of
Mallacca.
small, which is composed of the Bahar.

A Bahar great weight is 200 cattees, or three pices.

One pice is 66 cattees.

A cattee is 26 tails.

A tail is 1 ounce Lisborne weight.

And by this great Bahar they weigh pepper, cloves, nutmegs, sanders, indico,
allom, sanguis draconis, palo dangula, camphora, and many other commodities.

The small Bahar is also 200 cattees.

A cattee is 22 tails.

A tail is almost an ounce, 5/8 Portugal all weight.

And by this small Bahar they weigh quicksilver, copper, vermilion, ivory,
silk, musk, amber, lignum aloes, tynne, lead, benjamin, verdet, and other
commodities, etc.

Again, some observe that a tail of Mallacca is 16 masses.

And 10 masses is an ounce haberdepois, and 1 ounces is 16 (...) masses, by
which masses they sell Bezar stones, and some other commodities.

I should here proceed to surveigh the trade of this remaining tract and Coast,
especially that of Camboia, Cauchinchina, and others but little having fallen
into my hand of the trade exercised there, I willingly omit the same, and next
proceed to look only upon the traffic of China it self, and then to the
Islands belonging to Asia.

CHAP. XCVIII.
Of CHINA and the Provinces thereof.

CHina has on the East, Mare del Zur, on the West, China, and the Provinces
thereof.
India, on the North, a Wall extending 1000 miles in length, between the
Chinois and the Tartarians, and on the South, the Ocean.

The Trade of this Country is accounted very great, the situation of the
place, the temperature of the air, the disposition of the inhabitants, the
continual peace that abides amongst them concur to enlarge the same; the
many navigable Rivers, and the excellent fabriques here wrought, add to make
it eminent, and the commodities that it yields to maintain the same are these;
barley, rice, wool, cottons, olives, vines, flax, silk Commodities of China.
raw and wrought into infinite sorts of stuffes, all kinds of metal, fruits,
honey, wax, sugars, Rubarbe, porslaine dishes, camphire, ginger, all kinds of
spices, musk, civet, amber, and infinite abundance of salt, which commodity
only in the town of Cantor, yields custo^ to the Prince yearly 180000 duccats.

This Kingdom contains 15 large Provinces, each Province having a Metropolis
besides many Cities of lesser note; so that in the The greatness of China.
whole tract of this Country is accounted to be 30 Kingdoms and therein
writers have mentioned to be 1597 Cities and great Towns walled, 1154 Castles
4200 Borroughs without walls, wherein Soldiers are quartered, besides an
infinite number of villages and hamlets; the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom
being vulgarly called Quinsay, and is said to contain in circuit 100 miles,
having in the midst thereof, a lake of 30 miles compass, in which Quinsay.
are two fair Islands, and in them two magnificent Palaces, adorned with all
necessaries, either for majesty or conveniencie: the lake is nourished with
diverse rivers, on which is counted 12000 bridges, and in many Cities here
seated on the banks of great and famous navigable Rivers, are found oftentimes
ten thousand sail of great and small vessels; the King himself having in the
City of Nanquin (accounted the second in this Kingdom) seated Nanquin.
upon a fair and large river (if writers relations may have credit) 10
thousand sail of ships of his own, and the City being 9 leagues from the
Sea, the whole distance is found to be as it Ten thousand sail belonging to
the King of China in one River.
were wholly employed and taken up with Vessels and Boats; for therein the
inhabitants make their abode, dwell, negociate, and remove at their pleasure,
from one place and City to another:

It is confidently affirmed by all modern travelers that have been here, that
the inhabitants are not permitted to issue out of this Kingdom, nor yet
strangers permitted to enter into it; and though for the commodiousnes of
traffic this strict law find some tolleration for a certain limited time for
the nativ^s to trade abroad, yet is it most nearly looked into on the behalfes
of strangers, that would enter into their Country: therefore (this considered)
though the motives of trade and commerce be many; yet this inviolable custom
so severely executed, hinders justly the particulars I should in this place set
down of the trade of this mighty Empire; howsoever, it is observed that the
Iapaners and some neighboring Ilanders, as also the Portugals, and some other
Christians, have (by the favor of the great maritime commanders in this
Country, and their own fair deportment) procured a license of trade in
Canton, Macca^, Nanquin, and some other Seaports; but with such strict
limitations, as that in some Cities it is death for them to lie or abide a
night either in the Town or in the Suburbs, but abord their own Ships, and in
Canton where they find the most courteous usage, they may not upon pain of
death abide one night within the City walls; but as in the morning their names
are regis^red at their entering into the City; so they come at night and bl^t
out the same with their own hands: I can then but afford a taste of the whole
Trade, by a little that I have observed out of the collections of others, which
must serve for a model to the frame and foundation of what is practiced in
other Cities throughout this Empire, which I will comprehend under the title of
Maccau, most frequented by our Nations.

CHAP. XCIX.
Of MACCAV, and the Trade thereof.

THe Island and Town of Maccau, (as the place best Maccau and the tra^ thereof.
known upon this Coast to our Nation) is seated on the North side of a Baye,
which is at the mouth of the great River of Canton, which runs out of the
Lake of Quinsay spoken of before, opposite to which stands the great City of
Canton, which I mentioned, as the place where is found the present Staple of
all the commodities of China; and thither do Merchants of all parts frequent
to buy and barter for other commodities, with the restrictions and limitations
above specified: and as for Maccau, it is inhabited by Portugals intermixed with
the natural Chinees; the principal of their commerce being with the
inhabitants of Cantaon, from whence all the commodities of China are found to
issue; and here the Portugals at the arrival of their Ships, do choose out a
Factor amongst themselves, who is permitted in all their behalfs, to go to
trade for them at Cantoan, but in the night he is to abide in the Suburbs
under severe punishment, as I have before remembered.

Here is found a Ship to come yearly out of India, by a particular license of
the King of Spain; the Captains place is ever bestowed A particular Ship
yearly touching here from Goa to Iapan.
upon a person of quality, in reward of some former service, as indeed all the
Captains places of the Fortresses in India are; from Maccau the said ship then
(having dispatched her business) does sail to Iapan, and there fully discharges
her lading, and thence returns again to Maccau, and from thence to Malacca,
and so to Goa in India; and though this voyage of Iapan is ever granted by
particular license to some one in particular; yet to Maccau and Mallacca any
Merchant may go that will; but none may yet lade or unlade in either place,
before such time as these Ships termed of the Kings, are fully dispatched and
laden, and are ready to depart for India: it is recorded by some Portugals
that this Captains place may be worth to him for his part 200 thousand
duccats, and that the said Ship is commonly 1500 Tons in burden, and that
the voyage continues for three years from India, and so back; for in April
they set sail from Goa to Mallacca, where they abide some season for the winds
or monsons, which at certain times blow certain set months together; and
then from Mallacca they sail hither to Maccau, where they stay at least nine
months for the said monsons, and then sail to Iapan, where they must stay
likewise certain months for the dispatch of their business; and the monsons
to return again to Macca^, where again they stay, as in their voyage
outward: so that by these delays the time of three years is fully expired
before they have ended their voyage to and from Iapan; and all the time of this
Captains residencie either in Maccau or Iapan, he is there accounted the
chief ruler and governor of the place, having the like power as their viceroy
in Goa, and as the several Captains in their forts; for that when the one
departs from Maccau to Iapan, there comes another from Goa to Maccau, to
make the same voyage after the other has performed his; and when he returns
again from Iapan to Maccau, the other saileth to Iapan, and so the first
continues Governor again at Maccau, until he departs from thence to
Mallacca, and so to India; and by this means, there is always found a
Portugal Governor at Maccau.

The commodities in general of China, I have mentioned before the particular
and principal commodities of Cantoan and Maccau, Commoditi^s of Maccau and
Canton.
is silks raw, and silk wrought; the raw is found to be of three several
sorts, first lankin which is the best; the second is fuscan; the third and
worst is lankam, and these are known to us in Europe, and bear price there
commonly about 145 or 150 R (...) Spanish, the pico of lankin, the fuscan is
worth 140 or 145 R. (...) and the lankam is worth 70 or 75 R 8/8, and all these
are counted unspun silk; but the spun lankin is worth from 150 to 170 R (...)
the pico; the spun fuscan is worth 130 or 135 R (...), and the spun lankam of
canton 80 R. (...) the pico: and these I thought good to mention as being the
principal commodity vented out of these Countries to other places.

The commodities then wherewith the Portugalls do drive this Commodities fit
for China.
trade, and which they carry to Maccau from India is principally R 8/8 rialls
of eight, which in China is cut into pieces, and so paid out, as I shall show
hereafter in payment of merchandise; also wines of Spain and India, olive
oil, velvets, which of all other sorts of silk stuffes they cannot make, and
fine woollen, scarlet cloth, whereof they have none, nor yet can they make any,
although they have materials, as sheep and wool plenty; also looking glasses,
and all sorts of drinking glasses, and Crystal, ivorie, Elephants teeth, and
sundry other commodities.

The moneys or rather the manner of payments made here for Coins of China and
Maccau
commodities, differ from all other Countries observed in this Tract, for
silver here in some nature is accounted better than gold, not in value and
worth, but in current esteem and repute, as holding still the same quality in
goodness, and more apt and proper for their use; for the manner here is that
every man carries about him his weight and balance, to weigh the silver he
takes or gives in payment; and has also a pair of sheeres to divide, cut
and proportion his payment according to his commodity; so that for the general
the commodity is fitted to the payment in silver or piece of silver, and not
the silver (as in most places of the World) to the commodity or ware: and this
silver thus cut and divided into small parcells, has not any Sovereign stamp
or character thereon; nor is acknowledged as the peculiar coin of any Prince:
but being all reduced to one and the same allay, is passable at a valuable rate
and consideration amongst the Merchants of Maccau, Cantoan, and generally as I
am informed throughout all China. Besides which they have a Ticall of gold,
esteemed at 12 R (...); and note that the Ticall of silver of Siam is here 22,
and 23 For As accounted a Tail of gold.

The payment of custom in this place is also seen to be done in a rare and
seldom seen manner, for I find it noted by some to be here the custom, that
a Ship entering into Maccau, the Kings officers comes aboard, and measures her
breadth, length and depth; and so by a rule and proportion that they use, they
cast up the custom due by the bulk of the Ship, by which the same is paid;
and then the Merchants may unlade and lade at pleasure, without concealment of
any sort of merchandise whatsoever they have aboard: how true it is I know not,
with me it carries not any great belief, for that by what I have read, the
acuteness of this Nation is such that they cannot in so especial a point of
trade possibly be so dull conceited, nor of such gross understandings.

How far the weights of Mollacca differs from the weight of China, I have
showed before in the Chapter of Mollacca, I will now Weights of China, Maccau.
show how the weights in China are distinguished: I find by the observations of
some English, Portugals and Dutch that have had trade hither, the Bahar to be
the common weight of China; but in the concordance thereof with their own they
differ much.

The common Bahar of China is 300 Cattees, which is the same as 200 Cattees in
Mollacca small weight, as I have before remembered, for that three cattees of
China makes two catees of Mollacca; and this by the calculation of some does
make English 386 li. and yet by some others should produce in England 400 li.

A Cattee of China is 16 Taels, which are 14 Taels in Mollacca, which respond
with 20 ounces Haberdepois, and this way reduced the said Bahar is about 389
li. in 390 li.

A Hand is 12 cattees small weight.

A Cattee is 22 Taels, and a Tael is 1 ounces haberdepois, and this way reduced
it produces 412 li. haberdepois.

Hands 16 and 8 cattees, makes 200 cattees, which is the Bahar in small weight;
and because these observations do much disagree, I refer the truth to trial
and experience; for the calculations of English, Dutch and Portugals in this
particular do differ very much, as is before expressed.

The measures of the place I am enforced to omit, therefore refer it to the
better experienced.

Having thus done with the maine continent of Asia, and corsorily surveyed the
particular trade of some of the most eminent Cities of the Kingdoms therein
contained; being constrained by reason of the remoteness of these places, and
want of better information, to let the same pass not so perfect as otherwise I
could wish for and desire, I shall willingly in what is here by me omitted,
crave the advises of the better experienced; and that they would add by their
knowledge and trial what is either here defective or altogether left out: and
thus leaving the continent (according to my method) I will in brief run
through some of those Islands which merit observation, and survey the trade
thereof as amply as my advisos will give me leave.

CHAP. C.
Of the Islands of ASIA, and the Trade thereof.

THe Islands of Asia are either in the oriental Seas, as Iapan, Islands of Asia
and the Trade thereof.
Seilon, Mollucques, Iavas, Sumatra, Borneo, the Philipines and others: or in
the mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes, Ciprus, etc. of the trade whereof a word,
before I conclude this commerce of ASIA.

CHAP. CI.
Of the Island of Iapan, and the Trade thereof.

JAPAN is situated over against Canton in China, Iapan Island and the Trade
thereof.
having in length 600 miles, but narrow in breadth, in some places 90, and in
some but 30 miles: it obeys 66 several Sovereigns, the King of Tense holding
the principal authority, commanding 50 of the 66 above mentioned Kingdoms,
every King, Lord and Master having full power and authority over the goods and
lives of the subjects, servants and children subject unto him. It was
discovered by the Portugal Anno 1542, and since is much frequented by
Jesuits, who in great numbers have settled themselves here, and are found to
exercise trade and commerce, as cunningly and subtly as any Jew elsewhere in
the World.

Their chief Towns are Osacaia, Bunguin, Meaco, and are the principal Ports
frequented by Merchants strangers: the c^modities of this place and Islands, is
silver in some good measure ^gged up here, and carried hence by Merchants to
China to exch^ge for silks, and principally rice, which is found here growing
in such abundance, that the King or Emperor draws 2 millions of duccats
yearly, out of that which is gathered from his own possessions, which he has
received as his own demesne; and at Firando F^rando.
one of the Islands of Iapan, the English have settled a factory for trade, in
1613 by Capt. Saris labor and industry.

The civil wars that continually vexes these Islands, hinders Coins current
in Iapan.
an exact survey of the materials, whereby their trade is driven; yet so far
as I have collected I will here insert.

Their moneys current for the most part through these Islands are thus termed,
and with some small difference have this value.

Their silver coins current is A Tail, A Mas, and A Condery.

A Tail is a of (...) or 5 sh. starling, or Tail of Siam; and this A Tail is
10 Mas, or 100 Conderies.

A Mas is 10 Conderies, or 6 d starling.

And in some places the R 8/8 passes for 74 Condereis only and no more.

Their gold is coined into two small Bars of two several sor^, the one is
called an Ichebo, worth about 15 in 16 mas of silver; the other is called A
Coban, worth from 60 to 68 mas, which may be valued from 30 sh. to 34 sh.
starling. The wars that continually vexes this Country is the cause of this
inconstant rate and price thereof.

The weights in use in Iapan is the Pecull and the Cattee.

A Pecull is 10 Cattees. Weights in Iapan.


A Cattee is accounted by some 21 ounces, and by some 20 o^ haberdepois; so
that a pecul is about 130 li. or 131 li, English.

Their measure of length is an Inckhen or Tattamy, which is (...). Measure of
lengthin Iapan.
yards English; 25 yards being 12 Tattamies.

Their measure for rice is thus accounted,

A Gant is 3 Cocas, being as much as three English alepints. Measure for Rice
and grain in Iapan.


An Icke Gaga is 100 Gantas.

One Ickmagog is 1000 Ickgogas.

One Mangoga is 10000 Ickmagogs.

CHAP. CII.
Of SILON and the Trade thereof.

SILON lies in the gulf of Bengala, in length 250, and in breadth 140 miles;
found so fruitful, that the Island Silon and the Trade thereof.
grass grows, and the trees bear fruit all the year long without
intermission: it is commanded in chief by the great Mogul; the principal
Towns are Zilan, the Metropolis of the Island, and Columbo, fortified by the
Portugals; and as it is conceived commanding over the best harbor in India.

For commodities it has many, and almost all things that are found in India,
through all the several Provinces and places Commodities of the Island Silon.
thereof; first it has nutmegs, cloves and pepper trees good store, and the
best cynamon in all India, which is here had and found growing in whole woods,
and hence dispersed into all parts of the World: also it affords all kinds of
precious stones (except dyamonds) as Saphirs, Rubies, Topasses, Spinals,
Granati; also a plentiful fishing for Pearl, yet not accounted so good as at
Bareim by Ormus; it has likewise mines of gold, silver, and other mettalls;
also iron, flax, brimstone, ivorie bones, and sundry other commodities. Here is
also a hil^ of that great height, that the Inhabitants hold it the highest in
India, and call it Adams hill, upon which they say Paradise stood, and that
Adam was there created; whose footsteps, if they may be Adams hill the Silon
Paradise.
believed, do remain yet engraven there in the Rock, and goes not out: but
the Inhabitants being most active in their bodies, may be imagined to be so
also with their tongues, for throughout India they practice nothing but
juggling, and Hocus Pocus, and other feats of activity; being the most excellent
mannagers of hobbyhorses, and tumbling, by which trade they get money
throughout all the neighbor regions; and therefore not surveying this their
traffic Siloners excellent tumblers.
further, I will leave them to their come aloft jack, pass and repasse, and
pass my self over to the next Islands, being those famous of the Moluccoes,
the only Islands of all India, affording in such store and plenty, that
excellent and admirable spice, known to us by the name of cloves.

CHAP. CIII.
Of the Moluccoes and the Trade thereof.

THE Moluccoes are five in number, Mallucco, Tarnate, Tider, Gelolo and Macian,
to which may be added Islands Moluccos and the Trade thereof.
for neerenesse in the situation Banda, and 70 other lesser Islands, which
submit themselves; and their delicious commodities to the King of Terenate, at
present the most powerful through all these Islands. These Islands are found to
have for commodities some nutmegs, especially in Banda, Commodities of the
Moluccos
also some maces; but the principal commodities of all these Islands is the
delicate spice, known to us by the name of cloves, and Clovesaboundance.
found here growing in so great abundance, that as it is apparent the whole
World is furnished from hence; and all Merchants coming hither, and frequenting
these Islands, are found only to come for this commodity and for nothing else.
In this number I may also reckon the Amboina Islands, as the Island Amboina it
self, Pollerone, Pollowaie, Lantore and Rosingon, abounding with Amboina Islands
the self same commodity, and of late years made infamous, by the bloody
slaughter and but cherly tyrannical torture and death of some English Factors,
by the Machiavilian and matchless villainy of the Dutch; the actors of which
have all of them, or the most part come to untimely The matchles v^lany of the
Du^h in ^he Amboina Isles.
and fatal ends (if reports be true,) thereby showing the manifest judgment
of GOD in punishing their vilanies and wickedness, when as they thought
themselves safe and free from the hands and justice of Man; and for those that
as yet are living, I leave them to the terror of their guilty consciences, and
without repentance to their due punishment in the World to come; where an
uncorrupted and unpartiall Governor and Fiscall shall examine their Amboina
proceedings truly, and reward them according to their merits. Some of these
Islands are now by them commanded, having driven out the Inhabitants, and by
death cut off the interest of the English, who were jointly partners with them,
both in their conquest and trade; and now there is none left to the English but
Polerone, originally theirs, yet now due to them by a second composition and
agreement, who coming of late to take possession thereof, found that those
barbarous and wicked Dutchmen resident in the neighboring Islands, had cut
down and killed all the clove tr^s, and other of worth there growing, thereby
depriving the English of all their expected benefit, by that last but
prejudicial composition.

The coins current in Molluccos, Amboina, Banda, etc. and other Islands, I find
not any settled in use amongst them; the Spanish R (...) Coins cu^rant in
Mollucco, Banda, Amboina, etc.
is the most usual in their payment for commodities, and for the most part
they use no other coins but it: but I find that according to the innocence of
the times past, they barter and sell one commodity for another, which is yet
the most usual custom amongst them.

Their common weight in use is the Bahar and Cattee. Weights of Mollucco,
Amboina, etc.


The Bahar of Amboina of Cloves is 200 Cattees, and is English 625 li. which is
the great Bahar.

This great Bahar is 50 Barrotes, every Barrote being 12 li. haberdupois.

They have also in some of these Islands a greater Bahar, being ten times the
former quantity, making 6250 li. English.

A cattee is 100 Rialls of (...) almost 6 li. English.

Ten cattees of Mace is called a small Bahar of Maces, and of the value of 10
Rialls of eight.

100 Cattees of Nutmeggs, is a small bahar of nuts, and is of the aforesaid
value of 10 Rialls of eight.

100 Cattees of Maces is called a great bahar of maces.

And 1000 of Nutmeggs is accounted a great bahar of Nutmeggs.

And note that 10 bahars of nuts is accounted for 1 bahar of maces usually
throughout all the Islands.

A cattee of maces being commonly worth 1 (...).

And 10 cattees of Nutmeggs commonly worth but also 1 (...).

The Inhabitants finding now their native commodities requested by all other
Nations, who come from far Regions to traffic with them for the same, have
daily learned new experiments of traffic and commerce; and whereas in former
time they exchanged their cloves, etc. for cotton cloth and such like to cloth
them, which yet is in some use amongst them; yet now they begin to know the
worth of silver, and the value of the Riall of eight, and how that has power
to bring and provide to them all other ^ecessaries whatsoever.

Their measure of length is distinguished by fathoms and cubits, Measures of
Molluccos, Banda, Amboina, etc. Dry measures in Molluccos, etc.
^orrowed from their late Masters the Dutch and Portugalls.

But their dry measures for corn, grain, rice, etc. is called a Can^on,
making about 5 pints English.

A Quoian is their greatest measure, and is 800 Cantons.

It is to be noted here, that the Islands of Molluccos were first discovered by
the Portugalls in their Navigations to these parts, and ^fterward finding them
rich in Cloves, by little and little got foo^ing therein, partly by fair
means, but principally by building of Forts and Castles in diverse of them for
the better obtainement and preservation of the brave trade of these Islands: but
of latter ^eares, the Hollanders envying this their engrossing of this rich
^ommoditie, indevoured to supplant them, or in default of means and power to
effect that, so to plant themselves, that they might ^artake and share with
them in the Cloves, Nutmeggs, and Maces, ^he only commodities these Islands are
found to produce, which ^y their policy, valor, and craft, at length has so
well succeeded with them that now they are Masters and Commanders over many
Forts and strong Castles in these Islands; as at Mallayo, Tal^ucco and Tacuma,
in the principal Island of Ternate, at Mariero in Dutch Forts and trade in
Amboina.
Tidoro, at Nassaw in Timor, Mauritus and Tabiliola in Machian, and which is
entirely the Hollanders, 2 in Banda, 2 in Amboina, Barnefelt, in Bachian, and
sundry others, seated here and there through the most convenientest and best
ports for trade and shipping in all these Islands; so that now being become more
strong, potent, and daring, they have coped with the Portugalls in diverse
incounters by Sea and land, sometimes winning and sometimes loosing, according
to both their force and fortunes; in all their occasions, adding violence to
trade, trading peaceably where they cannot otherwise choose, and robbing and
pilfering when and where they cannot otherwise make up their mouths to profit;
in which practice of trade and theevery or theevish trade, I leave them and
these Islands, and come next to Iava.

CHAP. CIIII.
Of IAVAS, and the Trade thereof.

IN this tract is found Iava major and Iava minor, the greater being in
compass 3000, and the lesser 2000 miles; Iavas and the trade thereof.
the nearness of these two Islands to the Equator, makes these Counties so
wonderful fertile, that they are termed the Epitome of the world. The chief
Cities here are Pala^ban, Mega, Pegar, Agaim and Ballambua; and in the lesser
Iava, Basnia, Samara, Limbri, and others, but their principal trade is driven
at Sunda calapa, Bantam, Iacatra now baptized by the Dutch Batavia, and lastly,
Iaparra; in which three last, the English have residencie and Factories.

The commodities of these Islands, is Rice in abundance, Oxen, Commodities of
Iava Islands.
kine, hoggs, sheep, Indian nuts, and all provisions for food; also all kinds
of spices, as Cloves, Nutmegs and mace, which the native Merchants transport to
Mallacca and other neighboring Islands in great measure, also pepper in great
quantity, esteemed far better than that of India or Mallabar, principally
growing about the straights of Sunda, of which there is yearly laden hence
about ten thousand Quintalls English; it has also much Frankincense, Benjamin,
Camphora; also Diamonds, and many other precious stones, which are found
therein.

The fittest and most proper commodities for these Islands trade, are diverse and
different sorts and colors of cotton linens, which Commodities of India fit
for Iavas.
are made at Cambaia, Cormandel, and Bengala, called Serasses, Sarampuras,
Cassus, Sa^eposas, black cannequins, red Turrias, and diverse other sorts found
made in the places abovesaid.

Here the Hollanders are found to be Masters of Iacatra, of late Batavia alias
Iaccettra.
years called by them Batavia, the best and greatest Port of their trade and
rendevous in these parts, where by little and little they have so fortified
themselves, that they prescribe laws to the Inhabitants, and endeavor to
debar, both English and all other from enjoying any benefit of the trade
thereof.

In Sunda (which I account here as the principal mart Town and in a manner
the greatest in Iava major) they have no other Coins current in Iava, Sunda,
Bantam, Iacatara.
kind of money than certain copper pieces minted, which they call Caixa, in
the middle whereof is a hole to hang them on strings, for commonly they put 200
or 1000 upon one string, wherewith they make their payments, as by this
following account.

A Satta is 200 Caixas.

Five satas is 1000 Caixas, which is a crusado Portugal money, or about six
shilling starling.

The Merchants of Europe here resident keep their accounts Accounts in Iava,
Bantam, Iacettera.
in R 8/8 and pence, accounting 60 pence to the R (...) Spanish.

The weight at Bantam, Iacetra, Iapparra, and at Sunda, is the Picull, Weights
in Iava, Bantam, Iacettra, Iaparra, Sunda.
the Cattee, and Bahar.

A Cattee being less than the Cattee of Macau, contains but 20 ounces
English, and the other 20 ounces.

A Picull is 100 Cattees, and consequently is 125 li. English.

A Bahar is 330 Cattees of China, of 20 ounces as abovesaid, and may make in
England 412 li.

Their measure for length is ( -- --) Measures in Iava, Bantam, Iacetra,
Iaparra, Sunda.


Their dry measures for grain, rice, and pepper, is a Timbam, and contains
ten sackes, principally used in Pepper and Rice, consisting of 5 piculls; so
that by this computation each sack should contain in weight 62 li. English,
two sackes for a Pecull.

The common prices of commodities as I find them here observed, Prices of
commodities in Iavas.
are pepper of Sunda, is sold by the sack weighing a picull or 45 Cattees of
China, each cattee being 20 ounces English, at 5000 Caixas, and when it is at
highest at 6 or 7000 Caixas, maces, cloves, nutmegs, white and black Benjamin
and Camphora, are sold by the Bahar, good mace commonly sold for 120 thousand
Caixas; the Bahar and good cloves after the same rate, but bad and foul
cloves, are sold at 70 or 80000 caixas the Bahar; Nutmeggs commonly sold for 20
or 25 thousand Caixas the Bahar, white and black Benjamin sold for 150 or 180
thousand Caixas, and if extraordinary good, 200 thousand the bahar; but how
far these agrees with the now common current rates, I refer to the better
experienced.

CHAP. CV.
Of SUMATRA, and the Trade thereof.

SUMATRA, anciently Traprobana, and Salomons supposed Sumatra and the trade
thereof.
Ophir, was esteemed the biggest Island in the world, but modern experience
has found the contrary, being only 700 miles long, and 200 miles broad: The
Equator cutteth through it, so that the Suns vicinitie, makes it abound in
several precious commodities Commodities of the Island Sumatra.
for traffic, as first it has Pepper in abundance, whereof above twenty
Ships of burden is hence yearly laden; also Ginger, Aloes, Cassia, raw
silk, gold and silver, brass, and some other drugges. This Island is subject
to many Princes, the principal whereof are the Kings of Pedor and Achin; it is
here a custom that the natives do eat their slain enemies, and did erst
account their sculles for a great treasure, which they exchanged for other
necessaries, he being accounted the richest man that has most store of them in
his house, this custom is almost extinguished, for the trade of Merchants from
other Countries thither, of late years having brought silver and gold in
request amongst them, has made them since know better.

In this Island is found a hill of brimstone continually burning, and two very
strange and admirable Fountains, the one yielding pure Rarities found in
Sumatra.
and excellent Balsamum, and the other most excellent Oil.

The chief Cities of this Island, is Daren, Pasen, and Androgede, the
habitation of so many Kings, but the principal places and parts for trade
known to the Europeans, are Dachem or Achim, Achin, Tico, Iambe, and Priaman,
English Factories in Iava.
Ticko, Iambe and Priaman, all maritime and good harbors; where the English
are found to have residence and Factories; also Pedir, Campar and Manancabo, to
the which the Portugalls generally do trade; but the Inhabitants for the most
part transporting the native commodities of this their Island to Mallucca, which
is not distant above twenty miles of, are not much troubled with the
Portugalls Commerce; though in lieu of them the Dutch have of late got footing
and built Fortresses amongst them, to their as great trouble, vexation, and
slavery.

Within these few years these Ilanders were not known to have any coins
current in payment for Merchandise amongst them, Coins current in Sumatra,
Achin, Priaman, etc.
but the sculls of their slain enemies, as I said before, which they accounted
as their greatest treasures, and with which their barters and exchanges for
things necessary were made; but now of late the King of Achin in imitation of
other adjoining Princes, and the so near neighborhood of Mallacca, now in
possession of the Portugalls, have coined moneys, which in these days are
observed to be these:

A Mass, which is here accounted for 4 Cappans, which is 12d starling.

A Tail is 16 masses or 3 R. 8/8 or starling money 16 shil.

A Cattee is 8 tails in ordinary account, and worth 25 (...) (...) Spanish or
6li. 8 shil. starling, and sometimes in exchange from hence to other adjacent
parts, they account 7 and 7 Tails to one Cattee.

In other parts of this Island, as Iambe, Tico, and Priamon, they Accounts kept
in Iava.
have no coins of their own, but the most current is the Spanish R(...), in
which the Europeans keep their accounts, and for distinction divide ^t to
(...) ^0 deniers or pence to a R. 8/8.

The common weight through all Sumatra is a Bahar, but yet Weights of Sumatra,
Achin, Priaman, Iambee.
^ound to vary in many places, and consists of Cattees, which in greatness
also varieth, and from thence comes the difference, ^ut in Achin, Praman,
Ticcou and Iambe, where the English reside, ^he Bahar is found to be in each of
these places 200 Cattees; every ^attee is 29 ounces English, so that by this
computation the Ba^ar must make 360 li. English sotile.

The measures here in use are ( -- --) Measures in Sumatra.


CHAP. CVI.
Of BORNEO Island, and the Trade thereof.

THe next Island in this Tract is Borneo, and is equally divided Borneo Island,
and the trade thereof.
by the equinoctial into two parts, putting as it were a bond between the
dominions of the King of Borneo on the Northside, and of Laus on the South, in
compass accounted above 2200 miles, and held the greatest of all this ocean.

The Country does yield in great abundance, the wood which we call Camphora;
also that wood known by the Portugalls by the Commodities of Borneo Island
name of Polad' aguila; and also that costly sweet wood which is called
Callamba, which being good is weighed against silver and gold: also here is
found some gold, diamonds, nutmegs, maces, agarick, and other spices; and great
abundance of that excellent antidote, which in Europe is called the Besar stone.

It is plentifully stored with many fair Towns and harbors, as Cabura,
Taioparra, Tamorutas and Borneo, the Metropolis and Towns of Borneo Island.
most magnificent above all the rest, containing 25 thousand Inhabitants, and
seated in a Marish of the Sea, after the manner of Venice. Also Socodana, where
many diamonds are found, and where the English some years past had a factory
and residence, as also the Socodana and Beniermasa English Factories in Borneo.
same in Beniermasa, another good Port in this Island.

I have not met with the coins current here in payment for mer^handize, nor yet
with the weights and measures in use in this Island; therefore must refer the
same to the better experienced, and to the traders thither.

CHAP. CVII.
Of CELEBS Island, and the Trade thereof.

THe Island Celebs is the next in this Tract, not far distant from Borneo
Island, through part of which runs Island Celebs and trade thereof.
the Equator, yielding by the vicinity of the Su^ the same commodities proper
to Sumatra, Borneo, Gilolo and others, seated under the same line; it is
subject to several Princes, and injoyeth some eminent Towns frequented by
European Merchants, for the sake of their rich commodities, as Durati, Mamaio,
Tubon and Maccasar, the Maccas^ the English Factory in Seleb^.
chiefest Port for the trade and commerce of this Island, and where the English
have a residencie and factory, and following their observations made in this
place, I find,

Their coins current here in use is found to be the Mass, Cup^ Coins current
in Celebs and Maccasar.
and Tail thus valued.

A tail is accounted for 16 masses in current value, and is reckned to be
worth 15 rialls of eight.

A mass is a gold coin, as is the tail, and wants somewhat of 5 sh. or a
riall of (...) Spanish.

And this mass is 4 cuppans, each cuppan esteemed to be about 14d starling
money; and by this calculation the tail should make starling 3 li. 14 sh. 8 d.
and by the account of R (...) at 5 sh. starling, the tail is 3 li. 15 sh.
starling.

The common weights in use is the Ganton, Zicoyan and Mass, Weights in Celebs
and Maccasar.
thus agreeing with the English weight haberdepois.

The Ganton is both a weight and measure, in weight it is found to be about 5
li. English, and in measure about two English gallons.

A Mass in weight is 40 Gantons, which is 200 li. English, or 80 gallons
English.

A Zicoyan is 20 Masses in weight, which is 4000 li. English, or 800 Cantons of
this place.

To proceed to the rest of the Islands in these Seas, is a work past my skill,
or I think most men's else, considering the multitude thereof, the Philipins
being discovered by the Spaniard in Ann^ P^pins
1564, being in number 110 thousand, as some Authors report. Over against China
are also found 7448 Islands, and about India 127000 great and small more, which
in many places stand so ^igh one to another, that they seem not only to such
as are afar off to touch and to be all as one firm land, but whosoever
passes between them, may with his hands touch the boughs of the ^es, both on
the one and on the other side. Many commo^es are found growing upon these
Islands, with which the In^itants of many of them, maintain a Traffic with
their ^ghbours; the knowledge whereof I leave to the better ex^ienced.

Now forasmuch as Portugals, Dutch and English have of late The Portugals the
first Masters of the trade of East India, 1498.
^ares discovered those Countries of India, and that some of them ^ve since
settled themselves by Forts and Castles there: It will ^t be improper I should
here survey their strengths and holds ^ilt for defense, and their factorie
settled for traffic throughout is continent of Asia and the Islands thereof.
The Portugals ^en were the first that brake the ice, and in Anno 1498 departing
^om Lixborne, under command of Vasco di Gamma, doubled the ^e of bona
Esperance, which has proved so successful to them ^ce that time that they
have mastered, conquered and fortified ^emselves beyond that cape in Soffala,
Quiloa, Mosambique, Mom^a, and in Ormus in the Persian gulf, lately again
lost. In In^ they have the Castles and Towns of Diu, Daman, Basain, ^aul, Goa,
Honor, Barsola, Mongalor, Cananor, Cronganor, Cochin ^d Colan. In Silon they
have Collumbo, bragging of one of the ^st Ports of the World, on the coast of
Cormandell; they hold ^egapatam and S. Thomas: In Bengala they have Porto
pequenio, and ^rto grande, and Serapure; also Serone, Mollucca; and some holds
(...) the Mollucca Islands, Macao, and Nungasarke in Iapan and diverse ^hers; in
all which they are found to be both strong, powerful, and great, and masters
of all the rich traffic of these places, which thus for 100 years very
near, they have both peaceably and quietly enjoyed at their own terms and
conditions, till the ^utch disturbed them, who seconded them in the trade of
India, ^ho were the next who envying, that this rich stream should ^nely run
his current to Lixborne, and that all the precious commo^ities of India should
first salute Portugal, set out from Amsterdam The Hollanders became sharers in
1595.
(...) Anno 1595, and have since so well played their cards, and plea^ed as
some allege so strongly with Cannon law and steel argu^ents, that within 30
years they have found themselves to be Masters and commanders. In these
Countries and Seas of 28 Forts and Castles, and of 44 or 45 factories, for the
preservation and pro^ecution of their trade and government; the names and
draughts of which, some of their own Nation have published to their no little
honor, and no small estimation; so that it may be imagined that their flood
and the Spaniards ebb, will in few years bring the Indies to be more theirs
then the Portugals, notwithstanding their so long possession.

The English Nation are the last and least in this trade and disco^ery, The
English Nation the last traders into India, in An. 1600.
for they imitating only the Portugals and Dutch in the due ^ules of the
prosecution of a trade, but not in the prosecution of the natives; begun their
discoveries in Anno 1600, under the command of S r. James Lancaster, with 4
Ships, the Dragon, Hector, Asenton and Susan, whose endeavors have since by
the blessing of GOD, and the good government of that company so well succeeded,
that they have sent forth above 30 Fleets or voyages; and have settled their
residence and Factors in 20 or 24 several place^ of note, as at Ormus and
Iasques, in the entrance of the Persian gulp^, under the Persian Monarch at
Cambaia, Surrat and Agria, and other places in the great Moguls Country, at
Musulapan, Armago^ Petipoly, Pottana, Siam and other places on the coast of
Cormandel^ and the continent of Asia: at Achin, Ticko, Iambe and Prianian, o^
the Island Sumatra, at Bantam, Iaccettra and Iaparra on the Island (...) Iava, at
Socodana, and Benier masa on the Island Borneo; at Mogass^ in the Island of
Celebs, at Palleron on the Island Banda, at Firando i^ Iapan; and lastly in
Amboina, Hitto, and other of the Molucco^ which they quietly enjoyed, until
the traitorous and bloody mind^ Dutch did butcherly betray their lives,
purposely to deprive them of the trade, and to satisfy their unsatiable
blood-thirstinesse; as is extant (...) the passages of that act in several
languages in the World.

These are then the only three European Nations that now contend and get share
amongst them; the traffic and commodities of these eastern Countries, the
Portugals making Lixborne the scale of the East India commodities; the
Hollander making their Amsterdam the staple for their parts, and the English
London for their emporium; which within these late years, notwithstanding the
sundry crosses and losses, is increased to that height and eminency, that these
Merchants do not only furnish Italy, but also Constantinople, Aleppo, Smyrna,
and other parts of Turkey, with all those Indian commodities, which within
less then these twenty years, they brought from thence into England, to the
prejudice of Syria and Egypt, and to the enriching of the English subjects in
general: as has been most judiciously and at large demonstrated (by that right
honorable Knight Sr. D. D. in several particulars; as first by the riall
founders thereof; secondly by the equity and justice of the trade; thirdly by
the honor arising thereby to the English nation, in the strength added to the
Navy Royal of this land; fourthly by the former fortunate success of it, and
the profit that may be yet reaped thereby to the whole Kingdom, and to the
fellowship of that society; besides the increase of Mariners, and of arts and
knowledge; fifthly, by far discoveries and hopes of propagation of religion
in those yet heathenish Countries.

But leaving thus the Indian Islands, and the further survey thereof to those
late Masters of that trade, I will proceed in what is yet resting to pass
through, as belonging to Asia, which are the Islands of Ciprus and Rhodes,
seated in the mediterranean Sea, to which I shall now hasten.

CHAP. CVIII.
Of CIPRUS Island, and the trade thereof.

THe Island of Ciprus is accounted also belonging to Asia, Island Ciprus and the
trade thereof.
and situated in the Syrian Sea; in length 200 miles, in breadth 65; and is 60
miles distant from the shore of Cilicia, and 100 from the maine land of Syria.

This Island is said to afford materials to build a Ship from the keele to the
topsaile, and fitted for the Sea, either ^s a Merchants vessel for
transportation of goods, or as a Princes ^or warfare.

It affords also these commodities, as wine, oil, corn, sugars, cot^ns,
Commodities of Ciprus.
honey, wool, turpentine, alum, verdigrace, salt, grograms, and other
commodities.

The chief Cities of this Island are Paphos, Famagusta, Nicosia, Lescara,
Salines, and some others; in which Island the English have a factorie, for the
only trade of cottons here in use; and the English English consul at Ciprus.
consul resident in Aleppo carries the title of consul of Syria and of
Ciprus, in which place he has a vice consul to supply his occasions for the
preservation and maintenance of the English trading hither; which are only the
Company of Merchants called the levant or Turkey Company, as included within
their privileges.

The moneys of this Island current I need not mention, nor Coins of Ciprus.
yet their accounts, as being the coins of the Grand Signiors, and their
accounts kept after the same denomination as in Constantinople.

The weight in use through this Island is the dram, 750 whereof is Weights of
ci^rus.
the Rotolo, and 100 whereof makes a cantar, which is accounted 4 per cent.
greater than the common cantar of Aleppo; and is by calculation of such as have
resided there 80 ounces haberdepois, or 5 li. the Aleppo rotolo yielding by
this computation 4 li. 13 ounces, or 77 ounces: and the quintall or Cantar of
Ciprus by this account should be 500 li. sotile; but I find some observations
made, that upon some commodities that the 100 Rotolos of Ciprus have made in
London 510 and 512 li. The Rotolo of Ciprus contains 750 drams: and the Rotolo
of Aleppo is accounted 720 drams, and 62 drams makes 1 ounce, and 6 ounces make
here an Oak: but note that the cantar of Famagusta, is 4 per cent. greater
then this general cantar of the Island, which is above 1 ounces per Rotolo.
Note Famagusta.


This common cantar of Cyprus, I find thus to respond with the City of Venice
and other places.

Rotolos 100 of Cyprus, makes sotile U^ 780 li. and of gross 480 li. which by
this computation should be about 522 li. English: but I imagine this is
accounted the c^tar of Famagusta, which is 8 per cent. greater then that of
Aleppo, which deducted, being 42 li. there rests 480 li. haberdepois, the
weight rendered of Aleppo; so that Rotolo 21 in circa, makes 100 li. gross, and
Rotolo 13 do make 100 li. sotile; and Rotolo 1 is 7 sotile or 4 li. 8 ounces
gross of Uenice weight.

Again, I find these observations made on the weights of Cyprus, Weights of
Cyprus compared with other places.
for cottons, viz. 100 Rotolos of Cyprus cottons, has made in Venice 750 li.
which is 30 li. less then the aforesaid notes which are meant of Famagusta,
and has made in Naples 671 li. Bollonia 627 li. Montpelier 678 li. Barcelona
564 li. Sivill 589 li. Paris 448 li. Marselia 567 li. Genoa 710 li. Florence
656 li. Milan 678 li. Avignon 570 li. Bridges 555 li. Rome 631 li. London 506
li.

The truth whereof, I refer to the trial of the experienced.

Measures of length are here two sorts: first, the pico, by which is sold all
woolen cloth, and silk accounted 26 inches, and the Measures of Cyprus.
brace, by which is sold linen, being (...) longer then the pico abovesaid.

The 100 picos rendering in Venice 125 woolen braces and 116 of silk braces.

Wine is sold here by the Cusse, 7 cusses makes 6 fetches of Venetia, which is
a candie barrel, so that a cusse and a half, and a Zant jarre, Of Wine.
are of one and the same bigness.

Oil is sold by the Rotolo, which weighs 2 oaks which is accounted for 1000
drams. Of Oil.


Grain is sold by a measure called the moose, which weighs 40 oaks, and 2
mooses, or 100 oaks makes one staio in Venetia. Of Grain.


Salt is sold by the Moose; 1000 mooses here of salt, makes 14 Mooses in the
account of Uenetia. Of Salt.


Also some grain is sold by the coffino, 100 whereof making 24 in 25 steras of
Venetia, which is () bushels English.

In this part of Asia (following the opinion of Authors) is Island Rhodes seated
amongst the Isles Archepelago.
the Island of RHODES seated, formerly the habitation of the Knights of S^.
JOHN, now a Beylque of the Turks, and where for the commodiousnesse of the
Port, there is maintained a squadron of his Galleys yearly employed, to clear
and protect those Seas: matter of trade presenting here, I have here
willingly omitted, and placed the same amongst the Islands of the Archipelago;
to which place I refer the Reader, and who desires to see further thereof.

CHAP. CIX.
Of the Trade in general of ASIA, as it is found at this day.

TO conclude then the Trade and Traffic of ASIA Of the Trade in general of
ASIA.
in general; it is comprehended within a few principal Cities thereof: as
first, in the Grand Signiors Dominions in Aleppo, Smyrna, Constantinople,
Alexandria, Balsara, and Baruti, and Damasco: in Persia Dominions, in Sciras,
Ormus, Casbin, Gilan, and Hispahan: and in India and these Coasts, at Goa,
Mallacca, Siam, Pegu, Cochin, Calicut, Mesulapatan, and the Islands of Iava,
Iapan, Sumatra, Moluccos: in Tartaria, in Astracan, Capha, Sarmacand, and
Cambalu, etc. The Turkish Nation affoords not many Merchants of note; yet some
are found that from Constantinople do drive a Trade by Sea to Venice, Cairo,
Trapesond, Capha, and some few other places; and some again that with Caravans
by land drive a Trade from Aleppo, Damasco, and Egypt, to the Red Sea, and to
Mecha; but these I may more properly account Arabians then natural Turks, who
in general have been esteemed in times past, and yet are more industrious and
better versed in all manual Arts, then in the mystery of Merchandising; but
now they have well near lost that attribute, and wholly addict themselves by
reason of their grand Signiors tyranny, to no further trade then what
necessity does for the most part compel them, therefore not much worth here
further consideration.

But those several Nations inhabiting the large Coast of India, Persia, and
these abovementioned Islands, are found to be more addicted thereto and of
greater eminency, and are found by their traffic and commerce to have raised
to themselves Estates in these Countries equal to many of our European Dukes
and greatest Earls, whereof the Gusurets and Canarins, the frugall and proper
inhabitants of India, are accounted the chiefest and principal, occasioned
partly by their excellent subtilty in accounts and numbering, and partly by the
late navigations and commerce of the Europeans, Arabians, and other remoter
Nations amongst them, who bring them (for the most part) no other commodity
but plate and silver in Rials of (...) which they there exchange for the rich
commodities of India, as their Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, Pepper, Diamonds,
Emeralds, Rubies, Pearls, and such other, the precious Wares of these
Countries.

The Persian Nation challenge also a large share in this Trade of ASIA,
occasioned by their excellent and industrious fabriques, and their natural
plenty of raw silks, which from them is abundantly transported and spread
over all the World, and their sumptuous adorning and curiosity of living,
drawing to them by exchange, the riches and commodities of India and China and
other places.

The Arabians, (as possessing a great part of ASIA) may not here be omitted,
amongst which are found many eminent Merchants, not only trading by Camels
with Caravans from Turkey into Egypt and other places, and into the Red Sea,
but also from Aleppo to Babylon, Balsara, and so to the Persian gulf; and also
by Sea, not only on the Coast of Sindy, India, Cormandell, Siam, Pegu, and the
Islands aforesaid, where many Mahumetane Princes are found to bear rule; but
also at Suachem, Melinda, Brava, and Quiloa, and many other parts and Ports of
Africa

Neither amongst all these abovementioned Nations, which are found in the
general to afford Merchants of eminency and note, and to have a Country for
a particular residence to themselves, and where their Princes do bear
Sovereignty, are the Nation of the Jews to be omitted or forgotten, who
(though by the curse of the Almighty) are scattered and dispersed as it were
over the face of the whole earth, and are permitted (with some limitations and
restrictions) their abode in several Countries, paying for their liberty, and
freedom of residence and commerce, both great and large annual contributions
in sundry places; yet by their ingeniousnes in Trade, and their expertnes in
Arts, and their subtilty in the valuation of Princes coins, and their skill in
Accounts, they are found in all these aforementioned Countries to be both eminent
and rich Merchants, trading as well by Land as by Sea through all these
aforementioned Countries, and by their craft and Art, raising to themselves
eminence and great Estates thereby.

I should here give a share of this ASIAN Trade to the Chinois, Tartarians,
and other great Nations: but my ignorance herein does silence me.

Therefore it shall content me to have surveyed it in the general, and to
have left behind me what observations I have been able to collect of the
Traffic, and Traders of those vast and large Territories and Countries,
knowing that their strange Customs, and the manner of their Laws and
Government debarres all easy access into their Dominions, and what others
must not dare to see, I must not dare to offer to recount.

To conclude then, having thus run over and surveyed the general Commerce and
Traffic of ASIA, I will now turn my self toward EVROPE, the last division
of the World, and of this Work, and as the best known to us, and the best
reputed of Us.

EUROPE, AND THE PROVINCES AND CITIES OF TRADE THEREOF.



CHAP. CX.
Of Europe the last division of the World here handled, and the Kingdoms
thereof.

EUROPE which I have willingly omitted as Europe 15. parts.
last and principal, comes now to be surveied, that the Trade thereof may
the better appear in her particular Provinces and Cities, should be in
prerogative of worth the chief and first, but following the custom of
Merchants, I show the best last, and the worst first.

Europe then is divided into these Provinces and Islands.

1 Spain. 2 France. 3 Italy. 4 Belgia. 5 Germany. 6 Denmark. 7 Norway. 8
Sweden. 9 Moscovia. 10 Poland. 11 Hungary. 12 Dacia. 13 Slavonia. 14 Gracia.
The Islands of Europe are dispersed through these Seas.

1 Greek Seas. 2 Egean Seas. 3 Cretan Seas. 4 Ionian Seas. 5 Adriatique seas.
6 Mediterranean seas. 7 British Seas. 8 Northern Seas.
Of all which in order, and of each of these Divisions in order.

CHAP. CXI.
Of Spain and the Cities thereof.

SPAIN the most Western Continent of Europe is environed on all sides with
the Seas, exc^pt Spain.
toward France, from which it is separated by the Pirenean Mountains, and the
Fortress of Pampelona on the North-west, and Perpignan on the South-east.

The Commodities that this Country yields for Merchandise, is Wines, Sugars,
Oiles, Metalls, Licoris, Rice, Silks, Wool, Cork, Rosen, Commodities of
Spain.
Steel, Orenges, Limmons, Rasens, Almonds, etc. Aniseeds, Anchoves, Soda
Barrellia, Figs, Tuny fish, Iron, Shumacke, Saffron, Soape, Coriander, Honey,
Wax, etc.

Spain is found at this day to be divided into twelve Provinces, which
formerly were petty Kingdoms; viz. 1. Leon and Oucedo, 2. Navarre, 3. Corduba,
4. Gallicia, 5. Biscay, 6. Toledo, 7. Murti^, 8. Castile, 9. Portugal, 10.
Valentia, 11. Cattelona, 12. Aragon. Of which in order, with their Cities of
note and traffic.

In Leon and Oucedo I find no City of Trade memorable, the City of Leon
being the principal, and is the Principality belonging Leon 1. Oucedo 2.
to the Princes of Spain, under the name of Ast^rias.

In Navarre is of note, the City of Pampelona famous for her fortification,
and not for her negocation. Navarre 3.


Corduba is accounted the most fertile soil of all Spain, and has Corduba
for a principal City; from whence comes that excellent Corduba. 4.
Cordovant leather, known to us. 2. March^na. a principal breeder of the best
Genets in Spain: also 3. Medina Sidonia, whose Duke was principal Commander
of that pretended Invincible Armado 1588. Also Lucardi Barameda a great
Haven-towne, X^res which yields the Wines known, Sherry Sackes, because the
Spaniards are found to pronounce x as sh in English: and also Sivill which
requires (according to my Method) for her worth and eminency of Trade a
Chapter by it self.

CHAP. CXII.
Of Sivill, and the Trade thereof.

SIVILL is accounted the fairest City of all Spain, in compass six miles,
environed with beautiful Walls, and adorned with many stately buildings; as
Palaces, Churches, and Monasteries; one whereof is endowed with 25000. Crowns
annual rent. The river Baetis divides it into two parts, yet joined by a
stately Bridge: from hence the Spaniards set out toward the Western India,
and hither return again to unlade the riches of those Western parts of the
world, which principally are found to be Silver, Tobacco, Ginger, Cottons,
Sugars, Brasill, and Ferinand Bucqu^ wood, and so^ Drugges. Here is 30000.
Genets maintained continually for the King of Spain his service; and the Trade
of this place is of that greatness, that some are of opinion, the Customs of
this Town only is wo^th unto the King half a million of gold yearly; and
the Archbishop of Sivill is held so rich, that his rent amounts to 100000
Crowns yearly, and has under his Jurisdiction ^000. sm^ll Villages, and
consequently, in his whole Diocese 2000. Benefices, besides Frieries, Nunneries
and Hospitals, and esteemed the next in degree to him of Toledo: the rarities
of this place I willingly omit as well known to our Nation.

In Sivill, Madera, etc. the Merchants keep their Accounts by Marvides,
Account kept in Sivill and Madera.
of which 3^5. are esteem^d to make a Duccat of Exxo of 11. Rialls, every Riall
being 37. Mal. and so is but 374. Mal. But our English there resident keep
their Accounts in Rialls of 34. Mal. the Riall.

Their current moneys are these,

A Duccat of Gold of Sivill is worth 375. Marvides accounted Coins of Sivill.
5. s. 6. d. Ster.

A Riall of Castile is worth in Sivill 34. Marvides. and is so worth throughout
all Spain, which is accounted 6. d. Sterling. money.

A Dobra current is worth of Carlin money (...) Marvides; every 1000. Dobras
are 80. V. 888. Marvides, and is accounted in Merchandise 71. Mar. and is worth
in Valentia at even hand 4. Sold. 7. Den. 1/10 of Valentia money without
charges of Exxch.

A Dobra of Castile is worth 375. Marvides, or is as above a Duccat of Gold.

A Castiliane of Merchandise is worth 485. Mervides, about 7. (...). Sterling.
Vide moneys in Castile current in all Spain.

Their Exxo. are made upon the imaginary Duccat of 375. Mar. Exchanges in
Sivill.
payable in banco with five per centum, which is the Bancos salary, or without
the banco to be paid without the same; and this Duccat is commonly termed
Ducat^ de Or^ or de Peso; and is worth, as above, 375. Mervides. In Sivill they
^ake their payments as following, if you say in Ducate di Or^ or ae Castilia
upon banco, those are then paid in banco without loss at all, but if you say
to be paid in so many Duccats Dor^ in Pistolets forth of banco, they will pay
in the said money; but if it be said to pay in Carlins, it will cost, and
sometime per centum loss. But because I have at large in the Tract of
Exchanges in the Chapters 294. and 426. treated of the Exchange of this place,
therefore I will (to avoid repetition) refer the Reader thereunto for further
and ampler satisfaction.

There is used in Sivill three Weights or Kintars: as first, the Weights of
Sivill.
smaller which comprehends 112. l. of four Roves of 28. pounds a Rove.

The next is of 120. l. of four Roves of 30. l. to a Rove.

The last is the great, of 144. l. of 4. Roves of 36. l. a Rove, which last is
accounted the common Kintar of Sivill, upon which these observations have been
made, which for the certainety I refer to trial:

100. l. in Sivill have been found to make in London -- 102. l. Marselia -- 113
Venetia Sotile -- 152 Venetia Gross -- 96 Sicilia -- 5^ Lisborne -- 90 (...)
Florence -- 129 Antwerpe -- 98 Lions -- 97 Dansicke -- 117 Genoa Gross -- 100


Woolles of Sivill is commonly here bought about Michaelmas, Spanish wool.
and they pay ready money, at Christmas, and have from March to May for payment
of the rest, of which here is great quantity provided.

Silk is bought at Almaria, commonly worth 28. Pesanti the l. Morisco, which
is 18. s. Florence, for which place it is bought, and Raw Silk.
this it will cost 1020. Mar. the said pound which is 30. Rials, which is
performed between June and October, the best time being from July to August by
reason of the heat, for after that the weight of silk will increase.

And as for other Commodities here found besides Wool and Silk, it cannot
properly be said to be the Commodities of the place, but for the most are
comprehended under the natural Commodities imported from the West Indies, of
which this is the principal Port and Scale in Europe, and as a Country
entirely challenged by the Spaniards.

Their common measure in Sivill is the Vare, which has been Measures (...)
Sivill.
observed,

The 100. Vares to make in London -- else -- 74 Anvers -- 123 Frankford -- 154
Dansicke -- 102 Vienna -- 107 Lions -- a. -- 75 Paris -- al. -- 70 Genoa --
Pal. -- 336 Roven -- al. -- 74 Lisborne -- V. -- 74 Madera -- Br. -- 76 Venetia
-- 133 Lucca -- 148 Florence -- 151 Millan -- 170


Oil is bought here by the Rove, 64. Roves is in Venita one Miara, Of Oil.
40. or 41. Roves makes a Pipe, a Rove is 8. Somer, a Somer is 4. Quartiles,
and a Quartile is of a Stoop of Antwerpe, and 2. Pipes or 81. Roves is 25. or
26. Florence Barrels, or 252. Gall. Gallons of English measure, but Sivill gage
is accounted but of these Pipes 236. Gallons, at 118. Gallons the Pipe.

Corn is measured and sold by the Caffise, which is 28. Staos of Of Corn.
Florence, and makes Bushels English ()

Note that S. Lucar is the Sea Port of this City, whereto all S. Lucar.
ships of burden do first come and there lade and unlade, and where the
Officers of the Custom House do come aboard to take notice of the goods both
landed and laden for the City of Sivill, where the Custom House is,

The Customs of Sivill are great, and arise upon some goods to Customs of
Sivill.
10. 15. 20. and upon most to 25. per cent which I must refer to the better
experienced; only it is noted by some that have treated of the Kings of
Spaine's Revenues, that the Custom House yearly of this City does yield him,
as I said before, halse a million of Gold.

To proceed, in the precinct of Corduba lies Andalusia, wherein I Andalusia.
find Sivill to be seated. Secondly Granado, wherein the City of Granado,
Mallaga, and Almaria principal Cities are situated: and Granado. Mallaga.
lastly, Estremadura, wherein I find only Merida for a City of note, but not
of Trade: therefore a word of the two former, Granado and Mallaga, better
known to the English.

CHAP. CXIII.
Of Granado, and the Trade thereof.

GRANADO is the ordinary Parliament and Court of Justice for all the Southern
parts of Spain, as Valiadolid is for the North; and therefore it may be
imagined Where Lawyers are found to abound, little Trade is commonly
concurrent: it is of it self a stately Town, and curiously built all of
Freestone* it is fenced with a strong Wall, having twelve Gates, and 130.
Turrets; the Palace of the late Morish Kings is the prime and most magnificent
building of this City, it is ^ated within the Land, and has Motr^ll for the
next Port, the neighborhood of Almeria and Mallaga both maritime P^rts binder
much the Trade thereof, therefore I shall insist the lesser upon the Trade of
this City, which principally depends upon the Raw Silk made here and upon the
fabriques wrought thereof.

The Weight here used is the Cantar of 100. l. which has been Weights used
in Granado.
observed by some English to make 118. l. haberdepois, and by some Venetians to
have made there 111. l. Gross and 175. l. Sotile.

The Measure is as at Mallaga.

CHAP. CIV.
Of Mallaga, and the Trade thereof.

MALLAGA is seated on the Mediterranean shore, abounding in Reasins, and Wines
that are known by that name, and thence vented to our colder Climate, which
makes this Town famous for its plenty therein; where touching Anno 1617. I
noted this observation, their moneys are general with all Spain, the
principal being

A Riall, which is 34. Mervides, and is 6. d. Sterling.

A Pistolet of Gold is 23 Rials and the Double being 47. Rials. Coins in
Mallaga.


Their Customs upon Merchandise here differ; for Sugar, Almonds, Wine and
Oiles are found to pay Custom outward -- 7. per cent. Customs of Mallaga.


Cochoncale and other such fine commodities -- 10.

All Commodities which are found to issue ou^ else -- 5.

All Commodities transported from Port to Port -- 2.

Their Weight is the 100. l. divided into four parts of 25. l. which they call
the Rove, and every pound is 16. ounc. and 1. oun. makes 16. Weights of Mallaga.
drammes, and each dram 28. grains: and this 100. l. or Kintar has been
found to make 112. l. 5. ounc. English; but yet I find some that have made
observations upon this place allege that the 100. l. of Mallaga will yield in
London 105. l.

Their measure of length is a Vare, which is 27 inches by Rule. Measures of
Mallaga.


Their liquid Measure for Wine and Oiles is a Rove, and divided into 8.
So^bres: 25. Roves makes a Pipe, and is 100, Gallons English.

Their grain Measure is a Hanocke, and is divided into twelve Of Corn.
Almodos; this Hanocke is of a Bushel and twelve Gallons English, which
weighs by heap 144. l. and by stroke 29. l. English.

Note that Almeria agrees in Weights and Measures with Mallaga Almeria.
above named.

In Galicia, I find only Saint James of Compostella famous for the Gallicia.
s^pulchre of Saint James which is worshipped with incredible devotion; and
Baiona, commonly called the Groine, whereto some Q. Baiona.
Trade is driven by the Merchants of England, principally of Bristoll, which I
briefly thus anatomise.

The Coins are the same, as used throughout Spain.

Here is in use two Quintals, the one proper to Iron, which is in London 122.
l. and the other called the Sutle Quintall, which is 108. l. and the Measure
here in use is as in Bilboaa following.

In Biscay, I find Bilboa and Saint Sebastians, two noted Towns Biscay, and
the trade thereof.
of Trading, much frequented by Merchants, whereupon I have gathered these
observations of the Trade of these places.

The Coins are here current with all Spain, which is the Spanish Riall,
distinguished into white Quartiles, four to a Riall, and 4 black Quartile to
a single Riall, and accounted by 34. Mervides to the said Riall.

There is here in use two Quintars, the one proper to the Iron Weights of
Bilboa.
here made, which produces in London 158. l. and the other being the Sutle
100. l. produces here about 111. to 112. l.

Their Measure here of length is the Vare; 100. yards is here Measures of
Bilboa.
109. Vares, and the 100. Flemish Else, whereby Bays are bought in England is
here 80. Vares.

Corn is here sold by the Hanega, and five Hanegaes has been observed to
make a Quarter English.

The Customs here are 2 per centum, and valued as they shall be Customs of
Bilboa.
sold, and not paid till sold: but note that no Commodities pays here any
Custom but what is either to be eaten, drunken, or burned: and if a Merchant
hap to make a bad debt of above 500. l. the Custom thereof is not paid at all.

In Toledo is the City of Toledo famous for its Archbishopricke, Toledo.
whose Rents look as high as 300000. Crowns yearly; it is seated in the
center of Spain, but of no great consequence in matter of Trade, known to us,
as improper for the same by its situation, being an Inland City, and
overtraded by Churchmen.

In Murcia, there are three Towns of note, Murcia the first as principal of
the Province; Cartagena the second, as having a Murcia. Cartagena.
most excellent Haven, and agreeing in Weights and Measures with Alicant, that
is the third, that has choice Wines and good trading by its commodious
situation. Of the two former I cannot say much: in the later having lived some
years, I observed these Rules in the course and Trade of the place.

CHAP. CXV.
Of Alicante, and the Trade thereof.

ALICANTE seated on the Mediterranean shore, as Mallaga, Almeria, and Cartagena
are, is of late Alicante, and the Trade thereof.
years become (by reason of its commodious Road) to be the Scale of the
City of Valentia, where the principal Merchants thereof reside, and have here
their Factors and Respondents that negociate their affairs for them: it
affords Wines, Resins, Licoris, Soda Barillia, basse ropes, Soapes hence called
Alicant Soapes, Aniseeds, and such.

The Moneys are those of Valentia, see there farther.

Merchants keep their Accounts here in Livers Solds and Deniers; Coins
Alicant.
twelve Deniers make a Soldo, twenty shillings a Liver, which is accounted
Account kept.
to be five s. Sterling. as the Soldo three pence, and the Denier a farthing.

Their known great Weight is a Cargo, which is 10. Roves of 24 Weights of
Alicante.
l. and of 36. l. to the Rove: the Rove of 24. l. being 18. Ounces, and the
Rove of 36. l. being twelve ounces, by which is sold Pepper, Rice, Almonds,
Cloves, Spices, and other commodities of value.

All gross Commodities are weighed by 24. l. to the Rove, and four to the
Quintall, the Cargo making 280. l. Haberdepois, and the Quintall making 96. l.
in England.

All Sugars, Drugges, and Tin is weighed by a small Quintall which is 120. l.
of twelve ounces to the pound, which is about 18. or 20. per centum, less than
the English 112. l.

Soda Barillia carried hence to Venetia to make Glasses, and to Marselia to
make hard Soape, has been found to make a Cantar 133. lib. of Province: but
because this diversity of Weights may seem troublesome to be understood,
observe this general Rule, 96. li. of 18. ounces is 144. li. of 12. ounces,
and is the great Quin^all A general rule in Alicante Weights.
80. li. of 18. ounces is 120. li. of twelve ounces and is the small Quintall;
the difference found is 16. li. of 18. ounces per libram, and 24. li. of twelve
ounces li. from the great to the small Quintar.

Their common Measure is a Vare, which is less than the English Measures of
Alicante.
yard.

Their Wine Measure is a Cantaro, which is about 12. quartes English.

Their Corn Measure is a Caffise, about 3. bushels English.

Their Custom is 11. Deniers per centum Liver, which is 4 per cent. Custom.
and is payable 8. Deniers to the Duana, and 3. Deniers Sisa, which ^s paid as
well by the buyer as the seller, and as often as any goods ^re either bought,
sold, or bartered, so often is the said Custom paid by buyer and seller 9. per
cent. see Valentia farther.

The next is Castile, the most prevalent Province of all Spain, Castile.
and whence the Spaniards entitle themselves Castilians, and to which all the
other are united, either by conquest or intermarriages; it is divided into the
New and Old, in which is first the City of Segovia, whence comes our fine
Segovia cloth, made by Wools that first Segovia.
had their original from our English Sheep. Secondly, Valiadolid, Valiadolid.
an University, which yields no commodity but English papisticall Fugitives.
Next Burges, famous as contending with Toledo for the Burges.
Primateship of Spain. Next Salamanca, the most famous Academy Salamanca.
of all Spain; these are in Old Castile. In New Castile are found these
Cities, first Madrid the seat of the Kings of Spain, and from a late Madrid.
Village become a populous and large City. Secondly, Alcala. Alcala.
Thirdly, Alcantara. And lastly the Escuriall, built by Philip the Second
Escuriall.
and which cost four millions the structure. In this Tract, I have not
observed any eminent City of Trading, yet because the whole Country of Spain
in general has in many things a dependency upon the rules and orders in
matter of Trade belonging hereunto; I will therefore to shorten my Work as
well in the succeeding as in some preceding Towns give you a touch of the
Trade hereof under the Title of Madrid or Castile.

CHAP. CXVI.
Of Madrid in Castile, and the trade thereof.

THe general Coins of Castile I account as the general Coins passing
thoroughout Spain, which is to be considered Castilia and the trade thereof.
when I treat of the trade of any City under the subjection of the King of
Spain.

In the then Court of Spain being commonly in Madrid in Castilia, the duccat
is worth 375. marvides, and is called by Coins of Castilia.
some a dobra of Castile.

A Castiliano is worth 485. marvides.

A florin of Castile is worth 265. marvides almost four shillings starlin.

A duccat count or quento of marvides is a million. Quento.


A count or quento of marvides is duccats 2666, and at Dobra it is worth 2739
57/73 dobras, which is starlin 733. li. 6. s. 8. d.

A Riall single of Castile is worth 34. marvides, which is 6. d. starlin.

A quento of marvides is worth 3258. Rials and three marvides.

A Crown of Castile is worth 323, marvides, but of them you may not make
payment but of 500. only.

The Duccat of Spain has 11. Rials of plate, and every Riall as I said before
34. marvides, and every Duccat 374. marvides, which is 5. s. 6. d. English, the
Riall 6. d. and the marvides less then our farthing: the single Pistolet of
gold is 11. Reals. being 400. marvides, which is according to 6. d. a Riall 5.
s. 10. Esterling.

In Castilia they that give money upon Exchange, do agree to be paid Exchanges
in Castilia.
in Duccats of gold, or their worth in gold or silver, for if they should not
do so, they should be paid in base money, which would prove to be more then
five per cent. loss. The orders of the faires in Castile are thus.

The first is the fair of May, and is made in Medina del Campo, Faires of
Castilia.
and begins the first of June, and lasts 50. days.

The second is the fair of August, and is made in Medina de Ri^secco, and
begins the first of August, and lasts 30. days.

The third is the fair of October, made in Medina del Campo, and begins the
first of November, lasting 50. days.

The fourth is the fair of Villa lion, begins the first day of Lent, and
lasts twenty days, but is no fair of Exchange, the time expired, there may
no goods be sold, nor paiments made upon pain of forfeiture of the goods and
moneys. and it is to be noted that the letters be there fifteen days before
the time.

The paiments upon all the faires they make in Banco, not saying The paiments.
^rth, and they are to remit in duccats de Or^, in Or^ larg^, and forth (...)
Banco, when they say forth of Banco and for ready money, there (...) gotten
thereby one per cent. and when they say duccats of gold or ^e worth, it is
understoode in marvedes, 375. for a duccat, and when ^ey say forth of the
fair, it is understood for ready money, and ^is shall suffice to have said of
Castilia in general: and as for the ^stome and manner of their exchanges here
practiced, see the chap^r 426. of the exchanges of Spain at the end of this
tract.

In Portugal once a famous Kingdom, (and the rather for the Portugal.
^rtunate discoveries made in the Eastern Indies by the inhabitants) ^ere is
many fair towns of trading, but all of them giving prece^ency to Lixborne,
the metropolis of this Kingdom, I shall willing^ therefore omit the rest, and
enlarge my self thereupon: The Commodities of Portugal.
^nerall commodities this Country abounds in are these, Honey, ^ine, Oil,
Alum, Fruits, Fish, white Marble, Salt, etc. and those ^any other commodities
that it is now in great abundance found to ^eld are the proper commodities of
the East Indies, such as are ^epper, Cloves, Sugars, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cottons,
Callicoes, the Iems of ^dia, the Spices and drugs of Arabia, and the Silks and
fabriques of ^rsia and China, which though here to be had, yet I have here
^mitted the mentioning, as not being the native commodities of ^ortugall.

CHAP. CXVII.
Of Lixborne and the Trade thereof.

LIXBORNE is accounted to be seven miles in compass, Lixborne and the Trade
thereof.
and to contain 20000. families, having 67. towers upon the walls, and 22.
gates to the Seaward, and 16. to the Continent: it is seated upon the River
Tagus, accounted most famous and commodious for traffic and commerce, from
hence the Portugals set out to the East Indies, and hither do return again
with all those Spices drugs and other the rich Merchandise which East India,
Arabia, Persia and China do afford: at the entrance of the River Duer^ stands
Porto also, a town of good trade, where the galleys used in times past to land
the merchandise, and therefore is called Porta gall^rum, by which means some
authors do infer the whole country took its name of Portugal. But to
proceed to Lixborne, I will note what I have observed thereupon in matter of
traffic according to my proposed theme.

The coins in Portugal found current are these: Coins of Portugal.


A (...) of gold, is worth 400. Reas.

A Duccat of Portugal is 10. Reals, which is 400. Reas, which is five
shillings starlin.

A Riall is 40. Res, or 6. d. starlin, a mill Reas is 22. Rials.

A Teston is 2. Rials, or 100. Res, or 15. d. starlin.

A Vintin is 20. Res or 3. d. starlin.

A Mirle of gold is 1000. Res, which is 2. duccats.

A single Riall Spanish, is 2. Vintins, or 4. Res.

Their Waights are these, a small and a great, the great C^ Waights of
Portugal.
is divided into four Roves, and each Root. is 32. Reals, which is 128. li. at
14. ounces per li. which has been found to make in F^rence 149. li. their
small Quintar for Pepper and Ginger is neee^ 112. li. English: the Rove or
quarterne is 28. li. the great Quintall holds 15. in 16. per cent. more then
the English 112. li.

The King has a Quintar for his Contractation house to sell the Spices of
India, by which is 150. li. of Florence, and is about 114. li. English; the
great Cantar of Lixborne making in Florence 170. (...). (...) 130. li. English,
but all fine goods is by custom of the place to b^ sold by the said Kings
beam.

These observations upon the 100. li. small of Lixborne, have been made in and
yield

The 100. l. small of Lixborne does to yield in London -- 113. li. Marselia --
126. li. Venetia sotle -- 168. Venetia gross -- 106 (...). Sicilia -- 63.
Florence -- 149. Antwerpe -- 107. Lions -- 119 (...). Civil -- 110. Dansick --
130. Genoa -- 162. Alleppo -- 23. Rials Alleppo silk -- 24. 6. Irip. soria --
27. 6. Irip. Barbaria -- 98. li. Baruti -- 22. Allex. zera -- 52. 3. Allex.
forsia -- 117. 6. Sei^ -- 102. 10. Constantinople -- 93. 6. Rhodes -- 20. 7.
Acria -- 18. 3. Babylonia -- 15. 10. Ma. Balsera -- 4. 5. Ma. Ormus -- 113.


Which for trial I refer to the experienced.

Their Measures of length, dry and liquid here used are these; Measures of
length in Portuga^.
first, their Measure of Cloth is the Covada, which is near of ^n English
Yard; but the Measure of Linen is the Vare, and is ^n Ell, less nail of the
English Measure, by which may be made ^he computation for other Countries, and
by some found to be 8. ^er centum less.

The Measure of Corn is the Alquier, three Alquiers is a bushel, Of Corn in
Portugal.
(...) is 8. Gallons Winchester Measure, and five Alquiers is a Hannep of
Spanish Measure.

The Measure of Salt is called the Muy, and 60. Alquiers makes a Of Salt. ni
Portugal
Muy, and 2. Muyes and 15. Alquiers is a Tun of Bristoll water-mea^ure, which
is 10. Gallons Winchester, and 40. of those Measures do make a Tun.

Note that 4 Alquiers of Lisborne makes a Fanega or Hannep in Andalusia, by
some observations, which Fanega is 2. Staios and ^omewhat more of Florence, in
such manner that a Staio of Florence ^ay be accounted half a Fanega, and an
Alquier of Lxiboa may be ^ccounted half a Staio of Florence, which makes ()
Gal. Eng.

The Customs is inwards 23. per centum, that is, to the dechima 10. Customs
of Lisbor^.
^er cent. to the Sisa 10. per cent. and to the Consolado 3. per cent. and ^he
Customs outward is only 3. per centum.

These observations have been also made upon Measures of this place; 22.
Alquiers of Lisborne have made in Sicilia upon corn Observations upon the dry
measures of Lisb^.
(...). general Salmo, Alquiers 3 have made in Marselia one Mina; and ^t is to
be understood, that the Muy of Corn and Salt are all alike, but that there is
given one in 24. more upon Salt, because the Salt ^ooseth and not the Corn.
The Tun of Wine in Lisborne is 52. Almudin, and one Almudin is 13. Cha^ate,
etc. which is in England () Gallons.

The next Province is Valentia, giving name, or taking it from a (...).
City of the same name, the principal of this Province which is seated some
two miles from the sea, where there is found an open Road called La Gre^o, and
not capable of great ships, nor indeed safe for ships of any noted burden,
therefore is Alicante become the principal Scale for this City, in which
place having resided for some time Anno 1617. I shall touch the Trade thereof
as observed by me in those days.

CHAP. CXVIII.
Of Valentia, and the Trade thereof.

VALENTIA the principal City of the Province of Valentia, gives Rules to all
the adjoining places, as Valentia and the Trade thereof.
well for matter of Trade as judicature, wherein is vented yearly great
quantity of Pepper, Tin, Lead, Baies, Linnens, Fish, as Pilchards, Herings,
and Newland fish, and such other like Commodities, having their (...) current,
Weights and Measures as follows.

A Liver of Valentia is worth 20. Sold. of that money, and is (...)* Coins of
Valentia.
Sterling.

A Duccat of Gold is 21. Sold. of the said money.

A Castilian^ is 27. Sold. and 4. Deniers of the same money.

A Liver of Valent^a is worth 365. Mervides of Castilia, and changing them at
Naples for Valentia 18 sold. 4. Deniers, which with the charges comes even,
because a Duccat of Carlins is worth at Naples after the rate of sold. 18. Den.
3 and this because your money (...) at 15. per centum.

Their greatest money is a piece of 6. sold. which is three Rials Castile, then
have they three sold. which 1 Rials, and the half of three sold. which is 18
Deniers, which is 1 sold. every soldo is 12. Deniers, and 24. Deniers is a
Riall Costiliano, which is 6. d. Sterling.

Their Accounts are kept by Livers sold. and Deniers, 12. Deniers accounted to
a sold. and 20. sold. to a Liver, which is 10. Rials Castile, Accounts in
Valentia.
50 souls French and 5. s. sterling.

The Weights are these and thus distinguished.

The greatest Weight is a Cargo or Load, which is 360. li. of Vilentia, Weights
of Valentia.
and has been found to increase 3. or 4 per centum after the Weight of
Florence. This Cargo is accounted to be 12. Roves as well of fine as gross
goods; a Rove sutle being 30. li. and by this Weight Cargo fine. Ditto gross.
is weighed corn, sugar, oil, spice, and other fine goods.

A Rove Gross is 36. lib. and by this is weighed Wool, and such other gross
goods.

A Quintar as well the small as great is four Roves, which makes 120. li. of
fine goods, and 144. li. of gross goods, in which observe this true Rule for
all the Weights of Valentia.

98. li. of 18. ounces to the li. is 144. li. of 12. ounces to a pound, and is
accounted the great Kintar, and Note in weights.


80. li. of 18. ounces to the li. is 120. li. of 12. ounces per li. the small
Cantar: so that the difference is 16. li. of 18. ounces and 24. l. ^f twelve
ounces from the great to the small, and these two Weights ^ave been observed
to yield in other Cities of Trade after this ^anner.

100. lib. Sutle does produce the first Row. 100. li. Gross does produce in
the second Sutle li. Gross li. London 96 115 Marselia 107 128 Venetia sotile
140 168 Sicilia 54 64 Lisborne 84 102 Florence 122 147 Antwerpe 92 110 Lions
101 122 Civil 94 113 Dansicke 110 133 Mallaga 26 Rials 31 Rials Barselona 104.
l. 125. l. Majorque 102 124 Paris 102 124 S. M^llos 105 128 Allepp 19. 6. Rials
23. 4. Tripoli Siria 23. 4. Rials 24. 9. B^ruci 18. 8. 22. 4. Alexand. zera 44.
5. 53. 2. Scio 87. 6. 105 Constantinople 79 95 Rhodes 17 21 Genoa 133 163
Their Measures are these following:

Four Palms of Valentia makes a Vare, which is 1 Braces, of Measures of
Valentia.
Florence, and is parts of an English Yard; 100. Vares after this account may
be in London 83. in 85. Yards.

Corn is sold by the Caffiso in Valentia, which is twelve Barsellas, Of Corn.
which weigh 10 Roves of 36. lib. ^a Rove of twelve ounces per lib. which is in
Florence 7 Staios, and 37. Barsellas is there 24. Staios, which is a Mayo,
Barseilas 17. making a general Salmo in Sicilia; and is of the measure of
corn in England () Gallons.

Salt is also sold by the Caffiso, which weighes 18. l. of the Gross Of Salt.
weight of Valentia, eight Caffices making one M^dino in Iui^e, and one Caffice
making 3. bushells English.

Wine is sold by the Cantaro, which is a pitcher, and contains Of Wines.
twelve quarts of English measures: note hat 1480. Salms of wheat in Sicilia
have made in Valentia 1840. Saffici.

This Country affords, as I said before, hard Soape commonly worth 80. Rials a
Kintar, rising and falling as oils are in request. Commodities of Valentia.


Aniseeds are worth about 24. Rials the Rove, and daily is transported for
France and England.

Barillia is used in making glasses, and hard soapes; and worth 16. to 18.
Rials per centum.

Resins of Denia, a small Village, anciently a famous Town of this Province;
not so well esteemed as Mallaga fruit, is sold Genia.
here at 18. Rials per cent. and I have paid here for a whole ships lading
of 200. Tons, Anno 1618. 24. Rials per cent. proving commonly best when
dearest.

Almonds are here also plenty, worth commonly twelve Duccats a Cargo, which is
2. 2. 0. l. English, which 280. li.

Customs here paid is 9. per cent. 4 by the buyer, and 4 by the seller, and as
often as any Commodity is bought or sold, so often Customs in Valentia.
is this Custom paid, being 8. Deniers Duana and 3. Deniers Sisa; and if any
goods comes in to be shipped out again (com^only called a Transito) the
general Duty of four Deniers per li. is only paid and no more.

Their payments in Customs and all other ways are in Valentia money, and
worth 3. per cent. to be converted into Spanish Rials.

There is also a Duty called a Mottahecos, which is a pound of Pepper on each
Quintar, and so upon other fine goods: and this is as much as I remember
needful in this argument, and so I will proceed to the next Province which is
Cattalognia; and as for the Exchanges here practiced, see farther in the 291.
and 426. Chapters.

In Cattalonia is only famous, the City of Barselona the principal of this
Province, where having good cause of the remembrance Catalonia.
of my being here by reason of my imprisonment in the Inquisition, Anno 1618.
I must according to my Method afford the Cities Traffic, a note of
observation, in acknowledgement of their love and pains in my Release; moved
thereto, partly by the affection I had gained with many the chief Merchants,
but especially least the ^ame might deter other English from coming to
traffic and inhabit amongst them, and furnish their (...) with English
commodities which they seem much to desire, and oftentimes much stand in need
of.

CHAP. CXIX.
Of Barselona, and the Trade thereof.

BARSELONA is seated on the Mediterranean shore, and entering into that Golfe
which is so terrible to Barselona.
Navigators. In these parts called The Golfe of Lions, it has a reasonable
commodious and safe Harbor, and the Citizens do winterly enlarge and lengthen
the same by adding to their Moulde, that ships of burden may come within the
same: what I observed here Anno 1618. I will briefly declare.

Their moneys current in Merchandise, besides the Riall of Castile, Coins in
Barselona.
is a Liver which passes here at 20. sold. and a Duccat of Gold of Castile is
worth 24. sold. of the said money, and the soldo is twelve Deniers of that
money, wherein they are found to keep their Accounts.

Their Cantar is a 100. lib. which is English 92. lib. or thereabouts, Weights
in Barselona.
and has made by observation in

Florence -- 123. l. Genoa -- 130 Valentia -- 106 (...) Marselia -- 104 Venetia
Sotle -- 140
Their Measure is a Can consisting of eight Palms and has been found to
make three Braces in Florence, and in England found Measures of length.
to produce 1 (...) Yards English, and in Naples has been found to make 6
Palms.

Corn is sold by a Measure called the Quarter, one Salmo is four Of Corn.
Quarters, sold always free of all Customs, 2 Quarters making a Carga or
load, which is accounted 360. li. as is that Carga mentioned aforegoing in
Valentia.

Woolles are sold by the Rove, which is 30. li. making 26*. li. of Venetia
gross, whither the same is commonly transported, and in Florence 36. lib.

All gross goods are sold by the Carga, accounted 3. Kintars, which is 440.
li. sutle of Venetia, and 278. li. gross there, which is 372. li. in Florence,
and has been found to make English 300. lib. Haberdepois.

In this Province lies also Tortosa a fine small City, but the principal
Tortosa.
of the Inhabitants being accounted as Moors were some years before my being
here banished this Country, and therefore most places lies waste, and many
Villages are here along found without inhabitants, and the grounds to want
laborers.

The next Province is Arragon, wherein is Tarragon, a fine and hansome City,
but by the banishment of many of the inhabitants, Aragon.
as above is said, now made poor: in my being there in 1618. I found it most
to consist in making of silk, here bought and carried to Valentia to be
wrought: The principal City hereof is Saragosa, which should challenge a more
particular relation, as being Saragos^.
commodiously seated for traffic on the banks of the River of Ebro, but
being an Universitie, it were too great an honor for an inland town to
produce famous Scholars and em inent Merchants, yet in the current coins, it
is observed to rule as in Valentia: and because there is found practiced here a
great Exchange, I have inserted the same by it self, Chapter 292. in the end
of this tract, with all circumstances thereunto apertaining. And these are all
the principal Cities of traffic found at this day comprised within the
Kingdom of Spain.

CHAP. CXX.
Of the waights and measures of Spain reduced to the English hundred.

THe principal Cities of Spain and Portugal thus surveyed; It will not be
unworthy our observation Waights of Spain reduced to the 100. li. of England.
first to see how the waights and measures of some other lesser Cities here
omitted concur with the waights and measures of England, and then take a
general view of the Trade which is in general found in the compass of those
Kingdoms, now united and subject to the Crown of Castilia: First then to
begin with the waights of Spain and Portugal, I will reduce them to the
subtle 100. li. of London, which by observation has been found to make in

Sivill is 108. li. by great quintar of 144. li. of 4. roves of 36. li. smaller
quintar of 112. li. of 4. roves of 28. li. lesser quintar of 120. li. of 4.
roves of 30. li.


Granado and Almer^a bona 104. li. is the pound of 16. Ounces. 89. li. is of
silk and copper of 18. ounces. 52. li. great weight for flesh, 32. ounces.


Castilia and Medina del campo 98. li. Burgos 89. Rot.

Aragon and Barselona 102. li. 92. li. great weight for Woolen. 126. li. small
weight for Saffron.


Valentia 102. li. by quintar of 4. roves of 30. li. for Spices. 129. li. by
quintar of 4. roves of 36. li. the carga, is those The 100. li. of London.
quintars of 360. li. and the greater of 432. li.


Leon 105. li.

Saragosa 108. li. and by the small quintar 126. li.

Sava^ona and Salanico 126. li.

Viliaco 77. li.

Note here that the Islands of the Canaries, and all the Islands of Spain use
the waights of Si^ill as aforesaid, now for the Kingdom of Portugal 100. li.
London makes in Portugal Rot. 104. li. the great quintar of 128. li. the small
quintar of 112. li. containing each 4. Ro^es of 32. li. and 28. li.


Note here, that there is allowance made four upon the hundred upon Sugars,
and two and three per cent. upon Cotton wools and such ^ike, the small quintar
is the weight of the contractation house of the ^ndies: all spice is waighed
thereby, but all are waighed by the great quintall, and reduced upon the lesser
quintar, one quintar of Wax, is one quintar and half of 112. li. is 168. li.

Madera 104. Rotolos. or pounds by the quintar of 128. li. Cape Verde 104. Rot.
Saint Thomas 104. Rot. ^uynea 104. Rot. Morr^cco in Barbary 104. Rot.

Feas and suus in Barbary. 92. li.

Calicut 77. aracoles: note here they sell by the, Baccar or Baharr, being at
Laxborne four great quintars of 112. li. and observe that the Baharr is four
quintars for 120. aracoles.

The Bahar or Bahor is 20. faracoles of 32. li. per Rove, which at Lixborne is
5. quintals, 480. aracoles.


Whereby it may be discerned, that as Sivill has given the weight to the West
Indies discovered by the Spaniard, so has not Lixborne but in part given the
weight to the East Indies, who had amongst themselves there an eminent trade,
and consequently their weight and measure peculiar to themselves, before the
Portugal discovered the same.

As for the measures of both these Kingdoms, as I have done Measures of Spain
reduced to 100. yards in London.
with the weight in reducing it to the London 100. li. sotle, so will I reduce
the measures thereof, to the 100. yards of London which rendereth in

The 100. yards of London is in Castilia 111. Vares of 4. quartes, and every
quarto 2. palms. Toledo 111. Vares Cades -- 108. Vares. Di^to for si^ke --
148. Else. Andolusia -- 109. Vares. (...) -- 57. Cones. Saragosa -- 44. Canes.
Morocco 181. Covad. Both these of 12. to one Cove. Cap dalgi^ 141. Covad.
Sivilia -- 109. Vares. Granado -- 109. Vares. Barselona -- 57. Canes. Valentia
-- 97. Canes. Lixborne -- 82. Vares. Ditto for -- 109. Vares. Ditto for silk
-- 96. Covades.


CHAP. CXXI.
Of the Trade in general of Portugal and the Kingdom of Spain.

THe Navigations and discoveries of the Spaniards and Protugals into the East
and West Indies, though Of the trade in general of Por^gall and Sp^e.
they carried to the world, at first the specious colors of piety and Religion,
by planting their superstition in these heathen countries, yet ambition and
profit was doubtless the secret design of their intendments: Portugal whose
Kings first sought those unknown Regions of the East Indies, and seeking
discovered, and discovering in part conquered; presently made strict laws and
prohibitions for any of his Subjects to trade for certain the richest
commodities thereof but himself, and thereupon s^tled his contractation house
in Lixborne, where those commodities should be sold, waighed and delivered, and
these bargains being made by Commissioners appointed by him, were first from
thence called Royal Contracts; and thus for a long time it continued till his
Subjects having made further and ampler discoveries of those Regions for their
better encouragement, and to induce his people to those Navigations, he
permitted them afterward an ampler and larger liberty of that trade, reserving
certain particular commodities only to his own use and benefit; neither did
it otherwise appear in the carriage of those who were discoverers of the West
Indies, which we find to be the Spaniards; for though there wanted not fair
and plausible demonstrations of winning the souls of those poor people, yet
by millions they were slaughtered, butchered and slain, making a devastation
in that Country of those innocent inhabitants, as if there had been no way to
the eternal life of the soul but by a present death of the body, aiming
thereby as may be conjectured particularly at the possession only of their
estates, which by many deaths and torments, was drawn from them, and converted
to their own and to their Sovereigns treasury, as appears (to the scandal
of their Religion and of their King) in sundry of their own Authors published
in many languages: these two countries then thus discovered, and thus by rapine
gotten and settled, and since unitedtogether under one King, has afforded the
present matter of trade to all Spain and Portugal, which before that time
afforded not any commodities almost whereby ^rade might be as much as
discerned, much less maintained; and ^ow Lixborne for the East, and Sivill for
the West Indies is become the Staple for all the rich commodities those two
Countries do afford, and so continued till England and Holland by their late
Navigation shared with them in the traffic and riches thereof, which yet are
seen to be but as petty branches coming from the principal channel; but the
West Indies affording to them great quantity of Silver by the mines thereof,
which now is found so abundantly plentiful in the world, may be called
indeed and in effect, their best commodity, which ever since its first
coinedge, they have maintained in its prime weight and finenes, which many of
their Politicians have gone about at several times to inhanse, as if it would
^ave prooved a great benefit to their Commonwealth, but wiser ^udgements have
discovered that the raising of these moneys in Spain would prove altogether
prejudicial to that state, for all these ^ommodities that are brought to them,
which for the most part they stand in great need of, being necessary either
for back or belly would soon vanish, did not these their moneys all^ and
attract them: and contrariwise it may be hence imagined, and I think granted,
that what other Prince soever does inhanse his Silver or the moneys of his
Country, it must needs prove to his own proper prejudice, and the Spaniards
gain, because they raise and in^anse a commodity which is not theirs really,
but transported to them at second hand by Merchants and others, and of which
though happily possessing some small Silver Mines, of their own, yet the
gross is still his, so far forth as his quantity and abundance exceeds
theirs.

As for the other commodities which those Countries afford, ours and many other
nations were with the same from Alexandria and Venice at first supplied, and
then hence, but now having found the way to the spring head, we daigne not to
buy of them at the second hand, except such, of which their Princes reserve to
themselves a peculiar interest, either by farming the same to their Subjects or
keeping the same in their own hands, or by excluding all other nations from
the trade thereof, and these we and others are constrained to have from them,
in which number may be accounted Sugars, Tobacco, Ginger, and some other
drugges and the commodities of the West Indies in general.

Now for the inhabitants both of Spain and Portugal, they are in general
lovers of Merchansing and traffic, neither so mu^ spising it as the French,
nor yet so much addicted thereto as the (...) ans, yet more willingly
adventuring their estates at sea than the who herein are found to distrust the
providence of Almig^ God in a lawful calling, and prefer their own wisdom
(...) providence on land before the protection of the Almighty at (...) And as
they are well-wishers to Trade, so are they found in a larg^ measure to
practice it in such Cities as occasion and commodities do either present or
permit; for both in Sivill and Lisborne are found Merchants of great eminency,
but yet are such as for the most part bend their Traffic into both the Indies
and no where else, except peradventure a little to Antwerpe in Flanders, and
into Naples, and Sicilia in the Mediterranean seas, and which seldom are noted
to adventure their estates, or have any Factors resident but where their King
is chief and Sovereign. The Raw Silks, Wines, and Fruits of this Kingdom
are the prime commodities of import it now yields, as also Olives, Resins,
figs, almonds, etc. which the English fet^ from them in great abundance; so
that it is of late years observed, that the Planters of these Fruits, and
their Wine Merchants have by our over greedy purchasing of these commodities,
raised to themselves fair estates.

Two things I observed during my abode here, that are great lets and
impediments to the Trade of this Nation, the one is the banishment of the
Moors that here in great numbers inhabited, who painefully and industriously
manured their land, and by their labor and thristy living raised to their
Landlords and to themselves good and great estates, the which now for many
thousand thousand acres lies waste and desolate, whole Town and villages being
depopulate and the Lords, Castles, and Man^urs appearing ruined and decayed,
want the pains of these poor people that gave their Lords and Lordships
means of subsistency. The second is the residence of many Genoa Merchants
amongst them, who are found in good number to abide in every good City,
especially on the Seacoasts, whose skill and acuteness in Trade far
surpassing the natural Spaneards or Portugals, and who by means of their
wealth and continual practice of the Exchanges are found to devour that bread
which the inhabitants might otherwise be sufficiently fed with, and by reason
that the King of Spain is ever engaged to their Commonwealth for great and
vaste sums at interest, he is their Debtour not only for their moneys, but
also for their favor, which by many immunities throughout his Kingdom, he is
found continually to require them, and amongst the rest it is observed, that
there is no Genoa Merchant resident in Spain in any part, but has a
particular License to export the Rials and Plate of this Kingdom to a certain
round sum yearly, which they seldom use really to do, but sell the same to
other Nations, that are constrained to make their returns in Plate for want of
other more beneficial commodities, which for the certain profit it is found
ever to yield ^n other Countries is often preferred before all the other
commodities of this Kingdom. A third reason of hinderance I might ^dde hereto,
which is the current Coin wherein all commodities are ^ould and bought; for in
many parts of this Kingdom, being for ^he most part base and of Copper and
Brass, which to convert into ^ials and good money is found to cost the change
in some places 5. ^n some 10. in some 15. in some 20. per cent. which is the
first penny. The great Customs also paid in many parts of this Kingdom, is
^ikewise a great let and hinderer of Trading in general; which wheresoever the
same is by the Sovereign levied, will in a short ^ime and insensibly devour
and consume a flourishing Traffic, and enforce the suffering Merchant either
totally to give over, ^r bend his Trade where he shall find the burden
thereof ligh^er and more easily to be borne and endured. Now as for
Commodities which other Nations are found to bring unto them, and of which they
stand in need of, partly to supply their own necessi^ies, and partly to
maintain their West India Traffic, as this Eng^and brings them, great store
of Newlandish fish, Irish Salmon, Pil^ards, Herrings, Lead, Tin, Calves
skins, Baies, Says, Searges, and ^ther Englishmanufacturies; and in return
have only thence, wines, ^ruit, Oiles, some Indico and sugars, ginger, and the
like India commodities. East country furnishes them with corn, cordage,
masts, pitch, ^rre, rosin, firre-boords, and other timber, and only return
thence the commodities above named; only it is ever lawful to him that brings
(...) to carry out Rials of Plate in return thereof. France sends them corn,
linnens, Paper, and some few petty manufacturies, and returns thence Plate,
wine, fruits, and some India Spices. Italy affords them some Manufactaries, of
Silk, and has in return some Raw Silk, SegoviaWools, Barillia, and such
like: and herein is comprehended the general Traffic of Spain at this time:
so passing the Pireneans, I will enter into France.

CHAP. CXXII.
Of France, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

FRANCE is accounted one of the most Emin^ France and the Provinces thereof.
Kingdoms of Europe, and it is the best that can subsist without the help of
others: it is bounded on the North with the British Ocean, on the W^ with the
Aquitaine Sea, on the South with (...) Mediterranean Sea, on the South-east
with the Alps, on the East with the River Rhine, and an imaginary li^ drawn
from Strasburge to Callais.

This Country affords for Merchandise to her neighbors the natural notable
commodities, Corn, Wine, and Salt; the Farm (...) Commodities of France.
Salt only yearly bringing in to the Kings coffers 100000. (...) besides
which it yields Oiles, Almonds, Soapes, Canvas, (...), Paper, Oade, Linen
fine and course, Nuts, Beefes, and of late so^ Stuffes and Cloth made of
woollen, etc.

There is reckoned in this Kingdom 25. Provinces; the notable Cities of
Traffic found therein, I shall orderly handle.

The first Province is Aquitane, wherein are found the noted Cities of
Tholousa, Bordeaux and Rotchell, of which a word (...) Aquita^ia.
brief.

CHAP. CXXIII.
Of Tholousa, and the Trade thereof.

THOLOUSA is the Parliament seat of Aq^taine and stands on the banks of the
River Tholousa and the Trade thereof.
Geronde, which hence runs to the Walls of Burdeux and Blay, and so to the
Sea: it is very plentiful in Pastill or Wo^d, which hence i^ dispersed into
several Countries, the Country not affoording any other notable Commodity
worth mentioning.

Their Moneys is the same as throughout all France, which in Coins and
accounts.
Paris the principal City of this Kingdom, I shall handle, their Accounts
also here kept, are as through all France in general, in Livers or Francks,
Souls, and Deniers, 12. Deniers to a Souls, 20. Souls to a Liver or Frank.

The 100. li. or Kintar of Tholousa has been observed in W^de Weights of
Tholousa.
for Diers to make in England 124. lib. and the Cargo by which the same is
commonly sold to be 372. lib.

The Measure of this Country is called the Aulne, and makes Measures of
Tholousa.
in England 42. inches by the Rule.

Note that in Tholousa there is a Cantar also of 112. li. which is in use in
all other Commodities, Woade excepted, sold by the Cargo, Woade of Tholousa.
as above is mentioned, and is hence sent to Narbone, and thence dispersed into
sundry parts of the Mediterranean seas.

CHAP. CXXIV.
Of Burdeux, and the Trade thereof.

BURDEUX is seated upon the banks of the River Bordeaux and the trade thereof.
Geronde before mentioned, plentifully abounding in those Wines which being
White and Claret are known by the names of this city, here is al^o near this
city the little village of le Greve, which gives name to those Grave^ wines,
which we esteem so excellent, and between this town and Tholousa lies those
rich grounds which yields those sweet Wines by us known by the name of High
Country, which the inhabitants of Burdeux knowing their worth, would hinder the
sale and exportation of theirs of that growth, do therefore prohibit the same
to be landed, or sold in their Town ^ill Chri^ day in the morning, and ^hen
these High Country Merchants are more busy in landing their Wines, than they
are in attending their Mass; that Gabor or lighter being ever accounted free
of tax and Custom that first sets (...) head ag^ound, when their Mass
bell ringeth, and then it is lawful for any man for that day to come aboard
her and be drunk grasis.

Here our English have had many privileges and been esteemed as fellow
Citizens before all other Strangers, but our last Wars to the ^sle of (...)
has made them here inferior to all others, and now pay double their former
Customs* upon Wines, which in courtesy to the Dutch is abated them and laid
on the English shoulders, which may be remedied if his Majesty please; it is
otherwise then for Prunes and Wines a Town of no great Trade, for little
traffic is here else driven, Moneys only are hither remitted to provide the
same, but no commodities else vendible of import. In Anno 1611. I here learned
the French Tongue after I had been for a while in Rotchell, so will note in
brief, what I observed thereupon in those my younger days.

The Moneys current and Accounts kept are in Livers, Sold, Denlers, as
throughout all the Dominions of the French King. Moneys and account.


Their Weights and Measures are as follows.

The Weight of Bordeaux is the Pound, 100 whereof is the Quintar, Weights of
Bordeaux.
which has been found to he 110. li. English and the 100. l. in London is 90
lib. here.

Their common Measure is an Alne which is about English.

From Bordeaux I will pass by Blaie, where I will only note a Measure of
Bordeaux.
subjection of our English ships, which here at their going up to English
subjection at Blaie upon the river Geron.
Bordeaux, unlade all their Artillery and Arms, which by many treaties beweene
the Kings of England and France has been covenanted to be disused, yet the
insolency of the Captain of Blaie, scorning the commandments of his
Sovereign and his treaties, holds still the same in use to the great prejudice
of our Merchants trading to Bordeaux. And now to Rotchell, the place of my
first education beyond seas.

CHAP. CXXV.
Of Rotchell, and the Trade thereof.

ROTCHELL has been of long time accounted the Rotchell and the trade thereof.
strongest and best fortified City in France, and was (...) of late years in
possession of the Protestants, and was ever found as a Sanctuary for them in
their greatest dangers, it is commodiously seated for Trade on the Aquitaine
Ocean, thesea every tide flowing into the City, and carrying thereinto ships
of a reasonable burden: within these late years the French King has besieged
it, and after a long Siege starved the Inhabitants, and by that means enforced
the reduction, therefore what Trade it now has I am ignorant of, but Anno
1611. there was a great concourse of Merchanti, as being the staple for all
Spanish and English commodities for these parts of France.

Their coins current and form of Accounts are the same as throughout all
France, and their Weights are these.

The 100. lib. of Rotchell has made in London 96. lib. English, and by
observation in Lions of poids de la ville 94. li. Weights of Rotchell.


The Measure is the Alne, common in name with all France, but Measure of
Rotchell.
in many places is found to differ, making here 44. inches English.

From England is sent hither Butter, Calves skins, Herings, Newfound land
fish, and some English manufactuaries of cloth, etc. and hence is returned a
small Wine called Rotchell Wine, but more properly Cogniacke, also Salt from
the Isle of Re, Oleron, etc. and some Prunes and other commodities.

Poictou is the next Province, the principal City hereof is Poiters, Poitou.
famous for the study of the Civil Law, and next to Paris for greatness in
all France, but of no note in matter of Trade.

Anjou is the next, yielding the best Wines in France, the principal Anjou.
Town is Angiers and Sanmar, the only Protestant University in France.

Maine is the next, the principal Town is Man's. Maine.


Touraine is the next, the principal Cities are Blois, Ambois, and Touraine.
Tours famous for giving a beginning to the Protestants of France, and which is
noted for many excellent fabriques and Manufactuaries of silks here daily
made, known to us by the names of Taffe^ies, Plushes, and Tabins of Tours.

Britanie is the next, wherein is found Nantes for the situation Britanie.
pleasant, Rhemes a Parliament seat; and lastly, Saint Mallo seated
commodiously for Trade upon the British Ocean.

Giberoy a great Fair for these Countries, and Morlais affording that Linen
in great quantity known to us by the names of Locrams. Locrams. S. Mallos and
Morlais.


S. Mallos and Morlais comprehending these three known sorts of Dowlas,
Tregar, and grasse-cloth, also Noialls for saile-cloth, and some of other sorts
here daily bought up for ready moneys, and hence dispersed into Spain,
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

The next is Normandy, in which are found many principal Normandy.
Towns of Trade, as being commodiously seated by the neighborhood of the
British Ocean; the chief is Cane, Deep, Newhaven, Constance, and lastly
Roven, under the title whereof I shall comprehend the Trade of the rest.

CHAP. CXXVI.
Of Roven, and the Trade thereof.

ROVEN seated on the banks of the River Sein, Roven and the trade of Normandy.
and the seat of the Parliament of Normandy, is one of the principal Cities
of Traffic and Commerce in France, having a great concourse of Merchants of
all these Northern Kingdoms, and is one of the three principal Towns in
France where Exchanges are used.

The Commodities that is hence, and out of Normandy exported are Linnens course
and fine, buckroms, paper, cards, some Wines, and Commodities of Roven.
other petty manufacturies.

The Commodities sent thither from England, principally Clothes of sundry
Countries, as Kerses of Devonshire and York shire, Baies of Coxall, Cottons of
Wales and York shire, and of late pepper, galls, cotton yarne, and other Turkey
Commodities also, Lead, Tin, Fish, and some India Commodities.

The notes of trade observed there at my residence therein 1614 I shall briefly
touch as I then noted the same. Moneys and accounts in Roven


The Moneys current and Accounts kept are the same as in general used
throughout France, see farther in Paris.

The Kings beam is here called the Viconte, which is 14. per cent. Weights in
Roven.
greater than our English 112. lib. and some have found it to be 10. or 12.
li. by which is weighed all Commodities whatsoever, but I have often found that
the 112. lib. English has made by Viconte 98. li. and by common beam 101. li.

The Measure is here an Alne, by which all Commodities of Measures in Roven.
Woollen and Linen is measured, and is accounted 1 yards English, but those
that have made trial thereof find it to be 46. inches, but it is here to be
noted that in buying of Linen cloth of this Country there is allowed in the
account of Measure 24. Alnes for 20. and is called the Merchants Alne or
measure, and by the same is oftentimes here again sold in England, and it is
found that Deep, Cane, and some other Cities of Normandy afford also this
over-measure; in the sale of Normandy canvas here made, so that it may be said
this place has a great and a small Alne, the one exceeding the other 20. per
cent. or 120. for 100. and the smaller agreeing with our English Else. Roven
is found to have 3. Faires in a year, at two Faires in Roven.
whereof there is liberty given for fifteen days to buy and transport any
commodities in this City free of all customs and taxes: provided the said
goods be laden and departed down the River to a certain limited distance
below the city, by fifteen days after, otherwise to pay the custom as is
accustomed.

The first Fair begins the 3. of February, and lasts fifteen days.

The second begins the morrow after Whitsunday and lasts fifteen days.

The third is not accounted a free Fair for customs as the former, and
begins the 23. day of October, and continues only eight days, where note
that these days are accounted so many working days, sundays and holidays
according to the Church of Rome excepted.

Here is in this City a public Hall granted to the English for The English
hall in Roven for sale of woollen cloth.
the sale of all English woollen cloth, whereto they are enjoined to carry the
same and have certain set days to lay open and sell the same, and for the
hire and custody they pay a Duty of halledge or warehousedome: they have had
formerly here many immunities and privileges and were accounted as half
Citizens, but the civil wars of France, the insolency of the Inhabitants,
and the great authority of their Court of Parliament daily give new fashions
and new laws to the English Merchants here resident.

This City is the prime of Trade in this part of France, and is accounted the
principal Northern Scale of Traffic in the French Domnions, for from hence
are exported great quantity, as I said before, of buckroms, canvas, fine and
course, playing cards, box combs, paper, thread, teasles for Clothworkers,
and some plushes, and other stuffes lately here made, and in fine all the
principal commodities of Normandy, Paris, and those parts adjoining to the
River Sein; as for the Exchanges here used, see Lions in the Tract of Exchanges
of Roven.
Exchanges following, which gives Rules thereto in Chapter 277. and Chapter 302.

The next division of this Kingdom is the Isle of France, which is Isle of
France.
in the heart of the French Dominions the principal City Paris, being the
Metropolis of the Kingdom here situated, which though it consist not much in
Trade, save what may serve happily to feed and clothe the Cour^ and
inhabitants, yet all the other Cities taking hence the Rule of government for
Traffic may challenge justly a Chapter by it self.

CHAP. CXXVII.
Of Paris, and the Trade thereof.

PAris being the principal City of France, and the ordinary Paris and the
trade thereof.
residence of the Kings, is esteemed to be ten miles in compass, through which
the River of Sei^ does gently run, and so to Roven, thence to New^aven or
Haure de grace, and thence to our British Ocean. It is not of great
consequence in matter of trade, as neither affoording commodities to be
exported, nor yet venting store of commodities imported, though an ignorant
Frenchman, which had not seen further then this City, call it the greatest in
the world for the trade found therein, and for the multitude of Merchants,
which I imagine he understood shopkeepers; some Cloth, Lead, Tin, Baies, and
Stockings it venteth from England, Sattins, and other silk, and (...) from
Italy, some small wares from Germany, and that is all the most important. It is
one of the three Cities in France, where Exchanges have been placed, Roven and
Lions being the other two, and though I have diverse times bin here, yet I could
never find any remarkable observations in Trade, which indeed is no where in
France much practiced, because of the base esteem the French ^tion do hold of
Merchants and Merchandising, every Cobbler honoring his old shoes with the title
of sa merchandise, with as great confidence as he that never handled any
commodity but Silks or Jewels, in which foolish humor I will leave them, and
come to my purpose.

Paris giving rule in matter of Coin to all other Cities of France, I have
purposely referred it here to avoid the reiteration in any other City of this
Kingdom.

The least piece then of Coin current in France is a Deneire, two Coins of
France.
whereof makes a Double, and twelve thereof is a Souls; and Souls, twenty makes
a Liver, which some call a Frank, and thus in Livers, Souls and Deneires their
accounts are kept.

Their common Coins are pieces of 8. Sol. which is the of a Accounts in France.
French Crown in Silver: a piece of 16. Sold. which is the quarter Crown, 4.
of which makes 64. Sold, accounted for a French Crown, and 4. Solds which is
of 3. Livers Turnois. They have also pieces of 21. Sold, 4. Deniers, being the
(...) of the said Crown, called by some Testons, and the and thereof, and as
the quarter Crowns were at first raised from 15. Sold to 16. Sold, and thereby
the 60. Sold to 64. Sold, so were the said Testons also in proportion raised
accordingly. The Gold coins are only two, which is the common Crown, of 3.
Livers or 60. Sold, and the Crown of the (...), being 3. Livers 16. Sols, or
76. Sol.

All which Coins in their first coinage, bare this true worth and value, and
then were conceived to hold equality with England: thus 10. Sold to make 12.
pence starling.

20. Sold to make 2. shillings starling, which is their Liver.

60. Sold to make 6. shillings, or 72. pence, which is the French Crown.

But these in hanced to such rates as the necessities of the (...) Note of
moneys inhansed lately (...) France.
or commerce enforce them, find not now any settled ra^e, but according to the
will of the paier and receiver, for he that sels his Commodities in France now
for ready moneys, must contract if he be wise, at what rate he must have
these Coins in payment, least he imagine he sell to good profit, and yet by
experience find he sells the same to a great loss and disadvantage.

And note that since the writing of the abovesaid, the piece of 16. Sol, is
raised to 20. Sol. in the whole, which I place here as a Caveat for such as
shall have occasion to traffic into these Kingdoms, that he be inquisitive
and circumspect to inform himself in the true worth and value thereof er^ ^ee
part with his Comm^dities.

The Quintall of Paris is 100. li. which has been ^ound to produce Weights of
Paris.
in London near 100. li. sutle. 2. per cent. more or less, which in Lions
renders of 16. ounces 116. li. In Venetia sotile 144. li. 100. li. sotile in
Venetia making in Paris 62 li. of 15. ounces per li. The Carge or great
Quintall in Paris is 300. li. of 12. ounces per li. which makes in Florence
487. li. but the ordinary Quintall of 100. li. before named is of 15. ounces to
a pound.

Wine is sold by the Cesterne, 96. making a The, and each Cesterne contains 8.
pints, so that it may be accounted two Con^ of Florence, which is () gallons
English, see London.

They have two measures in length, one for Silks, and another for Measures of
Paris.
Linnens, the which are () But note that all Merchants selling Silk stuffes in
gross in Paris, the same is sold by the pound weight, which is better for the
buyer, for thereby he discerns the weight of the silk he has for his
money.

Paris does Exchange with many places, which I here omit, and Exchanges of
Paris.
place the same amongst the Exchanges in general in the Tract following at the
end of this Book in the Chapters 277. and 302.

It may be imagined that this Kingdom, considering the riches thereof should
abound in Trade and Navigation, but the better sort of men meddling not with
traffic, as conceiving the same to be The French not addicted to trade.
both ignoble and base, and consequently unfit for them; leave the same to such
whose spirits are elevated to that ripeness that they can but only be sorry
for their erroneous opinions: their Navigation also is not far, the
Marselians greatest voyage being to Turkey, and the inhabitants of Rochell,
Saint Mallo and Rochell, seldom sailing into any regions further then Spain,
their ill success in Americaes plantations, peradventure dissuading them, but
he that shall wisely look into the beauty of their inland Towns, the riches
of the Country it self, and especially the plenty of Corn, Wines, Linnens and
Sal^ that France produces; and how much these commodities are prised and
sought after by other Nations, will be more willing to excuse the French for
their so little desire to traffic into remote Regions.

The next Province is la Beause, wherein is Orleans a pleasant City, La Beause.
and where the nearest and most Elegant French tongue is conceived to be
spoken, seated on the Loyer, but affording little matter of Trade or commerce,
save that it is found to be a great through-faire for all such commodities as
does enter into the heart of the Country, Orleans.
as to Lio^s and other Cities, upon the River of Loyer and by this way and has
a growth of good Wines about it.

The next is Berry, wherein is Bourges seated as the prime and principal
Town, who are much addicted to Clothing, and where Berry. Bourges.
great abundance of Sheep are found to pasture and feed.

The next is Burbon, wherein is contained Burbon, Nevers and Burbon. Nevers.
Mollins.
Mollins, wherein I never saw any commodities worth relation, save those
excellent instruments of Iron in small cases here made in great abundance,
called est^us, and dispersed thence over all Christendom.

The next is Bevois, the chief town is Villa franche. Beavois.


The next is Avergne, the principal City is Clerem^nt. Avergne.


The next is Limosin, the principal City is L^moges. Limosin.


The next is Perigort, the chief town is Perigeux.

The next is Quercu, the chief town is Mo^lbon, one of the Perigort. Quercu.
cautionary towns in the Protestants possession, and now lately by the French
King reduced to his subjection.

The next is Daulphine, honored with the title of the Princes of France,
wherein is found Vienna, excelling in the art of making Deulphine. Vienna.
sword blades: Valencia, a fine City, watered with the Rhoane; and lastly
Lions, once the principal town of traffic in all these parts, Valencia.
where having occasion of residence 1616. I noted these particulars following
in Trade.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
Of Lions, and the Trade thereof.

LIONS has ever been accounted, a famous Mart Lions and the trade thereof.
Town, and doubtless before Navigation had its perfection, a City of great
Trade and Commerce, but for as much as all inland Towns must submit in this
point to maritime Cities by reason of the commodiousnesse of the Sea, which is
the greatest fartherer of all Traffic, so must this Town now give place to
many others that exceed her in the point of Traffic.

Their Mart for Trade here settled was formerly holden in Geneva, The Mart of
Lions formerly in Geneva.
and by Lewis the Eleventh removed hither, for the enriching o^ his own
Kingdom, and when Pope Julius the Second had excommunicated Lewis the Twelfth,
he commanded by his Apostolical authority that the same should be again
removed to Geneva, but his Holiness herein was not obeyed, for Trade must not
be constrained but entreated, though by Popes which would command all things;
and therefore stirred not from hence, where yet it continues.

This Town is watered with the streams of Rhoane and Soane, whith furthers it
much for carriage: it is most famous now for the many fabriques of silks here
wrought and hence dispersed through all France, and the Citizens to this end
have their Factours in Marselia, who trade for them to Aleppo in Syria, to
furnish them with that commodity by land; also they trade for Florence, Lucca,
Millan, Mesina, and other parts of Italy, but it is only for raw silks, and
some such Commodities as these places do afford. I resided here some years,
and found the greatest of their Trade to consist in Exchanges, as the
principal and most proper Town of France, thereto the Bankers of Florence,
Venetia, Lucca, and Naples having here their Factours purposely for this
occasion.

From England is here vented some baies, tin, lead, Cony-skinnes, and but few
commodities else; and to our Country it affords not any commodity worth
mentioning; what I have observed I shall only touch and no more.

As for Coins current, and Accounts keeping, it is the fame as throughout
France. Coins and accounts in Lions. An ancient Mark in Exchange in Lions.


There has been of long time in use an imaginary coin here current in
Exchanges called the Mark, which briefly to explain is

A Mark of Gold is 65. Crowns of Mark or 63. cro. 11. s. 9. d. of gold in
gold, or 62. crowns of Camera Vec^ia of Rome, or 68. 14. 3. Duccats current of
Venetia.

And they did use here to keep their Accounts by crowns of marks sold and
deniers, advising one Cro. de mark to be 20. solds of mark, but is 45. sold
turnois, by which crown of mark they did exchange by, as briefly for example.

They gave in Lions one crown in Mark to have in Florence 57. or 58. crowns,
according to the Cambi^.

To have in Rome 56. duc. of Camera more or less, as the exchange went.

To have in Naples 72. duc. of Carlins more or less, etc.

To have in Palermo or Mesina 25. or 26. Carlins, etc.

To have in Spain 400. Mervides, according to the rate of Exchange.

To have in Anvers so many gross as the Exchange did permit.

But this custom being now lost by the expulsion of the great Exchange now of
Lions.
bankers out of this Town in the days of Lewis the Twelfth, it is since
reduced to Crowns of the Sun of three Livers, by which imaginary (for so I
call it now as having none to be found of that value and rate) coin there is
now made, and the common and ordinary prices thereof I willingly here omit, as
having mentioned the same at the end of this Work in the Chapters 277. and
302. and other following, where all the due circumstances of Exchanges and
payments of moneys are observed, whereto I refer the Reader.

It is to be noted that here is observed four Faires, in which all payments
either by Exchange, or for Merchandise are made, which run still from three
months to three months, wherein for so many days rescounters of payments are
made without any money seen stirring, from man to man which is done in a
public place or Burse appointed to this purpose, as I have touched in the
Chapter of transferring of Bills of debts and specialties in my Factours
advis^: the times and terms of which Faires are these,

First, the Fair of Easter begins after the Octaves of Easter.

The second is the Fair of August, being the first Monday after Faires of
Lions.
our Ladies day in August.

The third is the Fair of All Saints the day after All Souls.

The fourth is the Fair of le Roies, the day after Epiphany, and every Fair
lasts fifteen days that are not holy days, all business is done in these
Faires, and all bills of Exchange, are made and dated in one day, and two
days after they make the rate of the Exchange, which Faires are counted by
their payments.

The term of their bills of Exchange hence are these, Terms of the bills o^
exchange in Lions.


From Lions to Florence, Rome, and Venice, about 30. days, little more or
less, according as the Merchant makes the agreement every Fair, but all the
aforesaid places, for one and the same day.

From Lions to Naples, and Valentia, 5. days later than Florence.

From Lions to Anvers as Florence.

From Lions to Spain, that is, to Medina in Villalion, the Fair of All
Saints, and of the apparition of Lions, they exchange for the Fair of
Villalion of Midlent, and the Fair of Easter of Lions for the Fair of May in
Medina del campo, as you shall see more at large in the days of payment of
bills dated in Lions, in the said place of the Exchanges of this place.

They have in Lions three beams, one used in the Custom House, Weights in
Lions.
which is the Kings beam, which contains 100. lib. the Quintall and is
greater than the second, which is the Towne-weight by 8. per cent. by which all
goods pays custom that is ponderous.

The second is the Towne-weight and is 100. lib. the cent. the pound thereof
containing sixteen ounces per lib. upon which all calculations are made.

The third is only the Weight used for silk, and is 100. lib. the cent. and
the pound containing fifteen ounces per lib. and called The pound of mark.

The 100. lib. of the Towne-weight is it whereby the observations have been
made with other Countries, and which by trial has been found to render thus
in these places following. In London -- 96. lib. Marselia -- 104 Venetia sot.
-- 143 Ditto gross -- 89 Sicilia -- 53 Lisborne -- 83 Florence -- 125 Antwerpe
-- 90 Sivill -- 92 Dansicke -- 109 Mallaga -- 28. R. Rome -- 122. l. Millan --
131 Paris -- 80. Genoa -- 135 Almaria -- 120 Burges -- 114 Rotchell -- 104
Deep -- 94 Roven -- 92


And in Asia have made these, In Aleppo -- 19. R. Silk R. -- 20. 9. Tripoli --
22.. Dito Barbar. -- 81. l. Baruti -- 18.. Alex. zera. -- 43. Dito forfor. --
96 Sci^s -- 86. Lod. Constantinople -- 78 Rhodes -- 17. 2. R. Acria -- 15..
Babylonia -- 13. (...). Balsara -- 3. 9.. M. Ormus -- 93.. lib.


CHAP. CXXIX.
How foreign Measures and Weights are compared with Lions.

I Find a French Merchant to have made these observations upon the Trade of
Lions, which I refer to trial.

100. lib. in Millan to have made by trial in Lions 69. lib. silke-weight, the
silk brace in Millan to Milla^ with Lions.
render in Lions (...) of an Alne.

The Cloth-brace there to render in Lions (...) of an Alne.

And 20. sols of Millan calculated for 10. sols turnois.

100. lib. in Turin to render in Lions -- 77. li. silke-weight.

The Ras which is the measure to be (...) of an Alne. Turine with Lions.


The Florin in money calculated for three sols turnois.

The 100. li. of Genoa to render in Lions ^2. li. silke-weight; 9. palms of
Genoa making a Cane, 1. palm (...) of an Alne. Genoa with Lions.


The Spanish Pistolet worth in Genoa then 11. lib. 12. s. in Lions 7. li. 7. s.

The Crown of Gold in Gold of Italy worth in Genoa 115. (...).

The 100. lib. of Florence to be in Lions -- 76 silk weight, 4. braces being
there a Cane, 100. braces being 49. Alnes Lions. Florence with Lions.


The Crown of Gold of Florence calculated at 3. li. turnois.

100. lib. of Lucca sutle weight has rendered in Lions 72 lib. silkeweight.

100. lib. of Lucca of Custom House weight made -- 81. li. Lucca with Lions.


The pound of which place being composed of 12. ounces.

And 2. braces of the said place made in Lions 1. Alne.

100. li. of Bollonia have rendered in Lions 77 li. silk weight.

The brace of Bollonia has rendered (...) of an Alne of Lions. Bollonia with
Lions.


The Liver thereof 20. Sols may be esteemed at 11. s. 3. d. turnois.

100. li. of Naples have made in Lions 68. li. of silk weight.

8. Palms make a cane, and the palms by 4. to make them quar^ers, Naples with
Lions.
and divide by 17. for 17. quarters in an Alne in Lions, which reduced into
London measure is.

The Duccat may be calculated for 48. s. turnois, which is 4. 10. sterling.

The 100. lib. Sutle of Venetia made in Lions 63 lib. silk weight.

80. Braces of that place silk makes in Lions 43. Alnes. Venetia with Lions.


The Duccat may be calculated at 50. Sol turnois, which is 5. (...). sterling.

The 100. li. of Mesina render at Lions 70. li. of silk weight.

The 100 braces of Mesina gives in Lions Alnes Messina with Lions.


The Ounce of Mesina gives by calculation in Lions

The 100. li. of Bergamo is in Lions 68. li. silke-weight.

the Brace of Bergamo is 5/9 of an Alne, mult. by 5. divid. by 9. Bergamo with
Lions.


the Liver of bergamo is 6. per 6. dr. tur. which is sterling. 7. d.

The 100. li. of Mantoa are in Lions 66. lib. silk weight.

the brace is (...) of an Alne, multiply by 8. and divide by 15. Mantoua with
Lions.


the Liver of Mantoua is in Lions.

The 100. lib. of Modena are in Lions 77 li. silk weight.

the braces are the same as in Mantoua. Modena with Lions.


The 100. li. of Antwerpe are in Lions 102. li. silk weight.

the Else of Antwerpe is (...) of an Alne, which is done by taking the
Antwerpe with Lions.
and of the sum and add them, they make Alnes.

the Liver of gross may be calculated at 6. li. tur. 12. s. sterling.

The 100. lib. of Sutle have made in Lions -- 96 lib. silk weight.

the 9. Yards in London make in Lions 7. Alnes, so that the Alne of London with
Lions.
Lions is 46. inches English.

the Liver or pound of London sterling. is 10. Livers turnois.

The Oak of Constantinople makes in Lions li. Silke-waights. Constantinople
with Lions.


the P^ of Constantinople is 5/9 of an Alne, mult. by 5. div. by 9.

the Piastre of Doller may be calculated at 45. s. sterling. 4. s. 6. d.

The Rotolo of Aleppo has rendered in Lions 4 li. Silk weight.

The Rotolo of Tripoli in Siria has made 4. lib. Aleppo with Lions.


The 100. lib. of Valentia in Syaine has made in Lions -- 73 Almeria -- 117
Tortosa -- 72 Saragosa -- 73 Spain with Lions.

lib. Silkeweight.

And 130. Vares of Valentia has made in Lions 100. Alnes.

100. lib. of Paris have made in Lions of towne-weight 116 Roven have made in
Lions ditto -- 120. li. Tholousa have made in Lions ditto -- 96 The weihts of
dive^ Cities of France with Lion^.
Marselia has made in Lions ditto -- 94 Montpelier has made in Lions ditto --
96 Rotchell has made in Lions ditto -- 94 Geneva has made in Lions ditto --
130 Besanson has made in Lions ditto -- 116 Bourge in Bresse makes in Lions
ditto -- 115 Avignon have made in Lions ditto -- 96


The Measure of Languedocke is a Cane, divided into 8. Palms, which Cane is 1,
to reduce Canes into Alnes, you must add and they make Alnes.

Now for as much as many other places, that traffic in Silk, are found to
correspond with this Town; it will not be improper I should inserte them
briefly here, as showing what the 100. lib. of these several places make
Silk weight, or as they term it poids de mare in Lions. of 15. oun.

Padova 100. li. gives in Lion^ 73. li. Regio 100. li. gives 78 Callabria 100.
gives 69 Cosensa 100. gives 70 Raconis 100. gives 66. Bavearre 100. gives 90
Aleppo Rotolo gives 4 Tripoli Rotolo gives 4 Ancona 100. gives 73 Placio 100.
gives 72 Marselia 100. gives 85 Avignon 100. gives 68

Note that the 100. lib. of Marc or Silk weight in the payment at Lions makes
108. lib. of the Town weight of Lions, the former Measures of Lions with other
places.
being fifteen Ounces to a Pound, and the latter being of 16. Ounces to a
Pound.

For the Measure of length of Lions, I find this observation to have been
made, that The 100. Alnes in Lions make in London -- 98. else. Anvers -- 163.
Francford -- 204. Dansicke -- 136 Vienna -- 142 Paris -- 93. Roven -- 85.
Lixborne -- 98. Sivill -- 132 (...). Madera -- 101. Venetia -- 177 Lucca -- 196
Florence -- 200. Millan -- 226. Genoa -- 472. palm. Spain -- 135. Var. Rome --
130. braces. Naples -- 50. Canes.



Which I refer to trial of the experienced; and thus much shall serve to
have said of Lions.

The next Province is Languedocke; wherein is found Narbone, Languedoc.
Nismes, and Montpelier, three good Cities, and which afford of late days, by
the industry of the Inhabitants some serges, says, and some fine cloth, of
this Country making; and here also grows that excellent Wine which takes his
name from the Town of Frontiniacke: and here also is that small Village
Beaveaire, having in July a Fair Beaveaire.
or Mart famous in these parts, and resembled at my there being 1618. our
Sturbridge, beside which they have yearly there other Faires but of no great
consequence.

The next Province is Provence, wherein is Arles, in times past the seat of
some Roman Emperors. Brignolle, whence our Prunes of Prov^nce.
Brignolle come, known to us by the name Prunels from Brignole, whereas in the
language of this Country the g. is not pronounced. Aix the Parliament seat;
and lastly Thollon, the best Haven in France, and most capacious, and Marselia
famous in trade for these Countries, of which a word in passing, and first of
Thollon.

CHAP. CXXX.
Of Thollon, and the Trade thereof.

THollon enjoying a fair and capacious Haven, and esteemed the best, largest
and safest in the Mediterranean Tholl^n, and the tra^e thereof.
Sea, is seated ten leagues to the Eastward of Marselia, wherein the King does
keep a Customehouse for Province, as having not so much power to settle one in
Marselia, by the privilege or insolency of the inhabitants, who endeavor still
thus to maintain that little liberty they have. It abounds only in Oils,
which hence is laden in great abundance, and dispersed into other Countries,
as England, Holland, and some Almonds, which we call Province Almonds: Some
Salt is here laden and brought from the Isles of Eres, about three leagues
hence, being the proper Merchandise of the King, who has Factors for the sale
thereof in every City and Town in France. In this place the moneys are the
same as through all France, and the waights and measures not much differing
from those of Marselia, which I will there more succinctly handle, and only
will show the manner of buying and providing here of Oils, as I have observed
my self here at diverse times during my abode in this Town and Country.

Oils of Province are here and throughout all Province bought Province Oy^es
how bo^ght and cast up.
by the Millrowle or Millroe, fourteen of which are accounted to a Tun of Oil
of 252. gallons, yet if carefully looked unto at the buying, and the same
truly measured, 13. Milroes will make the said Tun; the same is sold
commonly here by the Florin, an imaginary coin, and in value 12. Sol turnois;
the Milroe of Oil is commonly worth 26. to 30. Florence, the Caske of this
place cost ordinarily 18. Sold per Milroe, and the Custom outward is 10. Sol
per Milroe, and the Custom of the place gives 3. per 100. provision, and 1.
per cent. for brokeredge thereof. Now to reduce all charges to a constant rate,
it has been observed and found true by my self and others, that if 18.
shillings 6. pence stariing be accounted for every Florin that a Milroe of Oil
shall cost the first penny; so much will the Tun of Oil stand in clear
aboard of all accustomed charges.

But for as much as this rule holds only in Thollon, I will insert Measures
for Oils.
the particulars thereof how it is found to accord with our measure and weight
in England, because it is a staple and most requested commodity, and the
principal commodity that this Country does afford.

The common measure then is a Scandal, and of which it is found that 4.
Scandals make 1. Milroe, every Scandal being 4. gallons English. and 31. li.
haberdepois.

1. M^roe is 17. gallons English, and is 126. li. English.

2. Milroes is a charge which is 34. gallons, or 252. li. English.

4. Charges makes a But, which is. a The, or 12^. gallons English, and has
been found to make 1008. li. haberdepois.

The Custom hereof is a Crown of 3. li. Tur. upon every 100. Milroes, and
every Crown is accounted 5. Florins, or 60. Sols.

Wine is here sold by the same Milroe, as above is said. For Wine.


Almonds are sold by the Cargo of 300. li. Marselia weight.

Corn is sold by the Muyd and Mynots, 24. Mynots make a Muyd, For Corn.
and 1. Muyd is about 8. quarters English.

Province does afford many commodities for Merchandising, which Commodities of
Province.
hence is transported into several Countries, as first Oil as above made and
gathered in November and December shipe for England, Spain and Italy.

Also great quantity of Wools for Clothing, bought up in May, June and July,
by Milanois, Genoes, Piem^s and Montpelerians, which commonly bears 14. in 16.
the 100. ^oule, and being washed and cleansed, there is lost in the clensing and
clearing sometimes the one half thereof.

Also great quantity of Scarlet grain, and powder of grain, gathered in the
Heaths and Fields by poor people, and brought by them to the Lords of their
Territories, from the Month of May, to the Month of August, and is worth
green about 5. in 6. li. t^r. per li. but being dried diminishes at least
(...). thereof.

Also Almonds are here in great abundance found growing, gathered in
September and October, called (as before is noted) Province Almonds for
distinction sake, and are commonly worth from 12. to 15. Crowns the Cargo.

Also here is yellow Wax in good quantity, bought in October and November,
worth commonly from 40. to 50. li. per cent.

Also here is Honey bought in November and December, worth commonly about 22.
in 23. Cro. the Cantar. Besides which, here are many Bed coverlets, and
Wastcoats made and quilted of Satin, Taffeta and Callico, and hence dispersed
into several Countries. To conclude, there may be laden in Tholon, Marselia,
and generally throughout all Province, from 1500. to 2000. Tons of Oil
yearly, about 400. Quintalls of Almonds, about 1800. to 2000. Quintalls of
Wool, about 200. Quintals of Honey, and but little Wax, as being for the most
part spent in their own Country, principally in their Churches.

The Customs upon all commodities of the growth of France, paieth Customs
paid in Province.
in the Exportation but a ^all acknowledgement, but all other commodities pay
five per cent. but for Spices and all other commodities that are brought in
from the Levant, there is lately placed thereon throughout all Province a
Custom of ten per cent. and thus much for Thollon.

CHAP. CXXXI.
Of Marselia and the Trade thereof.

THe principal seat of Trade in Provence is Marselia, Marselia, and the trade
thereof.
famous for the great concourse of Merchants, and for the commerce that it
maintains with Turkey, Barbary, Spain, France, Italy, Flanders and England,
it is commodiously situated on the Mediterranean Sea, enjoying an excellent
Haven, and a reasonable road for shipping of all sorts, it wants to make it
perfect a course for Exchanges which here is supplied by the corrent of Lions,
and governed only thereby, to which place each fair some partidos are made,
not by the rules of other places, but by the rule of Interest from the date of
the Bill, to the time of the next succeeding fair there.

It vents from England some Baies, Clothes, Lead and Tin, Pilchers, Hering
white and red, and yearly about 2000. in 3000. tons of Newland-fish which
the English bring thither, and they also supply it with Moscovia commodities,
as African hides, above ten thousand pair yearly, Tallow 2000. Quintalls,
Wax 1000. Quintalls, besides other commodities of England, as Calueskins,
Hides, Salmon and some fish. It affoordeth not any commodity to be sent
abroad, save some Oils, Wines, Wools, Almonds, and Verdigrace, and all others
are hither imported from other Countries, as such as Alexandria, Aleppo, Acria,
Constantinople, Naples, Leghorne, or the coasts of Spain does yield; the maine
support of their trade is the plenty of Spanish Rialls, and the license here
for exportation, which is the only means whereby the trade of Turkey is
preserved to them, for from hence I have seen 100. thousand Rialls of (...).
shipped publicly upon a small Vessel of 160. tons for Scanderone, which has
been thence returned in rich Silks, Drugges and Spices. But of late days,
their success in trade has prooved so bad, and their losses by Pirates so
great and so many, that the town and Merchants have lost much of their former
splendour and fame, their great Vessels are now become small Barks, and the
great Merchants of Lions, Paris, Li^oges, Toures, and other parts of France,
who had here their factors for to continue this trade, have recalled them
after the sustentation of great losses, the payment of great sommes, for the
maintenance of their Ambassador in Constantinople; and especially the late
inhansement of their moneys, which is the ruin and overthrow of all commerce
whatsoever.

In this place I resided for some years, and therefore will note briefly what
I observed needful to my present subject.

The moneys current, and the accounts kept accord in all particulars with
Paris, sometimes alteration is found in Coins by means Coins in Marselia.
of the great trade, and that because both Italian and Spanish coins are here
current; these become sometimes a Merchandise, and are requested and inhansed
according as occasion for transportation does require, which is more in winter
then in summer, by reason of their general voyages made into Turkey, from
September to March, and commonly not after.

The pound of Marselia is 16. ounces, and 100. li. is the Quintall, Weights in
Marselia.
300. li. or three Quintalls, makes with them a Cargo.

The 100. li. in Marselia has been found to produce in these Cities following:

In London -- 88. li. Venetia sotile -- 134. li. Venetia gro. -- 84 Sicilia --
50. li. Lixborne -- 79. li. Florence -- 114. li. Anvers -- 86. li. Lions -- 95.
li. Sivill -- 88. li. Mallaga -- 24. Roves Dansicke -- 104. li. Alleppo -- 18.
R. Ditto silk -- 19. Tripoli -- 21. 1 Ditto barbar. -- 76. 2 Baruti -- 17. 5
Alex. zera -- 41. 6 Scio -- 81. 10 Constantinople -- 74. 5 Acria -- 14. 6
Babylonia -- 12. 5. M. Balsara -- 3. 6. M.


These observations I have found true by my own experience. Weights agreed
with other places.


Rotolo of Aleppo, gave in Marselia 5. li. 6. ounces Rotolo of Damasco gave 4.
li. Rotolo of Tripoli in Soria 4. li. Rotolo of Mantoa 5. li. Cantaro of Genoa
118. li. Cantaro of Cuietavechia in Allome 130. li. Cantaro of Alicant in
Barsilia 133. li. Rotolos 100. li. Malta in Olives 200. li. Loderos 100. li. of
Constantinople 135. li. Cantaro of Sardinia in cheese 100. li. Cantaro of Zante
in corrence 116. li. Cargo of Valentia in pepper 320. li. Cantaro of Argier
150. li. Rotolo of Cyprus in cottons 5. li. Cantaro of Valentia in cocheneale
88. li. Hundred of London, 112. li. gave in Tin 125. li. And the 120. li.
English* stannery in Tin made 134. li.

These Towns are said to agree with Marselia in their Quintall,

First, Lepanto 100. li. Arches 100. li. Candia Sotile 100. li. Petras 100. li.
Rotchell 100. li. Tholosa 100. li. Montpelier 100. li. Avignon 100. li. which I
refer to trial of him that shall have occasion, because I question the
truth of some of them.

The Measures of length is the Cane, which is divided into eight Palms, the
Cane making 2. yards English. Measures of Marselia.


Corn is sold by the Mine, the Sack of Pisa, and Leghorne is found to be 1
Mines of Marselia.

The customs here out and in are 1 per cent. but the City by reason of
cleansing the Harbor, and some ships set out against Pirates Customs in
Marselia.
have made the 1 inwards 3 per cent. and only 1. out, this is meant of
commodities of the growth of the Country; but in Spices brought in, as Pepper,
Ginger, Indico, or such as come not out of the Levant, but as they call it, out
of the Ponent, or out of the West Seas, it paies the Kings custom which is now
about 15. per cent. besides the Cities custom above named, and thus much for
Marselia.

The next Province is that of Avignon, the principal City thereof called by
that name, it is a fair Town, and seated upon the River Avignon.
of Rhone, but has no Trade that I could observe, though I have often been
there, it is subject to the Pope, and he permitting Jews to inhabit here,
are found the principal Pedlers, for Merchants I cannot call them. The City is
said to have 7. Palaces, 7. Parishes, 7. Monasteries, 7. Nunneries, 7. Innes,
and 7. Gates, and other things of note I observed not, and as for commerce, the
Weights and Measures diff^r not much from Marselia, and the great custom here
paid is some prejudice to passengers and merchandise that passes from Provence
to Lions, or from Lions to Marselia.

The next Province is Orange, the capital City here bearing that name,
belonging to the Prince of Orange, a strong Town, and Orange.
sweetly seated near upon the Rhone; here all Protestants passengers are
really welcomed, and Papists narrowly looked unto, in requital of the contrary
courtesy practiced at Avignon not above fix leagues off.

The next is Picardy, wherein I find Amiens and Abbevile for Picardy. Callais.
fair Towns, but of little or no traffic: Callais also the inlet of France
is strong, but has sent away its Trading with the Staple, which by the English
was planted and continued here for 200. years; whilst it was in possession
of the English, the French Kings were accustomed to have the same put daily
into their remembrance until it was regained; and were it not, that the
Merchant adventurers make mention thereof in their Oath taken at the entrance
into that Brotherhood, it is almost forgotten that ever it was English, which I
the rather mention here, that some noble English heart would daily put our
Sovereign in mind thereof till it return again to be English; in the mean
time a word of the Trade thereof.

CHAP. CXXXII.
Of Callais, and the Trade thereof.

CALLAIS formerly was the great Staple for the Woolles of England, and settled
here Anno 1347. by Callais and the trade thereof.
Edward the Third, to make good his Conquest after eleventh months siege, but
afterward it was hence removed, and this place lost by Queen Mary, Anno 1557.
after 200. years possession of the English, and was by our then Kings of
England ever called the Key that gave their Armies entrance into France; the
place is not now of any great noted traffic, though it and Bollen adjoining
be accounted the best maritime Ports in Picardy, opposite to Dover from whence
this is seven leagues distant.

The Coins here current are those in general of France.

The Weights here in use are three. Weights of Ca^.


First, is the Weight proper of the Town, the 100. lib. whereof is in London
about 92. lib.

The second is called the Merchants Weight, the 100. lib. whereof make in
London 113. lib. and the 100. sutle of London is here 88. lib.

The third is called the English Wooll-hundred, or Staple hundred, the 100.
lib. whereof is in London about 89. lib. or 90. lib. about 3. per cent.
different from the Towne-weight.

The Measure used here is the Alne, and makes in London() inches.

The next is Champaigne, wherein is Rhemes the principal City, Champaigne.
where the Kings of France are anointed, and where there is a College for the
entertainment of the English, English Fugitives, Jesuits I mean

The next is Burgondy, famous for Digion, which is notable through France for
good mustard, a note worthy our Tukesbury. Burgondy.


The next is Bresse, Chastilion being the principal City, and the last that I
shall handle appertaining to the King of France, or under B^esse.
his government.

The next in order according to my Method is the Franche Count, the principal
City thereof is Besanson, which in times past strove (...).
for precedence of Trade with Lions, but being an inland Town she has lost
that honor, the Inhabitants of this Country bringing home greater and more
honorable titles, as famoused abroad for good Soldiers, known by the name of
Walloons, and now is under the command of Spain. The Exchanges of Placentia
was once here seated from Cambery, but the Merchants being not well used
returned to Placentia.

100. lib. of Besanson is 112. lib. English.

The next is Loraine, the principal City is Nancy, yielding plenty of Corn,
and Wine, store of fresh water fish, and salt, and famous Loraine.
in that it was the Dukedom of Godfrey, surnamed of Bulloigne, which won
Jerusalem from the Saracens, and was the first Christian crowned King of that
Kingdom: and now to Savoy, as partaking with the French in the Trade as well
as in their Garb.

CHAP. CXXXIII.
Of Savoy, and the Provinces thereof.

THe Dukedom of Savoy comprehends only this Duchy and the Principality of
Piedmont, in the Savoy and the cities thereof.
former is Chambery the residency of the Duke, when he is in these parts: in
the later is Nisa and Villa Franca two Seaports, but not capacious nor safe
for ships of burden; next Aste, a great Mart for all Italian commodities:
and lastly Turin, the principal City where the Duke of Savoy holds his Court
and residence; and because in these later years of War between England and
France, our English Factours from Marselia fled hither for succor,
entertainment, and protection, which they bountifully had of the late Duke; I
must not pass over the Trade thereof without remembrance, nor be unmindefull
of that bounteous welcome they found at his Highness hands.

CHAP. CXXXIV.
Of Turine, and the Trade thereof.

TURINE being the capital City of Piedmont, having Turine and the Trade
thereof.
Nisa, and Villa Franca for Seaports, has had many furtherances to make it a
great City of traffic; for the Duke at several times, but lastly at the
coming of the English hither from Marselia, made a Cavidall or stock for
Trade of 300000. cro. whereinto he caused many of his Nobles to enter and
become Partners, but when the stock was made, and published in England and in
other Countries, this Dukedom was not found to give vent to any commodities of
consequence, some fish, and Calveskinnes excepted, wherewith to invest the said
Stock: notwithstanding he gave commandment that the English should be kindly
entertained both at Nisa and Villa Franca, and appointed certain lodgings and
Warehouses for them, and their wares; but Peace ensuing shortly after with
France, the Factours again returned to Marselia with due acknowledgement of
their Royal entertainment: the maine obstacle in Trade here being the too
near neighborhood of Genoa the rich, and of Leghorne the free, which neither
of the two Towns formerly mentioned can equallize.

The Moneys commonly current in Savoy are the Moneys of Italy Coins of Savoy.
and France, as neighboring, and the florin of the Country accounted three
sold turnois, which is 3. d. English.

Their Accounts are kept in Livers sold and deniers, as in France; Accounts in
Savoy.
but in Nisa they account by Florins and Grosses, a crown of sol of France is
4. flo. 2. gro.

Their 100. lib. makes in London about 82. lib. and 77. li. in Lions and in
Venetia gross 66. in 67. li. in Florence or Pisa 135. l.

Their Measure is a Ras both of Cloth and Silk, which is half an Alne of
Lions, and 23. inches English by the Rule.

This Country affoordeth for Merchandise Rice and corn, in abundance, and some
Silk wrought here, and some other commodities, but of no great consequence,
nor worthy mentioning; therefore I will forbear to treat further of this
Dukedom, and end my French Commerce.

Before I leave France, and therewith Savoy, who do in all things Waights o^
F^ance red^ced to London 100. l^.
partake with the Garb and manner of the French, and ere I enter into Italy,
having thus surveied some particular Towns of eminency therein. It will be
worthy notice to collect the Weights and Measures of such as we have omitted,
and so view the general trade of France; which I will begin in the Weights,
and reduce the same to the 100. li. sutle of London, which is observed,

The 100. li. of London has made in Paris by Kings beam 89. li. Deep 91
Burgogne 91 Roan by Vicount 88 by ordinary weight 92 weighed by the same and
account 4. l. per cent. over. Avignon 112. li. Callais 107 by Merchants weight
^8 Engl. Wool weight 110 Marselia 112 Aquimort 98 Mirabell 98 Abevile 91
Bordeaux 91 Lions by ordinary weight 107 by Silk weight 98 by Customers weight
90 (...) 112 Montp^lier 112 Rotchell 112 Ditto by small weight 115 Genoa 98 by
great weight 82 S. Anthony 123 Calsada 98
For further instruction, here I refer the ingenuous to the large Work of
Monsieur Savona, who has comprised all the Trading of France into a Volume of
too great a bulk for me to peruse it more accurately.

In like manner, to abbreviate my labor, you well see that the Me^sures of
France reduced to the 100. yards o^ London.
100. yards of London makes in these Towns following,

In Roven 77. alns. Avignon 80 Orleans 48. ca. Marselia Silk 48 Ditto for
woollen 44. Paris, Rotchell 78. aln Lions for Linen 80 Dito for Silk 115.
alnes. Provence 48. can. Geneva 80. stabs. Nantes, Abevile 110. alns.

And so for the most part the same are found through all France, the abovesaid
places only excepted.

CHAP. CXXXV.
Of the Trade in general of France.

FRom the particular Trade of the Cities of France, The general Trade of
France.
let us view the trade in general of this Kingdom, and we shall not find it
of any great consequence, for here it is found that the Gentlemen do not
meddle with Traffic, because they think such Traffic ignoble and base, and
so unfit for them; which error the French no less dearly buy than do some
English, to which Kingdom of late days they have in some sort blowed over
that opinion, though some of the better judgments of England are reformed in
that point, and find it a most worthy, excellent, and profitable Calling: but
as the French are found to neglect Merchandising, so are they less studious in
their Navigations than their neighbors, either Spaniards, Dutch, or English;
which I imagine proceeds not out of a desire to attempt, or courage to
perform, but because they abound with all things both for plentiful food, and
rich attire; and if they want any thing, strangers gladly bring it to them,
allured by four principal commodities which does much enrich the Inhabitants,
which is Wines, Linnens, Salt, and corn, being the prime commodities of that
Kingdom; yet it is found that the Marselians trade and navigate into Egypt,
Aleppo, and Constantinople, and the Normans and Britains, into England, Spain,
Ireland, and Netherland: in time of Wars they have also some small Vessels at
Sea, more fit for piracy and theft than for any great War of moment, and
their success has been so ill in their Colonies in America, that it has
quite disheartened them from seconding their attempts.

Three Cities here carry the greatest fame in Trade, Marselia for the Levant,
Roven for the English Channel, and Rotchell for the Ocean, this last subsisting
by the growth of their White and Claret Wines of Bordeaux: Roan by their petty
manufactories of Cards, Pinne^, Combs, Paper, and Canvas: and Marselia by the
Trade of Turkey, wherein are found Factours that do employ the estates of many
Merchants resident within Lions, and other inland towns of France, which gives
life to most of their Traffic and Navigation in these parts. Now it is
observed that England brings them Newland fish, herings, pilchers, lead, tin,
cloths, ke^ses, cottons, or frises, and have in returns Wines from Bordeaux,
oils and almonds from Marselia, and paper, canvas, bucroms from Roven, and
Locrams from Morlais, the East country and Holland brings them cordage, tar,
pitch, rosen, masts, and fur timber, and returns Wines from Bordeaux, and
paper, canvas from Roven, and sal^ from Eres: Spain brings them some spices,
and they return them corn, and linnens: Italy brings them some silk
fabriques, etc. and they return them oiles, cloth, linen, and the like:
Turkey affords them cotton woolles, raw silk, cotton yarne, hides, sheep
woolles* etc. and they send thither Rials of Plate, woollen cloth, and little
else; and this is the gross of the present Trade of France.

CHAP. CXXXVI.
Of Geneva, and the Trade thereof.

GENEVA being a fair City and wholly in possession of Protestants, is a
Nursery of Learning, and withal Geneva and the trade thereof.
no stepdame to Trade: it is seated commodiously, to that end upon the River
Rhone, which within 16. leagues after saluteth the Walls of Lions, and serves
out of Switzerland ^o convey many sorts of Merchandise to it, and to transport
the same thence to Lions, Valence, Avignon, Arles, to Provence, and Languedocke.

Their Moneys are as in France, and keep their Account in Livers Sold and
Deniers Turnois, and here also is current the Coins of the Coins in Genev^
and accounts.
United Cantons of Switzers, and the coins of Savoy.

The 100. li. here renders in London 107. li. and by some is found Waights of
Geneva.
to agree with the gross of Venice, and making of Venice sotile 158 2/3 li.
Incirca.

The Stab renders in London () and 60. Else here has been Measures of Geneva.
found to make in Venetia 100. braces cloth measure, and 106. bra. silk
measures.

But it is time that I should forsake these petty Provinces and travel over
the Alps, and come into Italy, which is my next Task.

CHAP. CXXXVII.
Of Italy, and the Provinces thereof.

ITALY is girded round with the Ionian, Tyrrhenian, Italy, and the Provinces
thereof.
and Adriatique Seas, except it be toward France and Germany, from which it is
parted by the Alps.

The Country in general for Merchandising yields Rice, silks, velvets,
sattins, taffetaes, grograms, rashes, fustians, armor, allome, glasses of all
sorts, as I shall mention in the particular Kingdoms and Provinces thereof.

Italy has ever affoorded eminent and ingenious Merchants, yet such as merit
not really in all things that Title, because that their Trade consists more
in Exchanges, which is a branch of Merchandising, than in Adventures, which is
the principal point which gives the Title to all bargainers, it being a common
speech though unmerchantlike, yea unchristianlike amongst them, That they are
loath to trust God with their Estates at Sea when they may have the same safe
on shore, as if then it were out of his reach or protection.

Italy is now divided into 10. Provinces, which affords many principal Cities
of Trade, which following my intended Method I will handle in order.

1. The Kingdom of Naples. 2. The Papacy. 3. The Commonwealth of Venetia. 4.
The Dukedom of Florence. 5. The Dukedom of Millan. 6. The Dukedom of Mantoa.
7. The Dukedom of Vrbin. 8. The Principality of Parma. 9. The Estate of Genoa.
10. The State of Lucca.
In each of which are found many notable towns of traffic, which as
belonging unto several Princes, will require a more particular Survay, than if
otherwise it were commanded by one sole Sovereign; and first of the Kingdom
of Naples.

CHAP. CXXXVIII.
Of Naples, and the Cities thereof.

THe Kingdom of Naples, is accounted the richest of Italy, abounding in
several commodities for Merchandising, Naples and the (...) (...).
as in Mines of diverse metals, in choice and rich Wines, in Saffron, Silks raw
and wrought, in Oils, Brimstone, Anyseeds, Argalls, etc. here I have seen
one field yielding at one and the same time three several crops, the ground
bearing Corn, having Mulberry trees intermixed, and Vines planted at the foot
of each Mulberry, which have made excellent Wines, and this I have observed for
twenty miles riding together on each hand of the way, which must needs be
pleasant to the beholders, and profitable to the inioyers and owners.

The Kingdom of Naples is divided into sundry Provinces, which I will only
nominate: as first,

Terra di Lavoro, wherein is found Capua, whose pleasures did effeminate
Haniball, Cuma where one of the Sibills resided, near Terra di Lavoro.
which is Lacus Avernus, the stink whereof kills Birds as they fly over it,
Baca, Nola and Puteoli; famous in times past for many Antiquities and Baths,
which in Anno 1619. I curiously visited for diverse days, in search of
shadows. The next principal Town is Gaieta, well fortified by the
Spaniards, and where Burbon that ransacked Stai^ of Gaeta i^ 43 li. o^ that
weight.
Rome lies interred; but the principal of this Kingdom is Naples: of which,

CHAP. CXXXIX.
Of Naples, and the Trade thereof.

NAples the Metropolis of this Kingdom, is a very beautiful City, and
estimated seven miles in compass, Naples and the trade thereof.
once called Parthenope, and now Neapolis, fortified with four strong Castles
in possession of the Spaniard, Castle Capedna, Castle Ermo, Castle Ov^, and
Castle Novo. It venteth out of England, Baies, Says, Serges, Fustians, Lead,
Tin, Pilchards, Newland-fish, red and white Herring, some Cloth and other
commodities; it consists much in Gentry, few eminent Merchants natives are
here found; the taxes laid upon Merchandises being so great, that it ruins
all commerce, yet what I observed here in Anno 1619. I shall relate.

The current Coins of Naples were then, Coins of Naples.


A Duccat of gold large is worth in Naples 11. Carlins.

A Duccat of Carlins is worth only ten Carlins, so that 100. Dutcats of gold,
are worth 115. Duccats of Carlins.

One Ounce is worth six Duccats.

A Duccat of Carlines is worth five Tarries.

A Tarry is worth 20. grains.

A Carlin is worth 10. grains.

Their accounts are kept in Naples by Duccats, Tarries and Grains, Account
keeping.
five Taries making a Duccat, and twenty Grains a Tarry; but these are
accounted Duccats current, every 110. Duccats current, make 100. Duccats of
gold.

The Waights of Naples are the Cantar and the 100. Their Cantar Waights of
Naples.
of Naples is 100. Rotolos, which is 2. li. 9. ounces Naples, and by which they
weigh all their gross goods, which is in Florence 32. ounces, and 285. li. and
is 196. li. haberdepois. But the 100. li. has been observed to produce

in Florence -- 90. li. in Rome -- 93. li. in London -- 71. li. in Lions -- 68.
li. in Venetia -- 106. li. Ditto gross -- 82. li. 1. li. sutle is in Venice
sotle -- 15. ounces. 1. li. sutle is in Venice gross. -- 9. ounces 58.
Note that in Gaeta is used another Quintar for some commodities gross goods,
which has been found to render in Leghorne 254. li. and in Naples all gross
goods are waighed by the great Cantar, and all fine goods by the hundred.

Their measure is a Cone divided into 8. Palms, which is in Florence Measures
in Naples.
after the opinion of some 3. Braces just, and it has been observed in the
measure of these two places, that 46. Braces of Satin made at Naples 12.
Canes, so that in stuffes the Cane of Florence makes in Naples 8. 2/23. Palms,
and consequently Braces 48. made in Naples 13. Canes 3. Palms.

Nine Palms of Naples are in Lions just two Alnes, so that the Cane make
English 81. inches by rule, which is somewhat more then 2. yards English,
without the inch, and some have found it to be 2. yards: 12. Canes in Naples
have made in Lions 21. Alns, so that 1. Alns have made a Cane in Naples.

Many commodities are sold by the Salmo, and 16. Tomolos is a Corn, etc.
Salmo, which Tomolo is two Staios of Florence, and in England Gallons.

Oil in Callabria is sold by the Migliot, which is 132. ounces, or 11. li.
and it requires 2. Milliots to make a staio of Naples. Oil.


Note that four Salmo in Oil in Naples have made 40. staios, which are in
Venice 40. mari, which are in England () gallons.

But Naples is more famous amongst Bankers for Exchanges then amongst Merchants
for any emminent trade, therefore it is needful I annexe the Exchanges
thereof, according to the custom practiced in this place, which you shall
find in the 284. and 343. Chapters at large, with all circumstances therennto
belonging.

The Customs of this Kingdom does diffe^ upon several commodities, as some
paies 2. some 4. per cent. and some more and some Customs of Naples.
less, according to the will of the Vice-king here, commanding for the King
of Spain, which by the Merchant is more precisely to be learned.

The next Province is Abruzzo, wherein is Salerne, famous for Physic here
taught; next Rhegum, opposite to Mesina, and in that Vare, Abruzzo.
the next Tarento, where grow great quantity of Olives, and whereof Oil in
abundance is made. Taranto.


The next is the Province of Ottranto, wherein is found Brindifie, the most
famous Havens in these Seas, and Ottranto and Galipoli affoording Ottranto.
great abundance of Oils and Cattle which last pay for tribute to the
Spaniard 100. thousand Duccats yearly; and for the Oils they are known to us
by the name of Apulia Oils, being the last Province comprised in this Country,
and the former Cities standing in Calabria, it will not be amiss to insert
two or three words of the trade thereof.

CHAP. CXL.
Of Callabria, and the Trade thereof.

IN Callabria is seated Tarento, Ottranto, Brindise, and Rhegium, which
abounding in oiles and ca^tle, especially Callabria, and the Trade thereof.
oiles, which many English ships do lade in these parts yearly, I will note
what I have observed therein.

Their Moneys are the same as in Naples, and and current throughout the
Kingdom. Coins of Callabria.


Their Weight is the Quintall of a 100. lib. which has made in Venetia sot. --
106. li. Weights of Callabria.
Venetia gro. -- 82. London -- 73.


100. lib. in Callabria has made in Venetia sotl. 12. ounces.

The Cantar of Naples is also sometimes used for gross goods, and is found to
be in Venice gross 186. lib. and observed to have made in London 196. li.

Their Measure of length is a Cane divided into 8. palms, and has Measures of
Calabria.
made cloth measure in Venice 3. bra. and in London () inches.

The (...) of oil here is 132. ou. which is 11. li. abovesaid, Of oil.
and it wants 2. li. of making a Staio in Napes.

The But of oil in Callabria is 500. Rot. which make in Naples 43. in 44. sta.
which is about 25. caf. and thus much shall serve for Callabria, a word for
Apulia.

CHAP. CXLI.
Of Appulia, and the Trade thereof.

APULIA comprehending some of the aforesaid citities, also Le^hy, Barry, and
Manfredonia the principal, Apulia, and the trade thereof.
abounding in corn, oil, almonds, olives, galls, wines, and other
commodities are sold thus.

Corn is sold by the Tomelo, which is two staios of Florence, a cargo of corn
being 36. tomolos makes Measures of corn.
in Flor. 72. sta. and English () gallons.

Barley is also sold by the tomolo, but of a lesser sise as containing 1.
siaio, a cargo making also 36. tomolos, which reduced to Florence measure is 48
staios, and is English () gallons.

Their Tomolo of Wheat is 36. Rotolos, which are 2. li. 9. ou. per Rotolo of
Naples, which tomolo comes to be in Flor. 100. li. 6. ou.

But the Tomolo of Barley, is 48. Rotolos, which is. more than that of Wheat,
the cargo making 3. Moyas of Florence.

Almonds are sometimes sold by the cantaro, and commonly worth here 26. taries
the cantar, and sometimes by the tomolo, and Of almonds.
of the Abrogino almonds there goes twenty tomolos to a cantar, and of the
common sort of almonds 22. tomolos.

A Butte of oil or wine of Pulia hold here twelve barrels, which Of oil.
have been found to make in Florence 10. barrels, and is in England () gallons.

Oiles in Pulia are sold by the 1000. l. which commonly cost about 20. Tar. and
yet sometimes found to be measured by the Salme, accounted for 10 staios, each
staio waighing 18. Rotolos, so that this way the Salmo of oil comes to be
180. Rotolos, which reckoned in Florence, at 2. li. 7. ou. per Rotolo, makes
Florence weight 465. lib. and English () pounds, commonly worth from 18. to 22.
tares a measure, which comes to produce about 5. or 5. barrels in Florence.

This Staio of oil weighs 49. li. of the weight of Pulia.

Galls are here sold by the Cantaro, and is 196. li. of haberdepois.

Olives are sold by the Tomolo, worth about 5. car l. a tomolo, in the time of
gathering, which is in June and July, which are put in sackes Of olives.
of six or 6. tomolos, and each tomolo of olive, weighes about 16. Rotolos.

A Salmo of wine is accounted to make 3. bar. of Florence, and is commonly
worth 10. carlins a salmo, and held to be incirca 14. Of wine.
ser. of Venice measure.

A Car. or Cargo of corn of Pulia, has been observed to make 34. fanegs in
Callais, and in Lixborne 145. alquiers of tomolos 36. of Naples per car. and
57. Chil^s of Constantinople.

But I have staid too long here, I will pass to the next Principality, which
is the Papacy.

CHAP. CXLII.
Of the Papacy, and the Cities of Trade therein.

THe Papacy contains four Provinces: first, Romandiola. Papacy, and the Trade
thereof.
Secondly, Marca Anconitana. Thirdly, Ducato Spoletano. And fourthly, St Peter's
patrimony. And first then in Romandiolia, are many principal Cities, and great
towns, of which the first is Bollonia, the chief University of Italy, Ferara
famous for the Iron mines about it, and within whose jurisdiction stands Modena
and Rhegium, two fair Cities; and last, Ravenna, once beautified with a fair
Haven, now choked by age and rubbish; of the Trade of these a word and in
order.

CHAP. CXLIII.
Of Bollonia, and the Trade thereof.

BOLLONIA under the command of the Pope, is an University much frequented by
Students of the Civil Bollonia, and the Trade thereof.
Law, it is seated within land, and is well known in matters of Exchanges, as
I shall show in due place, and has those Moneys current that acknowledge the
Popes stamp, as I shall declare in Rome.

Their Accounts are kept in Livers sold and deniers, 12. deniers to a Accounts
in Bollonia.
sol and 20. sols to a Liver, the Liver may be accounted to be incirca 13. d.
sterling money, and some are found to keep their accounts in duccatons, sols,
and deniers, cast up by 12. and by 20. as above is said.

Their Weights common in use are these, Weights in Bollonia.


Their Quintall is 100. li. which makes

In London -- 80. li. Rome -- 100 Millan -- 106 Florence -- 104 Genoa -- 133
Lions -- 77 Venetia sot. -- 120 Venetia gr. -- 75


1000. li. in Bollonia have given in Venetia sutle 1320. li. gro. 750. li so
that the 1. lib. has rendered their gross 9. ou. sutle 14. ounces 2. sach.

Their Measure is a Brace, and is found to be about 25. inches Measures in
Bollonia.
English, 100. braces here have made in Venetia cloth measure 96. br. and of
silk bra. 90. braces.

Corn is here sold by the Corbe, 100. whereof makes 92. staios in Venetia, and
100 corbes in wine make Amf^ra Venetiana 12. and 2. Corn.
quarters, and in dry measures 170. quartes, and in London () gallons.

From hence are accustomed to come to other parts, corn, almonds, oiles,
wines, raw silk, and sundry sorts of wrought sattins, taffetaes, Commodities
of Bollonia.
and other, called hence Bollonia silk, and of Bollonia making, and to
conclude this place, here are found many eminent Exchanges, the course of
which Exchanging you shall find in the general Exchanges here practiced, vide
Chapter 296.

CHAP. CXLIV.
Of Ferara, and the Trade thereof.

FERARA is the next principal City of Trade in this circuit, famous for his
Iron-mines Ferara and the trade thereof.
about it, seated on the banks of the River Poe and accounted one of the
pleasantest Cities in Italy, for in the midst thereof is a fair Green, into
which open about twenty Streets, of half a mile in length, and so even and
uniforme that thence the utmost ^nds thereof may be discerned; it affoordeth
wines, oiles, olives, iron, steel, and some manufactories of silk.

The Moneys are as at Rome to which this City appertains, admitting but of
very little difference in the rates current thereof.

The Quintall of Ferara is 100. li. which makes Venetia sot. 112. li. and
Venetia gr. 72. lib. in London incirca 75. li. haberdepois, and the 100.
Weights of Ferara.
li. sat. Venice makes here 87. li. and the 100. li. gro. 138. li.

The Measure is a Brace, 100. braces makes in London 72. yards.

Their Wine Measure is a Mastello, 11. whereof make an Amf^ra of Measures of
Farara.
Venetia, and is in England () vide London.

Their Corn Measure is a stare, 100. stares makes in Venetia 37. sta. and so
much shall serve for Ferara and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. CXLV.
Of Modena, and the Trade thereof.

MODENA is the next City seated in this Tract, yielding many fabriques of
silks, which it disperseth Modena.
to its neighboring towns.

Their Accounts are kept in Livers, sold, deniers, 12. deniers to a sold, and
20. sol to a liver. Accounts in Modena.


Their Quintall is 100. li. which renders Weights in Modena.


In Lions -- 77. li. London -- 72. li. Venetia sotile -- 109. li. Venetia
gross -- 72. li. Florence -- 98. li.


The measure is the Brace, the same as in Mantua, and 1. per cent. Measures in
Modena.
longer then the Brace of Ferrara, and by observation it has been found that
the 100. Braces of Modena have made 118. in Florence. Corn is here sold by
the Staro, 100. whereof makes 93. or 94. Stares in Venetia, and one Staio of
Modena, has made 2. Staios in Florence, and has made in Venice three quarts,
and six quarteroli.

CHAP. CXLVI.
Of Rimano, and the Trade thereof.

RImno, anciently Ariminum, seated on the mouth R^ano, and the Trade of it.
of the River Rubicon, affoords much silk, which it partly sends abroad, and
partly converts here into Stuffes, also some Wines, Oils, Corn: The coins
current as in Rome, as being subject to the Papacy, and the accounts are kept
in their same denomination.

The Quintall is the 100. li. which makes in London 81. li. and some have made
experience, that it makes in Venice gross 76.

Their Measure is the Brace, and is in London 27. inches bare. Waights*
Measures.


Their Corn measure is (...) stare, 100. making 210. in Venetia, and their
Wine measure is a somo, which makes in London ten gallons.

CHAP. CXLVII.
Of Ravenna, and the Trade thereof.

RAvenna is seated on the Adriatique Sea, and once beautified Ravenna, and the
trade thereof.
with one of the fairest Havens in the World, where Augustus Caesar always
kept a Navy mand, to defend these parts of the Empire, now choked up with mud
and rubbish: the neighborhood of Venetia, whose Senators have as well followed
Mercury by Merchandising, as Mars by Arms, keeps this City from any notable
commerce, yet I will note what I have observed here upon both in matter of
waights and measures.

The Quintall of Ravenna is 100. li. which gives Venetia sotile ^8. li. Weights
of Ravenna.
in London, 78. li. and the gross ^00. li. of Venetia made here 133. li.

The measure is a brace, 100. braces of Cloth in Venice, is here 112. Measures
of Ravenna.
100. braces of silk in Venice, is here 106.

Corn is sold by the stare, 100. whereof makes in Venice 66. staio, so that
3. staros Ravenna, have made the 2. staios of Venetia; and these are the chief
Cities of Romandolia.

The next Province is Marco Anconitana, wherein is famous, first Loretto, for
the Pilgrimage to our Lady Church, brought thither if you Loretto.
will believe it through the air from Palestine, whereunto a great trade is
driven by the superstitious Papists; next is Adria, which gave name to these
Seas; next Recanti, and Ancona, two fair Cities and of great concourse of
Merchants, of which first.

CHAP. CXLVIII.
Of Recanti, and the Trade thereof.

REcanti, Olim Aelia Recina, as some authors allege is a fair City,
affoording Corn, Oil and Wine, and some Recanti in Istria.
Silk for Merchandise to be exported:

The waights thereof being 100. l. gives in Land. 75. l. Waights.


and in Florence -- 96. li. In Venetia sotile -- 112. li. In Venetia gross --
72. li.
Their measure is a brace, 94. whereof make Venetia brace 100. li. Oil is
sold here by the Miare, which is the same as that in Venetia. Measures.


CHAP. CXLIX.
Of Ancona, and the Trade thereof.

ANcona is a fair City, seated on the hill Cinerius, which shoots into the
Adriatique Sea like a Promontory, having Ancona and the trade.
a commodious Haven built by Trajanus the Emperor, it is fruitful as the rest
of this Country, affoording principally, Corn, Wines and Oils.

The Quintall of Anconia is 100. li. and makes in London -- 78. li. Waights.
In Venetia gross -- 73. li. In Venetia sotile -- 116. li. In Florence -- 98.
li.


Their measure here is a brace, 106. whereof have made in Venice 100. braces,
10. cones of cloth in Florence have made here 37 braces. Measures. Ancona.


Corn is here sold by the star^, 6. have made a sum in Florence.

The next Province is the Duchy of Spoletta, the principal City bearing the
name of Spallata, whereof is not any thing in Merchandising Spallata.
worthy the note that I find; and their waights and measures do in all points
agree with Venetia.

The last part of this Country is Saint Peter's Patrimony, wherein are
principal Cities of commerce, Civetavechia, which has a pretty harbor, and
near which the Allom is made, which we call Romish Civetavechia.
or Roche, and beer the Pope does for trade sake allow a Gentleman the title
of Consul for the English Nation, to see that the Mariners who are apt enough
to give offense be not wronged or abused, at whose hands in Anno 1619. going
thence as a Merchant to Rome, I found all courtesies and friendship, and passing
through Pollidor, a pretty town, in the Christmas Holidaies, I came to Rome,
where what I did observe in matter of Trade, besides the devotion of the season
and time, I shall in the next Chapter declare.

CHAP. CL.
Of Rome, and the Trade thereof.

THis City in her ancient splendour, was fifty miles Rome and the Trade thereof.
in circuit, and had 750. Towers that beautified her walls, and inhabited by
463000. Families, but now the compass exceedes not ten miles, and a third of
that is also wast ground, and has two third parts of the inhabitants Clergymen
and Cortesans which latter here are accounted to be 40000. and pay 30000.
Duccats, yearly tribute, which does mainetaine in Civetavechia two Galleys
furnished, known by the names of the (...), as the place of their aboade in
Rome, but leaving this private Trade to the Virgin Fri^rs, I come to the
public commerce of this City, which according to my observation is following.

Rome and the territory thereof affoordeth for Merchandise, Corn, Wine, Oil,
Silk, Gl^ves, Al^me, L^testrings, Kidskins, and some fabriques made of Silk:
And from England, it receives Lead, Tin, Baies, Says, Stuffes, Pilchards,
Herrings white and red, Newland-fish, Calveskins, ^lt Salmon, (...), Wax, etc.
which are landed at Civitavechia, and thence transported by boats and barks to
Rome, along the so much famoused River of Tiber, which passes through the same.

The Coins of all Italy pass here current, but the principal of Coins in
Rome.
this Country that are current is the Duccat, or as they call it the Crown of
Gold, which is worth 11. Iulios or Paulos.

The Crown of Silver is worth 10. Iulios or Paulos, which is 100. Baioches, or
400. quatrins.

The Iulio is worth 10. Baioches or 40. quatrins.

The Baioche is worth 40. quatrins or 1^ sol. 4. den. small money of Rome.

Their accounts are kept in Crowns, Iulios, Baioches and quatrins Accounts in
Rome.
as above, and some in Duccats of Camera or destampe, of which 97. 11. 3. make
100. of Gold.

Their Quintall in Rome is 100. and makes in London -- 80. li. and with other
Countries is found to be in Venetia sotle -- 119. li. Waights in Rome.


In Naples 106. li. Venetia gross 75. li. Florence 102. li. Genoa 110. li.

But note, that of these Quintars of 100. li. is framed two different waights,
with allowances given thereupon, as in sale of Spices and such like.

The Quintar thereof is accounted to be of the above said weight 160. li. And
the second for the weight of gross goods accounted to be 250. li. to the
Quintar, which is to be observed in the sale of a commodity, and therefore the
commodity and the weight whereby it is sold is to be observed.

They use also two measures in length, the one for Linen and Measures in Ro^e.
Woollen, called the Cane, divided into 8. Palms, and 30. Cans is 100. Braces
Venetia; the other which they call the Brace which is 3 (...). Palms of the
said Cane, which Brace renders in Florence 1. Brace, the first making in London
() inches, and the latter () inches.

Co^ne is sold by a measure, called the Rugio, which renders in Genoa 1. Mins,
and in Florence 8. Staios, and is 412. li. of Rome, and is in England ()
gallons.

But by reason of the great occasion that Clergymen from most parts of Europe
have to use money in this City, the Exchanges thereof are most worthy
observation, therefore I have handled the same in the 278. and 326. Chapters,
with all circumstances thereunto belonging, to which I refer you.

From Rome I will take my way to Venetia, and to that Republique, and see what
is there note worthy in matters of commerce.

CHAP. CLI.
Of the Commonwealth of Venetia, and the Cities of Trade therein.

THe Commonwealth of Venetia contains these Venetia, and the Trade thereof.
Provinces, La Marca Trevigiana, Friuli, Histria, part of Dalmatia, and the
Islands of Candy, Corfu, Cephalonia, Itheca, Xante, Lucaia, Cythera, etc. In
which I find these principal Cities of Trade, first Treviso, next Padua a
famous University for Physic; next Vicentia, next Bressia which is accounted
the second for greatness in Lombardy, next Verona, also a fair City Crema, a
strong Fort, Aquilegia once of great circuit, now devoured by the neighborhood
of Venetia, Palma a modern town built by the Venetians within these late
years, next is Cape de Istria, Pola, and some others of lesser note, and last
of all the Metropolis of all this Commonwealth which is Venice it self; of
these, or as many as I have gathered any observation, I shall declare.

CHAP. CLII.
Of Treviso, and the Trade thereof.

TREVISO is the principal City of that Province, Treviso, and the trade
thereof.
which to the Venetians is known by Marca Trevi giana, and commodiously seated
for an inland trade, the chief City Venetia depriving all the rest of any
eminent honor in matter of Traffic, therefore herein I shall be the briefer,
and first,

For their coins current, and their Account kept, I willingly omit the same,
as to be found more at large under the Title of Venetia.

As for the Waights and Measures thereof, it will not be improper that I set
here the agreements thereof with Venetia, as being seated within that
Commonwealth.

Treviso is found then to have two several Waights, a gross and Weights of
Treviso.
sutle, in the same manner as Venetia, which thus agree together.

100. li. gross in Treviso makes gross in Venetia 92. li.

100. li. sutle in Treviso makes sutle in Venetia 112. li.

100 li. sutle Venetia gives in Treviso sutle 89. li.

100. li. sutle Venetia gives in Treviso gross 58. li

100. li. sutle Treviso makes gross in Venetia 70. li.

All which considered, the thousands are found thus to accord.

1000. li. sutle Treviso is 1125. li. sutle Venetia.

1000. li. gross Treviso is 1080. li. gross Venetia and backward.

1000. li. gross Venetia is 926. li. gross Treviso.

1000. li. sutle Venetia is 890. li. sutle Treviso.

1. li. sutle Treviso is sutle Venetia 13. ounces.

1. li. gross Treviso is gross Venetia 13. ounces.

1. li. sutle V^netia is sutle in Treviso 10 ounces.

1. li. gross Venetia is gross in Treviso 11. ounces.

The Measures of length in Treviso is only the Brace. Measures of Treviso.


the 100. cloth braces in Venetia is 100. braces in Treviso.

the 100. silk braces in Venetia is 94. braces in Treviso.

Oil is sold here by the Miare.

Corn by the staio, the 100. staios here are 109. in Venetia.

Wine is sold by the Cara, which consists of 10. consi, which according to the
measure of Venetia is 17. quartes; the next is Padoua.

CHAP. CL^I.
Of Padoua, and the Trade thereof.

PADOUA is a famous University, especially for Physic, which affords not much
matter of Trade, yet Padoua, and the trade thereof.
observing my intended Method, I will place here the concordancy of their
Waights and Measures with the capital City Venetia.

Padoua is found to have a gross Quintall, and a sotle Quintall, as the City
of Venetia has, and found thus to agree Weight^ of Padoua.
togeth^r.

The 100. li. sutle of Padoua is 112 (...) sutle in Venetia.

the 1000. li. gross of Padoua is 1020. li. gross in Venetia.

the 1000. li. sutle in Padoua is 1125. sutle Venetia.

the 100^. li. sutle in Venetia is 889. sutle in Padoua.

The brace in Padoua is the same as at Treviso aforesaid.

Corn is sold by the stare, three here makes one stare in Venetia. Measure of
Padoua.


Wine is sold by the Cara, one whereof here is 18. quarts Venetia.

Oil by the Miaro, which is here 1185. lib. gross in Padoua, for other
occurrences it is to be referred to Venice.

CHAP. CLIV.
Of Vicentia, and the Trade thereof.

VICENTIA would be in matter of Trade of greater Vicentia, and the Trade
thereof.
note were she not so near neighbor to and under the authority of Venetia,
for which cause I shall be the briefer, and thus is found to agree therewith.

The Waights hereof do precisely accord with Waights of Vicentia.
Padoua above mentioned.

The Measures of Vicentia are only one which is the brace, which Measures.
thus is found to accord.

100. braces of silk in Venice is in Vitentia 92. braces:

100. braces of cloth has made in Vicentia 98. braces.

Corn is sold by the stais, 100. whereof do make in Venetia 33. staio.

Wine is sold by the Caro, which in Venetia is 18. quarts.

Oil is sold by the Miaro, which are 40. Miri, which makes gross weight in
Venetia 1210. li. and gross of Vicentia 1185. li.

Here is made a fine kind of raw silk, and dispersed abroad, fit for silk
stuffes, called by the name of Vicentia silk, 100. li. thereof is 93. li. in
Florence.

CHAP. CLV.
Of Bressia, and the Trade thereof.

THe next is Bressia, seated likewise in this Province, more famous in her
Archbishop, who Bressia, an^ the trade thereof.
is an Earl, Marquess, and a Duke, than in any matter of Trade, yet according
to my intended Method begun, I will compare the Waights and Measures hereof
with Venice.

Bressia has but one Quintall, which contains Weights of Bressia.
the 100. li. of the laid place.

the 100. il. of Bresse is sutle Venetia 108. li. and gross 66 li.

the 100. li. gross Venetia is 147. li. and 100. li. sutle is 92. li. here.

the 1. li. of Bressia is sotle Venetia 13. ounces.

The Brace of Bressia agrees with the cloth brace of Venice. Measures of
Bressia.


Corn is here sold by the Soma, and makes two staio in Venetia.

CHAP. CLVI.
Of Verona, and the Trade thereof.

VErona is a fair City, and famous in times past for many notable things
here performed, which I Verona.
willingly omit, but in matters of commerce I find the waights and measures
thus to accord with Venetia.

Verona is found to have two Quintars, a gross and sutle. The 100. gross in
Verona, is 108. li. gross in Venetia. Weights in Verona.
The 100. sutle in Verona, is 110. li. sutle in Venetia. So that the 100. sutle
in Venetia, makes sutle Verona 90. li. And the 100. li. gross in Venetia,
makes sutle Verona 145. li.

The Brace of Verona agrees with the Silk Brace in Venetia. Measures in Verona.


Corn is sold by the Minali, 100. whereof is in Venice 45. stays.

Wine is sold by the Brenta, which is in Venetia 6. Sechi, and a Cara of Wine,
is in Venetia 17. quartes.

Oil is sold by the Miaro, which is 1210. li. gross, and 1738. li. sutle, in
Venetia, making 139. Basces, which are 8. Brentas and 11. Basses: where it is
to be noted, that 3. Basses of Verona, is 1. Miri in Venetia.

CHAP. CLVII.
Of Crema, and the Trade thereof.

CRema is a strong Fort, and bordering upon Millan, where the state of Venetia
hold a Custom house for Crema, and its trade.
the collection of their Customs upon such goods as go from these parts
either to Millan it self, or thence by transito to Lions or other places.

The Quintall of Crema, is the 100. li. thus agreeing Weights in Crema.
with Venice. 100. li. sutle Venice, is in Crema 92. li. and 100. li. gross
147. li. in 150. li. 100. li. in Crema, is sutle Venetia 108. li. and gross
Venetia 66. in 67. li.

The measure for length is the Brace, which is found to be two per cent. less
then the Cloth Brace in Venetia: whither now it is high Measures in Crema.
time I should repair unto and survay the traffic thereof, as at this day it
is found and observed.

CHAP. CLVIII.
Of Venice, and the Trade thereof.

VENICE is the principal city of this Republique, and Venetia, and the Trade
thereof.
is seated in the bottom of the Adriatique Sea, or Venetian gulf upon 72.
Islands, and distant from the maine land five miles, defended against the fury
of the Sea, by a bank extending twenty Leagues in length, through which there
is passage broken in seven places for Boats, but no ways for ships, but at
Mallamocco, and the Castles of Lio, which are found to be strongly fortified:
it is accounted to be eight miles in compass, and has for convenience of
passage near 4000 bridges, and 12000. boats, as some of our modern
travelers have observed. It is the only place where Policy, Warfare and
Merchandising have kissed together, for the most part of those Clarissimos which
here boast of their quality, greatness or wisdom, have either in themselves
or in their ancestors, had their original from traffic and Merchandising,
many of whom enjoying this title of Noble families; I have known in
Constantinople and other parts as Merchants and Factors, who in their youth
exercising this Art, do afterward as their genius leads them, either become
Captains and Providitors in Castles, Forts, or Cities, or Ambassadors, and so
employed into foreign States; or lastly Senators at home governing the
Commonwealth, but their worth being in it self sufficiently known to the
world, I shall descend to the subject in hand.

This City then has for many years had the sole commerce and traffic of
all the Mediterranean Seas, and not content therewith, have made that City the
common Mart of all the commodities of Arabia, Persia, India, and those Eastern
rich Countries by their great trade to Alexandria and Cairo, which continued
for many years; and when the Grecian Empire was both in its height and in its
descent, they managed the sole Trade thereof, till the State of Genoa did
look thereinto, and by their power and might at Sea, shared with them therein:
but the Portugal finding the way to India by the Cape of Bona Speransa, and
the English and Dutch Merchants following those leaders, now bring those rich
commodities that way straight to their own homes, which in former times they
were constrained to have from this City at a far dearer rate and at a second
hand, since which times, their customs have decayed, their ships rotted and
their Mariners, the pride of their Commonwealth all become Poltrones, and the
worst accounted in all those Seas.

This City now serves in matter of Trade for an inlet into Austria, and upper
Germany, which this way it yet fits with some spice, drugges, and other Arabian
commodities, which in part is brought hither from Alexandria, Aleppo, and
Constantinople, where they still have Consuls and Factours, and partly by a
second hand from England, now thereby bringing to them those commodities which
a few years past we had and fetched from them, as from the only City and
prime Merchants of Europe.

The Commodities here found and afforded are not many, nor of much worth, as
some corn, wines, oiles, rice, woollen cloth, paper, aniseeds, Commodities of
Venetia.
argall, glasses for looking and for drinking, quicksilver, some silks raw
and wrought.

The Commodities sent thither from England is lead, tin, baies, furs,
perpetuanaes, searges, says, and some cloth, indico, pepper, ginger, maces,
cloves, Nutmegs, etc. herings white and red, pilchards, Newland fish, salted
salmon, and such, it serves in these days for a Mart for the Commodities of
Istria, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Austria, upper Germania, and the Adriatique seas,
and serves these parts again with such commodities as are either brought
hither by the English, Dutch, and French from these several Kingdoms, or from
Alexandria, Aleppo, Smyrna, the Archepelago, and Constantinople by themselves,
as the sole persons to whom hence the Trade of Turkey is permitted.

Their Moneys current are these,

The Crown of Gold is worth 24. grosses of Venetia. Moneys of Venetia.


A Liver of gross is worth 10. Duccats of Gold large.

A Duccat of Gold is worth 24. Deniers the Liver of Grosses.

A Liver ordinary of Venetia is worth of Florence lib. 6. 4. sold, which makes
a Duccat in the said place of Venetia, those moneys which here are called
Piccoli, are the current Coin of this City, and the moneys which here are
called Grosses, is worth 1. lire 62. sol of piccoli or 10. Duccats, the Duccat
is always worth lire 6. sol, 4. of piccoli, or else accounted 24. Grosses, and
the Gross is worth sol 5. 2. of piccoli, and in the lire of grosses it is
accounted and reckoned as in Deniers, so that by this may be discerned to be
current, two sorts of Duccats, the one current in payment, which may be valued
sterling about 3. s. 4. d. and the other of banco, which may be valued about 4. s.
or 4. s. 2. d. as the Exchange will admit, wherein see farther, the one being
20. per cent. better than the other.

There is found to be in Venetia four kinds of Weights, which thus are
distinguished and found to accord. Weights of Venetia.


The greatest is called The gross pound, and 100. li. wherewith all Woolls,
brass, metalls, fish, flesh, and other gross goods are weighed.

The second is the Gold-waight used for Gold, Silver, and Jewels only.

The third is used in Gold and Silver thread, and in nothing else.

The fourth is the pound, and 100. lib. sutle, wherewith all silks, spices,
drugges, cottons, cotton-yarne, and such like fine goods are weighed by, which
thus are amongst them found to accord and agree.

100. li. gross is 158. li. sutle, 633. li. gross is 1000. li. sutle.

100. li. sutle is 83. gross, 1000. li. gross is 1580. li. sutle.

1. li. gross is sutle 1. li. 6. ounc. 5. sazi 18. Kr.

1. li. sotle is gross 7. ounc. 2. sazi 16. Kr.

100. li. of Silver or Gold thread is sutle 116. li. 8. ounc.

1. Marc of Gold is sutle 9. oun. sazi 2.

Where note that a Marc of Gold is 8. oun. 1. oun. is 4. quarters, 1. quarter
is 36. Kr. and 1. Kr. is 4 gra. so that 144. Kr. is 1. oun. and 1152. Kr. is 1.
Marc. 1. li. sotle is 12. oun. the 1. ounc. is 6. sazi, and 1. sazi is 1. dram,
which is 3. sec.

Also note that in Venetia there is bought and sold diverse commodities, some
by Balance, and some by stalero, as well in the gross as in the sutle Weight;
and that the balance weight is greater than the stalero weight 2. ib. per
cent. by the hundred more than by the pound, and the sutle Weight of the
Balance is greater than of the staliero sutle two pound per cent. by the
hundred than by the pound Weight.

Now let us observe how these two Waights the sotle and gross responds with
the Weight of other Countries.

The 100. li. sutle have been observed to make the first Row Weights of
Venetia agreeing with other Countries.
to the left hand, and the 100. li. gross the next Row.

The 100. li. sutle makes in the first row, and the 1^0. li. gro. makes in the
second row thus.

Alexandria zera 31. Rot. 50. Rot. Alexandria forf. 71. R 112. R. Alleppo 14.
R. 21. R. Archepelago 77. li. 121. li. Anversa 64. li. 102. li. Almaria 55. R.
90. R. Ancona 86. li. 136. li. Bergamo 90. li. 145. li. Bollonia 83. li. 132.
li. Baruti 13. R. 20. R. Cyorus 13. R. 21. R. Constantinople 56. R. 84. R.
Candia li. li. Corfu. 75. li. 117. li. Cremona 96. li. 151. li. Damascus 16. R.
26. R. Ferrara 102. li. 139. li. Florence 87. li. 138. li. Lions 70. li. 110.
li. London 64. li. 106. li. Lixborne 59. li. 9^. li. Millan 92. li. 150. li.
Mantoua 93. li. 150. li. Marselia 70. li. 112. li. Mall^ca 57. li. 90. li.
Napoles Rema 94. li. 149. li. Naples Romania 78. li. 121. li. Parma 90. li.
148. li. Piasentia 92. li. 150. li. Paris 70. li. 112. li. Roma 84. li. 132.
li. Ravenna ^4. l. 133. l. Ragusa 83. l. 13^. l. Scio and Smyrna 62. R. 98. R.
Sivilia 63. l. 98. l. Tripoli Barbaria 59. R. 93. R. Turin 92. l. 148. l.
Verona 90. l. 145. l. Zante 63. l. 100. l.

How far these may come near to truth I must refer to trial, therefore I
deliver them here as I received them upon trust.

The Measures of Venetia are two, and both called the brace. Measures in V^a of
length.


The first is the Silk brace, by which is measured all stuffes of silk,
Damasces, Sattins, Cloth of gold, of silver, etc.

The second is the Cloth-brace, by which is measured all Clothes and stuffes
made of wool, which is greater than the former 6 per centum.

Upon which last braces 100 has been made this concordance with the Measures
of other Countries.

100. braces in Venice make in London 55. else. Antwerpe 92. Frankfort 115.
Dansicke 70. Vienna 80. Lions 56. alns Paris 52. Roven 48. Lixborne 55. var.
Sivill 75. Madera 57. v. Lacques 111. br. F^orence 113. br. Millan 123. br.
Genoa 267 (...). pal.

The liquid Measures are these:

Wines are sold in Venetia two ways, either in gross, or by retaile, Of wines.
the gross by the Amphora and Bigonsa, and by retaile, by the Quart, the
Sachio, and Lire, where note that the Amphora is four Bigonsa, and the bigonsa
is 4. quarts, and 1. quart is 4. sachi, and 1. sachi is 4. liras or pounds, but
buying the same in gross, that is by the Amphora and the Sachio, 1. Amphora is
14. quarts, and 1. bigonsa is (...). quarets and half.

Oil is here also sold two ways, first by Measure, and next Of oil.
by the Weight of the staliero, the Measure is called the Miro, and is 40. lib.
and by the gross Weight is 120. lib. and 1. Mira makes by measure 25. li. and
by weight makes 30. li. 3. oun.

Corn is sold by the staio, which is 132. li. gross Venetia, and in Of corn.
Florence 175. lib. which is divided to 4/4. and to 8/8. and to 16/16. parts,
by which is made the Scandalios, the. being 32. lib. the (...). 16. lib. the
(...). 8. li. of gross.

Their Accounts are kept in Venetia diverse ways, as by sum in Accounts in
Venetia.
Duccats and Grosses, at Livers 6. and 4. sol per ducc. accounting 24. Gross
to a Duccat.

Others again by Livers, Sols, and Gross, which are valued at 10. Duccats the
Liver, accounting 20. sol to the Liver, and 12. Deuters gross to a sold.

Others by Liver, Sol, and Denari of Picholi, which Picholi are the common
current Money of the Country, where note that the Grosses are worth 1. Liver
per Sol 62. of Picholies or 10 duccats, the Ducc. is ever worth 6. Livers 4 sol
in Pechol, or 24. gross, the gross is worth sol 5. 2. pecholi, and ^n the
pound of grosses, it is the same in Deniers, as I showed before in the Moneys
current of the place.

The Exchanges made in Venice, I have inserted in the 281. and 368. Chapters,
together with all circumstances thereto belonging, Exchanges of (...).
where by the way it is to be noted, that in times past the goodness of their
Moneys both in payment for Merchandise, and in payment for Bills of Exchange
was alike and of equal goodness and value; but these wise Senators fearing
to loose what they cannot keep, I mean, that little Trade they yet hold, in
comparison of what they had, lost by their providence and circumspection, set a
distinction between the Moneys pay^ble for commodities, which they term their
current Moneys and out of banco, and between Difference between money in
banco and out of ^onc. in Ven^c. 21. per centum.
their Moneys paid by Bills of Exchange, which they term in banco, which has
had its original upon such unfit grounds that the very naming thereof, and the
particular circumstances of this difference is dishonorable to this
Republique, which therefore I will omit, only thus far the necessity thereof
is to be remembered, and to be well known and understood by all Merchants and
Exchangers that trade and traffic to this City, that the difference now at
this time holds in proportion between 20. and 21. per cent. so that it does
appear to all men that reside here, or have any commerce into this City, that
their payments made in banco, and by Bills of Exchange is accounted better by
near 21. per cent. than the payments made for commodities, bought and sold
between Merchant and Merchant.

The Customs of Venice are several, altering upon many commodities, and
though the wisdom of this Republique do manifestly Customs of Venetia.
discern a great diminution of their Customs in general, yet it so falls out
that they impose still greater, as it were endeavoring thus to make up the
annual rents thereof, as of late they have done upon Corrence, under pretense,
that if the English will come and lade them in the Port of Venice, or otherwise
come thither laden, they are then freed of a new Impest which is lately levied
in Xa^te upon that commodity: but they being of the condition of many Princes,
that finding their Country enriched with an eminent commerce and a plentiful
Trade, never leave imposing new Customs and Imposts thereon, till the Trade,
and Customs, and Imposts, and all other the benefits thereof are slipped out of
their fingers, and fled for protection to some other more friendly neighboring
State, or place, where the same finds a greater ease, and a lesser charge; and
that has Venice, Anvers, Lions, and Genoa, lost that famous Trade, which for
many years has made those Cities renowned, and by their falland easy
Customs has Leghorne, Marselia, Amsterdam, and London risen to that height
wherein they are now found to be, which if the Princes thereof do wisely
cherish, and content themselves with a reasonable Duty, such as Trade in it
self may well bear, and the Trader live, and chearefully proceed in his
negotiations, they may see their Countries daily to flourish, and grow both
rich and renowned thereby; otherwise Trade will insensibly fly from them, the
Merchants will give it over, or find out new paths, and divert it into some
other place, shipping will in an age rot and perish, and Navigation will
quickly be forgotten, and those Kingdoms must have other Nations to supply
them at the second hand, and by strangers shipping, with those necessary
commodities which the Country stands in need of, and the same both at dear
rates, and to the too late repentance of the State it self, as may now be
verified by this of Venetia, who would with many millions redeem that lost
Trade, and would with free liberty of Customs entertain that Commerce, which
they themselves peradventure by their too great Customs and Imposts levied
thereon by little and little in times past have of their own accord wilfully
or willingly lost, and thrust from them, as I shall declare further in the
Trade of Leghorne, and other places which have of themselves no commodity to
maintain a Traffic, vet have all things and want nothing that all other
Countries can afford, only by the benefit and commodity of an easy and light
duty of custom imposed upon Merchandise by the liberty and freedom of the
place and traders thereinto; and for as much as this state have by their
wisdom made of late days diverse subtle decrees for the benefit of their
own traffic, and for the regaining of their last trade which are in
themselves prejudicial to many other Nations, but principally to the English,
I hold it not improper in this place to mention some of the principal
thereof, that thereby if any the able furtherers of the English traffic shall
happen to peruse this Tract, fit remedies may be enacted to meet these
decrees, which I may call particularly injurious to the English Injurious
decrees of Venice against the trade of the English in the Levant seas.
Subject and Merchant, and tending to draw the whole trade of the Levant Seas
to the City of Venice only, to the general prejudice of the shipping of His
Majesty of England traffiquing in those Seas, which I conclude under five
points.

1. First, they have considered the late great Exportation of Corrance out of
Zant and Zeffalonia (two Islands of their Signory) into England, and that the
principal Trade of the English into their Signory is only for this Fruit,
therefore they have of late leavied an imposition of ten Duccats upon every
thousand of Corrance bought and shipped from the said Islands, and of later
times have also enforced the payment of the said Impost at Venice, which
formerly and at first was free, and have discharged their own Subjects
thereof, to the special damage and prejudice of the English.

2. Secondly, they have to burden the Trade of the English thither, or rather
seeing all the Trade of that fruit wholly sought out and coveted by the English,
to which end they use to vent in those Islands some few English commodities,
they have I say of late, burdened the native commodities of England brought
into those Islands with new Imposts, as leavying upon an English cloth 7.
duccats, upon 100. weight of tin 2. duccats, and upon a hearsie 2. duccats,
and so upon all other English commodities, thereby to enforce all commodities
of England to be brought into the city of Venice, and though sometimes English
Merchants finds it necessary in those seas to transfer some English goods out
of one English vessel into another, and yet not land the same, when as ships
do happen to meet together and to be bound for several Ports, yet the same is
not permitted them unles they pay the said Impost abovementioned, as if the
said goods were there really landed and sold, contrary to the common custom of
the Mediterranean Seas.

3. Thirdly, they have prohibited, that any Turkey commodities should be landed
there out of English shipping, or any other commodities that are afterward to
be shipped for the Kingdom of England, which for the convenience of English
shipping, the English Merchants trading into those Seas have often occasion of:
but they do compel the English first to send such goods and wares to the
City of Venice, purposely there to pay the duty of custom and the duty of
cottinio, before they will suffer them to ship the same for England.

4. They have made an act for the employment of their own shipping and
Mariners, and for the restraint of all forreiners, that no commodities of the
parts of Turkey may be brought into any the Signory of the State of Venice, but
only in Venetian shipping, wherein they have been found to have been so
strict and severe, that if any English ships happen to be fraighted either by
their own Subjects, or by the Merchants of any other Nation when any of their
own shipping are in Port, or happen to come into the Port, or within the space
of twenty days after, upon the firming of a bare Protest against the said ship
so fraighted, they have no law nor remedy left them in law to recover any
freight money, due for the said goods so laden by them.

5. Fifthly, they will not permit nor suffer no English ship to relade at Venice
except they come first fully laden thither, neither will they suffer freedom
of Trade from Venice to any parts of the Levant for ^he English Nation, neither
in their own nor yet in the shipping belonging to the Venetians, but do
straightly prohibit and forbid it, as also they do prohibit the bringing in of
some particular commodities by any whatsoever, themselves and their Subjects
only excepted.

6. To these I might add some others, but I will conclude it with this last
point of slight and fallacious subtilty some years past, when as the Signory
of Venice had here a permission from His Majesty of Englana to contract with
diverse Merchants for their ships to serve against the Spaniards in the Gulf
of Venice; when the said service was performed, and that they came to receive
their contract^d payment, they raised their moneys 12. percentum above the rate
of the same at the time of their agreement, by which rate, His Majesty's
Subjects came to lose a great sum of money by the said service, to their
great prejudice, and to the great dishonor of that so Honorable Seigrory.

Having by these few particulars given the ingenious Reader a taste of these
present policies enacted by this state of late for the supportation of their
decaying Trade, and also given a touch of the subtilties used by them to
preserve that little that is yet remaining, and their indevours to augment the
same, I will now in a word view the state of the present traffic of this
Cirie.

It is not to be questioned, but that this City has in all Ages The present
T^ade of Venice survaied.
affoorded many eminent Merchants, and has not been ashamed to make
Merchandising a proppe and supportation to their Nobility, which amongst them
is entitled Clarissimi so that this their School of Commerce has affoorded
such apt Scholars, and which have so notably profited therein, that they have
with as much honor worn the gown, as valiantly handled the sword; and he that
shall heedfully peruse their Histories shall find that not a few of them, have
with general approbation both of their Subjects and neighbou^s struck the
principal stroke in the government of that Dukedom. The fit situation of
their City, the large extent of their maritime coasts, the common aptnes and
addiction of the Citisens has much furthered the great Traffic of the same,
what it has been in times past, when their potency and Opulency was at the
highest, and when they set out and gave employment both in war and peace to
300. sail of Galleys, besides all other sort of vessels; I refer to their
own Histories. Their then rich trade to Egypt for the commodities of India,
Arabia, and to Constantinople and Alleppo for the commodities of Grecia,
Armenia and Persiae, to Germany, France, Flanders and England, for the
commodities of those Countries, must needs make this City famous for the
Traffic thereof; but their covetous appetite, that could not be satisfied
with this same, and the great wealth each in particular drew thereby, envied to
themselves that honor, which all other Cities of the World was constrained to
give them for their great customs imposed, joined with the accidents of that
age and time brought them to the present state of traffic wherein now they
are found to be, which is at present comprehended within a narrow scantling,
for their trade to Egypt is vanished, and seen only in the relics thereof,
for though in Alexandria and Cairo they maintain Consuls, serving in outward
appearance for the protection of their Merchants, yet indeed they serve to
little purpose, as having lost the former famous trade of Alexanaria and Cairo
in Sidon, Acria, Smyrna and other places of Turkey; they have their Consuls, as
also their Agent in Constantinople and Consul in Alleppo, which now are the
principal who give life to their designs, as indeed the places where their
trade is of greatest eminency, yet it is not so great but may be fathomed
within a small line, and as many things have notably concurred in the loss of
their former traffic abroad and in other kingdoms (as the discovery of India
by the Portugal, the subversion of the Greek Empire by the Turks, and the
favorable countenance of some of the late Kings of England to their own
Subjects, for their encouragement in trade, and their general inclination
thereto, so they in themselves have been chiefly wanting to themselves, and
have suffered a loss to fall in sensibly upon them; that has been the
greatest ruin of their traffic, comprised within the mystery of these their
new Imposts, and the decay of the shipping and Navigators, which that Prince
must ever carefully avoid that would have his Country and Subjects thrive
thereby; and having now lost all their trade to all other places (the dominions
of the great Turk only excepted their Ships and Galleys are decayed, and
their Mariners fled from them, some sparks are seen yet to remain, but the
great fire of their mighty traffic being extinguished, it will not be
needful for me to rake the ashes, and observe further that little cole that
is yet resting unconsumed amongst them.

CHAP. CLXIX.
Of Florence, and the Cities of that Dukedom.

THe Dukedom of Florence, contains the greater Florence and the Provinces
thereof.
part of Tuskany, and now may be said to be comprehended under the Signorie of
the great Duke, with the Republique of Pisa and Sienna, the principal marine
port whereof is Leghorne, which may be accounted the best and one of the
greatest towns of traae in all the Mediterranean Seas, and not only thus
continued and preserved by the industry of the inhabitants alone, but of other
Nations, which by reason of the great immunities and privileges of the place,
and the freedom given to strangers and Merchants, and principally because all
sorts of Merchandise may be here landed free of all customs duties and
imposts, this scale is grown to that height, that it is famous throughout all
the Mediterranean and Ocean Seas.

In this Republique I find only four Cities of consequence that challenge in
matter of commerce my observation which is, Florence it self the principal
City of this Dukedom; next Siena, then Pisa, and lastly the abovementioned
Town of Leghorne.

These Countries affoords for Merchandise, some Marble, Rice, Commodities of
Tuscame.
Wines, Oils, quantity of Silks, both raw and wrought in stuffes, famous for
their fabriques throughout Europe, as Sattins, Taffetaes, Velvets, Grograines,
Plushes and the like, called commonly of Florence. From England is here vented
Pepper, Cloves, Maces, Indico, Callicoes, as being Eastindia commodities, and
Lead, Tin, Clothes, Bays, Says, Serges, Perpetuanes as native; and the
English also bring hither Herings white and red, Pickled Salmon, Newland-fish,
Pilchards, Calveskins and many other commodities.

The Duke of Florence has ever been found to be a great lover of The Duke of
Florence a great Merchant.
Merchants and Merchandising, and is conceived to be at this day the greatest
Merchant in Europe, forgetting not that his Ancestors did raise themselves by
traffic to the greatness and height he now does hold; and to this end is
found in Leghorne a stock properly running in trade for his account, which is
employed in traffic as occasion of profit upon Merchandise does present it
self.

CHAP. CLX.
Of Florence, and the Trade thereof.

THe City of Florence is seated near the confluence of two Rivers, Arne and
Chiane, and is a very fair Florence, and the Trade thereof.
City, and abounding with public and private buildings of great beauty, and
therefore by some supposed to be called Florencia, a situ Florenti; it is in
compass six miles, and is the residence of the Duke, who here has a
sumptuous Palace: the greatest part of the trade thereof does consist in the
fabriques of Silks that here are made, and are hence properly called, and in
the Exchanges here used and practiced by Bankers, for all parts of Europe, the
inhabitants having lost the honor of Merchandising, which anciently they had,
when eminent Factors from hence were sent into Flanders and England and to
other countries to reside, who managed a very great trade, now totally decayed
what I have found from others or observed my self: in Anno 1619. when I was
here I shall set down for the present occurrences of the place.

The Merchants do here keep their accounts in Livers, Sold and Accounts in
Florence.
Deniers, 12. Deniers making a Sol, and 20. Sol a Liver; and others again in
Crowns, Sol and Deniers of Gold, of Livers 7. per Crown, accounting 12.
Deniers to a Sol, and 20. Sol to a Crown, but all their commodities are sold
by Livers, Sold, and Denieres of their moneys, and to reduce Livers into
Crowns, multiply by 2. and divide by 15. because 15. half Livers make a
Crown, and to reduce the said Livers into Duccats, (...) is to be taken.

The Coins current are the Duccats of Florence and the Picols.

The Duccat is worth 7. Livers or 70. Bolognini. Coins current in Florence.


The Crown is worth 7. Livers in Picholi, whereas the custom is different
from other Countries, wherein the Crown of gold is not found to have any
constant rate with the current money of the place, and is adjusted therewith
according to the rate of the Exchange.

The Liver is 20. Sold, and accounted to be nine pence starling.

The Duccat being 7. Livers, is accounted their 5. s. 3. d. starlin.

The Seudo or Crown of 7. Livers, is consequently 5. s. 7. starlin.

The Liver is also divided to 12. Chraches, whereof 8. is a Iulio, which is 6.
d. starling; 5. Quatrins is a Cr^ch, and 60. Craches makes a Liver.

Diverse observations have been made upon the Weights of Florence, Waights of
Florence.
which is the 100. li. or Quintall of 12. ounces to a pound, the most noted I
will here insert, and refer the truth to him that has a cause of trial,
because I have received them upon trust.

This 100. li. then has been found to produce in these places.

The 100. li. of Florence has rendered in Anvers 73. lib. Lions 76. Dansicke
88. Venetia sotle 114. Venetia gross 71. Siena 103. Pulia 104. Lucca 102.
Bollonia 95. Ferrara 101. Padoua 117. Millan 103. Cremona 113. Roma 98. Genoua
108. Marselia 91. Barselona 71. Valentia 96. Granado 66. Sivill 75. Lixborne
92. Paris sutle 90. Paris gross 112. Brussia 78. London 78. Ancona 98. Mai^rke
92. Sicilia settle Rot. 44. and gross R. 48. Tunes 100. Alleppo -- R. 15. R.
Ditto Silk 16. Tripoli Soria 19. Ditto Barbaria 67. Baruti 152. Alex. zera 36.
2. Alex. for fori 81. 6. Scio and Smyrna 71. Constantinople 64. Rhodes 14. 3.
Acria 12. 8. Babylonia 10. 10. Balsara 5. 00. M. Ormus 75. 10.

As of Weights formerly compared, so do I find the brace of this place
whereby all commodities are measured, and upon the Measures of Florence.
100. braces of Florence has been made these observations, and to make

The Cane is 4. braces and the 100. braces are in London 49. else Anvers 81.
Frankford 102. Dansicke 67. Vienna 71. Lions 49. Paris 46. alns Roven 42.
Lisborne 49. vares Sivill 24. Madera 50. Venice 88. bra. Lucca 97. Millan 112.
Genoa 235. pal.

Note that all Wrought silks are here bought by the pound weight, and not by
the Cane nor Brace above mentioned.

Wine is sold by the Cogne, which are 10. bar. and 1. barrel is 40. Of wine.
Metadels, or 20. botles, or fl^sht, each boil being 2. metadels, the barrel
is to weigh 120. li.

Oil is sold by the Orcio, which is a barrel, and contains 32. metadels, Of
(...).
which ought to weigh 85. li.

Grain is sold by the Moggio, and is staio 24. and the staio is 50. li. Of
corn.


Salt is also sold by the staio, which waighes 72. li. Of salt.


The agreement of the Staio of Corn I find thus computed with other Cities.
Agreement of dry measures of E^nce.


Staios 3. of corn in Florence is 1. sache of Venetia.

staios 3. in Florence make 1. sache in Pisa.

staios 2. in Florence make in Plombine 1. staio.

staios 8. in Florence make in Rome 1. Rotolo.

staios 10. in Florence makes in Palermo a general salmo.

staios 13. in Florence makes in Misnia a gross salmo.

staios 1. in Florence is in Naples 1. tomolo, 16. tom. is a salm. there.

staios 6. in Florence is in Ancona 1. some of Corn.

Mogia 1. in Florence is in Arles 10. sesterces.

staios 3. in Florence is in Marselia 2. mines.

staios 60. in Florence is in Brittany a tun of Corn.

I have been the lerarg in the Waights and Measures of Florence because I
shall have occasion to accord other Cities to this, andtherefore to make this
the more absolute, I have added the follo wing concordancy of the dry Measures
of this place with other Countries following, which I refer to the better
experienced for due trial.

CHAP. CLXI.
Of the dry Measures of several Cities in Italy, with other Cities in the
Mediterranean Seas.

NOw for as much as I find it very difficult to accord so many Cities in the
Measures of Corn, Salt, Wine, etc. Agreement of dry measures of sun^ry cities
of Italic, etc.
I will here add what I have collected therein, which properly may best follow
the preceding agreement of the dry Measure of Florence.

First then a Mine of Corn in Avignon is 1. staio of Pisa.

An Anne of Lions is 8. staios of Florence, which Anne of Lions is there
accounted 6. buccalls.

A Quarter of England is 11. staios of Florence.

A Mogio of Grain in Florence is 3. Annes in Lions, which Mogio is accounted
10. sesterces there and the same in Provence.

Alquiers 104. of Portugal are 40. Buccets of Lions.

1. Muy of Orleans and 12. in 13. Mines makes 13. buccets of Lions.

1. Tun of grain either in Picardy or Normandy, to be laden aboard their
ships is 16. Mins, which are 2 (...). in Moggios, which are 24. Mines, and
the 24. Mins there are 3 (...). Moggio of Florence, and 1. Mine of the said
places is 3. staios incirca of Florence.

1. Tun of Corn laden in Britanny, is accounted to hold and make 60. staios
of Florence.

1. Fanega in Callais is 2 (...). staios of Florence.

1. Salme general of Cicilia is in Portugal Alquiers 22.

the said Salmo of Cicilia is 11. staios in Florence.

the gross Salmo of Sicilia is 17 per cent. greater than the general.

the Salmo of Callabria is 6. tumelles of Noples.

the Tomolo of Naples is 2. staios of Florence.

the Carro of Apulia is 3. Moggio of Florence.

Alquiers 4. of Lixborne are 1. fanega in Andalusia.

1. fanega is 2. staios of Florence and a little more, so that the staio of
Florence may be accounted the fanega and alquier of Lisborne 2. staio.

1. Mogio of Florence makes in Arles 4 (...). sesterces.

And in Marselia does make 2. sesterces.

The Sato of Venice comes to make 1. sack of Pisa or little less.

the Mine of Corn of Genoa are 4. staio of Florence.

the Sestercies 5. of grain in Avignon, are 1 salmo of Cicilia.

A Carre of Corn in Pulia is in Callais 34 fanega, and makes in Lisborne 145.
alquiers of 36. tomolos of Naples the Carre.

The 500. Retibe of Corn in Alexandria is in Leghorne 1090. sacks.

the staio 63 of Corn of Ferrara makes just a Carro, and this Carro makes in
Constantinople 57. Caffise.

The Retibe of Alexandria is in Leghorne 6. staios.

the Cillaa of Chavallo is 3. staios of Florence.

1. Tun of grain in Britanny is 60. staios of Florence.

the Caffise of Corn in Valentia in Spain is. of a general Salme of Cicilia.

Sestiers 10. of Arles is in Florence 1. Moggio.

And as for the Tomolo of Naples, I find this observation in the agreement
thereof:

36 Tomolos of Na ples which is 1. Carr, has made in Venice 22. stai. Istria
22. Segnia 68. quart. In ^ll Dalmatia 22. stai. Ragusa 19. Cattarro 22. Ferme
Marca 9 1/10. somo. Co^fu 14. moza. Candia 97. mesn. Canca 14. moza. Alexandria
7. rib. Tripoli Barbaria 5. Caffise and 3. Iubes Z^rbe 5. caf. Millan 3. mos.
Parma 45. sta. Modena 26. Rimene 10. Cesena 13. Ravenna 34. Forli 21. Ferrara
62. Mantoua 56. Bollonia 24. corbe. Florence 80. stai. Genoa 16 (...). mine.
Padoua 34. stai. Treviso 20. Vicentia 24. Verona 50 min. Bressia 12. some.
Bergamo 19. stai. Cremona 11 some. Mirandola 26. stai.

For other particulars of these Measures I have observed the same in such other
place as my Collections permitted.

As for the Exchanges of Florence, which here are found daily practiced for
great sums, I refer the particulars thereof to the 282. and 400. Chapters
of this Tract with all the circumstances thereto belonging, and therefore hence
come to Pisa the second City of Trade in Toscanie.

CHAP. CLXII.
Of Pisa, and the Trade thereof.

PISA is the second City in the Dukedom of Tuscanie, seated in the entrance
of the River Arnus into the Pisa, and the Trade thereof.
Sea which comes down from Florence and waters the Walls thereof.

Here is the Custom House, placed by the Florentine for all goods that are
landed at Leghorne, and enters into his Country, or laden in Florence, and
going this way out of his Country, so that though Leghorne be free of all
Customs, yet the Duke losing little thereby save what the Town it self can
vent, which is but small, for it is but as a Scale and Port-towne to this
City, and the rest of his Territories.

Here is also kept his principal Courts of Justice, and the Knights of Saint
Stephen have here their Alberge, thereby keeping his Subjects from going to
Malta to be there enrolled, the Duke by these means using his best art to
make this City have some splendor, which by the strict subjection of the
Inhabitants the City otherwise is wholly deprived of.

Those goodly Buildings which it vet shows testifies its ancient
magnificency, and many things Anno 1619. I observed therein of note, though
improper to the subject, which bears in many places the relics of that
greatness it once had, by its command over diverse Provinces, and the Wars it
maintained for a long time together against both the Venetians and Genoues; but
to my business.

The Moneys, Waights, and Measures and Accounts of Florence are here only in
use, and therefore shall not need to reiterate. Weights.


Only the Corn measure is a Sacco, which is 3. staios of Florence.

The Wine measure is a barill Cornuto, which is 1. bar. Florence, so Measures.
that 7. bar. Cornuto is 10. bar. in Florence, which is in Candia 45. mistate,
and makes in Naples cogno 1. which is 1. but.

For Custom of the place, this has been observed, that a bag Customs in
Pisa.
of p^pper from landing at Leghorne to the dispatch in the Custom House here
is about a crown of gold per balle, and herrings English have charges from the
arrival at Leghorne until dispatched in the Custom house of Pisa 15. sold of
gold the bar. of 4000. herrings; and the like for other commodities in general.

The customs of the place is ordinary 4. cratches per liver.

CHAP. CLXIII.
Of Siena, and the Trade thereof.

THis City has been of more note and greater consequence in times past, but
falling under the command Siena, and the Trade thereof.
of the Florentine, they deprived them of all their trade and ancient glory; it
is an inland town, adorned with beautiful both public and privare
Buildings, their great Church has the Monuments reserved of all the Popes, and
of our famous Countryman Sir John Haukwood, who did the Florentine such good
and valiant service, that they have here honored his memory with a stately
Monument: here is observed to be spoken the best Tuscan Language in Italy; and
further I could not note material Anno 1619.

Accounts here and the Moneys current are the same as in Florence.

In Siena they have two Quintals, the one of 100. li. wherewith Waights in
Siena.
all fine goods are waighed, being incirca 3. per cent. less than the 100. li.
of Florence.

The other is for Woolles and some gross commodities, which contains 150. li
of the former 100.

The Braces and Measures agree with Florence formerly mentioned, Measures in
Siena.
other notes of Trade in this Dukedom I have not met withal, therefore will
pass hence to the Dukedom of Millan, and will omit the rest to Leghorne, the
only Sea Port of note belonging hereunto.

CHAP. CLXIV.
Of the Dukedom of Millan.

THe Dukedom of Millan being under command of the Spaniard, is rich in Natures
gifts, as esteemed Dukedom of Millan.
the Garden of Italy, affoording plenty of Corn, Rice, Wines, Oiles, Silks
raw and wrought, and sundry other commodities, it has therein also many fair
Cities, the principal whereof are,

First, Millan the principal of the whole Duchy. Secondly, Pavia. Thirdly,
Alexandria de la Pallia. Fourthly, Cremona. And fithly, Como; of as many of
which as is needful, I shall touch the particulars.

CHAP. CLXV.
Of Millan, and the Trade thereof.

MILLAN is a fair City and the greatest of Lombardy, the Castle whereof is
accounted impregnable, it is Millan, and the Trade thereof.
very populous, and contains seven miles in circuit, it is furnished in matter
of Trade with many great Merchants, or rather as I may more properly call them,
Shopkeepers, abounding in many rich manufacturies of Silks, and iron for sword
blades, cannons for Muskets and Pistols, etc. as silk stockins, chamlet,
fustians, gold thread, and sundry other commodities here dispersed into Savoy,
France, and other adjoining Countries.

Their Accounts are kept in Millan by pounds, shillings, and d.

Or as they call them Livers, Sol, and Deniers, 12. Deniers make a Accounts in
Millan.
Sol, and 20. Sol a Liver, which Liver may be sterling. 12. pence, as I shall show
in the Tract of Exchanges, in 280. and 410. Chapters.

Their Coins current in Millan are these:

A Duccat of gold of Millan is incirca 100. Sol of that money. Coires in Millan.


A Crown of gold of the Sun is worth about 96. or 98 Sol.

A Crown of gold Italian is 5. Livers and 6. Sol Imperial.

A Duccat of gold of Livers 5. and 18. Sol is Livers 6. Imperial.

A Duccat Imperial is esteemed 4. Livers.

A Duccat of Millan, or Imperial of Livers 4 per Ducc. and so they count it in
Exchange, the which they pay in Crowns of Italy at 101. Sol per Ducc.

Note that the Crown in Millan runs in Merchandise for Sol 110. and the
Duccat for the same.

Note also that the Imperial Coins are the current of this Country, but
French, Italian, and Spanish, pass here also in Merchandise, as being placed
between the two former, and subject to the last.

The Weigh, of Millan is the Pound, and the 100. li. which is the Weights in
Millan.
Quintall, which 100. li. is

In Venetia sotile 108. li. Venetia gross 66. Florentia 97. Genoa 106. Lions
69. London 70.

In Millan they have two Braces, the Cloth, and the Silk, upon the 100. Braces
silk has been made these observations, and to have Measures of Millan.
made

In London 43. else. Antwerpe 72. Frankford 90. Dansicke 60. Vienna 63. Lions
44. alnes. Paris 41. Genoa 209. palm. Roven 37. aln. Lixborne 43. var. Sivill
58. Madera 44. Venetia 78. brac. Lucque 86. Florence 88.

Which I refer to the experience of him that shall have occasion to make
trial herein farther, and so I will proceed to Cremona; as for the Exchanges
here practiced I refer you to the general Exchanges of Millan.
Chapter thereof in the end of this Tract, videlicet 280. and 410. Chapters.

CHAP. CLXVI.
Of Cremona, and the Trade thereof.

CREMONA is the second City of Trade in this Cremon^ and the Trade thereof.
Durchie, which endeavors by the industry of the Inhabitants to imitate and
second Millan in her manufacturies of silk, gold thread, etc.

Their common Weight is the Pound and the 100. Waights.
li. which has by trial been found to make in Venetia sotle 104. l. and by
the gross of Venetia 65. in 66. li. in Florence 86. li.

Their Measure is the Brace, agreeing the same as that of Florence. Measures.


Oil is sold by the Carigas, 18. thereof is 1000. li. Venetia in ^ile cariga,
15. is accounted for a 1000. li. of Cheese in Venetia.

Carigas 11. is accounted of Honey 8 (...) stays of Venetia.

CHAP. CLXVII.
Of Como, and the Trade thereof.

COMO is made more famous by the Lake whereon it is seated, being 50. miles
about, than by the trade Come, and the Trade thereof.
thereof, though it may well be imagined the same does add a good furtherance
thereto by the benefit and commodity thereof, and by transporting of wares to
neighboring places seated thereabout.

The Weight thereof is the Pound, and 100. lib. which has been observed to
produce in Venice sutle 108. and gross 67. li. which in Weights.
London is 72. li. haber depois, or thereabout.

Their Measure is a Brace accounted to be.

Corn is sold by the Mosa, which are here 14. pesos, and every peso Measures.
is 10. li. at 30. ^un. per li. which in Venetia is 378. lib. sutle, which is
205. li. gross, so that the said 14. pesos is in Venetia 1 (...). staios; and
thus have I done with the Duchy of Millan, and proceed to Mantoua and the
Dukedom thereof.

CHAP. CLXVIII.
Of Mantoua, and the Trade thereof.

MANTOUA has some other Cities of quality Mantoua, and the trade thereof.
subject thereto, but being debarred from the Sea, and environed with potent
neighbors that hinder the commerce thereof, I will therefore reduce what I
have collected note worthy to the City of Mantoa it self, which is a very
fair and strong Town, environed on three parts with a Lake of good breadth,
and with a strong Wall on the rest, through this Lake runs a River that
leads into Poe which is a famous stream in these part, and much enricheth
this Country, and furthereth the Trade of this Duchy.

The chief Commodities of this Dukedom is certain fabriques Commodities of
Mantou^.
of silks, such as are Taffataes, Sattins, Chamblets watered, and the like.

Their Accounts are kept in Livers, Sold, and Deniers, 12. Deniers making a
Sol, and 20. Sols a Liver, 5. of which Livers makes a Duccat Accounts in (...).
of gold large 9. 12. Sol making a Duccaton of Mantoa, or 115. sol of Millan
which is accounted () sterling.

They weigh in Manto^a by a Peso, and by the 100. li. 25. li. being Waights in
Manto^.
the P^so, and 100. lib. the Quintall, which has made in Venice sutle 108. li.
and V^nice gross 66 (...). lib. in Florence 98. li. and in London by
observation of some 71. li. haberdepois.

Their Measure of length is the brace, which does agree with the cloth brace of
Venice within a small matter. Measures in Mantoa.


Corn is sold by the staio, 100. whereof are in Venetia 40. staios and 1.
staio weighes about 80. li. of Mantoa weight.

In this Dukedom is also Aste, where is yearly kept a great and notable Fair
for many sorts of Merchandise, where many immunities Aste a Fair.
are granted to Merchants, during the time that the said Fair does continue,
and is held in the beginning of September, and thus much I have observed of
this Duchy.

CHAP. CLXIX.
Of Uibin, and the Trade thereof.

VRBIN is a fair City, seated on the bottom of the Vrbin, and the Trade
thereon.
Apenine, where it has for Sea Ports Pisaur^ and Fa^, the English here do
enjoy many immunities, and sundry privileges, the original whereof did arise
in the Reign of Henry the sixth of England, who created the Duke of this place
a Knight of the noble Order of the Garter; and he to requite the Honor to
himself done, returned it thus to the said King his Subjects, it now
affoordeth the common commodities of other parts of Italy which it also
follows in matter of trade.

Their accounts are here kept in Livers, Sold and Denieres, 12. Deniers
Accounts in Vrbino.
making a Soldo, and 20. Sold a Liver.

The current coins of this place are the Roman, and do as in most parts of
these Italian Principalities partake of one another coins, which passes
current with some small distinction from one City to another.

The waights is here the pound, and the Quintall being 100. lib. Weights.
which produces in Venetia s^tle 112. and gross 72. li. and has produced in
London 77. li. haberdepois.

Their measure of length is the Brace, the 100. Braces of Cloth in Venice
rendering here 94. Braces, and the 100. Braces of Silk, rendering Measures in
Vrbino.
here 102. in 103. Braces, which is in England () inches.

CHAP. CLXX.
Of Parma, and the Trade thereof.

PARMA, the chief City of this Principality, affoording Parma, and the Trade
thereof.
the commodities common with the rest of Italy, does over and above afford
that excellent Cheese known through Europe by the name of Parmesane, it is not
noted for any eminency in trade, the greatest fame that of late it obtained
was by being subject to that Alexander Farnese who was Duke thereof, and made
such a noise in the Netherlands, during his regencie there, to his Masters
great expense, but to little purpose, for trade observe that their accounts are
kept in Livers Sold and Deniers, Accounts in Parma.
12. Deniers to the Sold, and 20. Sold to the Liver, which is () starling.

The Coins current of Parma are.

The Weight is the pound of 12. ounces, and 100. li. to a Quintall, Waights in
Parma.
which is in England about 60. li. and in Venice sotile.

Their Measure is the Brace, agreeing with the Brace of Florence, Measures in
Parma.
and now to Placentia, also subject to this Principality.

CHAP. CLXXI.
Of Placentia, and the Trade thereof.

PLACENTIA is a commodious City for trade, and Placentia, and the Trade
thereof.
feated properly to that end upon the River Poe, affoording the ordinary
commodities of Italy, but in nothing so famous as for the Faires in Exchanges
here quarterly kept, to which place all Italy, Germany and other Countries do
make their Exchanges, rather for the Fatres, then for any commodities wherein
they intend to have the said moneys invested, and for the moneys of the Country
there is no account had therein thereof, but only of that wherein the
Exchanges is made, which is called the Crown of Marcque, wherein only
Accounts in Placentia.
Bankers and Exchangers do keep the account of this City, and of those
Crowns, their accounts are framed in Crowns, Sold and Deniers of Marcque, as
I have more at large treated of in several Chapters of Exchanges, vide 276.
and 382. and others following, which by reason of the great concurrencie I have
there amply specified, and to which I refer you.

The weight of Placentia is the pound, and 100. li. the Quintall, Waights in
Placentia.
which a 100. li. is in Ven^ce gross, 66. li. Venice sutle, 108. li. and by
that computation in London sutle pound 72. li. incirca.

Their measure is a Brace, which is 27. inches English, in this Principality
Measures in Placentia.
is Mirandola accounted, of which a word passando.

CHAP. CLXXII.
Of Mirandola, and the Trade thereof.

MIRANDOLA being a City also belonging to Mirandola, and trade thereof.
this Principality, I thought good to insert in my way what I have observed in
the waights and the measures thereof.

The weight of Mirandola is the li. 12. ounces, Measures.
100. li. whereof is a Quintall, and found to be haberdepoise 75. li.

The measure is the Brace, found to be 26. inches English, and so much for
Mirandola, and now to Leghorne, therewith to finish the Waights.
trade and commerce of Tuscany, and of these petty Dukedomes.

CHAP. CLXXIII.
Of Leghorne and the Trade thereof.

LEGHORNE is accounted the strongest modern Leghorne and the trade thereof.
City in the Mediterranean Seas purchased not many years past for 120000.
Duccats of the Genoes, by the Dukes of Tuscanie, who reedifying, or rather
building a new City to the old, new fortified and walled the same, giving safe
conduct to all men of what quality and degree soever to live here, so that at
the first it was a sanctuary for all Thieves, Pirates, Murderers and wicked
Rascals, and because here was also granted a liberty in conscience; the Town
was also stored with all Religions, but as the City became populous, and
Merchants being granted a freedom in Customs, the place became in a short
time to be filled with Inhabitants, and to add to these immunities, there were
dwellings for seven years given to any that would come hither to reside, and
all such should be free from all arrests or punishments for acts committed in
all other Countries, of what nature soever they were found to be, and by these
means at first, and since by the encouragement of the great Duke of Florence
it is become one of the principal Towns of trade in all those Seas, and is
properly accounted the Scale of the Florentine dominions; in matters of
commerce it is ruled by Pisa and Florence, which are the principal Cities of
this Duchy, and which yields the commodities that drives the traffic of
this place, the principal notes that I observed at my being in this place in
several Voyages, are as follows.

Their accounts are kept in Livers, Sold and Deniers, 12. Deniers to a Soldo,
and 20. Soldo accounted to a Liver, which is nine pence Accounts in Leghorne.
starling.

Their moneys are those of Florence, which current is the Duccat of 10. Iulies,
or of seven Livers, which is five shillings three pence Coins as in Florence.
starling, and a Scudo or Crown of gold, is 7. Livers, and one Crown of gold,
in gold, or as they say, de Oro. in Oro. is 8. Livers.

Also note that 12. croches make a Liver which is 9. d.

8. Craches make a Iulio, which is 6. d. sterling.

5. Quadrius make a Crache, 60. Crache a Liver.

3. Quadrins make a Sol.

To bring Duccats of Florence of seven Livers the Duccat into Crowns of Gold
of Florence of 7. Iul. per cro. divide by 15. and substract the quotient from
the sum divided, and the remainder is your demand.

Again, to bring Crowns of gold of Florence of 7. Iul. into Duccat of 7.
Livers, divide by 14. and the quotient added to the sum divided will answer
your desire.

There is ever found between the Moneys of Florence and the money of Leghor^,
a L^gio, which being both subject to one Prince is conceived by some that the
same may be removed by Merchants, if they would endeavor it, but they that are
well versed in the Trade of this place hold the contrary opinion, therefore I
will omit the reasons given on both sides, and advise him that has moneys in
Florence and is resident in Leghorne to make the best use thereof, and take the
benefit of the Laggio as the current rate will permit him, till the business
may be better rectified and the controversy by an equality may be decided and
determined.

The Weight is the same as in Florence, the Pound 12. ounces, and the Quintall
is 100. lib. which is English 75. lib. but some commodities Waights in Florence.
are found to be sold by the Quintall of 150. li. which is 113. li. English,
and some by a Quintall of 160. li. as fish, woolles, and which is 121. li.
English, the English 112. lib. making about 147. li. of this plac^.

Note that 150. li. is here a Kintar of Allome, and is 113. li. English.

151. li. makes a Kintar of Sagar is 114. li. English.

16^. li. makes a Kintar of fish, is 121. li. English.

100. lib. is a Kintar of all other commodities, and is 75 (...). li. English,
and is 108. li. in Genoa.

The Measure of this place is the brace, 4. braces making a Cane, Measures in
Flore.
50. Canes is 200. braces, and found to be 100. Else of London, observed by
some, 5. Canes to make 11. Yards English.

Their Corn measure is a Stare, 3. stares is a sack, and 3 (...). sackes is a
salmo: or 41. stares is a salmo, and this salmo is accounted a London quarter.

Also they have another Measure called a Maggio, and 8. sackes or 24. stares is
a Maggio, and a stare of good corn has been noted to weigh 50. li.

From England is vented here baies, faies, serges, cloths, perpetuanies, lead,
tin, Calve-skinnes, hides, O^tracan bides, salt, salmon, pilcherds, English
common (...) ven ted. n Leghorne.
caviar, herrings, tallow, also pepper, ginger, mace, cloves, nutmegs, indico,
and such India commodities.

This place being the greatest Scale of Trade in Tuscanie is found hence to be
sent into other parts, oiles, wines silks raw and wrought, Commodities of
Tuscanie.
rice, aniseeds, argall, and all other Italian commodities.

All goods entering here to be sold are not liable to the payment of Custom
for a year, but if kept a full year, do then pay a Custom, Custom in the
Port o^ Legborne.
and if sale present not in that time, the Merchant may ship the same out
again without any charges, but if for the advance of his commodity he send
the same into other parts of the Duchy of Florence, then the Custom is to be
paid at Pisa, as is there mentioned, to which I refer the inquirer, and
leaving Tuscanie I will pass over to Genoa.

CHAP. CLXXIV.
Of Genoa, and the Trade thereof.

THE State of Genoa comprehends Finali, Sarasena, and Noli, Cities of small
import, the Metropolis Genoa, and the trade thereof
Genoa being the Mistress of this Republique, being accounted eight miles in
compass, and inhabited by the greatest Mony-mongers or U^urers in the World,
who if they would not distrust God with their wealth by Sea, would easily
become and be accounted famous Merchants; their Usury is excessive, and has
more than once brought the King of Spain into their books for vaste sums of
money, and he having the trick of failing in his payments, and performance,
has been observed to have satisfied them in blanco in lieu of being paid in
banco, but I refer this to them that are constrained to suffer, and draw to
my observations being such as I have gathered upon this City.

This City would prove the most famous in all these Seas for Trading, were
not the Inhabitants such noted Politicians, and great biters by Exchange, that
no strangers can live among them, for they envy the great commerce practiced
in Leghorne their neighbor, and yet may exceed Leghorne, would their greedy
covetousness permit them, and suffer Merchants to bring their goods thither
upon small charges, but that Sovereign must not expect a plentiful Trade that
will have also a great Custom paid him upon all good, and he that desires to
lose the Traffic of his Country needs no other way to do it but by imposing
heavy Customs upon Merchants, and their commodities, but to their better
considerations I refer this point, and publish to the world their own common
Proverb which admirs hardly any Merchants to live or thrive amongst them,
Genoa fatta per noi, their City is only made for themselves.

In Genoa they keep their Accounts in Livers, Sold, and Deniers Accounts in
Genoa.
current, the Denier being 12. to a Sol, and 20. Sol to a Liver, which is 120.
Rays of Portugal, and 16. d^sterling.

Their current Moneys are diverse, as bordering upon so many neighbors, the
most current is the Deniers, 12. to a Soldo. Moneys in Genoa.
Soldos 4. makes a Cavalet. Cavalets 5. or Sols 20. make a Liver, which is 16.
d. ste. Livers 4. Sold 8. is a crown. Sold 7. den. 6. is a Spanish Riall of 6.
d. sterling. Sola 90. is a crown of Gold. Duccat in Silver is 4. liver, 16.
sol being 6. (...). 5. d. sterling. Duccat current is 4, Livers, sterling 5. s. 4.
d. circa. Duccat of Gold is 68. Sold of Gold. Lire 3. So's 1. makes a Riall of
Eight. Lire 4. 13. 4. of Genoa has made 1. ducc. in Leghorne.


Their Weight is the Pound of 12. (...). and the Quintall is 100. li. ditto
which is called the Sutle Quintar, and the Gross Quintar is 150. Waights in
Genoa.
lib. thereof (...) (...). lib. sutle Venice, and this Gross Quintar agrees
with the Gross Weight of Venice, between which two places these notes have
been observed, that 100. lib. Sutle Genoa makes Sutle in Venetia 105. li.

100. li. gross Genoa is gross Venetia 100. li. sutle 157 (...). li.

The said 100. lib. has made in London 71. lib. circa and 92. Leghorne.

And the 150. li. their Gross Quintar is London 105. li. circa.

And the 112. li. London has made here 143. li.

And by proof 100. li. in Florence has made here 109. li.

The Gross Quintar is 150. li. of 18. ^ces per li. by which is sold cottons,
and cotton-yarne, comin, and aniseeds, bony, rice, brass, lead, tin, soape,
and woolles, and some other commodities.

Their Measure of length is the Cane containing 9. palms, which 9. palms have
made 4. braces of Florence, and the measure is for silks Measures in Genoa.
and stuffes, but 10. palms in Linen makes a Cane, and is in Fiorence 4.
braces, and the said Cane by observation has made in Venice 3. braces of
cloth, and 3 (...). of silk braces, and upon the 100. palms have been made
these observations, and to have rendered

In London 27. yards. Anvers 34. else. Frankford 43. Dansicke 23 Vienna 30^.
Lions 21. alnes. Paris 19. Roven 18. Lixborne 20. vares. Sivill 28. Madera 21.
Venice 37. bra. Lucca 41. Florence 42. Millan 47.

1. Cane is in Barselona 1. Canes.

9. Parmes in Genoa is in Florence 1 1/16. Canes.

1. Cane in Genoa is in London 2. yards.

Note that it has been observed that five Palms has made almost an Ell
English, or 25. palms 6. else and. and 100. palms thus is 26. else and 50.
yards have made here 17. canes.

Corn is here sold by the Mine, whereof 64. make the 100. Saches at Pisa, and
100. Mins make 137. staios in Venetia, and the Mine Of corn.
pays 6. sold for custom in Genoa, and weighes 270. lib. and half a Mine is
called a Corno, the Quarter of Harwich measure has made here 2. Mines, but the
London quarter not so much.

Oil is sold by the barrel, 7. barrels making a Neapolitan but, called here
Botta dimena. Of oil.


Wine is sold by the Meserole, and 5. Meseroles is a Botta dimena, and 2. bar.
make 1. Mes^ole which is also 100. Pints, so that 500. Pints Of wine.
of Wine make a Botta dimena.

All goods entering into Genoa pays for Consolato of the River 6. deniers per
liver, and is paid by the buyer, according to the price bought, if a contract
be not made with the seller for the discharging of it.

And he that lands Commodities here in his own name and cannot make sale
thereof, has had formerly leave to carry the same out again without paying
any charges, but this privilege is now disanulled.

Many silk fabriques are here made common with all Italy, the principal
being Velvets, watered Chamlets, etc. sold by the pound weight, as is usual
through Italy.

This City is famous for the Exchanges here practiced, as does Exchanges.
more fully appear in the Chapter of the Exchanges here in use, vide Chapter
279. and so forward, where all circumstances are inserted and now to Lucca.

CHAP. CLXXV.
Of Lucca, and the Trade thereof.

LUCCA is the principal City of this Republique, and is pleasantly seated on
the River Serchio, in Lucca, and the trade thereof.
compass about 3. miles in a plain, the walls being adorned with trees,
makes the City appear to the Traveller to be in a Wood, till approaching
near the bulwarks, give testimony of her strength, and that these trees are
planted upon the walls where the Citisens in summer walk for shade: it does
wholly consist upon the Fabriques here made of Silk, such as is Damasces,
Sattins, Taffetaes, etc. which hence is vented into foreign countries, which
are all sold by the pound weight, according as is accustomed in Italy, and as
for other matters in trade what I observed in 1619. is thus.

Their accounts are kept diverse ways, some in Livers, Sold and Deniers of
Picholi, as in Florence, 12. Deniers to a Sol, and 20. Sol to Accounts in Lucca.
a Liver; some again in Crowns, Sold and Deniers of gold, of Livers 7. per
Crown, accounted by 12. and 20. as is abovesaid, but Silks are sold by so
many Duccats the pound, so that to reduce Duccats into Crowns, the number of
Duccats is to be multiplied by four, and divide the proceed by 71. adding
what may rest with the Duccats, and they shall be Crowns of 7. Livers.

Note that to bring Duccats of Florence, or as they term them Piastres, of
seven Livers the Duccat, into Crowns of gold of Florence, of 7. per Crown,
divide by 15. and substract the quotient from the sum divided, and the
remainder is the demand.

Again, to bring Crowns of gold of Florence, of 7. into Duccats, of 7. Livers
divide by 14. and the quotient added to the sum divided will answer your
desire.

Again, to bring Livers of Lucca into Crowns of Lucca or Duccats of Florence,
take the sum of Livers, and add as many more unto them, the product being
divided by 15. then the same are Crowns of Lucca of 7. Livers, I say, Livers
for Crowns and Duccats of Florence, of 7. Livers per Duccat, for that the
Crown of Lucca and duccat of Florence, re^all one in value, but in the Liver
of Lucca and in that of Florence, is some difference, because the Liver of
Florence is 7. per cent. greater then that of Lucca. Note also that 75.
Bolonius make a Florence duccat of 7. Livers, and 79. Bolonins make a Lucca
duccat, by which they account in sale of Silk.

The Crown is commonly thus charactered C. The Piastre or Duccat is thus D.
The Liver is thus L. The Sol is thus, and the Denier d.

Their Moneys common is that of Florence current, called Bolonini, the Crown
of gold is 7. Livers, 10. Sol in Picoli as at Florence. Moneys in Lucca.


The Ducatone is worth 7. Livers, and is called the Crown of silver, but the
Exchanges is made by Ducatons, Solds and deniers as more fully does appear in
the 283. Chapter of Exchanges practiced in this City, to which in that
particular I refer you.

They have in Lucca two waights, one of the Balance weight, whereby all goods
are bought and sold, and the other whereby Weights in Lucca.
Merchants do pay the customs by, wherein is about 12. perce^. difference.
The Balance pound is 12. ounces, 100. li. whereof has made in Lions 72. li.
the customers pound is also 12. ounces, 100. li. thereof has rendered in Lions
by trial 81. li.

The balance 100. has made in Florence 97. li.

The measure of Lucca is a Brace, which is 23. inches of London, Measure in
Lucca.
and two Braces have made an Alne of Lions, and upon this 100. Braces has been
made these observations, that it rendereth

In London 50. Else Antwerpe 83 (...). Frankferd 104. Dansicke 69. Vienna 72.
Lions 50. alnes Paris 47. Roven 43. Lixborne 50. Vare Civil 67. Vare Madera 51
(...). Vare Venetia 90. Braces Florence 102. Braces Millan 115. Braces Genoa
240. Palms
Silks have been thus sold in Lucca: Account of sale of silks in Lucca.


Damasces were sold at 4. Duccats and 18. Sold the pound.

Sa^tine were sold at 4. Duccats and 14. Sold the pound.

Rich Taffeta sold at 4. Duccats 16. Sold the pound.

It is here to be noted that in Lucca there is paid. more for the colors then
for blacks, therefore the custom is to add for the colors that are in the
parcel. to the Weight reducing them all to one weight and price, as if they
were all blackes; where also is to be observed, that Crimsons and Carnalions
pay 10. Livers over and above the. before mentioned, but being mixed with other
colors, and that either the ground or the flower (as in Damasces) be of
another color, then they pay but the half of 10. Livers besides the above
mentioned. or fourth in Weight.

Moreover for the most part of those silks made here, they are generally
reduced to 7. braces per li. either Saitins, double Taffetaes, or Damaskes, and
if they pass 7. braces, they are held advantageable to the Buyer in the
Measure, if under 7. braces they are held the richer, and less advantage to
the Buyer, the principal observations may be collected to lie in the
richness of the color, and the goodness of the silk.

CHAP. CLXXVI.
Of the Weights of Italy reduced to the Weight of London.

HAving thus run through many particular Cities of Waights of Italy reduced
to London.
Trade in Italy, and therewith noted the particular observations that has
come into my hands, appertaining to the Trade of those places, I judge it
expedient ere I leave it, to collect herein on the Weights and Measures of
these and other Cities, as I find them observed by industrious hands, and
because they are there calculated to the Standard of sundry places one of
another, I hold it fitting to reduce them to the English, wherefore I will take
the London 100. li. sutle for the denomination which I intend here to make use
of, which I have noted to make according to these observations:

The 100. lib. of London has made in Rome 127. li. Florence 121. of 12.
ounces. Bollonia 51. of 30. ounces. Millan 137. of 12. o. most used. Pavia 137.
of 12. o. being 13. of the other. Cremona 58. of 28. o. for flesh. Recanti 132.
Ditto gold thread 108. Verona 86. for gold thread 137. l. Bressia 177. for Veni.
gold 131. Naples 115. for Veni. gold. 129. Romagnia 115. for Veni. gold. 129.
Savoy 132. by small weight. 188 Carpi Mirandola 141. li. incirca. Parma
Plaisencia Lucca Mantoua Forli Carmia Acquilla Crema Come Piedmont Raviano 127.
li. Faensa Modena Riman^ Ravenna Rhagusa Candia 133. li. for gold thread. Or
else 85. Rot. the 100. is a Cantar.

The Weights thus reduced, I will also in the same method reduce the Measures
of Italy to the English yard, the 100. whereof is Measures of Italy reduced
to London.
found to answer in these places thus.

The 100. Yards of London are in Venetia woollen 135. brac. Istria 135. Piran
silk 142. Florence silk 163. for woollen 155. else. Rome 44. canes. Ditto
for woollen 140. brac. Lucca. 160. Rhogusa 160. Ferrara 142. Mantua 142. Ancona
142. Bollognia 142. Modena 142. Parato 142. Cesena 142. Carpi 142. Mirandola
142. Verona 139. Ditto cloth gold 144. Ditto cloth 115. Trevira 135. Bergamo
135. Vrbino 135. Pesaro 137. Ditto for cloth 142. Calabria 44. canes Candia
144. pich. Parma 145. br. Ditto for cloth 121. Ravenna 155. Corfu 155. Genes
163. Ditto for silk 384. pal. woollen at 9. pal. 82. can. linen at 10. pal.
38. Vicentia woollen 131. bra. Ditto for silk 107. Naples 145. cones Ditto for
silk 44. Padona cloth 135. bra. Ditto for silk 109. Millan for linen 160.
Ditto for silk 188. Ravenna 149. Bressia 135. Croma 135. Recanti 135. Cremona
135. Lacaia 135. Palermo 45. canes. Puglia for cloth 41. Ditto for silks 44.
Zara 149.

These are such as I have collected, the truth whereof I must refer to the
better experienced, for I am not ignorant, that some of these agree not with
the particular recited Chapters of the Trade of the said places, yet
notwithstanding, finding a reasonable ground of the said observations by other
judgments, I have willingly passed them here in the same manner, which I
refer to better trial.

CHAP. CLXXVII.
Of the Trade in general of Italy.

NOw having run through the principal places of Traffic in Italy, in the
particular, let The trade in general of Italy observed.
us note a word or two in the general, concerning not only the Traders, but
also Navigation which is seen in many places to be means whereby Trade it
self is preserved and performed.

In Italy then not only the Gentlemen, but even the Princes entitled do
profess themselves to be Merchants, without any indignity to their quality or
place, which many of our Country Gentiles and Nobles (with leave may I speak
it) foolishly disdain, and only permit retailing of goods to men of the
inferior sort, and Shopkeepers, but retain yet the gross ever in their own
and servants hands, and by this course they are found not only to keep the
Patrimonies descended to them by their ancestors, but also are daily found to
increase the same, while our Gentlemen prodigal in expense, and ashamed to
make honest gain, and exercise an honest calling, oftentimes not only destroy
their Families, but ruin themselves and not seldom their Posterities. Amongst
the Merchants of Italy then, the Venetians are the chief who in times past
enjoined every ship thence departing in Trade to carry one of their Gentlemen
or Clarissimo who was allowed him his diet and passage, but this wisdom of
their ancestors is now laid aside, and the charges thereof which is still
collected, is in every such Vessel begged by some poor Clarissimo or other,
so that their Traffic and Navigation is thereby much decayed, and the
Mariners and most expert of their Seamen employed in their shipping are for the
most part Grecians.

The Florentine is the next, the Duke whereof is here to be remembered, who is
the most eminent Merchant, and here not seldom imploies his own and others
ships for Corn, Salt, or other necessary provisions for his Dukedom and his
own store, thereby encouraging his Subjects to trade and adventure abroad: two
principal things are observed which do much enrich the Merchants of Italy,
the first is their frequent Exchanging, wherein they are the best versed in the
World; the other is the Trade of their Silks, wrought by the industry of the
Silke-worme, which wrought into fabriques are thence dispersed throughout
Europe, and some parts of Asia, but these are fetched from them by others, and
not exported by themselves, partly by the over great affection that they have
to their native homes, and their little desire they have to travail abroad,
but principally for want of good ships of burden, for excepting some few
Vessels in Venetia, Naples, and Leghorne, all the Merchants of Italy cannot
show a ship of 100. tons.

Naples is a large and rich Country, and Genoa rich, though of little extent,
yet the great number of Nobility in the former, and the great usury practiced
in the latter has reduced them to a neglect of all Trade, what the bosom of
their Country does naturally vent that they traffic with, and these being in
themselves rich induce other Nations to bring them those few things they want,
for though Italy as it now stands acknowledges many Sovereigns, yet one
Country supplying another, stands in need of little from Forainers, so that it
may be said, while they have peace they have plenty; some provisions of fish,
corn, and cloth, England does furnish them, and in returns have only their
silk fabriques, oiles, and some few other commodities, so that putting aside
the Trade driven thither by the English, as being of greatest consequence, the
Trade of the Spaniard, French, or Dutch, is but small, and but of little moment
amongst them; which in particular may be thus surveied; for Venice I have
given you the anatomy of the Trade thereof, now in the waine, and almost at the
last breath, save where it is preserved by their new devised Edicts, and the
natural growing Corrence, and by their small Trade to Constantinople, Cairo,
and Alleppo by sea, and to Austria, Dalmatia, Istria, Italy, and into the
upper Germany by land: the next part of this Trade of Italy is challenged by
Naples, which in it self affords rich silks, corn, oil, and wines, with
which they seem to be contented, for they covet not much to traffic among
themselves, nor yet with others further than for their meat, and drink, and
clothing, which to the poorer sort is most wanting.

The Papacy her share in the Trade of Italy is not worth the nomination, no
more is Mantua, Vrbin, and those other petty Signiories. The Tuscans rightly
demand a part, and it shall be granted them, both in their Florentine
fabriques, and in their privileged Town of Leghorne, but I may fear it will
not last long, for the Dukes growing both rich and covetous, and daily
encroching upon those liberties, at first liberally given to strangers
Merchants in Leghorne, and who every day are seen to lay some new petty duties
upon the goods there, as for Genoa, were they as truly wise for the good of
their Commonwealth as they are found to be to themselves, they are of ability
to do better, and to have that Trade their neighbors now deprive them of.
Millan likewise struggles for interest herein, and shall have it by my consent,
but it shall be only in their Iron-workes, which the Cantons serve themselves
with, and in their fabriques of silk which Lions does help them to vent.
Lucca may be offended in my silence, but this Cities peace may further that
Trade which otherwise her own or her neighbors wars would utterly ruin,
you may see then of how many parts and members this rich and pleasant Italy is
composed, and how the Trade thereof stands at this instant; it enjoys a
general peaceable and quiet inland Traffic, consisting for the most part
more of branches bred within her own bowels than of foreign helps, their
natural growing corn, silk, grain, and oil, induce them thereto, and the
benefit practiced by Exchangers induce the rich to use that Trade only and no
other, wherein I will for this time leave them, and in the next place turn my
head and hand to the survaying of the Netherlands.

CHAP. CLXXVIII.
Of Flanders, and the Netherlands, or the seventeen^ Provinces, and their
Cities.

I Will here for good Method sake in the first place take a view of the 17.
Provinces, which are The seventeen Provinces and the Cities thereof.
found this day to contain 4. Dukedomes, 1. Limburge, 2. Luxenburge, 3.
Gelderland, 4. Brabant; then 1. Marquisate, which is of the Holy Empire; next
7. Earldomes, which are 1. Flanders, 2. Artois, 3. Heinalt, 4. Nemurs, 5.
Zutphen, 6. Holand, 7. Zeland; and lastly 5. Baronies, 1. Westfresland, 2.
Virecht, 3. Overysell, 4. Machlin, and 5. Groineing, of all which briefly.

In the Duchy of Limburge, which I account the first Province, is Liege or
Luycke as the principal City, whose Trade I must refer Limburge. Liege.
to the better experienced in these Countries, and the like for the City
Limburge seated on the River Weser.

In the Duchy of Luxenburge, the chief City being Luxenburge, seated on the
River of Elze, in this Country is the famous waters Luxenburge.
of Spa, where many sick men are found to drive a great healthful but costly
Traffic: here is also Sidan, the seat of the Duke of Bullion, but of small
commerce. Sidan.


In the Duchy of Gelderland the chief City is Nimmegen, seated on the branch
of the Rhine, called the Whael, and does much abound Gue^derland. Nimmegen.
in cattle, as affoording fit pasturage thereto.

In the Duchy of Brabant, I find noted many principal Cities, as first
Levaine, the second Bruxels, the third is Bergen ap Zome, the Brabant. Lovaine.
Bruxels.
fourth Mastrech, the fifth Breda, in all which is found by the industry
Mastri^t. Breda.
of the inhabitants a reasonable traffic, but being ignorant in many
necessary particulars, I will also refer it to the more learned and better
experienced.

In the Marquisate is found Antwerpe, by which all the former Cities are
governed in trade, which by reason of the greatness of Marquisate. Antw^rpe.
the traffic in times past, was therein accounted the first and principal of
the known World, wherein I shall observe according to my former method, these
necessary particulars of traffic following.

CHAP. CLXXIX.
Of Antwerpe, and the Trade thereof.

ANTVVERPE is accounted the principal City of Antwerpe, and the Trade thereof.
trade that is subject to the Archduke in all these parts, and having had the
prerogative above all others in times past; neither yet to this day being so
decayed but that in many particulars it gives rule to all or the most of the
Neighboring Cities round about, which considered to abbreviate my task, I
think it will not be improper that I comprehend the trade of all those
Provinces that are under this government in this circuit to this particular
City.

Antwerpe then being seated upon the River of Sheld, which by eight channels
cut, runs through this City, is conceived to be eight miles in compass,
some of these channels being able to hold 100. great ships which made the same
more commodious for the transport and carriage of wares to any part thereof.
The former and ancient trade of this City was great and eminent, and
occasioned as some have observed by three means, and had its decaies also by
three occasions. First, by reason of two free Martes holden yearly, continuing
five and forty days, during which time, no man either in his person or in his
goods could be arrested or molested for either debt or otherwise. Secondly, by
reason that the King of Portugal having discovered the East Indies in Anno
1500 and diverted the course of trade driven by the Venetions from Alexandria,
and the Red Sea to his Port of Lixborne, kept here his factors and sent hither
those Indian commodities to seek their vent, and this first drew the English
Merchant Adventurers from Bridges hither to reside. The third was the Wars
that fell between the French and Charles the fifth, which brought hither many
Gentlemen from villages and petty towns for safety sake here to reside and
build. Now as the causes of her rising have been noted to be three, so the
causes of the loss of that trade may be reduced also to three.

First, the Wars here, and in general in these Provinces between the
Spaniard, and the Dutch Nation, wherein this City suffered pilledging, and
endured the command of new Laws.

Secondly, the abrogation of part of those Privileges that were granted here
to the English Merchant Adventurers and others, and the new and great customs
imposed upon their goods and Merchandise.

Thirdly, the Navigation of the English and Dutch to the East Indies, whereby
the Portugal factors decreasing thereby, and the Cities of London, in England,
and Amsterdam in Holland increasing thereby, were also sharers in the India
trade and commodities, leaving by this means this City bare and to subsist
upon the traffic of her own inhabitants, in that nature as now the same is
found to be.

Their Accounts are here kept by Livers, Sol and Deniers, which they term
Pounds, Shillings and Pence of grosses, 12. grosses making a Accounts in
Antwerpe.
Sold, and 20. Sold a Liver or pound Flemish, which may be accounted 12.
shillings starlin, or by their computation 240. grosses, by which species they
do make their Exchanges with all other Cities.

The current moneys here and in general through all the Arch Dukes countries
are, besides the Spanish and Imperial these current Coins in Antwerpe.
are Doights, four makes a Stiver, and ten Stivers is a shilling starlin, two
Blankes makes a Stiver and half.

Stivers 6. makes a shilling Flemish.

Stivers, 20. makes a Guilder, which is three shillings four pence Flemish.

Shillings, 20. makes a pound, which is 6. Guilderns.

Pound, 100. Flemish makes 60. Pound English, so that 20. Stivers is or may be
computed for two shillings starlin, and one pound Flemish for 12. shillings
starlin, and then 20. shillings starlin is 33. shillings 4. pence Flemish.

The Weight of this Country is the pound of 16. ounces, and the 100. lib. of
that pound which is their Quintar, which renders in Waights in Antwerpe.
London 104. li. and thereupon it comes as some imagine, that upon Spices the
tret of 4. li. upon 104. li. was allowed here to the buier, for the English
being supplied hence in those days with their spices, found the 100. lib.
there to give here in the City of London 104. li. made that allowance here
willingly, as desiring the 100. li. there, would yield them a neat 100. li.
here and take the same by the factory without further allowance or garble,
which was not then The conceived originall^ our treat in London.
in use.

Many observations have been made upon the weight and measure of this City,
which being reduced into a general table by Master Malines, and the same being
there accorded with all the principal Cities in the World, I will refer you
thereunto for larger satisfaction, and content my self according to my method
to insert the same as I find it, with some other particular places, because I
have found some errors in the said concordance.

The Weight then in use in Antwerpe being the 100. li. neat, has Weights of
Antwerpe compared with that of other places.
been observed to have rendered thus,

In London 104 li. Marselia 115. Venice sotle 155. Ditto gross 97. Sicilia 68.
Lixborne 84. Florence 132. Lions 110. Sivil 101 7/2. Dansicke 120. O^mus 108.
Rot. Alleppo common 22. 8. R. Ditto silk weight 24. 0. R. Tripoly Soria 27. 2.
R. Tripoly Barbaria 97. R. Baruti 21. 9. R. Alexandria Zeroi 51. 9. R.
Alexandria Forsia 116. 5. R. Constantinople 92. R. Rhodes 20. 1. R. (...) 18.
1. R. Babylon 15. 6. R.

And what other inlargements is here wanting, I willingly omit, and refer the
same to Lex Mercatoria.

Now in the same manner it will be needful I do calculate the Measures of
Antwerpe compared with those (...) other Countries.
Measures of Antwerpe, which is the Ell, which also by observation has made in
these places.

Acria 115. pico. Alleppo 108. pico. Argtere 136 covad. Allexandria 124. pico.
Amsterdam 101. else. Barselona 43. canes. Bridges 98. else. Candia 108. pico.
Castile 78. vares. Constantinople 113. pico. Corfu 116. braces. Damasco 111.
pico. Dansicke 122. else. Florence Cloth 116. else. Ditto for silk 102.
braces. Genoa 122. braces. Hamburgh 122. else. Holland 103. else. Lixborne long
63. vares. London for linen 60. else. Ditto for Woollen 75. yards. Ditto for
Frises 59. goads. Lucca 120. braces. Millan for Silk 141. braces. Naples for
Silk 33. can. Paris 59. alns. Roven 58. alns. Sivil 83. vares. Venice for
Woollen 101. braces. Ditto for Silk 101. braces. Valentia 73. canes. Vrbin 101.
braces.

Note that this is for the common measure of Antwerpe, besides which they use
another Elle for silk, and these Else make of that but 98. Else. The other
measure of sundry commodities here in use are these.

Beer is sold in Antwerpe by the Barrel, which is accounted throughout
Flanders and Brabant to be 54. stoopes, the 81. whereof Of beer.
is in Dansicke a fat, and contains there 180. stoopes; but 50. stoopes of
Antwerpe make the barrel of Lubecke, and the English gallon of beer is 2.
stoopes of Flanders and 1. stoopes of Amsterdam.

Corn is here sold by a measure called th Vertule, and 37. Vertules is a
Last of Corn in Amsterdam and 10. quarters in London, vide Of corn.
there further.

Wine is sold by the Ame, the stoop and the Butte, and is found thus to
accord together; 1. Ame is 50. stoopes, and one stoop is six Of wine.
pound, and a Butte is 152. stoopes; so that by this rule 6. Ames which is 300.
stoopes, or 1800. li. is in London 252. gallons, so that the Ame is by this
calculation found to be 42. gallons, and the stoop is about 3. quarts of
London Wine measure, or as some account it about 7. pints, vide London for more
certainty.

The Exchanges practiced in this place are great, and for very great sums of
money, especially when as the King of Spain has any Exchange of Antwerpe.
general disbursements in this Country, by reason of his continual Armies
here in action maintained against the Dutch, the particulars whereof I have
inserted in the end of this tract, in the Chapter 289. and in the Chapter 435.
and some others following, where I have at large declared the practice and use
among the Merchants of that place, in the calculation thereof, whereto I
refer the inquisitive.

As for the general present trade of this Country I shall comprise it with
the trade of the Netherlands, in the 181. Chapter following.

The first Earldome accounted one of the seventeene Provinces is Flanders, so
called peradventure, a flando, as lying open to the Winds, divided into
Imperialem Galicam, and Te^tonicam.

The chief Cities of Trade therein is first Gaunt, whose Wall is Gaunt.
seven miles in compass, the two Rivers of Sheld and Leye running through the
same, and makes in it 26. Islands, which are joined together by an hundred
Bridges, and had not her often seditions ruinated her beauties, she might have
been Queen of all the Cities of Europe, and here John Duke of Lancaster was
borne, commonly in Histories called John of Gaunt.

The second City is Bridges, once the most famous Mart Town of Europe, where
sundry Nations for many years kept both their Bridges.
Magasines and Factours, for the sale and providing of all the principal
commodities of the World, now much decayed of its former splendor by reason of
the removal of the English Merchant venturers, and of other Nations to
Antwerpe, about the year 1503. it is seated about three leagues from the Sea
upon a fair and deep artificial channel, filled with the waters of all the
neighboring and adjoining streams and fountains, which chanells in this
Country are very frequent by reason of the level of the ground in general,
which does both further the Traffic of the Cities and enricheth the
Inhabitants.

There is in this Country accounted four principal Seaports, which gives
entrance by Sea into this part of Flanders.

The first is Dunkirke, the Inhabitants whereof do in times of Dunkirke.
War infest the Seas by the name of Freebooters, and because most of their
Wars is with the Dutch, whom they account Heretics, the Jesuits and other
the Romish religious rablement of this place, join with these Pirates, and
bestow thus the charity of the ignorant Secular toward the ruin and rapine of
their fellow Countrymen and Christians, an evident testimony of the goodness
and zeal of their devout Orders.

The second is Scluse, seated at the mouth of the channel of Bridges, Scluse.
commanding a fair Haven capable of 500. Sail of good ships, and is now
subject to the States, and was taken from the Archduke Anno Dom. 1604. with
whose welfare it cannot stand to suffer the King of Spain to enjoy any safe
and large Harbor in those Seas; or adjoining Coasts.

The third Port is Newport, famoused in these our days by the Newport.
great Battle fought near it Anno Dom. 1600. between the Archduke Albertus
and the States, the Victory being acknowledged to be gotten next under God,
by the valor and courage of the English and their valiant Commanders.

The fourth Seaport of this Country is Ostend, which held out a siege against
the Archduke of three years and three months, Ostend.
which has made it for ever famous to Posterity.

In this Country of Flanders, properly belonging to the French, and whose
language is therein still used, is found the Cities of Lisle, accounted the
third Town of Traffic in all the Netherlands, Lisle.
and to the Inhabitants thereof, some infer the first invention of laying of
colors with oil, of making of Worsted Says, and many other Stuffes, which to
this day is seen to come thence.

Next is Doway an University.

Then Torney, which was surprised and taken by our Henry the 8. Anno Dom. 1513.
to whom the Citizens paid 100000. crowns Torney.
for their ransom, and it was restored afterward to the French for the same
600000. crowns, and from him finally taken by Charles the Fifth.

Besides these there are accounted in Flanders 35. Towns, and 1178. Villages
of lesser note, which I willingly pass over briefly, as intending to
comprehend the trade thereof in a Chapter by it self.

The second Earldome is Artois, containing twelve Towns of consequence, and
750. Villages, the chief whereof is, Artois.


The Town of Arrasse, whence our Tapestry and cloths of Arras have had their
invention and first original.

Then Saint Paul, the Earl thereof Lewis of Luxenburge played S. Paul.
so often fast and loose with Lewis the Eleventh of France, with Edward the
fourth of England, and with Charles of Burgundy, that he kept them for many
years at continual strife, which Duke Charles at length requited with the
loss of his head and Earldome.

The next Earldome is Henalt, comprehending 950. Villages, and Henalte.
24. Towns of note.

The most eminent being Camberay, taken by the Spaniards from Cambray.
the French by the Earl of Fuentes Anno 1595. accounted a free Town. Then
Mons.

The next is Bevais, at a Pillar whereof begin all the ways leading into
France, made all of paved stone by Brunhault the French Bevais.
Queen.

The next Earldome is Namurce, containing 180. Villages, and but 4. Towns of
note. Namurce.


Namurce is the principal, this Country has for Merchandise great store of
Grain of all sorts, and is enriched with Mines of Jasper, and all sorts of
Marble, and so abundant in Iron that it is incredible, making the Inhabitants
thereby both wealthy and laborious, and it is found moreover to produce a coal
wonderful in Nature, as kindled by water, and quenched by oil.

Zutphen is the next Earldome, being only a Town seated on the River Issell,
of good strength, taken from the Spaniard Anno Dom. Zutphen.
1590. at the Siege whereof was slain that Honorable Knight Sir Philip
Sidney, of whom was said,

Dignae legi scribis, facis, and dignissima scribi:
Scripta probant doctum te tua, facta probum.
Thou writ'st things worthy reading, and did do
Things that are even most worthy writing too,
Thy works thy learning praise,
Thy deeds thy goodness raise.
The next Earldome is Holland, in circuit 180. miles, no part of Holand.
which is distant from the Seas three hours journey, and comprehends 400.
Villages, and 23. Towns.

The chief whereof is Dort, where Anno 1618. was held a National Dort.
Synod against the Arminians.

Secondly Harlem, where Printing was invented. Harlem.


Thirdly Leiden, an University consisting of 41. Islands, to which there is
passage, partly by boats, but principally by 40. wooden Bridges, and by 110.
of stone, the rarity whereof being the first City of consequence I noted in
these parts Anno 1625. I could not choose then but a^mire, and here in this
Town is a Castle said to be built by Hengist the Saxon at his return out of
England, if their stories may be credited.

The next Town is Delph, a place of residence for the Merchant Adventerers of
England, where I was Anno 1625. admitted into that Delph.
Society whose w^lfare I am bound to desire, and whose prosperity I wish may
still increase: and though these Citizens have since upon some discontent
enforced them to remove to Roterdam, yet considering the Town is composed
altogether of Brewers, and that men so qualified are subject to forget
themselves, it may be imagined they have since slept upon it, and would
peradventure regaine their companies at a greater charge than can by any but by
their wisdoms be imagined.

The next is Alkmer, famous for the defeat which the Duke of Alkmer.
Alva received before it, to his great loss of reputation, and to this Cities
honor.

The next is Roterdam, famous in giving life to Erasmus, and noted Roterdam.
for lovers of the English Traffic, in giving lately free and worthy
privileges to the Merchant Adventerers of England, who from Delph lately
remooved hither to reside, to the future prejudice of those Brewers.

Lastly Amsterdam, as the now honor of all these Countries for matter of
Commerce and Traffic, who has raised it self to Amsterdam.
that height of Trade by the industry, policy, and wealth of the Inhabitants,
that 1000. sail of ships have been seen at one Tide to go in and out, and
as one of their own has it.

Quod Tagus atque Hamus vehit and Pactolus, in (...)
Vere, bunc, congestum, dixeru esse ^ocum.
What Tagus, Hemus, and Pactolus bear,
You would conjecture to be heaped up here.
Now for the manner and matter of their Traffic, I shall note the same such
as I have observed it at my there residency in 1625. above mentioned.

CHAP. CLXXX.
Of Amsterdam, and the Trade thereof.

AMSTERDAM is now by the late addition of the New to the Old a fair City,
strong and beautiful, Amsterdam, and the Trade thereof.
the River Tay flowing like a large and calm sea on the North side thereof,
and the River Amster of which and the word Dam this City is named, running
from the South through three Lakes enters this City, and passing through it,
falls into the River Tay on the North side.

This Town does consist of 5. principal Streets, through which the water does
run, and are divided therewith, in which ships, barges, and boats, of all
kinds are found both to come and go continually, either to lade or unlade,
which is not only beneficial to the Inhabitants, but also commodious and
beautiful.

The Trade of this City is much enlarged since the passage of Antwerpe was
stopped, and the Trade of the Inhabitants to the East and West Indies,
occasioned by their industry, their love to Navigation, and not the least by a
great plenty of Moneys which they deliver out at easy rates at interest as
wanting land, or other means to put out the same to better benefit, nothing
being left them but Commerce and Navigation to employ the same, and of late
days England, and other neighboring Countries are found to have their estate
going at interest according to the custom of the place, which is 8. per cent.
whereas in their own Countries 4. and 5. per cent. is as much as the same will
yield them.

But for the Coins, Weights, and Measures, as I observed them, I shall here
insert, and refer the rest to the better experienced.

They keep their Account as in Antwerpe, by which all these parts Accounts in
Amsterdam.
were regulated in former time for what concerned Traffic.

Their Moneys have also a correspondency with Antwerpe coins, Moneys of
Amsterdam and all the Netherlands.
but inhansed or debased as they see occasion by reason of their great yearly
disbursements, and ordinarily the same is found to be as in the Account of
Antwerpe, so as that their Liver or Pound, which is twenty shillings Flemish,
may be accounted twelve shillings sterling.

Florins 6. makes that Pound of 20. stivers per florin

Stivers 120. m^kes a Pound of Gross.

6 stivers a Flemish shilling.

Stivers 5. is accounted as much as 6. d. sterling. or 5. sold turnois.

Stiver 1. ^s a sold turnois.

A G^osse is 6. deniers turnois.

Catolus gulden is 20. stivers, 2. shillings sterling, or 20. sols turnois.

Besides these as the current moneys of the Country, All Coins of Europe do
pass here currantly for their value, and are received and paid in payments
for Merchandise accordingly.

Their Weight is the Pound, 100. whereof makes their Quintall, Waights of
Amsterdam.
which 100. or Quintar is held in London to be incirca 111. English, yet some
allege that the same truly calculated will not produce above 108. li. sutle,
and for the concordancy see further.

Their Measures is the Ell, which reduced to Yards English is Measures in
Amsterdam.
found to be 134. Else for 100. Yards of London, and the 100. Else of London
are here 167. Else, so that the 100. Else here makes in London about 74.
Yards, or 60. Else incirca, and 40. Flemish Else make in England 24. Else.

In the Exchanges this place is governed by Antwerpe, rising and falling
according to their p^esent occasions and the value current Exchanges in
Amsterdam.
of their Moneys, which is often inhansed, and debased, it being very
frequently observed in this City and the rest subject to the Netherlands or to
the United Provinces, that when they have occasions of great Receipts, they are
decryed in value, and raised again where they have occasions by their Wars,
or otherwise of great disbursement, according to which diversity of need full
occasions, the Exchange of the place is observed to alter, therefore therein
cannot be prescribed any direct Rules, though for the most part it is found by
common difference to be about 3. per cent. worse than the Exchanges practiced
in Antwerpe.

Now for the 100. lib. Weight here in use, I find the same thus by
observation of some friends to answer and agree with these Weights of Amst^dam
with other Cities.
places, as

In Antwerpe 107. li. Conixburgh 132. Constantinople 93. Rot. Coppenhagen 102.
lib: Dansicke 126. Flanders in general 117. Florence 133. Hamburgh 102. London
110. Lions ordinary 118. Mantua 155. Marselia 119. Melvin 131. Millan of 12.
ounc. 151. Stokholme 127. Venice sutle 167. Venice gross 103. Vienna 90.
Naples 128. Norinburge 99. Paris 98. Portugal 113. Prague 93. Ragusa 140.
Revell 126. Roven by Viconte 97. Rotchell small 118. Rome 139. Sa^tomer 117.
Saragosa 119. Sivill small weight 113. Sicilia 12. ounc. 161. Stralsont 98.
Toulouse 118. Verona 95. Vrbin 144.

And thus much shall serve for the concordancy of the Weights here practiced.

The Measure of length here in use is ^n Ell, which thus is found Measures of
Amsterdam with other Cities.
to make with other places, I say the 100. Else does yield

In Alleppo 106. pico Argiere 135. covad. Allexandria 122. pico. Antwerpe 99.
else. Conixburge 123. Constantinople 111. pico. Florence for silk 101. brac.
Genoa 120. brac. Grenado 82. vares. Hamburgh 121. else. Lixborne short 82.
vares. Rome 33. c^es. Valentia 72. can. London 59. else. Ditto woollen 73
yards. Lions linen 59. alnes. Marselia woollen 33. can. Middleburgh 99. else.
Millan linen 118. bra. Norinburgh 118. else. Paris 58. alns. Prague cloth
109. else. Rh^gusa 118. bra. Roven 57. alns. Sivill 82. vares. Stokholme 123.
else.

Besides these Measures of length, the concave Measures are in use.

Corn is here sold by the Last, which contains 24. small barrels, each
barrel 1. Muydens or Muys, each Muyden contains 1 (...). sackes, each sack
being three archetelings, which is 3 (...). shepels, so that the last of corn
contains 108. shepels, and this last is observed to make

Antwerpe 37 (...). vertules. Bordeaux 38. boisea^x. Bridges 17 boots. Cyprus
40. medinos. Embden 55. werps. Hamburgh 83. shepels. Lixborne 225. alquiers.
London 10. quarters.

In Pulia 36. timans. Rhegi^ 42. loopes. Roven 40. mines. Rotchell 128.
boisea^x. Roterdam 87. archetelins. Sivill 54. henegas. Sicilia 38. medinos.
Venice 32. stares. Sweden 23. measures. Copenbaven 23. barrels.

For the Measures of Wine, Oil, Beer, and other liquid commodities, I refer
you to Malines and others better experienced therein, and proceed forward to
the description of the remainder of the United Provinces.

Zealand is the next and last Earldome of the seventeene Provinces, consisting
of seven Islands, the remainder of 15. which the seas Zealand.
are said to have devoured.

The chiefest Cities of these seven are these.

First Middleburgh, which from nothing grew great by the residence of the
English Merchant Adventerers, and now by their removal Middleburgh.
hence is now almost come to nothing again; by this City and Stoade, and many
other places may easily be discerned the benefit that a Trade brings to a
City or country, therefore my prayers shall ever be, that London may never
loose that great reputation it has gained by commerce throughout the World.

The next City is Flushing, famous in that it was the first that the
Low Country men got from the Spaniard, and being cautionary to Flushing.
the English, Sir Philip Sidney was the first Governor thereof.

Then Brill, Tergouse, Brever-haven, to all which my curiosity lead me in 1625.
in that my Northern Voyage.

Westfrisland is the first Barony, and accounted one of the seventeene
Provinces, wherein is found for principal Towns Lewardin. Well frisland.


Next, Harlingham, then Zeutsen, and some other Seaports.

Vtrecht is the next Barony, containing therein the Towns of Utreicht.
Rhenen, Wicket, Amsford, Montfort, and Vtrecth the principal City, and a
pleasant Bishopriche, it is accounted the most excellent seat in all these
Countries, whereto are found many Ferries for passages, for it is said, that a
man may easily go hence in one day to any one of 59. walled Towns equally
distant from this City, or to any of 26. Towns to dinner, and return again
at night to bed, which is both strange and true.

Overissell is the next, from whence comes our Linnens bearing Oversell.
this name, the chief Cities are Swall, Campen, and Daventer.

Mailin is the next, famous in her famous Nunnery, where are Mailin.
sometimes found 1600. Nuns, who may at their pleasure leave the Cloister and
marry, as indeed it is fittest for them.

The last Province is Groineing, the chief Towns being that of Gro^neing.
Old-haven and Keykirke, and these be all the principal Cities of Traffic
in the said seventeene Provinces.

Now for the abbreviating of my Work, I have comprised in short the Weight,
Measures, and Trade of this populous and rich Country thus according to my
intended Method.

The particular Weights and Measures of the chief Cities of these Waights in
general of the Netherlands reduced to the 100. li. in London.
seventeene Provinces for brevity sake I have thought good here by themselves
to reduce to the Weight and Measures of London.

And first for the 100. li. haberdepois of England what it produces in these
Cities.

In Bridges 98. lib. Gante 104. Audmarte 106. Amsterdam 90. Ypres 104. Dixmude
104. Lislle or Lile 106. Flanders in general 106. Abevile 90. Alder 87.
Lovaine 96. Malmes 95. Halste 104. Poppering 104. Doway 106. Holand 95. Torney
104. St. Maur 106. Guelderland 95. Zeland 95. Walsond 95. Arschot 96. Barow ap
some 94. Brussels 96. Cortericke 106. Hartegen bosh 96.

The reduction of their Measures to the English 100. yards is thus Measures in
general of the Netherlands reduced to the 100. yards of London.
found to accord therewith, as the 100. yards in London make

In Bridges 126. else. Dunkirke 135. Gante 130. Honsooten 135. Andemarte 130.
Ysingham 130. Bolduc 135. Da^e 130. Brussels 135. Ypres 130. Lovaine 135. Sluse
130. Liege 153. Mastricht 139. Covin 93. Lisle or Lile 125. Cambray 125.
Amsterdam 134. Doway 125. Harlem 125. He^t 126. G^lderland 139. Oversels 139.
Middleburgh 135. Flushing 138. Vere 125. Romerswald 132. Artois in general
131. Tourney 144. Holand in general 138.

CHAP. CLXXXI.
Of the trade ingenerall of Flanders, and of the Netherlands.

NOW let us consider the general Trade and Navigation of Flanders, I mean
first that part Of the trade ingenerall of the Netherlanders and Flanders.
thereof as is subject to the States, and called the Netherlands, and then the
trade of Flanders, as at this day it is observed and found in obedience to the
Archduke. First then, these Netherlanders, or (...), are of late years become
notable Mariners, and have undertaken, and fortunately achieved many dangerous
and long Navigations; every particular City having both many and great ships
belonging thereunto: and in some places, where houses are dear and scarce, I
have seen whole families live in Lighters, and such Vessels, wherein they
eat, drink, and sleep, and have their continual habitation, their children,
like Water-r^s, seen continually dabling in the water, of which element, for
the most part, their country is subsistent. They are accounted better for
Northern designs and voiages, by reason of their Countries cold situation,
than for Southern, yet their late (...) the East and West Indies, and their
good successes there demonstrate they can also accommodate themselves to the
hotter clymates.

Their trade is generally throughout the world in imitation of their neighbors
the English Nation, whose steps for many years they have followed, only in
Turkey they have but small traffic, by reason their country wants those
commodities that are fit and proper for that Empire, such as Clothes, Lead,
Tin, the maine Staple of the English trade thither.

As for their judgment in traffic, it is singular, by reason their want of
many necessities both for back and belly, inforceth them to pay nearer into
Co^ than other nations that live in a more fruitful and fertile country; and
the easy rates that Money is to be found at interest, adds some help to
their inventions: they were few years past accounted of a heavy and du^er
^mper; but the Italians who in foreseeing wisdom and providence, would be
throughout the world accounted for Pro^, were by them made (...), as wise after
the deed too late repenting. For when they came first to (...) their trade in
Flanders, they took young youths of that nation to be their Cashiers, and to
copy their letters, whereby they came to learn the secrets of their trade,
and afterward to the Italians great prejudice, exercised it themselves, and
not contented therewith, as it were thus depriving them of the trade of
Flanders, but they followed them into Italy, and there living as sparingly as
they, and dispersing themselves into sundry Provinces, and principal towns,
have given a great blow to their great traffic in Italy; and that which
adds much to their knowledge and gain is, that they covet still to buy all
commodities at the Well head (as Merchants say) and where that commodity has
its first original, and where the same is cheapest, and then transport them
not so much to their own homes, as elsewhere where the same is dearest, and
not shaming to retaile any commodity by small parts and parcels, which both
English Merchants and Italians disdain to do in any country whatsoever; by
which means they are come now to that height, that though by nature they want
all things, yet by industry and Marchandising, they not only supply their own
defects, but also many of their neighbors wants and necessities, as I could
instance in sundry particulars. Neither must I omit one custom here used, and
not found I think elsewhere in the world, that whilst the Husband sports idly
at home, their Women are oft-times seen to be the Merchants, and in some
Provinces here sail from City to City, to compass their affairs abroad, as
they for the most part are found to manage it at home: for in their shops they
sell all; and take account of all, and it is no reproach to the men to be never
enquired after about these businesses of trade, who take moneys of their wives
for daily expense, and gladly so pass their time over in idleness. Now
forasmuch as Bridges has been the City where in times past this great
traffic was cohabitant, it will not be amiss a little to look back upon
it and those times, and see the glory of it in its luster then, and the decay
thereof in its ruin now.

It is recorded by Iacobus Marchantius, that L^dovicus Crassus in The ancient
staple of Bridges.
Anno 1323. granted a Staple to Bridges, which his son Mal^us confirmed:
which Staple was a privilege of staying all foreign commodities in the
place, except the seller and bringer chose rather to return whence they came.
This City has an eminent market place, with a public house for the meeting
of all Merchants at The original of Burses, of places of meeting for Merchants,
which in England is now termed the Exchange.
noone and evening: which house was called the Burse, of the houses of the
extinct family Bursa, hearing three purses for (...) arms, engraven upon
their houses, from whence these meeting places to this day are called Burses in
many countries, which in London we know by the name of the Royal Exchange,
and of Britains Burse. Fifteen Nations in the height of this trade, had each
their several houses or colleges here, namely, the Merchants of England,
Scotland, France, Castilia, Portugal, Arragon, Navar, Catalonia, Biscaia, the
Hans Cities of Germany, as Lubecke, Hamburg, Rostock, Dantsicke, Riga, Revel,
and diverse others Cities. Then the Merchants of Venetia, Florence, Genoa,
Lucca, Millan, and others.

Now then, these Nations having by this means each here a residence, supplied
this City of Bridges with the particular commodities of their countries, as
first, the Italians they brought Chamblets, Grograins, thread of Silk, Silver
and Gold, and Clothes made thereof, also Jewels, Wines of Candia, Allome,
Brimstone, Oils, Spices and Drugs of all sorts, which they had by their trade
of Egypt, India, Arabia and Grecia. 2. The French brought Salt, Wines, White
and Red, Paper, Linnens, and some Oils. 3. The English Wool, Lead, Tin,
Beer, and some Woollen clothes, for vailes for women used in those days. 4.
The Scots brought Skins of Sheep, and Conies, and such like. 5. The
Spaniards and Portugals brought Grain for Scarlet Die, Gold, Silver, Raw
Silk, some Drugges and Spices. 6. The Germans, Danes and Pollackes brought
Honey, Wax Corn, Saltpeter, Woolles, Glass Furs, Quick silver Rhenish
wines, Timber for building, and the like. And 7. Flanders yielded to these,
Horses, Cattle Butter, Cheese, Herrings, and other Seafish, Woollen and Linen
Clothes, Tapestry of great beauty and variety, excellent Pictures, and other
Manufactaries. And by this great concourse of Nations, Flanders gave the name
to all the Netherlands. To increase yet this trade, Burdges in Anno 1414. got a
privilege, that they who were free of that city by gift, buying, birth, or
marriage, should be free from all confiscation of their goods, which exceeds
the privileges of any other City in the Netherland: for those of Ipre having
the like, yet loose it upon any force offered to the Prince. This trade thus
continued till the year 1485. when as it began to decay, partly by the
narrowness and unsaftie of the Port of Sluice, and the River leading from
thence to Bridges; and partly by the fame of the large and commodious River
Scaldis at Antwerpe, and partly by the Civil wars then afoot in this
country: First then the Portugal having taken Callicut in the East Indies,
carried the Spices of India to the Faires of Antwerpe in anno 1503. and
contracting with that City, drew the Fuggero and Welfarts, two potent Germain
families of Merchants thither. After which the Merchants of Florence, Lucca,
and the Spindas of Genoa seated themselves there, as also the Merchant
Adventurers of England in anno 1516. and many of other Nations were invited
thither by the privilege of marriage dowries, which became shadows to many
frauds: for when husbands either brake in their life time, or be found
Bankerout in death, the wives are preferred to all debtors in the recoverie of
their dowry. And thus far he shows the rising and falling of the trade of
Burges, and how it came to be removed and settled in Antwerpe; and how since
also it has been lost and departed thence, I have showed in another place: and
this is as much as I have thought good to insert of the trade in general of
Netherland, concluding, that though the country be of small extent, and be
barren of rich commodities either to preserve or maintain a trade, yet the
industry of the inhabitants has made them potent, wealthy, and great
Merchants, and now at this day they traffic to all parts of the habitable
world, with the commodities of other countries, which by their endeavors and
pains they make and purchase to be as if naturally and really the same were
their own.

Now for the general trade of Flanders, so far forth as it is in obedience
to the Archduke, or more properly to the Kings of Spain, it must be granted,
that it holds not any equality at this day with that part in subjection to the
States. Antwerpe as the principal City of which the Flemings did, and might
justly boast, is now, as then, the chiefest; but the former splendour is now and
long ago lost: for it had the pre-eminence, and was one of the chief Cities
of traffic in the world; but is now only the chief of this jurisdiction.
What it could formerly herein challenge, it has now lost: for if the trade
thereof be well observed, it will be discerned, it looks not so high by many
millions as it then did, the Merchants the inhabitants partake of one of the
qualities of the Spaniard Merchant, which they have since their reduction to
that Scepter, learned thence, and this is never or very seldom to traffic or
adventure their estates into any other Princes dominions, but where their Lord
is Sovereign. Which rule found here, as in all Spain for the most part true,
and granted, it must be confessed their trade cannot possibly be of any great
consequence: for such is the nature of a free and uncontrouled Commerce, that
no Country or Nation how remote or distant soever, can give limit or bound
thereto. Whereupon it may be inferred, and as by proof at this day it is found
observeable, their general traffic is small, and consists more by a
laborious industry of the inhabitants at home, than by their great adventures
by sea abroad, their greatest navigations extending but to Spain, and in some
second adventures thence to India, and that for no great matter, and otherwise
they trouble not, neither the East nor West, neither the North nor the South
parts of the World, no nor hardly as far as into France, England, or into
Netherlands, the nearest neighbors (when at amity) for any great matter of
moment.

The principal means whereby their small traffic is now maintained to them,
is by their several sorts of cunning and artificial Fabrickes and
Manufactaries, which every town of any note is notable for, such as are
Hangings of Arasse, Tapestrie, some sorts of stuffes of Silk, and of Woollen
and Linen, and in exchanges to purchase which, the English, French, and other
the neighboring Nations bring them Woollen Clothes, Wines, and some other
needful provisions which they want, to supply their occasions, and the
necessities of those Armies as are for the most part seen to be fed,
maintained and clothed in this Country. Dunkerke their only and best
Seaport, affoords some shipping, but so poorly set on work by way of
Merchandising, that they find their best traffic to consist of thieverie and
boothalling against both their friends, and their enemies the Netherlanders,
which yet they are so far unable really to set out ^o anycompetencie of
strength, that the Jesuits and other the devoter Orders of Friars, are
oftentimes induced to set their helping hand thereto, this way oftentimes
spending in uncharitable actions and bloodshed, the charitable alms of the
poor and deluded multitude: and how well this trade has thriven with these
irreligious Ecclesiastical Orders, their great late losses by their own
reports sufficiently witness to the world.

So leaving the Antwerpians to endeavor the regaining of their lost traffic,
and the Dunkerke Free-booters, and their holy partners to the recoverie of
their late damage by some more honest Commerce, I will here leave Flanders,
and hence travel further into this continent, and survey the particular trade
of the famous Empire of Germany.

CHAP. CLXXXII.
Of Germany and the provinces thereof.

HAVING briefly run through Flanders, and Germany and the Provincos.
the United Provinces, and reduced the trade thereof into two principal
Cities, that is to Antwerpe for Flanders, and the other Provinces subject to
the Spaniards; and to Amsterdam for Holland, and the other Cities subject to
the States. i must be constrained in a manner to use the same method in the
survey of the trade of Germany, reducing the traffic of the lesser to the
greater Cities; the greatest being also not much known to our Nation for any
eminency this way, as being inland, to which our English (whose traffic
principally consists at sea, and consequently in maritime towns) have but
little knowledge of, though otherwise eminent, as being far distant from it.
Germany then is bounded on the West with France, and Belgium, on the North
with Denmark Germany bounded.
and her seas, on the East with Sprusia, Poland, and Hungary, and on the South
with the Alps.

This Country does afford to the Merchant for transportation, many notable
Commodities, as Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, and Lead, by Commodities of Germany.
their Mines; Corn, Wines, Allome, Quicksilver, Arms of all sorts, diverse
Manufoctaries, as Linen, Woollen, Silks, etc. and sundry other commodities.

Three sorts of Cities are said to be contained in this Empire, the Hans-townes
72.
first are those that are called Hans-townes, which are such as enjoy large
privileges and immunities, and are thought to be about 72. in number, and for
the most part are found either to border upon the seas, or to be seated upon
great and navigable Rivers, being for the most part rich, and of reasonable
Commerce and trade, or famous and noted for some one particular Art, Fabric,
or Manufactorie.

The second sort are called Imperial Cities, and accounted free in Imperial
Cities 60.
respect of their great prerogatives, as in coining of Moneys, and knowing no
Lord, but ruled by the Imperial laws; for which they acknowledge and pay a
contribution yearly to the Emperor, whom they account their Protector, and
these are found to be about sixty in number.

The third are such as are held by inheritance by some Princes, as
Principalities.
is Heidelberg, Vienna, and others of which are accounted in this Empire in
circa ( --) and may be called Principalities. There is also found in this
Empire conducing to traffic, (besides the lesser) four great navigable
Rivers, that enrich these Hans-townes, Imperials, and Principalities,
communicating the commodities of one City to another, and at last to the
Seaports, where the same is last of all vented into foreign kingdoms.

The prime whereof is Danubius, which in running 1500 miles, does receive above
60 navigable rivers, and disgorgeth it self into Danubius.
the Euxine or Black sea.

The second is the Rheine, running 800 miles through Germany Rheine.
and Belgia, disgorgeth it self into the Germane Ocean, taking in Albis, which
is accounted navigable for 400 miles, (and some others) Albis.
and is the third river of this country.

The fourth is Odera, running 300 miles in length, issues out in the Baltique
sea; besides which there is many other of lesser note, as Odera.
Weser, E^se, and others in themselves found to be great Rivers, enriching
diverse parts of this country, though far inferior to the former.

Lastly, this Empire is found to contain twenty large Provinces, which by
reason of my little insight therein, I will cursorily post over, and refer
the same where I am defective, to the better learned. East-Frisland is
accounted the first Province, wherein is found the Cities of Oldenburg,
Ammerdun, and lastly Emden, which for its East Frisland.
former eminency in trade, I cannot so slightly pass over without a word of
the trade thereof.

CHAP. CLXXXIII.
Of Emden and the trade thereof.

EMDEN has been in times past of far greater Emden and the trade thereof.
trade than now it is: It was for some years the seat of the English Merchants
Adventurers, but the civil wars about Religion, raised between the Citizens
and their Count, was in part the cause of the decay of the trade thereof. This
City lies in the utmost border of the Empire, and only divided by the River
Emse from the Netherland: and by an Inland sea from West Frisland, being one of
those Provinces. In the Summer it is found a pleasant City, but in Winter as
if drowned in the Seas, and all the fields covered with water, makes it to
appear as an Island in the waters. As for the Moneys current, and form of
accounts kept here by Merchants, I omit that to the place of the coins and
accounts of Germany in general, noted hereafter. In the mean time it is to be
observed, that the weights and measures in use are these. The common weight of
Emden is the pound of () Weight of Emden.
the quintall or 100. pound makes in London

Their common measure of length is an Ell, wherewith they measure Measure of
Emden.
Linen, Woollen, and Silks in general, the 100 whereof has been observed to
make in London 48 (...) else, and the 100 yards of London to have made
thereabout 162. or 163. else.

Corn is here measured by the Werpe, 55 werpes make 10 quarters of London, or
a Last of Amsterdam; but 61 werpes is here a Last, consisting of 4 werpes great
of 15 (...) Barrels the werpe.

Westphalia is the next, containing in it self a large tract, and Westphalia.
producing those Acornes in abundance, which feed their Swine, and which
affoords those Gammons which are accounted so excellent a dish. The Northern
part of this Country is Bremen, wherein is found the town of Breme, as the
principal: then Clappenburgh, Exenburgh belonging to the Duke of Saxony. Then
Collonia, wherein is said to be the bodies of the three wise men which came
from the East to worship our Savior. And this belongs to the Bishopric of
Collen. Here is also Warendorpe and some others belonging to the Bishop of
Munster, and Boport, E^gers, Coblents, and Triers, belonging to the Bishop of
Triers: of the principal of which a word passando.

CHAP. CLXXXIIII.
Of BREME and the trade thereof.

BREME is one of the Hans-townes, so called for the Breme and the trade thereof.
freedom of the traffic here practiced, strongly fortified, five miles
distant from the sea, the River Visurge serving to convey all commodities
thither, as running through the City, near which lies that small but well
known town of Ossenbridge, noted for the great quantities Ossenbridge
of narrow linen cloth that is thence conveied to England and other countries.
It is reported that in this City the Custom was first raised in swearing and
inhansing of new comers by Bread and Salt, and of infranchising them into
their City, by paying a certain mulct, or fine in good liquor to the rest of
the company which is now a general received custom in all the Hans-townes of
Germany, and become part of the traffic thereof.

The commonweight of Breme is the pound of ( --) Ounces the 100. Weight in
Breme.
pound thereof has rendered in London () pound.

The common measure for length is the Ell, which agrees with Measures in Breme.
the Ell above mentioned in Emden. But in Ossenbridge it is found that the 100
yards London makes 84 else there in circa, and 100 else of London is here in
Ossenbridge about 105 else.

CHAP. CLXXXV.
Of COLLEN, and the trade thereof.

COLLEN commonly for distinction called in Latin Collen and the trade thereof.
Colonia Agrippina, is a very fair City, whereto is found great concourse of
Merchants, near to this City did Caesar with incredible expedition make a
Bridge over the River Rheine, near which the town is at present situated,
which more terrified the barbarous enemy, than the report of his valor. The
Archbishop of this City, is the second Especial Elector of the Empire, and
C^ancellour of Italy. Here is said to be the bodies of the three wise men
which came from the East to worship our Savior, vulgarly called the three
Kings of Collen, whose bodies were translated by Helena the mother of
Constantine, unto Constantinople; and from thence by E^storsius Bishop of
Millain transported to Millain; and finally, brought hither by Rinoldus the
Bishop of this place.

The Commonweight of Collen is the pound of () the 100 whereof Weight of Collen.
has been observed to have made in London 110 pound.

The common measure of length is the Ell here in use: the 100 Else whereof
have been observed to make in London 60 Else. Measures of Collen. Exchanges of
Cullen.


Here are great Exchanges practiced in this City as proper and fit thereunto,
by reason of the rich Bankers and Merchants that are found here to reside, the
which I have largely declared in the chapter 290 ^f Exchanges of this place in
the end of this work: wherefore it will be here needless to insert the same.

The third Province is Cleveland, containing the Earldome of Cleve, Cleveland.
the Dutchies of Gulicke and Berge; wherein are found the fair Cities of
Cleve, Calker, Wesel, Emericke, Aken, Gulicke, Dulkins, and others which I omit
for brevitie.

The fourth Province is Alsatia, wherein is found the towns of Psaltberge,
Wesenberge, Colmar, and principally the famous City of Alsatia.
Strasburge: of which a word.

CHAP. CLXXXVI.
Of Strasburge, and the trade thereof.

STRASBVRGE is one of the Imperial Cities before Strasburg and the trade
thereof.
mentioned, seated a Musket shot from the river Rheine, whereto there is a
channel cut for conveyance of all commodities. There is here also a wooden
Bridge over the Rheine, but very weak, and of no great strength. The circuit of
the city may be about 8 miles, well fortified, and is famous for many
rarieties, the principal being their Clock, which cost so many years labor to
perfect, and the Steeple of the Cathedral Church is numbered amongst the seven
miracles of the world, for its excellent structure and beauty. The courtesy of
the inhabitants to strangers, is not to be forgoten: And here they are
accustomed at the Cities cost, to give all Handicrafts entertainment, that they
may either teach if expert, or learn if ignorant; by which means they are
found to have confluence of Artisans, which does both much further their Cities
stock, and inricheth the inhabitants.

In Strasburg are found two weights, a gross and sotile, and by observation it
has been found that the 100 pound sutle of London Weights of Strasburg.
^ath made here incirca 70 in 71 pound of the grosseweight for gross goods of
16 ounces the pound: and 107 pound sutle weight of 12 ounces the pound, by
which they use to weigh all fine commodities, as Drugges and Spices, as Sugers,
Pepper, Cloves, Maces, Cynamon, Almonds Dates, and the like.

The treasure of length of Strasburge is the Ell, which is in London Measures
of Strasburge.
() inches.

Their coins current is the Bohemico gross or Blaphace, which is three
crutfers, one cruster is two pence, and one pey is two hellers, and one heller
is two orchins, by which coins they keep their account. Vide further chap. 206.

The fifth Province is Franconia, divided into eight parts, the lower Palatine
is the first part, wherein is found Worms, Spiers, and Heidelberge, Franconia.
the chief City belonging to those Princes. Bacarac famous Bacarac.
for the excellent Rhenish wines here growing, Co^b-Openham, Frankendale, and
others.

The second part is Wittenberge, the chief towns are Toubing, Wittenberge.
2. Stutgard the Dukes seat, 3. Marlach and others. Stutgard


The third part is Auspach, 2. Haibram and others. Auspach.


The fourth is Baden, wherein is the City Baden, Durlach and others. Baden.


The fifth is Ments, wherein is Lantse^, Being, and others. Ments.


The sixth is Bainberge, a fair City, and some others. Bainsberge.


The seventh is Westberge, a City, and Arustime, and others. Westberge.


The eighth part belongs to the Emperor, wherein is found Noremberge,
Norimberge.
the fairest and richest City of Germany, and seated in the center thereof:
and also here is Frankeford, seated on the river Menus, Francfort.
famous for the two Book-marts here kept annually, in Mid-le^t and
Mid-September. A word of the most eminent of these before I proceed to the next
province.

CHAP. CLXXXVII.
Os Worms, and the trade thereof.

WORMS is a town of great antiquity, and yet wants not magnificence in her
buildings: Worms and the trade thereof
On the west side thereof grows in great abundance those Wines known to us by
the name of Rheni^. It is more famous for the many Imperial Parliaments held
here of old, than it is for trade, therefore I shall not have cause to insist
much hereupon. Near to this City stands the City of Frankendale, a new,
modern, strong, fair and beautiful piece, which has made it self famous in
the late wars of these parts: these coasts affoording the most excellent
wines above mentioned here in great plenty abounding: and are found to grow
especially on the west side of the river, which is the prime commodity of the
inhabitants both of the City and Province. The weights and measures here are
found to accord with Spiers, to which I refer the enquirer.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII.
Of Spiers and the trade thereof.

SPIERS is half a mile from the Rheine, seated in a Spiers and the trade
thereof.
plain on the West side of the said River, having more antiquity than
beauty; and yet more beauty than trade. Here the Imperial Chamber is held,
in which Court the differences of the Empire are judged, and the Electors
themselves may be called hither to trial of law. The weights and measures are
these: First for the weights of Weights of Spiers.
this place, the common is the pound of 16 ounces, or 32 lootes, of which is
made two several quintals, one of 100 pound, another of 120 pound; and the 100
pound here is in London 111 pound, and the 100 pound of London is about 88
pound here of 32 lootes per pound. Measures of Spiers.
The measure of length used is the Ell, which is in London () inches.

CHAP. CLXXXIX.
Of Heidelberg and the trade thereof.

THE City of Heidelberg is seated in a plain environed Heidelberg and the
trade thereof.
on three parts with high mountains, the fourth part open, and beholding the
River; from which it is a mile distant, and to which it conveyeth all
commodities by a small river that runs by the walls thereof. This is an
University. and the chief seat of the Palsgraves, and has not been much
famoused for the trade thereof, the weights and measures here in use are these.

The weight common in use here is the pound of 16 ounces, of which Weights of
Heidelberg.
is made three several hundreds or quintars, the first of 100 pound for fine
goods, the second of 120 pound for gross goods, and the third of 132 pound for
provision of food, as Butter, Flesh, etc. The 100 pound has been found to make
in London 108 pound, and the 100 sutle makes then here about 92 in 93 pound.

The measure of length is an Ell, which makes in London () inches. Measures of
Heidelberg.


CHAP. CXC.
Of Norimberg and the trade thereof.

NORIMBERG is seated in a barren soil, Norimberge and the trade thereof.
yet this defect is supplied by the industry of the inhabitants. It is absolute
and of it self, and accounted one of the Imperial Cities of the Empire, and
the richest of all the rest: the inhabitants by their subtle inventions in
Manual works, and cunning Arts, with the encouragement they daily give to
(...), draw thereby the riches of other countries to them. Every child though
but seven or eight years old, is here put to work, and is enabled thereby to
get his own livelihood; and by this means is all Europe filled with the
trivial commodities of this Town, known by the name of Norimberg ware, which
makes the City rich, strong and powerful: their trade is not great otherwise,
and the weights and measures in use are these.

There is here but one pound in use, as in Spiers, of which is also Weight of
Norimberge.
composed two several (...) agreeing with it, and as there I mentioned, with
London.

Their measure of length is the Ell, both for Linen and Woollen, contrary
Measure of Norimberge.
to the custom of most cities of Germany, the 100 else whereof has been
found to make in London 63 else, and the 100 yards of London to have made here
138 else.

The place is famous also for the great Exchanges that are practiced Exchanges
of Norimberg.
therein, which I have at large handled in Chapter 298, with all circumstances
thereto belonging.

CHAP. CXCI.
Of Frankfort, and the trade thereof.

FRANKFORT is a free City of the Empire, famous for the common Assemblies here
Frankfort and the trade thereof.
of the Electors for the choice of the Emperor, and for their two annual
Faires, as also for many Parliaments of the Empire held here. It is seated upon
the Mane, which runs through the same, dividing the City into two parts,
which is united by a goodly Bridge. It is strongly encompassed with a double
wall, and is seated in a large plain, the streets narrow, and the houses built
of Timber and Clay: here is in this town Sanctuary for Bankerouts for the
space of fourteen days, which is never without some guests and company, from
some one adjoining City or other. And if in those fourteen days they cannot
compound or escape, then by all wiles they will get out of the privileges
thereof, and entering in again, begin their fourteen days over again; and
thus some are found to do for six months, or a year together. There is
found in their Marts or Faires, a great trade and concourse of Merchants, but
it is principally famous for Books, which from all parts of Europe are brought
hither, printed and dispersed hence, the town consisting much upon printing,
and other manual Arts. The weights and the measures in use are

The weight of this place is the pound of 16 ounces, of which is Weights of
Frankfort.
made three several hundred, or quintals, which agrees with that of
Heidelberg before mentioned; and as that also with London, Lipsicke, Friburgh,
Vlme, Iffan, Isuff, Basle, Costute and Domstetter, holding also in each of the
said towns, the said concordancie, therefore here need no further repetition.

Frankefort is found to have two several measures for length, the Woollen and
the Linen ell, differing about 2 per cent. so that the 100 else Measures of
Frankfort.
for Linen here, gives in London 48 else, and the 100 else in Woollen gives
about 49 else London: and the 100 yards of London readers here of linen 169
else, and of woollen 168 in circa.

The Exchanges here practiced are great, which I have handled in the Chapter
298 at large with all due circumstances. Exchanges of Frankfort. Helvetia.


The sixth Province is Helvetia, wherein are contained the thirteen Cantons of
the warlick Switsers, preserving their liberties by their valor,
notwithstanding their potent neighbors. The chief of their Cities is Zurich,
2 B^l, an University, 3 Constance, famous for the Council here held in anno
1414. 4. Berne, 5. Vpbaden, the ordinary place for the common assembly of the
said Cantons, 6 Lucerne, and others, and of the trade of the principal of
these, a word in passing.

CHAP. CXCII.
Of Zurich and the trade thereof.

ZURICH is seated on the Lake Ze^isca, which Zuricke and the trade thereof.
divides the same into two parts, which again is united by three fair
Bridges, the middlemost serving as a meeting place for Merchants: which lake
runs into the brook Limachus, which passes to ^aden, and so into the
Rheine, carrying Boats, by which commodities are transportable, the weights and
measures in use are.

The Moneys current in the Switsers Cantons, I shall note in the Weights of
zurick.
place of the coins of the Empire: the weight then here is, the pound of 16
ounces, of which is made the 100 pound, and the 120 pound, and it is found that
the 100 pound sutle of London turns here 93 pound.

The measure of length is here an Ell, the 100 whereof renders in Measures of
Zurick.
London 52 else, or thereabouts.

CHAP. CXCIII.
Of BASIL, and the trade thereof.

BASIL lies upon the river of Rheine, which divides Basil and the trade
thereof.
it into the lesser and the greater Basil: it was once an Imperial City, but
now is joined to the Cantons of Switserland. It is a famous University, and
much frequented by Students, the benefit of the Rheine running hence through
Germany, communicates the commodities of this City to all other seated
thereupon.

Basil is found in weights to have but one pound, equal with Frankfort Weight
of Basil.
and Heidelberg, of which is composed three several quintars, one of 100
pound, another of 120 pound, and the third of 132 pound, and agrees with
London, as you shall find in Heidelberg and Frankeford aforementioned.

The Measure of length of Basil is the ell for Linen and Woollen, the Measure
of Basil.
100 else whereof renders in London 48 else, and the 100 yards of London has
been observed to give here 167 else.

The seventh Province is Valesia, seated wholly amongst the Alps. Valesia.
Sittin is the only walled town of this Province.

Boetia is the eighth, in which is Chur the Metropolis of the Grisons, Boetia.
and here is the Voltolin taken by the Spaniards 1622.

Suevia is the ninth, wherein is found the Cities of Vlme, 2 Ausburg, Suevia.
3 Norlinghen, 4 Ravensperge, and others, of some of which, as most notable, a
word.

CHAP. CXCIIII.
Of Ausburg and the trade thereof.

AVSBVRG is a free City of the Empire, governed Ausburg and the trade thereof.
by a Senate of Citizens: it is seated upon the Northern mouth of the Alps,
in a fruitful plain of Corn and Pastures, it is strong and well fortified,
and beautified with many houses of free stone of six or seven stories high. In
this City lived those famous Merchants of the family of Fuggers, who have
built here many public buildings, and many private, which at a reasonable
(...) are let to the poorer inhabitants. Here is also a magnificent building
for the meeting of Merchants, in manner of our (...) (...), called commonly the
(...). There are two (...) rivers which run through the suburbs, which are
commodions for trasportation of Corn and Wines which this Country of Schwaben
or Suevia yields in great quantity. This City is also famous for the
consession here made of their faith by the Protestant (...), (...) (...) the
Emperor in anno()

The (...) of Ausburg is the pound of 16 ounces, the 100 pound being Weight of
Ausburg.
the (...), makes in London 109 pound, and this agrees with Munchen, Wesell,
(...), and some others of Germany.

The measure of length is here the ell, found two fold, one for Woollen, Measure
of Ausburg.
and the other for Linen and Silk, which because it very nearly agrees with
Frankefort, of which I have made mention before, I pass the same over.

Bavaria is the tenth Province, the chief towns are Munchen on Bavaria.
the river ^ser, and the Dukes seat, 2. (...), an University, 3 Ratisbona, 4
Pass^, 5 Salsburg, and many other great Cities.

Northgola or the Upper Pal^ is the eleventh, and belongs totally to the
Pala^es of the Rheine, the chief towns are A^berg, Northgola.
whose Silver mines yields yearly (...) thousand Crowns rent to the Princes
Coffers. 2 Newberg and others.

Austria is the (...), wherein is found the famous Cities of Vienna, (...)
Austria.
on (...), one of the most beautiful towns of Germany; and walled, as
stories say, with the monyes that Leopold the Duke had for King Richard the
first his Ransom, being by him taken in his return through Palestine. 2
Gratse, from whence the present Emperors Gratse.
have their name. 3. (...) (...) the (...) of (...). 4. Newark the chief of
Carniolo, and in Tirolis is found the City of Inspurg, Tiroll Bolsan, and
Trent, famous for the Counsel here held, and here concluded after 40 years
lingering, and politic delays.

CHAP. CXCV.
Of Vienna and the trade thereof.

VIENNA is at present the seat of the Germane Emperors, Vienna and the trade
thereof.
and is now the (...) of this Country against the (...) of the (...), who have
more than once is (...) (...) it; on the North side runs the river of Dano^;
which here divides it self (...) three (...), incompassing a good space of
ground, and then meeting again; and all this is again united by three stone
bridges, one containing 29 arches, another 57 arches, and the third 15 arches,
each arch being 60 foot asunder. Here are many Merchants of great quality, that
have their factors in Venetia, Florence, and other parts of Italy, to supply
them with the Fabrics of Silks made there, such as are Sattins, Damasces,
Taffata, Velvets, cloth of Gold, and such like.

The weight in use here is the pound, which is in some commodities Weights of
Vienna.
divided into 32 Lootes, in some into 128 quints, and in some unto an 512
pfenning, of which pound the quintar is made, which is 100 pound, which does
render in London about 123 pound incirca, and therewith is also found Idra and
Erford to agree, the 100 pound of London making here 81^ pound.

Their measure for length is two, one in Linen, and the other in woollen:
Measures of Vienna.
the 100 yards in London makes here in linen 103 else, and in Cloth and Silk
113 else.

There is here, as being the Court of the Emperor, a great Exchange Exchanges
of Vienna.
in use, and they are found to account and Exchange by ^ix Dollers of 8. shil.
Flemish, and by Ducats of gold of 12 shil. Flemish.

The kingdom of Bohemia is the thirteenth, wherein is accounted about 780
Cities, walled Towns and Castles, the chief whereof Bohemia.
is Prague, the Metropolis of this kingdom, 2. Eger, 3 Budeis, 4 Melmuke,
Pilsen, and others, and in this tract is found Prestan the chief City of
Silesia, also Gorlits^ the chief City of Lusatia, and Brin and Preslan.
Gorlitse. Olmuts.
Olmuts the chief of Moravia; but the trade of Bohemia I will comprise under
the title of Prague here following, as being the Metropolis thereof.

CHAP. CXCVI.
Of Prague, and the trade thereof.

THe City of Prague includes three towns, as new Prague, old Prague, and a
City inhabited by Jews, Prague and the trade thereof.
encompassed with one wall neither strong nor beautiful: the river Molda does
run through the same, but is not navigable, nor commodious for carriage or
transportation of merchandise, to which the inhabitants are not much addicted,
Corn and Wi^e being the prime commodities the Country affoordeth, and timber
in abundance, of which the walls of their houses are for the most part made,
and that in whole pieces as the same grow, and not so much as the bark thereof
taken away.

The weight of Prague is the pound of 16 ounces: the 100 li. sutle of Weight of
Prague, and of Bohemia.
London has made here about 83 pound, Pasau and Regenborge agreeing also
therewith, as does also the most part of this Country.

Their measure is the Ell, of which they have two, one in Linen, Measures of
Prague and of Bohemia.
and the other in Cloth and Silk; the 100 yards of London has made in Linen
148 else, and in ^llen 160 else.

Vide coins current in Bohemia.

Brandenburg is the fourteenth, wherein is reckoned 50 Cities, and 64 walled
Towns, the chief of which is Brandenburg, then Brandenburge.
Frankefort for distinction called upon Oder, next Berlin, the residence of the
Marque^, and H^velburg seated upon Havel, and many others of consequence,
whereof little is come to my observation, therefore I will in silence pass
them over.

Pomerian^ is the fifteenth Province, wherein is found Statin the Pomeriana.
Wallen.
residence of the Prince, and Metropolis of this Country, then Wallen, once
the famous Mart-towne of all these Countries, the Russians, Danes, Saxons, and
Vandals had here their particular streets of abode for Commerce and trade, but
ruind by war, the trade was removed to Lubecke, where yet in some measure it
is found to continue still.

Meklinburg is the 16 Province, wherein is found the Cities of Malchan, then
Sternberg, next Wismar, and some others. Meklinburg.


Saxony is the seventeenth Province, wherein is found to be many Cities of
note; the principal is first Erford, one of the fairest in Saxony
Germany, 2 (...), an University for Physicians, 3 Smalcold Famous for the
Protestant league here made, 4 Dresden, seated on the Albis, and the Dukes
Magasin for war and Arms, for ^0000 horse and foot ever in readiness at a
days warning. 5 Lipsicke, an University, which yearly does yield the Duke for
custom of (...), Drunk, and transported 20000 pound steerling. 6 Wittenberg
an University, and the chief seat of the Elector of (...), and 7 Maidenberg,
where it is said Luther studied Divinity. Of some of these a word.

CHAP. CXCVII.
Of Lipsicke, and the trade thereof.

LIPSICKE is seated in a plain of ^ost (...) Lipsick and the trade thereof.
Come-ground, the streets fair, and the chief houses built of free stone of
four roofes high: it is accounted also an University, but found to be of no
great note, by reason of the neighborhood of Wittemberg: they have for some
trespass lost those great privileges that they formerly enjoyed, and therefore
their trade is not accounted great, they may now neither fortify their town,
nor wind a horn in their night watches, as other Cities in Germany do, nor
yet use Red Wax in their public Seals or Contracts, which are all of them
accounted in Germany of signs of freedom. The weights and measures in use
are these.

The weight is the pound, of which is made three quintars, one of Waights of
Lipsicke.
100 pound, another of 120 pound, and a third of 132 pound. Vide more hereof in
Frankefort and Heidelberg, with which it is found to accord.

Lipsicke has two measures, one for woollen, and the other for linen, 14 per
Cent. difference: For the 100 yards of London does make in Measures of Lipsicke.
woollen commodities 160 else, and in linen 140 else.

The Merchants here account by Marks of 32 gross, and the gross Accounts and
exchange of Lipsick.
being 12 heller; but they exchange by Florins of Breslow, 30 to have posito in
Norimburg 32 Florins, and in Vienna 34 Florins.

CHAP. CXCVIII.
Of Wittenberg and the trade thereof.

WITTENBERG is seated on a plain sandy ground, accounted an University,
wherein they Wittenberge and the trade of Saxony.
proverbially say, a man shall meet nothing but Wh^res, Scholars, and Swine,
which shows that the inhabitants have little trade, as living for the most
part by the Students, and peradventure by the flesh of Swine and Women, but by
what weight and measure the same is proportioned to them, I am to seek,
therefore refer the same to the next Merchant that shall have occasion to
make his observation thereupon.

CHAP. CXCIX.
Of Dresden, and the trade thereof.

DRESDEN is a fair town and strongly fortified, Dresden and the trade thereof,
in which the Elector of Saxony keeps his court: it is famous for the
magnificent Stables and Armories which the Duke keeps here in a continual
readiness, the river of Elve divides the town into two parts, the new and the
old, which is very strong both by Art and Nature, and accounted the strongest
modern City in Germany, the inhabitants are much addicted to trade, and the
river does much further their endeavors; but Nature affoording them a rich
soil, takes away much of their edge: for it is ever found that the barren
soil affoords to the inhabitants the greatest encouragement. Their weights and
measures are,

Dresden, Misen, and all Saxony is found to have three weights, and Weights of
Saxony.
the 100 pound of London made of Zigostatica, or the Princes weight, 96 pound
of 16 ounces it made 92 pound of Merchants weights of 16 ounces, and 144 pound
of the common weight of 12 ounces.

Their measures of length is two, agreeing with Lipsick above mentioned,
Measures of Saxony.
in which I need not further to insist.

Brunswicke is the eighteenth Province, wherein is Brunswicke the principal
City; secondly, Wolfinbotle, where the Duke commonly Brunswicke.
resideth; thirdly, Alberstade, then Luneburg, and some other of less note.

CHAP. CC.
Of Brunswicke, and the trade thereof.

_(...) comprehends in one five several^ Brunswicke and the trade thereof.
(...) (...) free Imperial town, strongly fortified ^e ^es with two, and in
some places with (...) walls, and encompassed with the river (...) Ancor: the
inhabitants are found addicted to trade (...) the morning, but their
intemperance at night takes aw^ (...) (...) ^hereof: they are great
Husbandmen, the earth answ^ (...) ^r labors, whichyeelds them plenty of Corn,
both for themselves, and their neighbors wants, the earth yielding them rich
reward to their labors, and their after noones hours spent in good
fellowship, makes me imagine there may be some trade amo^ (...); which in
particular I permit the reader in silence to co^

CHAP. CCI.
Of Luneburg, and the trade thereof.

LVNEBVRG is a free Imperial City, over which the Duke of Luneburg
challenges a superiority: it is Luneburg and the trade thereof.
found to be fairly built of Brick, and well and strongly fortified for its
safeguard and defense, with deep Ditches, and thick Mudd walls. It is most
famous for the natural fountain of Salt here found, over which is built a
spacious house, that contains 52 Rooms, and every room has Salt fountain in
Luneburg.
eight several Caldrons of Lead, wherein is boiled eight tons of Salt daily,
the profit whereof is divided into three several parts: one part to the City,
one to the Duke of Luneburg, and another to a Monastery, and some other
adjoining Earks: their trade is not otherwise of very great consequence.

The nineteenth Province is Hassia, wherein is found the Cities of Dormstade,
then Marburg an University, and some others. Hassia.


Veteravia is the twentieth Province, wherein is the Cities of Friburg,
Veteravia.
then Hanan, next Dullinburg, Nassan, Catzenbogen, and some others of lesser
note.

CHAP. CCII.
Of Friburg and the trade thereof.

FRIBVRG is of round form, environed altogether with high mountains, having
within Friburg and the trade thereof.
it many ^ults and cave^ to go und^ (...), through which (...) of the City
(...) Mines found i^ (...) at certain hours are (...) ^cke by the and of a
Bell: their work is for the (...) by night, and their rest is by day, and the
residence (...) (...) Silver Mines in Friburg.
more under ground than above in their houses (...) (...) ^of belongs in half
to the Citizens, and half to the El^ (...) ^om the Country appertains.

The weighs in use in Friburg is the pound, of which is made Weights of Friburg.
three several quintars, one of 100 pound, second of (...) and, third of 132
pound, agreeing with Frankefort and H^ (...) ^d Lipsicke; as before.

The long measure is the Ell, which is () inches (...).

In this tract is also comprehended the three ^periall Cities of Measures of
Friburg.
Stoade, Hamburg, and Lubecke, which acknowledging no Sovereign, being free
and Hans-townes, I shall here touch, and first of Stoade.

CHAP. CCIII.
Of Stoade, and the trade thereof.

STOADE is an ancient City, and one of the free Stoade and the trade thereof.
Cities of the Empire, and one of those Sea Towns which from the privilege of
traffic with their neighbors are called Hans-townes: it is commodiously
seated for traffic upon the river Elve, in which stream they maintain
certain Buys to guide the entering ships: the English Merchant Adventurers
had for a while here their residence, forced thereto by the discourteous usage
of the Hamburgers; and before their arrival this Town was so poor, that they
sold the privilege of coining of moneys, and some other such rights to
Hamburg, by whose company they grew rich, not without the envy and
impoverishment of the Hamburgers, who often attempted, the (...) (...) N^ ^ces
(...) (...), (...) ^s (...) (...) gri^ (...) ^ll by (...) prohi^ (...) ^gion:
so then ^ng (...) (...) ^y never left, till partly by f^ (...) ^ats, they
labored their return, w^ (...) ^formed, and where to this day it is found
(...) (...) ^idence and Court. The present trade of (...) pending much upon the
priviledg^ ^at they (...) ^tion and choice of all the Rhenish wines passing by
the^ (...)

(...) their acco^ pounds, shillings and pence, but they Coins of Stoade.
ha^ (...) ^als, and (...) as I ^ll show hereafter. Their C^ (...) these.

(...) money here and in Hamburg is two pence.

3^ (...) ^s a Doller, which is 5 shillings 4 pence there.

4^ (...) (...) 8 pence, makes a Spanish Riall of 6 pence sterling.

1 (...) (...) (...) 33 Stivers, and is 4 shillings 4 pence sterling, (...)

1 (...) 16 stivers, which is two shillings 8 pence Flemish.

7^ marks is 20 shillings. I say 20 shillings Flemish of that money.

Their ^ight is the pound of 16 ounces, 100 pound is their quintar, Weights in
Stoad.
wh^ (...) made in London 107, and some have observed 109 pound

T^ (...) ^re is the Ell, as in Hamburg following. Measures in Stoade.


CHAP. CCII.
Of Hamburg and the trade thereof.

HAMBVRG is a free City of the Empire, and Hamburg and the trade thereof.
one of them which enjoy the privilege of a Hans-towne, and for the building
and populousness much to be praised: the ^ate house is a beautiful Fabric,
and the Exchange where Merchants do meet together, is likewise a pleasant
place. The haven is guarded and shut up with an Iron chain, the City it self
compassed with a deep ditch, and on the East and North sides with a double
ditch and wall. Water is conveyed into the same from a hill distant some miles
off: it is seated on a large, plain, and sandy soil, and adorned with ^e
Churches, and six gates; on the South side it is washed with the river (...),
which also puts a branch into (...) (...)* (...) (...) (...) North east the
river Alster runs by to* (...) (...) (...) (...) all the ^tie of their (...)
(...) the other Sea-bordering Cities, (...) (...) (...), have for the most ^t
broad ^d (...) large hall, the lower part whereof on bo^ (...) ware-h^, and in
the ^per part, lying (...) their chief household stuff^ is placed, and espec^
(...) of English P^wter, which being kept bright, makes (...) to them that
pass by, so that their (...) promise (...) outwardly than they have (...)
(...) present (...) tie is great, principally by reason of the residen^ (...)
Merchants, and some quantity of shipping of reason (...) found belonging to
the Citi^ns.

The weigh^ of (...) is the pound, of whi^ (...) 120 Weights of Hamburg.
pound, their quintar, divided into three (...) of (...) (...), of 10 pound to
the stone, ^0 (...) the Skip pound, which is the second, and 20 Lispond of 15
(...) the said 300 pound, which is the third; so that it may be (...) ^perly
said to be two (...), one of 120 pound, another of 300 pound.

(...) (...) of length is an Ell, wherewith they mea^ both Me^e of Hamburg.
(...), W^, and (...) the 100 ^of has been for (...) ^ke (...) (...) about 48,
(...) for (...), (...) the 100 yards of (...) (...) ^ound to yield here about,
162 or 163 yards, (...) ^ith (...) before mentioned.

The Merchants here are found to exchange for London by the Exchange in Hamburg.
pound sterling, and for all other places upon the Rex Doller, of 54 sh.
Lapisto, or 54 stivers.

A Doller is here noted to be worth three whitpence, one whitpeny to Doller.
be 18 shillings, one shilling to be 12 pence, and one penny two hellers.

Corn is here measured by the Schepel, ninety making a Last, Of Corn.
and 83 Schepels making a last of Corn in Amsterdam, or 10 quarters English.

CHAP. CCV.
Of Lubeck, and the trade thereof.

LVBECKE is an Imperial and free City, and one of those that are accounted
Ha^-towns; Lubeck and the trade thereof.
it is seated on the top of a fair and spacious Hill, upon the very crown
whereof is a beautiful Church, from whence leads (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) the mariti^ (...) (...) distant from the to^ (...) (...) of Bric^ ^aving
(...) (...) ^alles. The government of the (...) (...) their neatn^ (...)
garden^ ^eous (...), civilitie of manners, and strict execution of (...) is
conveyed hither by pipes; and Brewers, that (...) most (...) constrained to
live together in one (...) of (...) ^ater in his own ho^ al^ (...) ^tants
(...) con^ained ^o liv^ a st^ by (...) ^hey are set on work, and provided for.
This (...) ten Churches, one whereof being a decayed (...) to an Armorie of all
Amunitions for (...), being the principal, and seated (...) very summer ^f
this hill, whereon the (...)

(...) this City at present is great, partly by the industry of (...) ^tants,
and partly by reason of the commodiou^ ^tion Beer o^ Lubeck (...)
(...), and the neighborhood of the ^ique sea (...) (...) ^ous for the (...),
an^ (...) tran^ (...) (...) by some (...) (...) (...)

The common weight of Lubeck is a pound, of which is made a Centiner Waights of
Lubeck.
and a Skippound: for 112 pound is the centiner or quintar; the stone 10 pound,
and 32 stone to the Skip pound, which is 320 pound, and the 20 Lispound of 16
pound mark is also accounted for a Skip pound, which is in London () pounds.

The measure of length of Lubeck is the Ell, 120 else whereof makes in London
60 else, and the 100 yards London has made here 160 Measures of Lubeck.
else in circa.

In Lubeck corn is measured by the last, 96 Schepels making a Last, Of Corn.
which is 10 quarters of London, and 85 schepels is found to make a Last in
Amsterdam.

Lasts 7 of 18 Barrels in Lubeck is found to make 100 sackes of Salt, being 122
small Barels for the 100 sacks at Ar^iden in Zealand, which is found to be 7
lasts of 18 Barrels of salt in London, but accounted by the weigh in London to
make 11 weyes, and it is accounted 40 Bushels to a Wey, water measure of ten
gallons.

(...) (...) (...) the B^ which is 50 Stoopes of Antwerpe,

^

CHAP. CCVI.
(...) the Coin^ (...) in genera^

CONSIDERING the pri^ (...) ning ^rrant ^anie.
of moneys ^d (...) of Germany to (...) (...) that (...) to sundry (...) (...)
that are (...) within this Empire, it will pro^ (...) bour to my confessed
ignorance, (...) down all the coyns found current the beside (...) accidents of
war, necessities, trad^ (...) taintie in all certain rules and Ed^ (...) on
for an uniforme val^ to be coyn^ (...) for current, through all this Empire;
yet beca^ (...) omit what I have in this point gathered, I will (...) sam^
(...) leave the truth to try all and experience: A^ (...) I (...) this part^
(...) of C^ (...) will not be (...) in (...) (...) accou^ ^ept in the ^ntrey.

(...) kept by (...) (...) coins: (...) of (...) is (...) the second is by
florins, batchers, and crutchers, the florin being accounted for 15 batches,
and the batch for 4 crutchers, the third is by florins, sold. and deniers, 12
deniers being a soldo, and 20 soldoes a florin, the florin may be valewed at 3
shil. 4 pence starling, or 33 sh. 4 pence tarine, and the batch at 2 shil.
starl. and in payments of merchandise, note that a florin is accounted for a
common silver guilden, of which there is no such coin found, being merely
imaginary, as is the same coin of marks of Collen and Lubecke, likewise
imaginary, or at least not now coined, nor in use.

Now for the current coins, observe that first in Stoad, Hamburg, Coins in
Stoad. Hamburg, and Lubecke.
and Lubecke before-named, the gold Rhenish guilde^ was worth, when these notes
were taken, 28 (...) silver misen gross, or worth 36 lubecke shil. and the
Imperial doller was worth 33 lubecke sh.

A common silver giulden was worth 28 lubeck shillings.

A french crown of gold was worth 44 lubecke shil.

An English angel was worth two dollers and a quarter and (...) lubecke
shillings; or to say otherwise, it was worth 12 flemish shillings and 4 lubeque
shillings.

Lubecke shil. 7, made an English shilling starl.

Lubecke shill. 6, (...) (...)

(...) of (...) is (...) 33 ^rkes (...) (...)

(...) confines of the Empire and the Low (...) (...) E^den was wo^th (...), an
(...) (...)
(...) understan^ (...) (...) stiver^ (...) was (...) ^ch crown was worth 3
flemish guil^. ^d 6 stive^ (...) as also o lubecke shillings make one shilling
^ish, (...) it is to be ^ted, that Princes and Cities do coin (...), which
are found often in their value to differ (...) ^ildens. ^ine,

(...), and in those parts, they have current coins (...) small pieces
stamped, called copstackes, and a Coins (...) in Breme, Ofdenburg, etc.
doll^ (...) ^rth 4 (...) ^ckes or 55 groats, a french crown was wor^ (...)
and on^ ^pstacke 10 stivers or 12 groats, and this (...) a little more than an
English penny, a sesling was wor^ (...) (...) ^cke shilling, and they have here
half seslings.

(...) ^cke, a doller was 36 maria gross, which are of equal Coins current in
B^nswicke.
weig^ ^th 24 silver misen gross, also 9 maria gross make 8 lubeck^ shil.
(...) doller was worth 18 spitzgrossen, whereof (...) wo^ ^ia g^e.

(...) ^rg, Le^sicke, (...) and in all the Electorate (...) (...) (...)
and (...) (...) bouring territories to the c^ of (...) ler (...) (...) silver
grossen, which are the sam^ (...) or 3^ (...) (...).

A Rhemish gold guilden was worth 27 silver gros. and the Philip doller was of
the same value.

A common silver guilden was esteemed at 21 silver gross.

A french crown at 33 silver gros.

A Spanish pistolet at 32 silver gros.

A half Millres at 36 sil. gros. the hungarian duccat at 30.

A short and long crusado at 35 silv. gros.

A Rose noble at 3 (...) dollers, the English angel at 2 doller; the silver
gross was worth more then 2 pence, and about 2 pence starl.

And for the small Coins, a Gross was worth 4 driers, and 1 drier 2
dreyhellers, and 1 dreyheller was worth a pfeninge and half, and 12 pfeninge
made a gross, and two schwerd grossen made one schneberger.

In general through all the upper parts of Germany, a doller was esteemed at
18 batsen, a silver guilden at 15, a Philips doller at 20, a Coins current
through the upper parts of Germany.
french crown at 24 (...), a gold crown of Italy at 24, a silver Itolen
crown at 22 batsen, a Rhenish gold guilden through higher Germany was worth 27
silver misen gross, a silver guilden there as in Saxony at 21 gros. the bats.
may be accounted 3 pence English, and 4 creizers make (...) ^ts, 4 pfeminge
make a cretzer, and three cretzers make a zwelver, (...) silver (...).

(...) (...) have (...) (...) common payme^ which p^ (...) (...) occasions, and
this being none of t^ (...) ^ners do carry out the Coins of the E^ (...)
(...) (...) ^mmodities (...) ^he Empire, and there^ (...) (...) moneys (...)
(...) (...) to receive (...) than the commonly do otherwise pass at.

The Kingdom of Bohemia, as also that of Hung^ (...) Coins of the Empire in
the same value (...) at first coin^ (...) (...) of (...).
consent of both those nations, but it is to be under (...) (...) well in
those free Cities, and by those free Princes (...) privilege of coining, there
is always stamped cer^ (...) money that only passes current in their
iurisdict^ (...) ^ther; and these passing in the Kingdom of Bo^ (...) (...) to
be these; First, 3 potchandels make one ^zer, ni^ (...) ^ne potchandel make
four weissgrosse, and 30 gross of M^ia o^ ^sse make a doller, also here
Merchants reckon two hellers (...) (...) and fix pfenings for a gross, and 60
gross for a shocke, and ^osse for a mark.

(...) ^zerland it is found that diverse of the Cantons (...) ^yne (...)
(...) which pass current among themselves the p^ of which ^ts are found to be
in Ba^, ^rich, and Sc^ ^he (...) (...) w^reof I will only note.

(...) (...) ^oine is the Rappen munts, where^ ^ed a (...) ^retzers: and 20
plaparts, or 60 cretzers make a common guilden, and 3 pfeninge make a cretzer.

At Zurich it is found that 6 pfenings make a shilling, and may be worth a
penny starling, and 3 pfenings make a sickerling; two great finfers of Basil,
and one little finferlin makes a bats of Basil, and in like manner 5 finferlins
make a bats, and 5 finfers 2 bats.

But my work were endless to run through the particular coins current, and
stamped in every particular place of this Empire, therefore this shall suffice
for a taste of the variety; and whosoever carries any merchandise into these
countries, let him be sure to know the true worth of the moneys he receives
for the same, lest he prove in conclusion a loser by his traffic.

CHAP. CCVII.
The Weights of Germany reduced to the 100 li. of London.

THE Next thing in order to be handled is the Waights in general of Germany
reduced to the 100 li. (...) London.
Waights and Measures of the Cities of Trade in this Empire, which I have in
part touched already (...) (...), the ^est or as many (...) (...) ^me ^hin my
collections I shall here (...) (...) (...) ^ingenious and better skilled m^
add the (...). And (...) for the weight, which here I have redu^ to the (...).
sutle of London, the which is found to yield in

li. ^berg 88 (...) 89 (...) ^ce 88 ^rge 91 ^piers 88 ^leberge 92 ^ke 92 ^ge 92
(...) 116 (...) The (...) of Lo^ does (...) in
92 ^ienna 81 Statin 92 Erford 81 Ipsburge 81 Salsburge gross 79 ^itto small
108 ^bech 92 ^tsen 133 ^ostuts 92 Mison of 16 ou^. li. 96 Of (...). the li. 142
Of Merchants waigh^ 92 Munchen 91 Wessell 91 Saxony in general 96 Norlinghen
91 Francfort 92 Breslow 116 Canoli 83 Domstreder 92 Regenberge 83 Loosen 141
Offen 92 Basile 92 Paslow 83 Hamburge 92 Copenghen 9^ Basil 92 Zuricke 94
Wallo^s country (...)

CHAP. CCVIII.
Of Measures of Germany reduced to the Measures of London.

HAving done with their Weights in general, I will do the same for their long
Measures in general, which I will Measures of Germany.
reduce to the 100 Yardes of London, and note that the same has been observed
to have produced in these Cities of Germany.

Embden 163 else. Lubecke 160 el. Munster 80 el. Collen 160 el. Erford 218 el.
Francfort 169 ^cloth (...) 80 (...). Norimberge 160 el. (...) silk 138 el.
Vienna for linen 103 el. Ditto for silk 113 el. Prague 14^ el. Ditto for
(...) 160 el. Vlme 160 el. Ditto for woollen 128 el. Lipsicke 160 el. cloth
Ossenbrigs 84 else. Breme 163 el. Hamburge 163 el. Basil 167 el. Bantson 148
el. (...) (...) (...) el. ^lle (...) el. (...) (...) (...) el. cloth Ditto
(...) 138 el. (...) long (...). 1^ el. Ditto short measures 1^3 el. Zearech
(...) el. Statin (...) el. Ocermond ^1 el. Wismar 157 el. Gripswald 163 el.

The rest I willingly omit for brevity sake, and (...) (...) to the trial of
the better experienced.

CHAP. CCIX.
Of the trade in general of Germany.

THe particular Trading of several Cities being (...) observed, it will not
be amiss a little to look (...) the Trade in general of Germany, and
therewith (...) Navigation The general trade of Germany.
of this nation, by which we find, (...) in all Cou^ almost the same is
principally maintained. The Cities then found on the Sea-cost on the North-side
of Germany, have very great ships; yet more fit for great stowedge and burden,
than either for sail or defense; and therefore oftentimes to this end
fraighted by the Netherlanders. Neither can I attribute much commendations to
the German Mariner, for those Seas in good part, and the Balticke sea
altogether, are found free of pirates and piracies, which is the chief reason
why their ships are found in the general to be so ill armed, either defensive
or offensive, and in one thing they concur with the Dutch, to the shame of
the Christians profession, that there is never found any prayers used aboard
their ships, neither morning or evening, contrary to the laudable custom and
godly exercise of our English mariners, who constantly use prayer and Psalms,
at least four times in four and twenty hours, which is at the setting of the
four quarterly watches of the day and night. These Maritime Cities are for the
most part either Hans-townes or free Cities, because they enjoyed of old in all
neighbor Kingdoms, great privileges of buying any Commodities, as well of
strangers as Citizens, and of selling their own to either at pleasure, and to
bring in or carry out all commodities by their own ships, with like immunities
equal to Citizens in all the said do^nions, and no less prejudicial to
others, than advantageous to themselves and in London they were wont to dwell
together in the house ^lled the S^il-yard, and there enjoyed these and many
other privileges, which now for many years have ly^ dead; partly by reason
the English found not these, or the like privileges in these free Hans-townes;
and partly, by reason they have found ^re commodious to make use of their own
shipping, as in these ^es it is found they do.

Notwithstanding all this, yet it is observed that the Germans in general
apply themselves very industriously to all Traffic by land, but the free
Cities on the sea coasts do but coldly exercise it by sea; Be^ (...) found to
be spent and exported amongst themselves in (...) ^dible measure and quantity,
with an extraordinary gain, (...) therefore noted for one of the prime
commodities of this empire, bringing profit not only to private men, but also
to Prin^ and to free States, there being no Merchandise in the world that ^ore
easily finds a buyer in Germany, than this: for other commodities, it is
observable that Germany sends into Italy Linens, corn and wax; it sends into
England Bords, Iron, Diaper, Rhenish wines, and Norimberg wares, which can
hardly be called commodities; into Spain they send Linens, wax, brass,
copper, cordage, mastes, gunpowd^ and this is their principal Exportation. Now
for their Impo^tions, Italy returns them Silks of all kinds; England Lead,
Tin, a^ woollen cloths; and Spain returns them Spanish wines, fruits, eiles,
salt some wools, and other commodities.

I formerly noted, that the English had their Staple at Embden, the Count
whereof used them well and courteously^, but wars growing between England,
and Spain, the place grew dangerous for them: for their goods were oftentimes
taken, and themselves made prisoners, even in the mouth of the harbor;
whereupon they removed to Hamburg, where being oppressed with new impositions,
and being denied the exercise of their religion, they removed also thence, and
settled their Staple at Stoade.

Then also our English had their Staple at Dansick in Prusen, for the kingdom
of Poland; but when the Dansickers under pretense of the Suevian war, exacted
of them a Doller for each woollen Cloth, and as much proportionally upon all
other commodities; and afterward, though the war being ended, yet would
remit nothing of the same; and withal, forbad the English, by a law decreed,
to live in Poland, the commodities whereof were only sold there, lest they
should learn the language, and find out the mystery of that trade and
Country: And lastly, when as they exacted as much weekly of an Englishman
dwelling in their City, as they did of a Jew dwelling there amongst them, the
English thereupon made agreement with the Senate of Melvin for 11 years, to
pay them six gross for each Cloth brought in, and accordingly for all other
goods, and to pay as much more in the City of Kettle to the Duke of Pri^ for
his giving them free passage to Melvin; ^d so ^is meane^ they settled their
Staple in Melvin: whereupon the D^kers being offended with the Citizens of
Melvin, and the Hamburgers no less with those of Stoade, procured all the free
Cities by a public writing to outlaw not only Melvin and Stoade for
receiving the (...) to the common prejudice of the rest, but also Coningsberg,
the (...) of the Duke of Prussen, and the free City of Lubeck for favou^g the
English in this their course, and for permitting them being strangers, to sell
their goods to any other than the Citizens of each several City. But how
these differences came afterward to be reconciled, and their Staples removed
thence, I have showed in o^ (...).

And being now entered to speak of the trade of Pr^ Germane Trade of Pru^ca.
Province, but of late years annexed to the Crown of Poland, which of it
self is of great importance, it will not be amiss to enlarge my self upon
some particulars thereof. The English (...) are found to bring thither great
quantity of Tin, Lead, and ^ollen-Cloathes, and other commodities, and to
bring thence hard and liquid Pitch, Hemp, Flax, Cables, Masts for ships,
Boords, and Timber for building, Linen Cloth, Wax, Mineral salt, which in
Poland they dig out of pits like great stones, and the same being put to the
fire, is made pure, and being black his color is more durable, (...) less
subject to giving again than our boiled Salt. Also the bring thence Pine Ashes
for making of Soap, commonly known to us by the name of Sope-Ashes, and Corn
in great quantity; yet the English are found seldom to have need of their
Corn for the use of England, which many times of their own they transport to
other nations; but they buy it as the free Cities do, to transport it to other
Countries, which the Low Country men do also buy as well for themselves, as to
serve Spain, and other Countries therewith, so great a quantity thereof is
hence dispersed into all parts of Europe.

Amber is also brought from thence, but not gathered neither at Amber.
Melvin nor Dansicke, as some imagine, but on the sea side of Koningsperg,
where, as I said, the Duke of Prusen holds his Court, and so all along the
coast of Curland; where, howsoever it lies in great quantity on the sands of
the sea, it is as safe as if it were locked up in warehouses, since it is death
for any to take up the least piece thereof, and being only by the law
accounted to be the proper commodity of the Duke, to whom the same
appertains. And this being as much as I have thought requisite to handle
concerning the trade of Germany in the general, or of the Imperial Cities
and Hanstownes in particular, I will proceed to the next kingdom, which in
order is Denmark, and to the principal Cities, and particular trade thereof.

CHAP. CCX.
Of Denmark, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

DENMARK has on the East Mare Balticum, on the West the Germa^ Denmark and
the Provinces thereof.
Ocean, on the North Sweden, on the South Germany.

This Country does afford for Merchandise, Fish; Tallow, hides, and having
abundance of Oxen, 50000 are said to be sent hence yearly to Germany, also
Buck-skins, armours of all sorts, furniture for shipping, Bords, such as
Wainscot, firrewood, etc.

This Kingdom now contains Ci^bricke, Chersonesse, the Islands of the
Balticke, and part of Scandia, and first this Chersonesse is divided into four
Provinces.

Halsatia is the first, wherein are found the Cities of Niemunster and
Bramsted, and is the title of the second Son of Denmark. Holsatia.


Dithmars is the second Province, wherein are found the Cities of Dithmars.
Marne and Meldorpe, the Inhabitants of this last esteemed so wealthy, that
they are said to cover their houses with copper.

Slesia is the third, wherein are of note Sleswicke, 2. Goterpe, and 3. Londen
a haven town. Slesia.


Iuitland is the fourth, the towns of note are Rincopen, 2. Nicopen, 3. Holne,
4. and Arhansen. Iuitland.


The Balticke Islands are 35 in number, but of them 4 are found to Baltic
Islands.
be of principal note, 1. Seeland, 2. Fionia, 3. Borneholme, and 4. Fimera, of
which a word.

In Seeland is found thirteen Cities, the chief whereof is Haffen the Kings
seat, and the only University in Denmark, known to Seeland.
other nations by the name of Copenhagen, that is Mercatorum portus, or the
Merchants haven: Secondly Elsinour, standing on the sea side, Copenhagen.
in which town the Merchants that have passed, or are to pass the Elsinour.
Sound, do pay their customs to the King: And thirdly Rotchilt, the Sepulcher
of the Danish Kings, between this Island and the firm land of Scandivonia is
the passage called the Sound toward Moscovia, which did formerly yield unto
this King a great yearly profit, but now much decayed since the English found
out the Northern passage into Russia. This Sound is in breadth 3 miles, and
commanded on Scandia side by the castle of Helsenburg, and on this Island by
that of Cronburg, both castles of good defense.

In Fionia is found eight Towns, the principal whereof Osell Fionia.
Scomberge and others.

In Bornholmia is a principal City Barnholme. Bornholme.


In Fimeria. is found the City of Peterborne, and is the Island in which that
famous Mathematician Tic^ Bra^ built an artificial tower, Fimeria.
wherein he studied the Mathematics, and wherein are still reserved many of
his rare Mathematical instruments.

Scandia is the last part of this Kingdom, lying part of it on this Scandia.
side, and part beyond the Articke circle, so that the longest day in the more
Northern part is about three months, and contains the Kingdoms of Norway,
Swethland, and part of Denmark; the part of it belonging to Denmark is
divided into three Provinces, 1. Halandia, 2. Schonia, and 3. Blesida.

In Halandia is Halanesoe. Halandia. Scania.


In Scania is the City of Londis a fair haven, Falsgerbode and the castle of
Elsimbourg, one of the keys of the Sound before mentioned, and the seas are
here said sometimes so to abound with hering^, that ships are scarce able with
wind and Oar to break through them, and the Country is the pleasantest of
all Denmark.

In Blesida is found the City of Malmogia, and the strong castle of Blesida.
Colmar against the Swedlander. The principal trade of this Kingdom is
contained in Coppenhagen and Elsinour, therefore under the title of these two I
will comprehend the Traffic of this Kingdom.

CHAP. CCXI.
Of Coppenhagen, and the trade thereof.

COPPENHAGEN is the Seat of the Kings of Coppenhagen, and the trade thereof.
Denmark in winter, and may be interpreted the Merchants haven, on the East
side is the Kings palace or castle, which bordereth on the sea shore, where the
haven is found to be, the sea being not far distant from the North side
thereof: the City is of a round form, affording little beauty, as being but
meanly built of wood and clay, and the castle of stone. Here are found some
Merchants, yet for the most part of no great eminence: for the Country
affoordeth norich commodities that may allure others thither, or serve to be
transported to other regions, whereby a gain may be expected.

The Moneys of this kingdom commonly current is the Doller, Coins of
Coppenhagen.
and shilling; two Danish shillings making one Lubecke shilling, and 66 Danish
shillings accounted for a Rix Doller, which is five shillings Sterlin.

Their accounts are kept by marks of 16 shillings Danish. Accounts in Denmark.


Their exchanges are here practiced by the Rix doller above mentioned, the
common current coin of these countries.

Their measures and weights I will briefly observe by themselves, and therefore
hasten to Elsinour. Measures and weights, etc.


CHAP. CCXII.
Of Elsinour and the trade thereof.

ELSINOVR of it self is but a poor Village, but much frequented by Seamen by
reason of his Elsinour and the trade thereof.
neighborhood to that straight Sea called the Sound, where the King of
Denmark has laid so great impositions upon all ships and goods coming out
or going into the Baltique sea, as this sole profit surpasses far all the
revenewes of his kingdom: the strong Castle of Cronburge lies in this village
upon the mouth of this straight, to which on the other side of this narrow sea
in the kingdom of Norway, another Castle is opposite, called Elsburg, which
two are the Keepers of this straight, that no ship can pass in, or come out of
the Baltique sea without their leave, and consequently without due payment of
this Imposition. On the south side of Cronburge Castle is the largest Road for
ships, toward the Baltique sea where the King is said to have his lodgings,
which cannot choose but be a delectable prospect to all men, but especially to
him: for ships go in and out here by Fleets of hundred, and he is certain,
that none do pass either way but according to their burden and loading,
adds somewhat to his treasury. The haven is capable to contain a great Fleet,
for it has Cronburge Castle on the North side, the Castle of Elsburge on the
East side, and Seeland, the chief Island of the kingdom on the West side, and
the Island Fimeria, or Wherne on the south side, in which I noted before, that
Tycho Brahe the famous Mathematician had his residence. The Danes conceive this
Island to be of such importance, as they have a Fable, that Henry the seventh of
England offered for the possession of it, as much Scarlet Cloth as would cover
the same, with a Rose Noble at the corner of each Cloth. If any such offer were
made, doubtless the wisdom and judgment of that Prince, knew how to make
that Island being fortified, peradventure to return him his charges again with
good interest; but it is not credible, by reason that it cannot benefit a
foreign Prince whose territories lies out of the Sound, by which he must
needs enter those beforementioned Castles commanding the entrance, though it
might prove more beneficial to some Prince bordering upon the Baltique seas,
and to whom the sea is open for passage.

CHAP. CCXIII.
Weights in general of Denmark reduced to that of London.

NOW for the Weights of this Kingdom, they are found to differ in many places:
so many as have come to my hand, I have reduced to the sutle hundred of London,
which sutle hundred is found to produce in these Cities of traffic and some
others adjoining.

i. Aldar 87 Coppingham 92 Cracon 119 Dansicke 116 Hamburg 92 Wild 116
Elsinour 92

li. Lubecke 92 Melvin 120 Revel 116 Rhiga 116 Statar 108 Stralsont 88 Bergen
Norway 92

Where it is to be noted, that generally in Coppenhagen, and in most parts of
Denmark, they have a great and a small hundred, one of 112 pound to the
hundred, and another of 120 pound to the hundred, accounted twelve stone of ten
pound to the stone: Also they have a Skip-pound, 32 stone of ten pound the
stone, or 20 Lispound of 16 mark pound is a Skip-pound, and 20 times 16 pound
is 320 pound.

CHAP. CCXIIII.
Measures in general of Denmark reduced to London.

AS I have done with their weights, so will I proceed with Measures ingenerall
of Denmark.
their measures, reducing them to the hundred yards English, and makes in

Arsnis 166el Breme 162el Breslow for cloth 148 el Ditto for Silks 160 el
Conixborough 166 el Lubecke 160 el Munster 80 el Ockermond 141el Revel 166 el
Rhosticke 158el Wisinar 157el Dansicke 162el Doinin 163 el Embden 163 el
Gripswould 163 el Hamburgh 163 el Melvin 162 el Narva 166 el Osenbrighs 84 el
Rhiga. 166 el Statin. 141el

And thus much shall serve to have said for the measures of this Country,
whereto I have added the measures of some other the adjoining eminent Cities of
trade and Commerce.

CHAP. CCV.
Trade in general of Denmark.

TO conclude, the trade of Denmark driven by the inhabitants, is not great,
their country partly not The generail trade of Denmark.
affoording commodities for Merchandises; and their seas, I mean principally
the Baltique, not being for many months in the year navigable for frost. The
inhabitants are frugall in food and apparel, and therefore not much addicted
neither to Silks nor Spices, and the great traffic and concourse of other
nations, through the Sound, that furnishes them with all necessaries, makes
the inhabitants less desirous to sail abroad to fetch the same at the first
hand. Stockefish and other salted Fish they send into foreign Countries, and
so also they do their Oxen and cattle in great quan^ty, besides the
commodities which the country does natu^lly afford, mentioned in the former
part of this countries de^ription; neither have I heard any great fame of their
Naviga^ons or Mariners, which principally sail Northward, and little to ^e
Southward, though otherwise it is conceived that next to the ^nglish their
Vessels are the strongest built to endure the blasts of ^he colder climates,
and the scorchings of the warmer regions; yet ^f late days I have understood,
they have undertaken some new ^iscoveries and trade into the East Indies, which
they have since ful^y performed, to the great encouragement of such as shall
fol^ow them.

CHAP. CCXVI.
Of Norway and the Cities thereof.

NORWAY is bounded on the North with Lappia, Norway, and the cities thereof.
on the East with the Dofri^e mountains, on the other parts with the seas.

The chief commodities of this Country is Stockfish, Nidrosia.
rich furs, train Oil, pitch, and takling for ships, as masts, caples,
deal-boards, fur, and the like.

Towns are here thin, and the houses therein poor and miserable. Bergen,
one of the 4 ancien^ Marts of Europe.
The chief of those that are, is Nidrosia, the Archbishops seat of Norway,
Iseland, and Groinland: The second is Bergen, one of the four ancient Mart
towns of Europe; the other three being London in England, Nomgrade in
Moscovia, and Bridges in Flanders; and all of these but London are decayed, for
this Bergen has yielded to Wardhouse; Nouegrade, by reason of the charge of
navigation through the Balticke into the Northern passage, has given way to
Saint Nicholas, and Bridges being deprived of her traffic by Antwerpe, it is
now also removed to Amsterdam, for the Hollanders by blocking up the haven, but
especially by keeping of Bergen up Zome, have such a command over the river,
that no vessel can pass or repasse without their license. But to proceed:
Finmarch also appertains Finmarke.
to this kingdom, and both to the Dane: the chief Cities are Saman, secondly
Hielso, both Sea-townes, but the principal is Wardhouse, Wardhouse.
seated in the very Northern end of all the country, being a town of little
trade, but great concourse of shipping, that this way are bound for Moscovia,
which must needs touch here, and it is so called, as seated in a little Island
called Ward.

In Bergen in Norway the common weight is a pound, the 100 li. of Weight in
Bergen.
London hathbeene found to make there 92 li. but weighing with a sling, as they
do, is found to be very uncertain.

The measure is

The particulars of the trade of this Country, here necessarily to be handled,
I am enforced to omit, by reason of my ignorance, therefore entreat the better
experienced to supply my defect therein.

CHAP. CCXVII.
Of Swethland, and the Cities of trade thereof.

SWETHLAND is bounded on the East with Moscovia, on the West with the Dosrine
hills, on Swethland and the cities thereof.
the North with the frozen Seas, and on the South with the Balticke seas.

The Commodities that this Country affords for merchandise is Lead, copper,
silver, drawn out of Commodities of Sweden.
their mines, and it abounds also with hides of Buckes, Goats and Oxen,
tallow, Tar, Malt, Barley, rich furs, and the like.

It contains five Provinces, Lappia, Bodia, Finland, Gothland and Sweden; of
all which a word.

In Lappia I find not any City of note, being cold and comfortless. Lappia.


In Bodia is the town of Virei^ and Helsinga.

In Finland are many strong towns populous and rich, Albo and Bodia. Finland.
Narve, both of great strength; also those two strong Cities of Veburg and
Ruiallia, which cost the Sweden 100000 crowns yearly the keeping, by nature
defending his own, and offending his Enemies Teritories.

In Gothland stands the chief City of this kingdom, Stockholme, Gothland.
seated in the waters, after the manner of Venice, and the residence of the
Sweden King, next Lodusi^ a town of great traffic, then Waldburge and
Colmar, two impregnable Cities.

In Sweden are the chief Cities of Vpsall a Bishopric, second Sweden.
Nicopea, a sea town of good strength; third Copperdole, most famous for its
abundance of brass, which is here in such plenty, that there are found 400
brass pieces in the castle of Stockholme; under which I will comprehend the
trade of Sweden.

CHAP. CCXVIII.
Of Stockholme and the trade thereof.

BEcause I intend upon the general trade of Eastland to handle some particular
Cities belonging to the Stockholme, and the trade thereof.
crown of Sweden therefore I shall be the briefer upon the trade of this City
of Stockholme the Metropolis of this kingdom. Stockholme then being the
residence of this King, whose arms of late were so prevalent in Germany is
accounted famous in those Northern regions for the great concourse of
Merchants and traffic here daily practiced, seated in watery marshes, after
the manner of Venetia, and supposed to be built upon piles, and therefore
bears in their language some construction thereof, which not unproperly may
bear in our ancient English the same sense: It is situated in part upon the
lake of Meller, and in part on the East sea, out of which the great trade of
shipping to this place does come and enter by a deep and narrow channel,
spacious and commodious for ships of the greatest burden; but the fort of
Waxholme on the one side of the passage, and the fort of Digne so fitly seated
opposite to the same in the narrowest of the gut and straight, command the
whole channel, and guard the lake and City, and no Vessel is suffered either
to go in or out, but here have their conge and admission: It is besides
fortified with a strong castle, wherein is found for the defense thereof four
hundred pieces of brass Artillery; and for the beauty thereof, it is adorned
with many goodly private and public bu^ldings, the Kings palace being more
renowned for the antiquity, than stately structure thereof.

The Commodities for transportation found in this City are Commodities of
Stockholme.
principally Iron, Steel, Copper, Wire, all sorts of grains, Lead and other
Mineralls, Honey, Wax, Tallowe, Hides, and the like: which is hence dispersed
into all parts of these Northern Climats.

The Moneys in use generally current throughout the Kingdom Moneys current in
Swethland.
of Sweden, is the Doller, which is divided into marks, and eight marks makes
a doller, and this mark is divided into clipping, so that two clippings make a
mark, and a clipping is accounted for 9 stivers Flemish, and by this doller
they exchange with other neighboring Countries, and it is valued in sterling
money at ()

The weight in use or this place is the pound, and the 100 pound Weights of
Stockholme.
of London has produced here 116 li. they have here also two shipponds, the
one the proper shippond of this place, which is 320li. of the said weight, and
the other shippond is 340 li. the proper shippond of Dansicke of 34 stones, as
there in the chapter of Dansicke appears, and this quintar or pound is found
to agree with Narva Riga, Revell, Dansicke, and some towns of trade in the
Balticke sea.

The common measure of length here used is the Ell, and is the Measure of
Stockholme.
same in all Sweden, except some principal towns of this tract hereafter
noted, and the 100 yards of London does produce 166 else and (...), but note
that in Barrow in Sweden this ell is found to be very uncertain, for the
bigness of a man's head is measured about with a rope, and this they account for
an ell, so that here a great head may be some benefit to a Merchant, for by
this rule the greatest loggerhead shall have consequently the largest measure.

Corn is here sold by a measure, called a Loop, 23 loops does make a Of Corn.
Last in Amsterdam, or 10 quarters in London.

CHAP. CCXIX.
Of Moscovia and the Provinces thereof.

MOSCOVIA is bounded on the East with Moscovia and the Cities thereof.
Tartaria, on the West with Livonia, Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North
with the fr^ Ocean, and on the South with the Caspian sea the Turks, and Palus
Meotis.

This country affoordeth for Merchandise Commodities of Moscovia.
Furs of many sorts, Flax, Hemp, Whales grease, Honey, Wax, Canvas, Ropes,
Cables, Caviare, Astracan bides, Tallow, raw bides, and B^gars.

The many rivers that are found to be in this Country, does Famous Rivers of
Moscovia.
much further trading in general; First, Tanais, which disburdeneth it self
into Palus Meotis; secondly, Duino, which enters into the Scythian seas at the
Abbey of S. (...), where our English since the discovery of the Northern
passage, use to land and disperse themselves into all parts of this vaste
Empire. Thirdly, Boristenes that enters into Pontus Euxinus. Fourthly, Onega,
which opens it self into the Baltique sea. And lastly, Volga, which with no
less than 70 mouths disgorgeth it self into the Caspian.

This Empire is divided into 9 principal Provinces, which together with the
chief towns thereof, I shall only touch.

Novogradia is the first, the chief Town being Novegrade, seated on the
Dunia, and once one of the four ancient Mart-townes of Novograde. 1.
Europe, now of late decayed since the discovery of the new passage unto the
town of S. Nicholas by the river of Obye.

Plescovia is the second, wherein is the City Plescoue, the only Plescovia. 2.
walled City in Moscovia, and yet of no great eminence.

Valadomira is the next, having also a town of that name. Valadomira. 3.


Rhesan is the fourth, wonderful plentiful in Corn, that neither Rhesan. 4.
can birds fly, nor horses run through it for thickness, the chief town
Rhesan was the Metropolis of Russia, it is the first part of Moscovia,
abounding in Grain, H^y, Fish, and Foul without number.

Servia is the fifth, the chief towns are Staradub and Pativola.

Permia is the sixth, the chief City is Sick^iardley, abounding in Servia. 5.
Permia. 6.
Stagges.

Candora is the seventh. Candora.


Petrosa is the eighth: in both these countries the inhabitants do Petrosa.
live under ground, and have for half the year together perpetual day, and
the other half year perpetual night, as situated beyond the Artique.

Moscovia is the ninth, and so named of the principal City of Moscovia.
Mosco, being about five miles round, having therein 16 Churches, of which the
one half are made of wood and dirt, as most of the houses are: the Emperors
palace stands in the midst, and Mosco.
fortified with three Bulwarks and 17 turrets, and continually guarded with
25000 Soldiers. This is the most populous province of all this great Empire:
for it extends 2000 miles in length.

Besides these, there are yet some petty provinces wherein are Smalensko.
found the towns of Smalensko, then Toropiers, next Coloprigod, Landiskron,
and some others of lesser note, which I willingly omit, till my information be
better.

The trade of the English was here begun in the time of Queen Elizabeth of
England, and Basiliades King in this Country, about the year 1575, and within
ten years after it was perfectly settled; and because the trade of Moscovia is
confined to a small circuit in these vaste dominions, it will not be improper
that I comprehend the same under the title of the Metropolis of this kingdom
Mosco.

CHAP. CCXX.
Of Mosco and the trade thereof.

MOSCO is the Metropolis of all this Mosco and the trade thereof.
large kingdom, to the which the Emperor some years past repaired, as most
fit for the government of so large an Empire, accounted the midst of all his
dominions. It is pleasantly seated on the river Mosca, running into Tanais,
where it loses its name, and passing Assow, disgorgeth it self into the Palus
Meotis, and so to the Euxine. About fifty years past, it was esteemed ten
miles in circuit, and in its height of greatness then burned by the Tartars,
wherein 80000 persons were consumed, and since reduced to five miles compass,
beautified with 16 Churches, some of stones, some of timber and earth, and with
the Palace of the great Duke situated in the very heart thereof, enriched with
the branches of two rivers for use and ornament, which water two strong forts
that defend the place. At the Abbey of S. Nicholas the Patron of this country
upon the river of S. Nicholas.
Dunia, or Obby, the English Merchants use to land, and thence disperse
themselves to Smalensko, Novo groad, hither and into all the other parts of
this vast Empire, amongst whom they find kind entertainment, and by the
favor of the Prince, have larger immunities granted unto them than to anyother
nation, their traffiquing attributed to the never dying fame of Queen
Elizabeth in whose days the trade was here first settled; and to the plausible
behavior of the English Merchants ingenerall.

The Merchants here are observed to keep their accounts in several Accounts
in Moscovia.
manner; some, as the English, by Rubbles and pence, or as the inhabitants
term them, Muskofkins, 200 whereof making a Rubble, which is accounted 2 Rix
Dollers. Some again, as the Dutch, and other nations, by Rubbles, Grevens, and
Moskofkins or pence, accounting 20 pence to a greven, and ten grevens to a
Rubble, which is most in use here, this Rubble being found an imaginary coin,
and not real.

The current moneys here is a Capecke, in value a stiver Flemish, and Co^nes
current in Moscovia.
somewhat more than an English penny: for ten Capeckes is a grevene, which the
English call 12 pence sterlin, because that ten grevens is a Rubble, which is
10 shillings sterlin. Three Capeckes they call an Altine, by which name all
receipts and payments are made in bargaining and contracts, 33 Altines and one
Capecke making a Rubble.

At Archangel is found practiced amongst the Merchants an Exchange Exchange at
Archangell.
for Moneys, rising and falling, according as the Russe Moneys are observed to
be plentiful or scarce: the English sometimes among themselves giving 11
shillings, and 11 shillings 6 pence sterlin in England for the Rubble here; and
the moneys commonly taken there in August, to be paid in London the last of
December following.

The weight of Moscovia common in use is the Pood for fine goods, Weight of
Mescovia.
and the Bercovet for gross goods, the one being derived from the other.

By the Pood is weighed Silk Bever-wooll, Yefts, etc. and is accounted for 40
pound Russe weight: and three pood has been observed to make 112 pound
English, which by this computation should make 37, pound haberdupois, and all
goods there bought by the pood is 10 per cent. loss in England.

By the Bercovet is weighed Tallow, Hemp, Cable-yarne, Coile, or Lard-ropes,
and all gross commodities, and is a Russe Ship-pound: 10 poods makes a
Bercovet, which makes 360 pounds sutle haberdupois, so that all goods being
bought there by the Bercovet or Ship-pound is held 10 per cent. profit: for
commonly the English Merchants reckon the over-weight to pay the freight of the
same goods so bought.

The measure in length here generally used, is called an Archine, Measures in
Moscovia.
being a Brabant ell and a nail, or something more than ^of an English yard,
reckoned by the English Merchants there resident two per cent. more, and may be
in circa 28 inches, so that the 100 Archines may produce in London 77 in 78
yards, and the 100 yards be here 128^ Archine, or thereabout.

The native commodities of this country in general I have already Commodities
of Moscovia.
nominated, it will not be amiss I should more particularly view them and the
ordinary rates they carry in price, together with the particular marks
whereby their goodness and quality is discerned.

Their most precious commodities and merchandise hence exported by
forraignenations, are their rich Furs, the principal is the Sables, bought
commonly by the Timber, which contains 40 skins, Sables.
which must be large and well colored, and are found of all prices, as in
goodness, from 15 to 20^ Robbles the Timber.

Black Fox skins is known amongst all Northern Merchants for the richest
Furre in the world, and is here found in great store, bearing Black Fox.
price as in largeness and growth from 5 to 200 Robbles piece.

Otter skins are here found plenty, by reason of the many rivers of Otters.
this country, accounted the region of springs and streams, sold by the
Timber of 40 skins, from 5 Robbles to 40 Robbles the Timber.

Minikins are also sold by the Timber of 40 skins, and commonly sold about 6
Robbles the Timber. Minikins.


Martins are also sold by the timber of 40 skins about 15 Robbles the Martins.
timber, rising as found in richness of hair.

Ermins sold also by the Timber of 40 skins, about 2 Robbles per Ermins.
timber.

Grawerte or Squirrels sold by the thousand, as in goodness from 14 Robbles to
30 Robbles the thousand. Squirels.


Red Foxes by the 10 skins, at 12 to 15 Nobbles the 10 skins. Foxes red and
white and dun.


White Foxes by the piece about 5 Altins the piece.

Dun Foxes by the piece, about 40 Altins the piece,

Sable rands sold by the pair, from 2 to 6 Robbles the pair.

Bever wool is a Staple commodity also of this kingdom, and sold by the
pound about 2^ Robbles per pound. Bever.


Bever Wombes also by the pound, being a thin skin and well grown, is commonly
worth 1 Robble per pound.

These are the ordinary Furs which their Northern clymate affoords for
Merchandise, the next found here are these.

Yellow Wax is here found made by the industry of the Be and hands of man in
great abundance, sold by the pood, which is 40 Be Wax.
pound here, the hardest and best colored bears price here commonly about 4
in 5 Robbles the pood.

Tallow is sold by the Berquet, which is 10 poode, being clean white Tallow.
and hard about 7 in 8 Robles the berquet.

Tar is sold by the Hogshead, being thick as the best is commonly Tar.
worth () per Hogshead of () gallons English.

Train oil is sold by the Barrel, which is half a hogshead, and discerned
Train.
by its clearness without grounds, and of a whitish color about 4 robble per
Barrel of gallons English.

Hemp is sold by the berquet of 10 poods being clean and green Hemp.
bears price commonly from 3 to 5 Robles the 10 pood.

Flax is sold by the Bercovet the bright silver color is held the best, Flax.
commonly about 7 robbles the Bercovet.

Cable yarne is sold by the Bercovet, and being well spun, round and Cable
yarne.
not too much twisted from 67 robble the Bercovet.

Coyles or Tard ropes by the Bercovet about 7 robbles the Bercovet: Coiles.
where note, that the English and other nations hither trading, buy here great
quantity of Hemp, and spin it out there into yarn, to save the charges of
freight: every 1000 pood does cost about 100 or 110 robbles charges; and if the
hemp prove good, there is found near ^losse, if bad, so much more, and worth,
being in Cable yarne, as I said above from 6 to 7^ robbles the Bercovet.

Dried Cow-hides being large and weighty, are sold by the hundred Cow hides.
hide, worth from 40 to 44 robbles the hundred.

Red Evits by the pair at 2 rubbles per pair, and sometimes sold Evyts.
by the pood, at 40 robbles per pood: and note that the white are commonly
worst esteemed b^ (...) in price.

Losh hides are sold by the piece, the largest and not worm-eaten Losh hids.
is the best, from 6 grevens to 5 rubbles the piece, as in goodness.

Duckes feathers sold by the pood, as in goodness from 3 to 5 rubble, Feathers.
the pood.

Caviare is also a principal commodity here sold by the pood, and Caviar.
commonly worth 40 Altines the pood.

Course Linen is made here in great quantity sold by the 1000 Archine Linnens.
of yard, and the broad from 15 to 20 robbles the 1000 Archine, as it is found
in finenesse. Some other commodities this country affoordeth which I omit, as
of no great consequence.

CHAP. CCXXI.
Of the trade in general of Moscovia.

THE excellent commodity of the great Rivers Of the trade in general of
Moscovia.
that in all places of this large Empire are found to water and enrich this
Country, should much incite this nation to the trade of Merchandise; but it is
often found, that where nature is most liberal in her furtherances, the
inhabitants prove most backward in their endeavors; the natural coldness of
the clymate enclosing the people into their warm stoves, and the neighborhood
of the Tartars (who in some respects resembling dogs, neither suffering the
Moscovians to traffic, nor yet traffic themselves) by their continual
harrying of the country, and the often incursions and wars of the Swedens,
may in some sort serve them for a reasonable excuse; yet it is found that these
wars prove main helps sometimes to their traffic, especially in Furs, for
their bodies thereby inured to cold and hardness, make the pastime of hunting
a profitable exercise in the worst season of the year, the rest of their
Merchandise come to them very near in the same kind: for it wholly depends
upon Manufactories and labor for their cordage, linnens and yarne they have
from the earth, as their hides, tallow, and wax upon the same: their Caviare
and Train oil, and some other such by Fishing, so that it may be supposed
they are more addicted to husbandry and fishing, than to merchandising. The
English about the year of 1575 first discovered the trade, and found here good
entertainment, and great privileges from the then reigning Prince, and the
first discoverers were in London incorporated into a Society of Merchants by
the name of the Moscovia Company, by grant of Queen Elizabeth; which company
has since been subject to some alterations and contingencies in their trade,
by reason of certain cross accidents happening therein; but being in England
ordered by the advice of a Governor, Deputy; and certain selected
Committies, and in Moscovia by an Agent, who regulate Mr. Henry Garaway
Alderman being at present Governor.
the same, by whose wisdom they have of late so prudently settled their trade
in general, and reformed their passed errors, that it is now seen to
flourish, and in likelihood to increase daily to the particular benefit of
that company, and the good both of this and that Kingdom in general.

CHAP. CCXXII.
Of Polonia, and the Provinces thereof.

POland is limited on the East with Boristhenes, Poland and the Cities thereof.
which parts it from Moscovia, on the West with Vistula, which parts it
from Germany, on the North with the Baltique sea and Sinus Frinicus, on the
South with Hungary.

The chief merchandise which this country Commodities of Poland.
affords for transportation, is Barley, Oats, Amber, Wax, Honey, Hemp, Pitch
Tar, Rosin, and some cordage, and other commodities.

The chief rivers, is first Vistula, navigable 400. miles, and ends Rivers
of Poland.
in the Baltique sea, Niger, Ruben, Bog, Mimel, and others. The Provinces are
counted to be 11. and the principal Towns therein are as follows.

Luconia is the first, in length 500 miles, in breadth 160 miles, where are Riga
an Archbishopricke, 2 Derpt, a town of great commerce, Ruialia Luconia.
and Narve, two strong towns.

Lituania is the second, abounding in beasts, which yield the inhabitants
Lituania.
furs for commodities, the chief cities are Vilna, second Vilcomire and
Brestia.

Volinia is the third, wherein is found Kiovia and Circassta. Volinia.


Samogitia is the fourth, the chief town is Camia. Samogitia.


Podolia is the fifth, affording three harvests of one sowing, the Podolia.
chief city is Camiensa, held invincible, seated on high rocks, Orkacow,
Wincecsa, and others.

Russia Nigra is the sixth wherein is found, Leinburge, Grodeck, etc. Russia.


Prussia or Spruce, wherein is upon the Seacoast Amber found, the Prussia.
chief cities are Dansicke a famous Mart, especially for all sorts of grain,
1000 measures, whereof being here daily sold, 2 Regiomount, or Conisberge, a
famous University. 3 Heilsperge, 4 Manberge, 5 Angenberge, 6 Cul^e, and others.

Podlasia is the 8 wherein is Ticocksin, the place where the Kings Podlasia.
treasure is reserved, Biesco, K^isen, and others.

Masovia is the 9, the prime city being Marckesowe. Masovia.


Poland is the 10 wherein is the Metropolis of Polonia which is Cracovia,
seated pleasantly on the river Vistula, here is also the cities of Poland.
Lublin, Guisua, Siradia and others, and of the principal of these, or others
seated in this Tract, as follows.

CHAP. CCXXII.
Of Cracovia, and the trade thereof.

CRacovia is the chief and Metropolis of all the Kingdom Cracovia, and the
trade thereof.
of Poland where the King and his Council have their continual residence; it
is seated in a plain, having mountains on all sides, but somewhat distant, it
is compassed with two strong walls of stone, and a dry ditch, the building is
very fair, of freestone 4 stories high, but covered with tiles of wood or
shingles, it is of round form, in the midst whereof stands a large
quadrangular marquet place, wherein is seated the Cathedral Church, and the
Senate house for the city, about which are many shops for Merchants, upon the
East side of the city, is the Kings castle, fair and well built on a hill,
lying open on the South side, without any building above the wall, on the East
side are the King and Queens lodgings, on the North side lodgings for feasting,
on the West a Chapel where the Kings are interred: it has not received any
great fame for merch^ndising, many Scotch-men have attained to some estate here
by trading, but it may more properly be called pedlerising than merchandising,
for they have a moveable Magasin which they transport by horse, from town to
town wherein their commodities are enclosed; and not a few such are found to
have begun this traffic at first by their backs, and afterward by horses,
their coins current with their weights and measures I will here insert.

It is not above 300 years since the Polonians used silver coins stamped; for
before that time, they did traffic with little pieces Coins current in
Polonia.
of uncoyned silver, and by the exchange of skins, and other such commodities,
but at this day they make all contracts by silver guildens, but have no such
real coin amongst them, the coins current are these: A Gold Ducket, known
by the name of Polander is of the same value which the Hungarian Ducket, and
worth 70 polish gross, a silver Guilden or Florin is worth 30 polish groshe,
which is 2 shillings starling, a doller in specie is worth 40 polish groshe;
but in all contracts for buying and selling, the doller is accounted 36 groshe:
a Creitzer is worth 3 potchanels, 18 deniers make 1 grosh: (...) grosh of
Poland or Bohemia, is worth 7 potchanels: 16 whites make one Ort, 4 Orts make a
doller, valewed in starling money four shillings four pence.

The common weight of Cracovia is the pound, 136l^' whereof i^ Weights of
Cracovia.
here accounted a Quintar, which makes in London, 114l^' circa, and the 100l^'
of London, has yielded here about 120l^' but the common pound is reduced to a
stone of 40l^' to a stone, and to a shippond, which is ten of the said stones.

The common measure of length is -- an ell which is (...) an English Measures
of Cracovia.
ell, but they sell their linen by shockes which produces 57 else English the
shocke.

CHAP. CCXXIV.
Of Dantzke, and the trade thereof.

DAntzke is a very fair City, standing at the foot of a great mountain that
hangs over it, the famous river Vistula Dantzke, and the trade thereof.
passing by it on the East side, and running toward the North, falls into the
Baltique sea, a little Brook enters the City on the South side, and runs
through it toward the North, affording many commodities to the City: as first a
fair water Conduit, where by a Mill the waters are drawn into a Cesterne, and
thence by pipes serving every private citizens house, then a Corn mill for the
Senate (besides their private mils) which affords them in every hour a golden
guilden throughout the year to their public treasury, and besides many other
mills; it has one for sawing of boords and timber, having an iron wheel,
which not only drives the ^aw, but hooketh in, and turns the boords to the
saw without the help of hands; the corn Garners of this town are also fair,
remarkable and many in number, wherein the citizens do lay up the ^orne
coming out of Poland, and according to the wants of Europe, ^arry it into many
Kingdoms, and many times relieve fruitful Provinces in time of casual
dearth, into which Garners under a great penalty no man may carry either fire
or candle lighted, by a Law enacted amongst them.

The city is compassed with one wall, yet contains three several cities,
governed by three distinct Senates, out of which one chief ^nate is chosen to
govern the whole City, and according to the Roman superstition they have St.
George for their Protector, whose ^ed cross they carry, in their flags, as
does also England, Genoa in Ita^, and the Island, Scio, in the arches; the City
is seated about one ^glish mile from the Baltique shore, the port being called
Dermind, ^here the ships of burden do ride to lade and unlade their
com^odities; and the City being acknowledged, a free town is found (...) coin
moneys, which as I find observed, I shall note here, together with the weights
and measures here in use.

Their accounts are kept here in sundry manners; the common ^eing by polish
Guilders of 30 gross and 12 pence to a groshe. Accounts kept in Dansicke.


But Merchants buy commodities here by the great Mark of 60 gross, and by the
lesser of 15 gross, and also by the doller of 35 gross, of (...) stivers the
gross.

Their moneys current being thus accounted: One great mark Coins current in
Dansicke.
(...) two polish Guilders; one polish guilder, is worth two lesser ^arkes; one
lesser mark worth 15 gross, and the gross 18 pence, ^esides which, they
coin Hungarian ducats of gold, as they do (...) Poland, and they have two
coins in gold called a milres, and half (...) milres; and each milres is
three dollers and two ses^int, 36 polish gross ^aking here a doller.

The weight of Dansicke in use is the pound for fine goods, the 100l^' Wei^hts
of Dantzke.
(...) London making here 116l^'. Besides which, they have a skippond and ^pond
thus distinguished; 16 mark pound is one lispond, and 20 ^pond makes one
skippond by the small stone of 24l^' for spices etc.

But they have also a great stone to weigh gross wares, as Flax, ^xe, and the
like of 34l^' whereof 10l^' to the skippond of 340l^'.

The measure for length of this City, is the ell, the 100 else whereof Measures
of Dansicke.
makes in London about 49 else, and the 100 yards of London does here render
162 or 163 else incirca.

The measure of Beer in Dansicke is the fatt which contains 180 stoopes which
is accounted 81 stoopes of Antwerp.

The measure of corn here, is the Last which contains 61 shepells, 56 whereof
makes a Last in Amsterdam, or 10 quarternes English London, 4 sheppells make
one mudd, which is the shippond before mentioned of 34l^'.

Merchants for the most part throughout all Eastland are found to Accounts in
Eastland.
keep their accounts in Florins, or Guilderns and in groshes and deniers,
accompting 12 deniers to the groshe, and 20 groshe to the Guilderne or Florine.

CHAP. CCXXVI.
Of Elbin, and the trade thereof.

ELbin is but a small, yet a fair City, and of late days i^ compassed with
walls, grown great and large by the trade and residence of the English
merchants, which Elbin, and the trade thereof.
since, upon some grievance and coffeehouse are hence removed: in this City
lies the gross of the trade of Prussen, especially for all the gruffe goods of
that Dukedom; it once appertained to the Tentonique knights, but now to the
Kings of Poland, and who for the present, the citizens acknowledge for their
Protector, and otherwise it yields him but little obedience, being of it self
a free City: from this City toward the North-east, is a channel that runs
up to Coninxburghe, the seat of the Dukes of Prusland, by which all commodities
are transported and conveyed from the one to the other.

The coins current, and the manner of their accounts here kept, I have touched
before, and the weight in use in this place, is the Weights of Elbin.
pound 40 whereof makes the stone, and 10 stone of 40l^' makes the shippond,
which is 400l^', which is 350l^' of their great weight, and the 100l^' of
London has been found to make here 120l^'.

The Last of Wheat is here accounted for 5200l^'

The measure of length in this place in use, is the Ell, and the 10^ yards of
London is found to make here 163 else. There are also in this Measures of Elbin.
Tract found for eminent cities of trade, Coninxburghe, Stettin, Starlsont,
Revel, Rhiga, of which a word or two, and first of Coninxburgh.

CHAP. CCXXVI.
Of Coninxburgh, and the trade thereof.

COninxburgh, vulgarly Queensburgh, and in Italian Coninxburgh and the trade
thereof.
Mont Royal, is the Metropolis of this Duchy, seated upon an Inlet of the
Baltique sea, and washed with the pleasant river of Piegol, it is found to have
an Academie for Sciences, and well stored with Merchants from all the Northern
parts of the world; and here the Merchants of Prusen keep their Factors for
the venting of their inland commodities: upon this shore is also found in some
quantity that excellent Amber, which the inhabitants call Bernstein, which in
English may be translated the Burning stone, of which some writers make three
sorts, the first coming from certain Gummie trees, the second made by art of
gold and silver, and other ingredients, and the third this sort coming
naturally from the bottom of these seas, which for 6 months are frozen up, and
deny the seaman and merchant the use of navigation.

The Moneys and Accounts here in use are mentioned before: and the common
weight used amongst Merchants is the stone, containing Weights of Coninxburg.
40 pound, and 10 stone makes a Ship pound, of 400 pound, and the 100 pound
Haberdupois of London, does yield here about 120 pound, or 121 pound: besides
which, they have also the Ship-pound of Dansicke in use for some commodities of
350 pound, but this weight is to be avoided by the stranger, as being ever
accounted too favorable to the Citizens.

The common measure of length is the Ell here for all Commodities Measures of
Coninxburg.
measurable: the 100 yards of London has made here by observation 166 (...) in
circa. And thus much shall suffice to have said of this City; from whence
proceeding, I come next to Rhiga and Revel two eminent Cities also in this
tract.

CHAP. CCXXVII.
Of Rhiga and the trade thereof.

RHIGA is the principal City of Livonia, or Liffland, Rhiga and the trade
thereof.
seated near the Emboseure of the river Dunia, strengthened with an exceeding
strong wall, many Ordnance to defend it against all enemies, and bordering upon
the Liffeland sea: it was formerly the chief residence of the Tentonick
Knights, and then and now reinforced by the Garrison of Dunmund, accounted one
of the impregnable fortes of this Northern clymate, where all ships entering
are searched, and pay a certain Toll, or Duty: the inhabitants curious for
the preservation of their liberty, acknowledge the King of Poland for their
Protector, to whom they pay a yearly contribution, but else are governed by
their own ancient laws and privileges which they enjoyed from the Knights
their old masters, at the resignation of this country to that King.

The commodities of this Country for merchandising and exportation,
Commodities of Rhiga.
is Corn, and grain of all sorts, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Wax, Rosen, Tar,
Horses, and all sorts of rich Furs, as Martins, Ermins, Sables, Bevers, and
the like, not wanting any necessary for nourishment save Wine and Oil, which
foreign nations do bring them.

The weight in use is the pound, 20 pound whereof makes a Lispound, Weights of
Rhiga.
and 20 Lispound makes a Ship-pound, and 12 Ship-pound being 4000 pound, is
accounted a Last of Rye both here and at Nerva, and the 100 pound of London
has been observed to make here 116 pound.

The measure is the Ell agreeing with the Ell in use in Revel, Coninxburgh,
Measures of Rhiga.
and Nerva, 100 yards London making 166 in circa.

The coins and accounts differ not much here in value from the Coins in Rhiga.
others before mentioned, yet found to differ in appellation: for the Rix
Doller, and the Mark Lupes is here all one, which makes two Swedens or common
Marks, and one Sweden is 8 Lups shillings: one Lups is 2 shillings, one
shilling is 12 pence, and one penny is two hellers.

CHAP. CCXXVIII.
Of Revel and the trade thereof.

REVEL is nothing inferior for trade to Rhiga, situated on the North part of
the Baltique seas, famoused in these Revell and the trade thereof.
Northern countries for the safety and commodiousnesse of the haven: it is
well stored of Merchants that frequent the place for the traffic of the
commodities thereof, nominated in the aforegoing Chapter. The inhabitants stand
much upon their ancient privileges granted them by their old masters
Tentonique Knights, and acknowledging the King of Swethland for Protector, to
whom they yield obedience, the keeping of which cost him 100000 Crowns yearly,
as naturally defending his own, and offending his neighbors teritories. This
City in one thing has a larger freedom than Rhiga, and is the same as in
Lubeck for coining of moneys, which they do four square, yet are bound to
stamp the same of the same worth and value as the current coins of Poland,
therefore I shall not need further to insist thereupon.

Their common weight is a pound, their Ship-pound is 400 pound, Weights of
Revell.
and the 100 pound of London makes here 116 pound.

There is found some Exchanges practiced in these parts by the mark Exchanges
of Revell.
Swedens of 16 shil. and by the mark Lups of 32 shil. etc.

Their common measure of length is the Ell, agreeing with that of Measures of
Revell.
Coninxburgh and Rhiga, the 100 yards London making by computation in circa 166
else here. Narva also seated in this tract, agrees in weights and measures
with Revel, therefore I shall not need to insist further thereupon.

CHAP. CCXXIX.
Of Stralsont and the trade thereof.

STralsont lies also in this tract, and is found seated on the Baltique sea,
opposite to the Island of Raugie, Stralsont and the trade thereof.
where the late K. of Sweden first landed in his invasion of the Empire: ^it is
now subject to the Duke of Pomeran, and in whose cause it has endured a long
and straight siege; but being well and strongly fortified, by suffering, it
over-came, and is now accounted a famous Mart in these Northern parts for
Grain, Pitch Tar, Rosen, Honey, Wax, Hides, Tallow, and the like. Here
passes in Merchandise the moneys of Norway, Denmark, Sweden and Germany, of
all which I have spoken, and the Duke has also a peculiar coin, which is
stamped in equal value to the Imperial Doller, as above is said.

The weight of Stralsont is the pound, 10 whereof is accounted for Weight of
Stralsont.
a stone, and 16 for a Lispound, and the 100 pound in London has produced here
about 88 in 89 pound.

The measure of length is the Ell, and is found to agree with the Measures of
Stralsont.
Ell of Statin, as is showed hereafter.

I must not here omit a word in memory of the ancient City of Iulin, seated
in this Duchy, and which once was the principal City Iulin.
of trade in all this sea: for here the Vandals, Saxons, Muscovites, Poloniant,
Swedes, English, Danes, and Germans had their several quarters of residencie
for Commerce; and all the commodities of these Countries were brought hither by
these nations. It is noted, that the inhabitants were the last of all these
Northern people, that embraced the Christian Religion, by reason that being in
the height of their prosperity, perceiving the Gospel of Christ to thrive and
increase in all their neighboring territories, strictly prohibited, that no
stranger whatsoever here resident, should embrace the same, nor that any should
as much as mention any new religion unto them; but in these latter days their
great traffic is lost, and they are become religious according to the
superstition of that religion they use, and since have suffered much by the
vexations of the continual wars of the Danes, and appears now for the most
part ruined, where I will leave it, and pass thence to the next town of Pomeran.

CHAP. CCXXX.
Of Stettin and the trade thereof.

THis Stettin is the Capital City of Pomeran, situated Stettin and the trade
thereof.
upon the river of Oder, in pleasant and delightsome soil, and carries in
these Northern Regions that renown, that from hence the Dukes of Stettin in
Pomerland have their appellation. The City abounds in all commodities for
merchandise that the neighboring Countries afford; and of it self it
yields to merchants the commodities common to Prusson, Sweden, and Polonia.
For its defense, it is strengthened on all sides with ramparts, ditches, and
good artillery; the river of Oder is beautified with many useful and necessary
bridges, the one whereof is purposely made to lead to the Granaries and
storehouses, where the corn and grain, either for store or exportation, is
laid up, and where their Arsenalls are seated, in which their warlike provision
is kept, and where vessels of all sorts both for the sea and river is seen
daily to be fabricated, beside the several Churches and Colleges that adorn
this city, the Dukes Palace must be accounted as the principal ornament, built
of that art and sumptuousness, that it gives not place to the most excellent
in Italy, in fine, Statin is not to be accounted the least of the hauns-townes,
and though the Prince be daily there resident, yet it proves no way
prejudicial to the privileges thereof.

The commodities of this City are for merchandising, such as all the
Commodities of Stettin.
East Country affords, viz. Tar, Pitch, Rosen, Honey, Wax, Hides, Grain,
and all kind of Furs.

The weight of this City is divided into two kinds, derived from the pound
weight here in use, the quintar is accounted 112l^' of this Weights of Stettin.
place, and that is the first, and the second is the stone, which is also of
two sorts: as a stone of 10l^' being the small stone, and a stone of 21l^'
accounted the great stone, and it has been observed that the 10l^' of London
Haberdupois has yielded here incirca 92l^'.

The common measure in use for length is called the Ell, as the usual
denomination thereof in all the East parts, and the 100 yards of Measures of
Stettin.
London has been observed to produce here about 141 else.

And thus much shall serve to have said of these cities, which I have entitled
under the names of Poland and Eastland, though in themselves acknowledging
several distinct Princes, having taken that liberty to my self in my first
method, rather narrowly to observe the maritime shoares and the principal
cities seated thereupon, though acknowledging diverse Sovereigns, than
precisely to follow the limits and bounds of Princes dominions according to the
largeness and extent of their command and power.

CHAP. CCXXXI.
Of the Weights and Measures of Eastland, to that of London.

NOw, for as much as there be many other eminent cities of trade which in
particular I have willingly omitted to handle, therefore according to my
observed order I will contract them here, and show how the weight and measures
of London do agree, and are found to accord together.

And first, I find it observed, that the 100l^' of haberdupois in London, does
make in these towns following, viz. in The agreement of 100l^' London to
diverse of Poland.


l' Stralsont as I said, 88 Statin 92 Revell 116 Dansicke 116 Coni^xburghe 120
Rhig^ 116 Thore^ and Narv^ 116 Cracovia 120 Elbin 120 Wild 116

And thus much shall serve for the weights in general of Eastland, and as for
the measures, take here the same observations made upon Agreement of the 100
yards London to diverse of Poland.
100 yards of London which produces in

Else. Embde^ 163 Hamburg 162 Brem^ 163 Lubecke 160 Munster 86 Ossenbridges 84
Wismar 156 Coninxburge 166^ Rhiga and Revel 166^ Rhostique 158 Gripswald 163
Donim 163 Stattin 141 Dansicke 163 Ocermond 141 Melluine 161 Nerva 166 arsius.

CHAP. CCXXXII.
Of corn measures of Eastland reduced to that of other Countries.

THis Country is above all other commodities abounding in corn, which hence is
transported into all parts of Europe; it will not be amiss, to see what
observations have been Corn measure in Eastland.
made upon the measure thereof, here in use, and concurrent with other places.

Schepels 60 in Da^tzke, make a Last, and 4 makes a Mudde, which is the
skippo^d of 340l^', as you find it there noted.

Werpes 61 makes a Last in Embden, or 15^ barrels of 4 werpes.

Schepels 90 make a Last in Hamburge.

Schepels 96 makes a Last in Lubecke.

Schepels 96 makes at Fameren a Last.

Schepels 96 makes a Last in Hileger haven in Denmark.

Barrels 42 makes a Last in Coppen-haven.

Barrels 36 makes a Last in Ebeltorffe donie:

Quarters 10^ makes a Last in London; but in lading of shi^, quarters five are
accounted for one tun lading.

Now let us see how these respond together, and how these agree With the
agreement thereof with other countries.
with the Last of Corn in Amsterdam, upon which I find these notes, and that
the same makes in

Da^zke 56 ^chepels. Embden 55 Werpe^. (...) 85 Schepels. Lubecke 85 Schepels.
Fameren 78 Schepels. Hylegher 80 Schepels. Coppenhaven 23 small Barrels.
Ebolltorffe 23 Barrels. Sweden 23 Barrels. Coninxburgh 6/7 of a l^st, for the 6
lasts are 7 at Amsterdam. Melvin (...) of a Last. Statin (...) of a Last. Rhiga
42 Loopes, Rostique and Mechburgh measure of Lubecke Antwerpe 372 Vertales
Brussels 10 Muden and Diffring in all places of Brabant Middleburgh 40 Sackes
41 to the last in Zealand. Roterdam, Delft. 87 Achtellins. Gronninghen 33
Muddes. London 10 quarters and 5 quarters to a Tun.

CHAP. CCXXXIV.
Of the trade in general of Poland and Eastland.

HAving thus surveyed the trade of this Country Of the trade in general of
Poland and Eastland.
in some particulars, it will not be amiss to look upon it in the general.
The revenewes both of the King and Gentlemen is here esteemed but moderate, and
scarce sufficient to maintain a plentiful table, and to exchange with
merchants for Wines and Spices, which they yet much covet, as also they do
foreign stuffes of Silks and Cloth: I have noted that this kingdom abounds
with Beasts as well wild as tame, and yields excellent horses, not great,
but quick, nimble and stirring; it abounds also in flesh, foul, and
water-fish, and in all kind of pulse and grain; it is found also toward the
Carpatian mountains of Hungary to have some mines of Gold and Silver, of Iron
and Brimstone, it yields also in abundance, plenty of honey found in hollow
trees, besides the husband-mans Hives: it yields moreover Wax, Flax, and
Linen clothes made thereof, Hemp, Pitch of both kinds, Masts for ships,
Boards and timber, rich Furs, Salt dug out of the earth, Amber,
Sope-ashes, and Rye in abundance, which has made Danzke famous throughout
Europe.

No marvel then if Merchants bring unto them Silks from Italy, Cloth from
England, Wines from France and Spain, and the very Spices and Drugges from
India, since they not only sell them at good prices, but also bring thence
such precious and staple commodities. Poland it self is found within land and
Prussia with their immunities subject to this kingdom, is found to have the
principal traders therein inhabiting, yet have they but few ships, using
strangers to export their commodities. For the rest of the Polanders they are
observed to live content with their own, and not by way of Merchandising to
stir much abroad; yet are they not rich, because they want the above said
commodities, which the proud Gentlemen and Nobility of these countries buy
dear, and will have, though brought from far unto them, and they are noted to
have so little Gold and Silver, as despising all in respect of it, they sell
the rich commodities of their country at a low rate, especially those which
are for daily food, and thereby made unfit to be exported. The people
themselves are not much addicted to traffic into remote regions, nor to
travel far out of their own Countries, yet in imitation of other their
neighbors, they sometimes trade with their rich Furs into other countries,
of whom I have observed some to come to Constantinople, rather making a
rangeing voyage, than coming with intent to trade and reside. Wherein they
cannot be much blamed, in regard that they have in plenty all things that
naturally is wanting to mankind, if they can be contented therewith: but the
inhabitants of Pomerland, East country, etc. are observed to be more
ingenious, and far more addict to traffic and commerce, and have some
vessels fitter for transport and carriage than for warfare, but yet most proper
for their gross commodities and large stowage, however their winter colds
depriving them of almost half the years traffic: the other half wherein
their seas are navigable, cannot make them any competent amends and their
Merchandise being altogether gross, cannot give them therefore the attribute of
Eminent Merchants.

CHAP. CCXXXIIII.
Of Hungary and the principal Cities thereof.

HVngarie is bounded on the East with Transylvania and Valachia, on the West
with Austria, on the North Hungary and the Cities thereof.
with Poland, on the South with Sclavonia, etc.

This kingdom now stands divided between the Grand Signiour and the
Hungarians: the great Turk enjoyes Buda, seated on Danubius, once the
Metropolis of this kingdom Buda.
and Court of the Kings, also Guilia Pest, Alba Regalis, called by them
Wisenberge, next quinque Ecclesiae, Rab, and some others of lesser note.

In the Hungarians possessions are these principal Cities, Presberge Presberg.
the present Metropolis of this Country; second Strigonium, 3 Agraria, 4
Comara in an Island of that name, 5 Tertax, 6 Canista, 7 Zegith, before which
Soliman the great Turk ended his days, and some others of lesser consequence.

This Country does much abound in cattle sufficient to feed all Germany, the
store is so great, that they yearly sell to their neighbors Commodities of
Hungary.
80 or 100 thousand Oxen, they have also some Copper, and Tin, some quantity
of Corn^, Honey, wax, and such like commodities, and from hence to
Constantinople I have seen Hides, Butter and Cheese, that in great abundance
have come out of these parts through the Black sea. Further matter of trade
has not remarkeably fallen into my hands, therefore for the current coins of
this Country, with their weight and measures in use, I must refer to the
better experienced, and hence travel to Dacia and the rest of those provinces
comprehended within that circuit.

CHAP. CCXXXV.
Of Dacia and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

DAcia is bounded on the East with the Euxine, on the West with Hungary, on the
North with the Carpathian Dacia and the cities thereof.
mountains, on the South with He^us dividing it from Greece.

The rivers that enrich this Country are Danubius, 2 Aluta, 3 Salvata, 4
Cockle, 5 Morus, and some others.

The commodities that this country affoordeth for merchandise, is Butter,
Cheese, Honey, Wax, Hides, Oxen, Tallow, and warlicke Commodities of Dacia.
horses of great worth.

The provinces are these, and are all under the command of the Grand Signiour.

Transylvania the chief towns thereof are, 1 Wisenberg, 2 Clansenberg, 3
Bristitia, 4 Fogares, and others, and now in possession of Transylvania. 1.
Bethlem Gabor the Vaviode thereof.

Moldavia is the next, the chief Cities are Saccania, the second is Falsing, 3
Kilim, 4 Chermon, etc. under a Vaviod who is tributary to Moldavia. 2.
the great Turk.

Valachia is the third province, the principal towns whereof are 1 Salnium, 2
Praclaba 3 Terg^vista, the Vaviods seat, who is tributary Walachia. 3.
to the Turk. This country abounds in mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Salt Pits,
Wines Cattle, and Brimstone, and esteemed the richest of these provinces.

Servia is the fourth, and has these Cities. 1 Stoneburg the seat of Servia 4.
the Despot, tributary to the Turk, 2 Somandria, 3 Belgrade a famous town,
which cost the great Turks much blood and money the getting, and was accounted
before as the Bulwark of Christendom on this side.

Rasia is the fifth, the chief City is Bodin, a famous Mart. R^sia.


Bulgaria is the next, wherein is found Sophia, the seat of the Beglerbeg of
Greece, who has under him 21 Sansakes. Next is Nicopolis, Bulgaria.
and some others of lesser note.

Bosna is the last province, wherein is Casachium and ^siga, the residence
Bosna.
of their former Despots. All which afford not further matter of trade: for
where the great Turk once commands, traffic is accounted very rare, and is
seldom found of import, and being ignorant in that little there is, I am
constrained to omit it.

CHAP. CCXXXVI.
Of Sclavonia, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

SClavonia has on the East, the River of Drinut, Sclavonia.
and a line drawn from thence to the S^a, on the West a part of Italy: on the
North, Hungary; and on the South, the Adriatique sea.

The commodities that this country does afford Commodities.
for merchandise, are Horses for service, Cattle, Oxen, Hides, Tallow, Butter
and Cheese, and has some Mines of Silver and Gold now in the great Turks
possession. The Provinces and Cities of note in Sclavonia are these.

Illyria, now by the Turks called Windismarque has in it Zatha seated upon
Danubius, 2 Zackaocs, 3 Windisgreets and others. Illyria.


Dalmatia is the second Province, the chief City is Ragusa situated on the
Adriatique Sea, formerly a town of great traffic Dalmatia.
and riches, and now tributary to the Turk; next is Scium 3 Zara, both seated
on the Sea shore, and subject to the Venetions: 4 Spallatta, a Sea-towne, from
whence to Venice, that State keeps many Galleys for transportation of
Merchants goods, and by reason of an unreasonable freight by them taken, they
stand to the hazards and adventures thereof, which they did to their cost in
Anno 1619, my self being in Naples when as the Duke d'ossuna then Vice-king,
took two of these their gally grosses laden with a rich booty as was reported
to the import of 300000 Cro. which the state of Venice were enforced to make
good principally to Merchants Turks of Constantinople, to whom the greatest
part thereof did at that time appertain, and who are found at this day to be
the greatest traders this way. The next town is Scodra, famous for the
resistance it made against the Turks, and last, Lissa, famous here for the
sepulcher of Scanderbeg, whose bones were dug up, and worn by the Turks at
the taking of this City, as conceiving them to be of excellent virtue to make
them partake of his good fortunes: This Province being now divided between the
Venetians and the Turk.

Croatia is the next, the chief towns are Gardisca, seated on the Croatia.
river Savut, 2 Brumon, 3 Novegrade, 4 Sisgith, and lasty Petrovia; this
country is now subject in part to the Venetians, and in part to the Austrians,
of the trade of the most principal of this in brief, and first of Rhagusa and
Spallatta.

CHAP. CCXXXVII.
Of Rhagusa and Spallatta, and the trade thereof.

THe trade of Sclavonia is at this day but of small account, and little to our
Nation: the two cities of Spallotta and Rhagusa seated therein, merit the
principal consideration.

Rhagusa then, formerly called Epidaurus, being situated on the Rhagusa, and
the trade thereof.
Adriatique sea a commonwealth of great traffic and riches, was in times
past of far greater fame and name, both in trade and navigation than now it
is: for from hence was the original of those great ships here built, and in
old time famous, as then vulgarly called Argoses, properly Rhaguses.
Rhaguses, the last which they were noted to have, they lent Philip the second
King of Spain, in 1588 to invade England and had her burial in our British
seas, and may all others so thrive, that envy the prosperity of England, since
which, I hear not of any they have of any consequence. They now pay 12000
Ducats yearly to the Turk for a tribute of that trade and liberty they now
enjoy, which notwithstanding is of no great consequence.

The country affords not any commodity of moment for our Nation, and we
only send thither some blew Hampshire Kersies, some Lead, Tynne, and little
else.

The Moneys thereof are such as pass current through the state of Moneys
current in Rhagusa.
Venice, and Turkey their neighbors, and their own being in correspondence
therewith, and a^mpted by grosses.

Grosses 6 is a Liver Grosses 62 is a Venice Chicquin Grosses 59 is a Hungar
Grosses 40 is a Naples Ducket Grosses 38 is a Riall* Grosses 59 is also a
Sultanie, accounted in England for 8 star. Grosses 1 is 2 Gassets A Gasses is 2
Saldes

The Weight is a pound of () and 100l^' is the quintall. Weights of Rhagusa.


The 100l^' is English 80l^' 1l^' Rhagusa is 9 gros. Ven. and is Venice sutle
120l^' 1l^' Rhagus. is 14 sac. 2 (...) sutle. and is Venice gross 76l^'

The Measure is the Brace, which agrees with the Brace of Venice: thus the 100
cloth Braces is in Ragusa 124, and of silk 116 Brac. and Measure of Rhagusa.
is in England () inches.

Note that the weights and measures of Spallata do wholly agree with those in
Venetia, therefore I need not to say further thereof in Spallata.
this place; and by the way, note, that for the weights of Rhagusa, I find this
observation made: the 100 Rot. of Alexandria Zero is in Rhagusa 260l^' the
100l^' forfori is in Rhagusa 116 l' the 100 laidin, is in Rhagusa 165 l' the
100 of Damietta, is in Rhagusa 120 l', the 100 of Roma, is in Rhagusa 666 l',
the 100 of Baruti is in Rhagusa 625 l' the 100 Damasco, is in Rhagusa 600 l',
the 100 of Tripost in Soria, is in Rhagusa 500 l', the 100 of Alleppo is in
Rhagusa 600 l', the 100 of Rhodes and Gasa, is in Rhagusa 666 l', the 100 of
Cyprus, is in Rhagusa 625 l', the 100 of Bursia in Natolia, is in Rhagusa 146
l' the 100 of Constantinople, is in Rhagusa 146 l', and the 100 l' in Rhagusa
does make as follows:

In Puglia 39 Puglia 110 l' Rome 101 Florence 105 Perosa 95 Siena 108 Acquilla
107 Lansan^ 106 Vrbino 106 Crema 111 Piemont 101 Forli 111 Faensa 110 In Cesena
106 l' Ricanati 107 Camerino 108 Bollonia 110 Lucca 106 Millano 111 Verona 108
Bressia 111 Ferara 106 Modena 109 Genoa 114 Fanno 106

Further matter worthy mentioning that concerns either the weight, measure, or
trade of this place I have not observed, therefore I pass it over; and hence
take my journey to Grecia, the next place which challenges my survey.

CHAP. CCXXXVIII.
Of Greece, and the Provinces thereof.

GREECE, accounted the mother of Arts and Greece and the Cities thereof.
Sciences, is bounded on the East with the Egeansea, the Hellespont, Propontis,
and Thracian Bosphorus, on the West with Italy and the Adriaticke sea, on the
North with the mountain Hemus, and on the South with the Ionian sea, and is
now entirely subject to the Grand Signiour.

The general commodities found here, and transported hence, Commodities.
are Wines, Oils, Copper, Vitrioll, Brimstone, Silks, raw and wrought, as
into Velvets, Damaskes, Grograines of Goats hair, or wool, Cute, Aniseeds,
Cominseeds, Currants, Sopes, Carpets, Cottons, etc.

The chief Rivers navigable are Cephisus, rising in Epirus, and Rivers in
Greece.
setting in the Egean sea, Erigon, and Aliemon, rising both in Macedonia, and
issuing in Thermaicus sinus, then Sirmon in Migdonia, Alicus and Nisus in
Thracia, and some others.

The principal provinces are seven, and the Cities therein are as
Peloponnesus, or Morea.
follows, Peloponnesus is the first, dividing it self into six lesser
parts, wherein is found the Cities of Elis, Olimpia, now ruined, though once
famous; then the Cities of Corona and Modona, the now flourishing Towns of
this Province: here was also in times past Thebes, Lacedemon, Sparta, Argos,
Nemea, Corinth, now a villedge called Crato, all now gone and ruined, and here
is now of note in matter of traffic in this circuit, found only Modon,
Corona, before named, and Pretrasse, and some others of lesser consequence,
whereto Merchants do frequent for traffic sake. Of the trade whereof a word.

CHAP. CCXXXIX.
Of Modona, Corona, and Petras, and the trade thereof.

THese three Cities as situated on the same shores, Modona, Corona, and Petras,
and the trade thereof.
and subject to the same customs, and found abonnding in Corn, Wines, Oils,
and Currants, Galls, Aniseeds, Silk, and such like, which I have thought good
to put into one member, to abbreviate my task.

In Petros there has been of many years a trade maintained by the endeavors
of the English, who here by authority of the Grand-Signiour Petras.
have a protecting Consul resident, who has the title of the Consul of the
Morea: and here is vented from England some Clothes of Suffolk, Sarges, Tin,
Lead, etc. In exchange whereof they transport Exchange.
hence these commodities aforenamed, Corn and Oil being by their laws
prohibited transportation, but by the connivence of Officers found permitted
notwithstanding.

The moneys of these places is current with those of Turkey, and those of
Venetia, as possessors and borderers, which they account Moneys of Morea.
by the Turkish coins, as in Dollers and Aspers.

Aspers 80 accounted to a Doller, or (...) which is the best commodity: aspers
120 accounted to a Sultany Hungar or Checquine, which coins are found to rise
oftentimes 10, 20, or 30 per cent. in aspers, as the occasion of trade, or
misgovernment too oftentimes does permit.

The weight of Petros is the pound of 12 ounces, ordinarily making 11 drams to
an ounce, 3l^' making their oak, which is 4l^' 2 Weights of Morea.
English, or 400 drams here.

132l^' makes their quintall, which is 117l^' London; but their Silk is sold
by a pound of 15. which is 1 pound abovesayd: and it has been found that
112l^' English have made in Petras 126l^' the sack of Currants commonly
weighing of their weight 140l^', which in Zant has produced in circa 118l^'.

100l^' of Petras has been found to make in Venice sotile 130 l', and in the
gross weight of Venice 83 l', which thus computed may be 88 in 90 l'
haberdupois of London.

The measures of these places are two for distinction of length, First the
Silk Pico is found to be 25 inches English, and the Cloth Pico Measures of
Morea.
27 inches by the rule in England.

Oils is sold by a measure called the Liver and weighs 7 l', Of Oils.
20 whereof is found to make a Candye Barrel, which must hold 15 Gallons
English. which should be 112 l' haberdupois.

Corn is here sold by the Bachel, whereof 9 and ^hath been noted Of Corn.
to make in England 8 Bushels Winchester measure.

From Petras it will not be improper that I trace the Dalmatian shore, and
survey the Cities seated on the maritime coast, and found in the gulf of
Venice, purposels omitted in the Chapter of Dalmatia, as more proper to this
place; and then proceed to the rest of the Greciam provinces.

CHAP. CCLX.
Of Catarro and the trade thereof.

THough in this tract then Rhagusa and Spallato be the principal Cattarro and
the trade thereof.
Cit^es of trade known to our Merchants of London, yet now coasting this
Dalmatian shore, it will not be improper that I take a general view of such
eminent Cities of note as are observable in this tract, the next of consequence
being Catarro, seated in a gulf bearing the name of the City, enjoying a
commodious harbor and safe from all winds, but not enjoying any great trade,
by reason of the too near neighborhood of Rhagusa yet the place does afford
for Merchandise which is exported to Venetia, and to other places in that
gulf, Wax, Honey Tar and Pitch or Rosen, some minerals or colors for
Painters-tallow and candles Cordo^ts and sheep Skins, Figs, Almonds, Nutt,
and some other commodities for victual.

The Moneys here, and generally throughout all this coast, are Moneys in
Cattarro,
those current in the State of Venetia, and the dominion of the great Turk, of
which more is said in its due place.

The weight here used is the pound, and the 100 l' here is in Venetia Weights
in Cattarro.
sutle 133 l', as has been observed, and may be about 90 l' English and the
said pound is 16. And the said 100 pound of Catarro has made in Sicilia 127
pound, and the 100 pound of Sicilia has made here 78 pound, and the gross
Salmo of Sicilia has made here 4 stares, the 100 pound of Catarro has been
also observed to yield in Lansano, and other parts of Pulia 117 pound.

The measures of Catarro are, Measures of Cattarro.


From Catarro I will take my passage to the next City neighboring, the most
important being Sebenico.

CHAP. CCXLI.
Of Sebenico and the trade thereof.

SEBENICO is also found on this shore, and seated upon Sebenico and the trade
thereof.
the river of Cherca, abutting on the gulf of Venetia, and having a commodious
harbor locked from all dangers of winds by sundry small Islands, Caprano and
Standica being the principal, Tina a fair City lies upon this river more
into the land, which adds to the trade of this place, and were it not for the
continual piracie of Rovers upon this coast, and especially amongst these
Islands, the trade thereof would doubtless increase daily, and grow, by reason
of its commodious situation, to a great height; yet notwithstanding this
difficulty, it affoordeth for merchandise exportable, Wax, Honey in great
plenty, tallow, hides and cheese, excellent Oil of Olives, and strong Wines,
Figs and some other fruit.

This City of Sebenico is found to have two several weights Weights of
Sebenico.
commonly in use; the one for the weighing of fine goods, and the other for
gross goods.

The first being called the sutle hundred, consisting of 100 pound, is in
England 80 pound haberdupois.

The second called the gross quintar of 100 pound, does also produce in London
128 pound haberdupois.

The measure of length in use is the Pico, which is accounted to Measures of
Sebenico.
be about 23 inches English, and is about 10 per cent. less than the cloth
brace of Venice.

This note has been made between the weight of Venice and Sebenico.
100 pound sutle Sebenico is sutle in Venetia 120 pound. 100 pound gross
Sebenico is gross in Venetia 120 pound. 100 pound sutle Venice is sutle in
Sebenico 83 pound. 100 pound gross Venice is gross in Sebenico 83 pound. 1
pound sutle in Venice is in Sebenico 10 ounces. 1 pound sutle Sebenico is in
Venetia sutle 14 2 sases.
And so leaving Sebenico I come to Scutari.

CHAP. CCXLII.
Of Scutarie, and the trade thereof.

SCutarie is accounted the Metropolis of Albania, and situated upon a Lake,
called the Lake of Scutarie, or Scutary, and the trade thereof.
Scodra, through which the river of Bolon^ runs, and so to the Sea, near
the gulf of Lodrin, and included in the gulf of Venetia; but being now as the
other cities of this Tract in subjection to the Grand Sigr; the trade thereof
is much decayed, and the city ruined from its ancient splendor and beauty,
yet the industry of the inhabitants, does afford some silk made here; also
wax, honey, hides, cordovante, and some other skins for merchandise.

In Scutary is used two sorts of weights, a gross and a sotile; the gross The
weights of Scutary.
hundred of 100l^' is in England 108l^' in circa haberdupois, by which all
gross commodities are weighed, and the sotile hundred, by which all fine
commodities are weighed, is English 64l^', and it has been observed, the
1000l^' sotile of Venice, has made here gross 664 l', and the 1000 l' gross
here in Scutary, has made in Venice 1600 l'.

The measure of length here in use, is the pico observed to accord Measures of
Scutary.
with Venice thus: the 100 braces of cloth has made here 112 picho, and the
100 braces of silk in Venice, has made here 106 picho, which in England must
be accounted for (27) inches.

All sort of grain is sold by the stare not only in Scutary, but also Of
Grain.
in Boiano, seated on the mouth of this river, and the 100 stares make in
Venice 66 stares which is in England () accompting by this computation every
three stares of Scutary to make two stares in Venice.

And thus leaving Scodra with this short survey, with the applause due to it,
for its excellent situation and strength, I hence pass to Valona, or Avalona.

CHAP. CCXLIII.
Of Valona, and the trade thereof.

VAlona is also a fair commodious city, seated on the shore, between the
cape of Languetta, and Valona, and the trade thereof.
the cape of C^rion and is appos^ to the (...) of Ottranto, and occomped the
entrance into the gulf of Venice; and though it be in subject (...) to the
Turks, who are not always found friends to traffic, yet by the industry of
the inhabitants, it affords for merchandise to be exported, raw silk powder of
berry or grain, for dying of rich colors, w^xe, honey Rose^, cottons, carpets,
^rdovants, some salt fish, which they call sarrache, and other such commodities
in good quantity.

The weight here, is the pound, of which the quintar is composed, Weights of
Valona.
being 100 l' which has been found to produce in England 88 in 90 l'
haberdupois, and has made in Venice, from whence I gather my notes for these
towns 133 l' sotile, so that the pound of Valona makes sutle in Venice 16
onnces, and the pound sotile there, makes in Valona but 9 ounces.

The measure of length here in use, is the picho, common in name Measures of
Valona.
throughout all the grand Sig^ours Dominions; the 100 braces silk measure of
Venice making in Valona 105 to 105 picho, which is in London () yards English.

And the 100 braces of cloth in Venice, makes here 112 pichos, and having done
with Avalona, I proceed in the next place to survey the trade of Larta.

CHAP. CCXLIV.
Of Larta, and the trade thereof.

LArta is a pretty commodious town for traffic, seated on a gulf, which
bears the name of the town, Larta and the trade thereof.
having two points of a land fortified, that commands the entrance into the
said gulf out of the Mediterranean sea, and is seated also on this shore,
between the Islands of Corfn and Santa Manra; it is as the rest of the cities
aforegoing, subject to the grand Sigr. and does afford for merchandise to be
exported great store of Sheep skins, and Cordovanis, raw silk, by us known
by the name of Morea silk, powder of Berry for Dyers: Cottons, Wa^ce, Honey,
Pottargot in great abundance; being the row of the Mullet in great quantity
caught in this gulf of Larta.

The weight here in use, is the pound, 100 l' whereof does make Weights in
Larta.
the quintar, and is found to produce in London 88 l' in 89 pounds.

The measure of length is the picho agreeing with the picho before Measure of
Larta.
mentioned used in Valona.

And now I come to Lepanto the next town of consequence.

CHAP. CCXLV.
Of Lepanto, and the trade thereof.

LEpanto is seated in the entrance of the gulf Lepanto, and the trade thereof.
of Lepanto made famous to posterity by the Sea Victory obtained by the
Christians over the Turks, and the overthrow of their fleet herein 1571, it is
here opposite to the city of Petras which is seated on the right side of the
entrance in this gulf, as Lepanto is on the left. It is subject to the grand
Turk, whose coins are here current, as I shall have occasion to speak of
more at large, when I handle the trade of Constantinople the metropolis of all
his dominions. This place affords for merchandise which is hence exported
into other parts, silk raw, called by us Morea silk, powder of grain, or
berry for Diers, honey, wax cottons, correns, cheese, wines, grain, Oils,
Galls, Aniseedes, and some other commodities.

In Lepanto. is used two several weights, the one called the gross Weights of
Lepanto.
weight, agreeing with the gross weight of Venice, which in England is about
107l^', the other agrees with the weight of Petras, by which is sold silk,
grain, wax, and some other commodities; and by the gross weight is sold,
woolls, cottons, honey, cheese, and all manducable commodities; but the Correns
here, are usually sold by the bag or sack, at so many aspers a sack or
bag, the which bag ought to weigh 140l^' Petrasin, the which 140l^', is of
Venice sotile 182l^', which is haberdup^is 120l^' or 121l^' incirea, where it
is to be noted, that 200 l' petrasin, make 260 l' sotile Venice, which is 174
l' English, and is the staro of Correns in Venice; again, note, that the 100
l' petrasin, or the 100 l' in Lepanto of Petras weight, is about 86 l'
haberdupois, which is 130 l' sotile in Venice, and 83 l' gross, and the pound
petrasin, makes gross Venice 10 ounces by observation.

The 100 l' sutile of Venetia, yields here petrasin 77 l'.

The 100 l' gross of Venetia, yields here petrasin 121.

The measure is here found to be the picho, agreeing with the pich^ Weights of
Lepanto.
of Larta and Valona aforementioned.

Before I pass out of this gulf, it will not be unproper, that I insite the
bottom thereof, where Caranto a small Villedge, now supplies the place of that
ancient and famous Corinth, a City commodious for the command of a brave trade,
as enjoying two famous Ports into two different Seas, seated formerly on the
Istmos, enjoying a double harbor, one of each side thereof, the one whereof
regarding Asia, and the other beholding Italy, and by the commodiousnesse of
which situation, the City in a short time, came to a great largeness.
Acrocorinth was but little distant thence, on the top of an adjoining
mountain, upon which mountain was seated the famous Temple of Venus, near
which was that notable fountain discovered by the impression of the foot of
Pegasus, as the Ancients did feign.

This Corinth was destroyed and ruined by L. Mummins, because the inhabitants
had irreverently, and unworthily handled the Ambassadors The ancient Corinth.
of the Romans 952 years after the first building thereof, by Allettus the
son of Hippottes.

In this continent, if the memory thereof may not here be improper, was the
City of Misene the dwelling of Agame^on, where Misene.
the Temple of Juno stood so much famoused, both for the antiquity and devotion
thereof, near which was the Lake of Lerno, where Hercules slew the Lernian
seven headed Hidra: Here was also Argos Argos.
built, by that all everseeing Argos, so much celebrated by ancient Poets:
likewise Epidaurus, renowned for the Temple of Esculapius, Epidaurus.
filled with the tables of those that had been healed by him, the sick who
entered into the Temple to be cured, were to sleep there a night, and imagined
that Esculapius healed them, during that their repose and sleep.

Here is also Lacedemon, by some called Sparta, now Misithie formerly great and
powerful, girt not with walls, but with the virtue Sparta.
of the inhabitants: not renowned for the magnificencie of public works, but
the discipline, instruction, and the manner of their living. Here was also
those pleasant Arcadian plains, and Arcadian plains.
the places where the Olympian games were solemnized; with diverse Olimpians.
other memorable antiquities, which the injury of time has eaten out and
consumed; wherefore I here omit them, and return again to my purpose and
prosecute my method.

CHAP. CCXLVI.
Of Salonica and the trade thereof.

OF Modon, Coron, and Petras, the three prime Cities of Morea, I have already
handled, now Salonica and the trade thereof.
there rests a word of the trade of this ancient and famous City of Solonica,
anciently called Thessalonica; to the inhabitants whereof Saint Paul writ one
of his Epistles: it is yet a rich and large City, and the residence of the
S^giac of Macedonia under the Grand Signiour. The present inhabitants are
Greeks, Turks, and principally Jews; who are here found to be very rich and
eminent Merchants, 80 Synagogues of them being accounted to be in this town
employing themselves in several Arts and Merchandising. It is seated in the
bottom of a gulf called by the Cities name; and by the demurre that happened
in the English trade to Turkey some years past, these Jews and inhabitants,
and some Moors banished out of Spain, have here set up some Loomes, and made
cloth, in imitation of our English Suffolk clothes, which has proved a great
detriment to the sale of Hampshire kersies; once vented in great quantity
generally throughout Turkey, and especially in these parts; besides which sort
of cloth now here made, and hence taking name, the place affoordeth the
general commodities of the Morea, as powder of Berry Orgrame for Diers, Wools,
Cottons, Wax, Honey, Cordovants, Aniseeds, and the like.

The weights here in use are two, the one called the quintar turcesco, Weights
of Salonica.
and the other the quintar petrafin.

The quintar turcesco of 100 pound makes in English pounds 119 pound to 120
pound in Venice gross 112 pound, in Venice sotil 176 in 178 pound.

The quintar or 100 pound Petrasin make English 88 l' as is before mentioned:
by this all silk, powder of grain, and other fine goods are sold; and by the
quintar turcesco is wool, cotton, cavlare, wax, honey, and some other gross
commodities sold and weighed.

The measures of length is the Picho, which is 27 inches English, Measures of
Salonica.
and the hundred braces of cloth in Venice holds here 112 picho, and the
hundred braces of silk in Venice, holds here 106 picho.

Ne^re this City is the Town of Siderocapse, so well known to Syderocapse
rich in mines of gold.
the Turks for the rich mines of gold there adjoining, from which the great
Turk does monthly draw for his own share above 20000 Dollers besides the
charges.

Near the entrance of the gulf of Salonica is found the high and craggie hill
of Athos, now the holy mountain; whereon is found Mount Athos.
four and twenty monasteries of Colloires, or religious Grecian Friars, with
such devotion and zeal, that the Turks themselves not only admire their
quiet living, but oftentimes communicate to their necessities, giving them
gifts and alms. Here it is reported the ancient learning of many Greek
Fathers ^es buried, or at least immured, till by some divine hand they may be
freed and dispersed through Christendom.

And now to the rest of the Provinces of this fruitful and famous Country.

The next province is Achaia, wherein was that famous Athens, Achaia. Athens.
Marathron. Megara. Thebes. Thermopila.
now Salines, also Marathron, where Darins was overthrown.

Then Megara, famous in times of old. Thebes built upon the river Cephisus:
here is also the straights of Thermopilae 25 foot in breadth, defended by 300
Spartans against Xerxes to the loss of 30000 of his men. Here is also the
mount Helicon and Parnassus, Parnassus.
famoused amongst Poets, and the Pythian City accounted the midst of all the
world, and many other remarkable places, which were here in times past, all
having yielded to age, and therefore merit not a longer stay, or a more serious
survey of the trade thereof.

Epyrus is the next province, wherein was found famous, 1 Antigonia, Epyrus.
2 Casiope, 3 Ambrasia and others now ruined and or no account.

Albania is the next, wherein is 1 Albanopolis, 2 Sfetigrade, 3 Durazzo,
Albania.
a strong town, 4 Croia, under whose walls Amurath the second died; now
affoording little known trade unto us.

Macedonia is the next, wherein is Scidra, Adessa, Eribea, all fair Macedonia.
Cities, but little known to the English for matter of trade: only it is not
to be forgotten, that this country is famous for Philip and Alexander the
great his son; who from hence had their original.

Thessalie is the next province, where the Cities of Tricca, Lomia, Thessalia.
Demetria, Pharsalia and others stood, now also ruind and forgot.

Migdonia is the next province, wherein was Stagira, next Apollonia, Migdonia.
Nepolis, Antigonia, who also are now all ruined; giving pre-eminence to
Thessalonica, now called Salonica, seated in a Bay of that name, as I have
mentioned in the chapter beforegoing.

Thracia is the last province comprised in Grecia, wherein is Thracia.
found the Cities of Sestos opposite to Abidos upon the Hellespont, famous for
the loves of Hero and Leander, and now the Castles or keys of Constantinople,
Abdera the birth place of Democritus, who spent his life in laughing, Calipolis
situated on the northern promontorie of the Chersonesse, the first town that
ever the Turks took Calipolis.
in Europe, Trajanopolis, founded by Tra^anus, and Adrianopolis built by
Adrianople.
Adrian the Emperor, and by Bajaset taken in 1362, and made the seat of his
Empire, till the taking of Constantinople about 90 years after, and Pera, a
city of the Genowaies opposite to Constantinople: and lastly, Pera.
here is found the famous City of Constantinople it self the Metropolis of
Greece, and the present seat of the Emperors of the Turks, wherein having
resided for some years, and finding that it comprehends most part of the
traffic of his European Dominions, it will not be amiss for me to observe
it in a particular Chapter, as well meriting the same.

CHAP. CCXLVII.
Of Constantinople, and the trade thereof.

CONSTANTINOPLE, the seat and residence of the great Turk, is situated
Constantinople, and the trade thereof.
upon the stream that passes from the Euxine seas, to the Meditorranean, and
thereby reaping the benefit of all that the winds can convey thither, both from
the black and white seas, as they term them: It is not more commodious for
Merchandise, than for to be the head of an Empire, affronting Asia, and behind
it Europe, whereof it is accounted the uttermost limit, esteemed to be 20 miles
in circuit, and comprehending 700000 living souls, as some have conceived,
which would grow innumerable, did not the grand Signiours armies yearly, and
the plague once in three or four years sweep away abundance of them.

It was first built by Pausanias, a Lacedemonian captain, 660 years before
Christ, and by him called Bisantium, afterward ruined by ^everus, and in Anno
313 reedified by Constantine the Great, and made the seat of his Empire, and by
him beautified and adorned with magnificent buildings and curious ornaments,
and called Constantinople, then it fell into the hands of the Latins, from them
to the Grecians, and lastly, in 1453 to the Turks, who now command it, upon
which some have made this observation: That the first Emperor of the Latins
who commanded it was a Baldwin, and so was he also, that lost it, also that it
was built by a Constantine, the son of a Helena, a Gregory being Patriarch
and lost by a Constantine, the son of a Helena, a Gregory being Patriarch,
and as it was gained by a Mahomet, so have the Turks a Prophecy, that a
Mahomet shall lose it.

The City is formed in manner of a triangle, or more fitly, as we see the
composition of a Harp, having its two largest angles bordering on the seas upon
a point that stretches it self into the sea, and the third, which is the
least part encompassed with a strong tripled wall, encompassed with dry deep
ditches for defense, and stengthened with sundry towers now daily ruined, for
the Turks hold but few cities fortified, either by walls or bulwarks, save
some principal places, frontiers, or such like.

It has many goodly modern buildings, and amongst the rest, many Canes for
Merchants strangers to abide; and Besesternes for Canes.
them to make sales of their commodities in, it has also many goodly
Besesternes.
Mosces, or Turkish Churches, and that anciently of Santa Sophia converted to
their irrelegious devotion, is not the least, though only the now standing
Chancell of the first building, near which is the grand Signiors Palace, in
the very point of the angle encompassed for 3 miles in circuit with a high
wall, and fortified with many 100 pieces of Ordnance: this city, the common
mart of all commodities of this Empire receiving and distributing what either
comes or goes; the Merchants of London about 1580 here began to have some
trade, and brake the ice by their land travel hither through Hungary;
afterward it was settled by the benefit of the sea; and the first English ship
that came hither, was about 1585, with an Ambassador to refide; who obtained
here such favor by the recommendation of Queen Elizabeth, that her subjects
in their treaty and capitulations, had many immunities and privileges granted
them, and amongst the rest, a toleration of their Religion, freedom to their
persons and estates, and that their customs should only be 3 in the hundred
out, and 3 in, whereas all other Christians there resident, paid 5 per cent'.
Since which time, the English have here driven a great trade, under protection
of diverse Ambassadors, that have here resided, which have had their Election,
Salary, and Maintenance from a society of Merchants incorporated in England
under the great Seal: first, by the said Queen Elizabeth, and confirmed
afterward with new privileges by our deceased Sovereign King James: and
lastly, by our present King Charles under the Title of Merchants of England,
trading the levant seas, wherein was at first comprehended the Eastern Indies,
the dominions of the great Turk, and also the Signorie of Venice; this company
deriving their original from the company of Barbary Merchants, which about
this time, by reason of the civil wars of Moroco and Fesse, began to decay,
and within a short time come to nothing, and who afterward searching more
advisedly into the trade of these Eastern countries, this Company settled a
Consul in Alleppo, and a vice Consul in Tripolie the then principal seat of
Syria with the titles of Syria and Cyprus: also they placed another Consul in
Chios, entitled of Scio, Smirna, and the Arches: as another Consul since in
Argier, and another in T^, and the last in Petras in Morea, strengthened with
command from the Port and Durano of the grand Signior, not only for their
peaceable living, but also for the quiet enjoying of these privileges granted
unto them as above is said.

The commodities that this place at first affoorded to our Nation, and which
hence in those days were brought into England, were Commodities found in
Constantinople.
Grograins, Chamblet, Moher, Persia silk, Gold in great quantity, Carpets,
Aniseeds, Cottons, Galls, some Pepper, Indico, and other spices, which now by
the benefit of our East India trade, we send thither in far greater
abundance than ever we had them thence; and those are yet the common Staple
commodities of this country.

The commodities which at first this company did send to Constantinople, were
Lead Tin, and principally a sort of blew Kersies, called Commodities sent from
England to Constantinople.
Hampshire, and Stoplists, and some few clothes of Suffolk, Furs of Martins,
Cony, Fitchos, Sables, and such: and now those kersies (...) altogether out of
use, and converted into clothes of Suffolk Glosters Coventries, and the like,
which they send in colors dyed and dressed, to the number of eight or ten
thousand clothes yearly; and now we also supply their markets with Indico,
pepper, cloves, maces, antmegs, ginger, calicoes, and other East India
commodities.

The Merchants here residing, keep their accounts as almost is accustomed over
all Turkey, in Dollers and aspers, whereof 80 aspers Accounts in Constantinople.
is accounted a doller and though in merchandise it does pass at 90, 100, or
110, or 150 asp. as I have known it; yet the standard of the doller in
accounts alter not of 80 asp. to a doller, nor of the 120 asp. to a Sultany.

The coins current in Constantinople, are those proper to the whole Empire;
which is principally the Sultany in gold, which agrees Coins current in Turkey.
with the Hungar, Venice, Ch^quine, and Sheriff of Barbary passing for 120 asp.
and the doller of Germany* the Rial of (...) Spanish passes for 80 asp. so
that the 1 (...) Rial of (...) is a Sultany of gold; how beit of late days
silver is found more plentiful, and gold more scarce, so that the said
Sultany, Hungar or (...) is worth 1 (...) doller, and 10, 20 or 30 asp. more or
less, as the same is demanded and sought after: also here are found other
dollers, both of Italy and Germany, to pass for a considerable value, as the
L^ doller at 75 asp. and the Germane Ses^ine at 70 asp. etc. and in fine, most
sort of current coins in the world, if found good silver, find here a real
price in payments of merchandise.

The weights used amongst Merchants are these,

A Grain is the least, 4 makes a quillat. Weights in Constantinople.


A dram is 16 grains, of which all the weights of these countries are composed.

An Tusdrome is 100 drams, and is 1 l'sotile Venice, or 72 mitagales here.

A Lodero is 176 drams about 132 l' haberdupoit 19

An Oak is 400 drams, which is near 2 l' 12. or 10.

Loderot 100 is accounted to be 42 Oaks, and called a quintar; which quintar
is accounted to be 118 in 120 l' sutle English.

A Batman is 60 aches, which is 2400 drams, or 16 l' Engl. By which weight silk
is here bought, making 10 great l' (...) per Batman, Batman 7 and Oaks 2 makes
a quintal, which is 120 l' English. Lode^ 13 and drams 112 makes a Batman: all
silk is sold by the Batman, and yet weighed by the Lodero; so also is
Grograine yarne and other To bring Loderos into Oaks.
commodities sold by the Oak, yet weighed by Lodero. To bring therefore
Loderos into Oaks, do thus, posito, you have 14 Loders, and would know how
many Oaks it produces; First multiply your 14 Loderos by 44, which produces
616: then cut off the two last figures for the C. will remain 6 which is Oaks:
then multiply the 16 you cut off by 4, and it makes 64, which is drams, and so
your 14 Loders is 6 Oaks 64 drams, and so do of any other sum given.

Drammes 720 700 680
are accounted Rotolos of silk and other commodities in Aleppo, according to
the custom in sale of that commodity which is to be noted: and this dram is
16 Killats.

A Mitigall is 1 (...) Drams, which is 24 Killats 20 Mitigals of gold is 3
English.

A Chicquine Sultanie or Hungar is 18 Killats or Carats.

Rotolos 3 (...) and 20 Drammes in Aleppo is a Batman in Constantinople, four
hundred Drammes making an Oak consisting of four Yusdromes or pounds, ten
ounces to the yusdrome, and ten drammes to the ounce; and hereby I have
estimated near forty eight drams to sixteen ounces haberdupois. Where note,
that here (as in Aleppo) several commodities are sold by a several Oak, as
there by several Rotolo, as the Oak of Saffron is here 120 drams, and no
more; and so in others. Weights of Constantinople, with other Countries.


Now having considered this weight in it self, let us consider it as it is
found to agree with other Cities of trade, which may best be done upon the 100
Loderos as the known beam; here the Oak, and Batman and Rotolo being fained
and compounded thereof.

London 120 l' and found by often trial but to be 117 and 118 l' Aleppo 24 2
Ditto silk 25 2 Tripoli Suria 29 4 Tripoli Barbaria 500 Loders in
Constantinople make in
104 l' Bar^ti 23 6 Alex. Zera 56 Alex. Forfori In ^ergams 160 li. In Crom^ 163
li.
125 l' Rhodes 22 Acria 19 6 Babylonia 16 8 Balsora 4 8 Milan, and Verona, and
Mantua 163 l' Lucca 157 l' Genoa 160 li. Florence 151 li. Venice sotle 176 li.
Venice gross 112 li. Cairo 123 Rot. Cyprus 25 Rot. Corfu 112 li. Lorta and
Cattarro 132 li. Rhigusa and Spallato 146 li. Mesina gross 62 Rot. Sicilia
sotle 69 Rot. Naples and Puglia 60 Rot. Anchona. 148 li. Rome and Bolonia 146
li.

The measures of lengtth in Constantinople used in trade, are Measures of
Constantinople.
three, and all called Picos: the first is the Cloth Pico: four whereof has
been observed to make three yards English, and is about 26 inches, and if
heedfully noted, twenty seven inches very near.

The second is the Grograine or Chamblet Fico, containing 24 inches, and
observed to make 24 pico 16 yards English.

The third is the linen pico, which is only the former doubled: and note that
in the measuring here of all commodities of length, here is no allowance made
nor given in courtesy, as the inch is overplus in England; but the said picos
are found to be made flat of Iron, and no more allowance given than the
thickness of the pico at the end, which commonly exceeds not the thickness of
an English shilling.

Corn is sold by a measure concave, called the Killow, and weighs about 20
Oahes; and it has been observed, that 8 of a Killow is Corn measure
a London quarter, and does make a Salmo in Lighorne; and five Killows in Zant
make 6 Bushels English.

Wine and Oil, and almost all liquid commodities is sold by a meter, Wine and
Oil.
which makes 8 Oaks and is accounted of a gallon English.

Note that in Constantinople all fuel to burn, fruit, fish, flesh, and for
the most part all commodities are sold by weight, and very few by the concave
measures, which is a good benefit to the provident. Observe that Scio does
agree with these measures and weights; and so also should Smyrna by the
observations of Merchants, some years past; but some difference is now found
peradventure crept in by the abuse of the weighers, and the falsehood of beams;
and this difference is found more gross upon cottons and galls, than upon any
other commodity which may proceed both from the foulness of the first, and
the greenness of the later, which I refer to the reformation of the more
judicious.

The customs paid in Constantinople is diverse: as the Italians, and Customs
in Constantinople.
other frankes and Jews pay upon all commodities, both outward and inward, 5
per cent.

The Turks themselves are free from all customs.

The English and Dutch pay 3 per cent, inward, and as much outward, upon all
commodities, and this is paid in species, and not in money, except that the
Merchants do compound, as oftentimes they do, with the customer, that an
indifferent rate be made upon the commodities, and upon that rate is 3 per
cent. taken accordingly. Miseteria.


Note, that over and above this custom paid by agreement and capitulation of
foreign Princes for their subjects, there is paid upon all ponderous
commodities a duty of 1 per cent. and upon all measureable commodities is paid
1 per cent. and these customs are called Miseteries, and ever paid between
the buyer and the seller, the Turk, if happening to be either, is ever
exempted, which duty, both by the buyer and seller is paid to the Brokers, who
repay it to the Farmer thereof, and both (...) for the collectour, and is a
rent settled for the maintenance of an Hospital founded by Sultan Achmet, as
hoping by this new custom levied upon strangers, and thus disposed of to
charitable uses to gain heaven at the charges of Christians. Gallata.


Opposite to the City of Constantinople, is the City Gallatta, formerly
Cornubisantium, and in times past belonging to the Genoes, who in the declining
state of the Grecian Empire were possessors of this City, and many other in
this Empire both of great trade and consequence which are now in the possession
of the grand Signiour, between which a river now runs, wherein all shipping
find both a safe and convenient harbor, and in which all the Western
Christians, either English, French, Dutch, or Vendian Merchants have their
common residencie, intermixed with Grecians, Jews, Armenians and some few
Turks, where also is placed a custom house opposite to another on
Constantinople side, both commonly farmed by one and Emin.
theselfe same Emine or Farmer, who is the Receiver of the Grand Signiours
customs, which are found commonly payable, the one half in aspers, of 80
aspers to a doller, and the other half in sultaines of gold, or otherwise, as
the Farmer and Merchant can agree for, and compound the same.

I have showed before, how that the Company of English Merchants The
government of the trade of the English in Constantinople.
incorporated by the name of the society of the levant Company in England, do
elect and nominate an able and skillful, well qualified man in Merchants
affairs, who with his Majesty's consent and approbation resideth here, as
Ledger Ambassador, to protect both the said Companies Factors, and their
Estates here in matter of trade, whose charges and salary is paid and defraied
wholly by the said Levant Company, and for the honor of the English Nation,
and as necessary to his Port, and the said Companies traffic through the
grand Signiours Dominions, they are found also to maintain at present, and to
pay salarie to 6 Consuls in 6 several places of this Empire, and to wait upon
these and their Factors, they give pay to 40 Ienisaries 20 druggermen, or
Interpreters: 6 Secretaries: 3 Ministers, besides Mr. Alderman Garaway at
present being governor, and Mr. William Cockaine Deputy, to whom I owe this
grateful acknowledgement, as to those who have lent me their ready furtherance
in this work.
sundry other needful officers. And for the government of this trade in
England, they have a Governor, who is always yearly chosen in London, and is
ever one of the most eminent of the said Company, then a Deputy, and thirdly a
Husband, in which last, the said Company have for some years honored my
employment, and thought my pains worthy their acceptatic^, and these in
consideration of their care, have a yearly courtesy or gratuity for their
pains: also to these is added a Secretary, accomptant, and some other
officers receiving salarie, and for the better regulating of this trade, and as
assistants to the above said, they have a Treasurer, and 18 Committies yearly
chosen, and are ever the greatest traders, and the most eminent of the said
Society, and commonly the deepest interessed in the general trade; and in
this nature has it continued since the first erection and incorporation of
this Society in (...) 1585, by Queen Elizabeth, whose love to her Merchants
protured them in Turkey many privileges, and granted them in England the
immunities aforesaid. Now for the levying and supportation of this charge
annually thus happening, and for the raising of the present that is given to
the grand Signiour, at the change of every Ambassador, there is levied a lanto
upon the Merchandise, either imported or exported, in or out of Turkey, upon
the members The English nation the greatest traders into Turkey of Christians.
of the said Company, which in England is called by the name of impositions,
and in Turkey, by the name of consoledge, which the said Company do impose
upon themselves, and set the same either higher or lower, as their occasions
and necessity of their charge does require, and these are the most eminent of
all the Merchants Christians that traffic hither.

The second eminent traders into this city, are the Venetians, and The
Venetians being the second.
the subjects of that Signiory, to protect whom, and for reasons of estate,
because of their near neighborhood, that Common wealth maintains here an
Ambassador, commonly entitled the Bailo, together with 10 Consuls in sundry
parts of the grand Signiours dominions, together with 60 Ienisaries, 30
druggermen, and sundry other officers, which are all paid and defraid out of
the office of Cottinio, in Venice, from whence also issues all avenies, and
other losses and charges that happen for the preservation and maintenance of
the trade of Turkey, or the liberties and immunities granted thereto throughout
all the Grand Signiors Dominions.

The third eminent traders into this City, are the French, and The French
being the third,
the subjects of that crown: to protect whom, and also for preser varion of
amity settled between them, that King maintains here an Ambassador, together
with twelve Consuls, dispersed into sundry parts of this Empire; together with
80 Ianisaries, 34 Druggermen, and sundry other Officers, all paid and defrayed
out of the Coffers of the French King, who willingly contributeth the charge
for the ease of his Merchants, and has but small leviations upon them for the
same.

The fourth and last is the Dutch Nation, who in some manner are The Dutch
being the last and least.
found to have some traffic hither; to which end that State maintains in
this City an Ambassador, whom they entitle their Orator, besides whom they
have only three Consulships, twelve Ianisaries, ten Druggermen, and some other
Officers dispersed through the Grand Signiors dominions, whose charge is borne
by the state of the Merchants of that nation, trading hither at a tanto per
cent, and not by the purse of the said provinces.

Besides these, some small trade is driven here by the subjects of the King of
Poland, as also by the subjects of the King of Hungary, and by the Emperors
subjects; who each of them have here their Ambassadors: but the trade thereof
is of so little consequence, and subject to such change and variation by reason
of the war and peace, which sometimes is truly observed, and sometimes
again as little regarded, that it merits no great consideration in this place.

As for the traffic driven here out of Armenia, Moscovia., Tartaria, Egypt,
Georgia, Persia, and other Countries of Asia, and Africa, I pass them over in
silence, having handled them particularly in those several kingdoms; to which
I refer the reader.

Now the trade of other Nations hither I have noted, it is not unproper I
should give a touch of the trade of the inhabitants of The trade of the
citizens of Constantinople.
this City into other places: four sorts of people are found hence to use a
traffic such as are the native Greeks, Turks, the Armeniant, and the Jews.
The Jews bend much of their trade into the land, as to Adrianople with English
Clothes, Tin and Spices, brought hither by other nations: To Angora for
grograines, Mohers, and grograine yarne: to Salonica and other Cities in
Peloponnesus for silks and other manufactories. the Armenians drive most of
their trade into Georgia, Armenia and Persia for raw silks, galls, and some
drugges; and carry thither Clothes, Tin, and other European commodities, and
Rials of silver. The Turks bend their traffic to Venice with grograines and
Chamblets, and other commodities of Dalmatia and Slavonia; and thence return
Sattins, Velvets, and some Woollen clothes, and Venice gold: then to Mecca,
Damasco, and Cairo, with European commodities; sometimes by sea, but oftener by
land; and bring thence Iems, Spices, Drugges, and Callicos, and other Indian
commodities. The Greeks for the most part found to be either shop keepers,
and so cannot be termed Merchants; or else Mariners, which sail to Capha, to
Da^ius, to the Arches, Cyprus, and Alexandria; and these are noted to drive
some small trade, that it merits not here any further observation.

Having thus as briefly and succinctly as I could, handled the trade of the
maine continent of Europe; and being come to this City of Constantinople, one
of the most eminent and fairest Cities, not only of Europe, but also of the
whole world, whose trade I have also duly and yet briefly related: It is now
high time for me to look homewards; and so leaving this famous City, sail
down the Thracian Bosphorus to the Hellespont, leaving in view and sight on
Europe side the once famous Galipolis, the late Station for the Galipolis.
Grand Signiors Galleys; whose materials either for the matter or for the
manner of traffic, differs not from this used in the City of Constantinople
it self, though otherwise it yeeldes to the Merchants for transportation good
quantity of raw Hides, sheep wool, Aniseeds, and some other commodities;
and taking aboard me one qualified here who according to the custom of the
place supplies the room of general Consul for all western nations, I sail
with him to the Castles of Sestos and Abidot, the now keys of this sea and
said City, famoused by the ancients for the sad and disastrous love of Hero
and Leander; where staying three days to clear my Vessel, according to the
manner of each that would depart hence, discharging 101 Dollers 6 aspers to the
Custome-houses of Constantinople and Galatta, and to the Captain of these
Castles, and here 124 Dollers 54 aspers more, I and my ship are cleared and
discharged hence: and being freed, and my sails flowne, I begin to descry the
Arches, and there survey what Islands of note and consequence I find in those
seas, leaving behind me the maine continent of Europe; and having thus
performed my land-travaile, and fully discovered and laid open the traffic
and commerce thereof I am called upon in the next place, to survey the trade of
the principal Islands comprehended under this part of the world Europe.

CHAP.. CCXLVIII.
Of the trade of the Isles seated in the Egean, Ioniam, Mediteranean and
Adriatique Seas.

THe first Island falling in view, coming out of the Helespont is the Isle of
Tenedos opposite to Troy, Tenedos.
which has a pretty town in it, and enriched with excellent wines.

The next is Samothracia in the Egean sea, affording Samothracia.
at S^ia a good harbor for ships and naught else of consequence.

Lemnos is the next in the said seas affording that soveragine Mineral Lemnos.
against infection called Terra Sigillata, the earth thereof is made into
little pellets, and sealed with the Turks Character, and so dispersed Terra
Sigillata.
over all Christendom for an excellent Antidote.

Scio or Chios is the next of note, affording that excellent Gum, Scio.
called Mastique, which in July and August the inhabitants do force out of
trees, by making of deep incisions into the bark thereof, with sharp
instruments, out of which the juice dropping is afterward hardened like unto a
bright Gum, and in September following gathered, which Mastique is farmed of
the Grand Signiour, as his Mastique.
peculiar commodity, and therefore ever maintained at a constant price, and
hence dispersed throughout the world.

CHAP. CCXLIX.
Of SCIO, and the trade thereof.

I Have already declared in the trade of Smyrna, Scio, and the trade thereof.
how that of late days the principal seat of traffic was in this Island in
the town of Scio, where a Consul for the English and other nations did reside;
but finding the Port of Smyrna seated on the continent more proper for lading
of Cottons and Cotton-yarne, and other gross goods, the principal commodities
of this seat, they removed their habitation thither, and with them is that
trade that was here also removed, yet in that it was found a place where great
concourse of Merchants was found, we owe it a touch of its weights and
measures, etc.

Accounts were and are kept in dollers of 80 aspers, and of Aspers as Accounts
in Scio.
in Constantinople.

The moneys are the same ingenerall mentioned in Constantinople, save that
commerce, does oftentimes make them be here 2 or 3 per cent. better esteemed.

The weights here, are derived from the dra^ of Turk^ that I Weights of Scio.
mentioned in Constantinople.

100 drammes make a Rotolo, which is 19 (...) V^ca sotile. 400 drams make an
Oak. 100 Rotolos make a quintar, accounted in circa 118l^' English, and should
hold as in Smirna 120l^', but daily experience finds the contrary, both here
and in Smirna, not making above 118l^' sotile haberdupois.

Their measures are here two, the linen picho qt. 26 inches, and the Measures
in Scio.
cloth picho usual in Constantinople of 27 inches, for other passages, vide
further Constantinople and Smirna.

I will now proceed to the rest of those Islands in these seas, which are first
Lesbos, in which, Mitylena is noted for the principal town, Le^bos.
where was borne Sapph^, the inventresse of the sapphique verse, Pittacus, one
of the Sages of Greece, Arion the Dolphin harper, and which have famoused this
Island to posterity.

Negroponte is the next, where the Sea ebbeth and flows 7 times Negroponte.
a day, which because Aristotle cold not unriddle, he here drowned himself:
the chief City is Col^his, Caristia and others.

Here is also Seiros, Salamis, the 12 Sporades, also Delos, where Seir^
Salamis. Delos. Samos.
Oracles were given to the Petitioners, and the 53 Islands of Ciclades, which
afford nothing note worthy: also Samos the habitation of that fortunate
unfortunate Policrates, and Coos the birthplace of Coo^.
Apelles and Hippocrates, then Pathmos where St. John wrote his Revetions
Pathmos.
being confined hither by Domitian, which are now of small account, save only
in their number, and so I come in the next place to Rhodes.

CHAP. CCL.
Of Rhodes, and the trade thereof.

THE same of this Island and City is sufficiently known through Europe; and
Rhodes and the trade thereof.
the valor of the ancient Knights the masters thereof sufficiently restified,
in the defense thereof; it now (in matter of traffic) by reason of the
commodious harbor and situation daily increases, and many Merchants
Christians are found to frequent the place by day; but must by night get
lodging in the suburbs, so fearful are the Turks of the loss or surprisall
of this place, which cost them so much blood in the gaining.

This City is a Mart for most of the commodities of the Arches, as of Corn,
Wines, Oils, Rasins, Wax, Honey, Cordivants, some cotton Commodities of Rhodes.
woolls, and yarne and stuffes made thereof, as Dimitties, Vermilion, and as
also some Damaskes and other stuffes of silk, etc.

Their accounts are kept in aspers, only amounting by increase, after the
manner of the great Turks treasures, to hundred and Accounts in Rhodes.
thousand, and so to Loads or cargo, which is 100000 aspers.

Their Movies is the same as throughout Turkey, all other coins being rather
esteemed here as a commodity than a coin: for they Coin current in Rhodes.
rise and fall according to contract, so that in all bargains here, the price
of the money by the buyer as well as the price of the commodity by the seller,
must be agreed upon.

Their weight is a Rotolo: the quintar is 100 Rotolos, which Rotolot 100 do
make in England 536 l', and by consequence the Rotolo of Weights in Rhodes.
Rhodes is haberdupois 5l' 6. in circa, and has made in Venice 800 l' sotle,
and 506 l' gross by observation; and in Genoa has made 762 pound sotle, in
Florence 701 pound, in Rome 676 pound, in Rhagusa 666 pound.

Their measure is a Cone which is about 84 inches English. Other Measures in
Rhodes.
notes have not come to my hands, therefore from hence I will sail to Candia,
anciently Creete.

CHAP. CCLI.
Of Candia and the trade thereof.

THis Island is situated in the mouth of the Egean Candia and the trade thereof.
Seas, and is very fruitful in these commodities which it affords for
Merchants; first, Muskadels, whereof there is above 2000 tonnes yearly
exported, then in Sugars refined, and hence called Commodities of Candia.
Candid, in Gummes, Honey, Wax, Sugars, Dates, Olives, Apples, Oranges,
Lemons, Reysins, but deficient in corn.

The chief Cities herein are Candia, the Metropolis, Canea, Rhetmio, Sittia,
and Suda not to be forgotten, being the best harbor Suda a brave Harbor.
in all these Seas, and capable to receive 1000 sail of ships.

The coins of Venice is here current with little difference, and Coins
current in Candia.
their accounts kept as there, and twice a year the Gally grosses from Venice
come hither to furnish the inhabitants with all those commodities which nature
has denied them of, and which other, Germany, Italy, France, or England can
afford them.

There is here used two weights, or two quintals, as in Venice, a Weights in
Candia.
sotile and a gross quintar, which is found thus to agree with the said City
of Venice.

100 li. gross of Candia is 110 li. gross Venice, and 118. li. Engl.

100 li. sutle of Candia, is 114 li. sutle Venice, and 76 li. English.

100 li. gross of Venice, makes here about 90 li. gross.

100 li. sutle of Venice, make here about 86 in 87 li. sutle.

There is here also used two picos, a cloth pico, and a silk pico, Measures in
Candia.
100 braces cloth in Venice, is here in cloth 106 picos, () 100 braces silk in
Venice is here also 100 pico silk, which by observation has made in London ()
inches.

Muskadels are here sold by a measure called the Mestach, 100 Of Wines.
Mestach of clear Malvoise, makes 24 quarts of the Begonso measure in Venice,
or 21 of the Sechio measure, which is in England, () gallons.

To proceed then in the Ionian Isles, I find next Cerigo, which Cerigo.
is plentiful in Marble, and out of the Castle of the chief towns of this
I Will, was Helena the wife of Menelaus stolen by Paris, where during my abode
here, the Castelan did show me, and lodged me in the chamber whence as he would
have me believe, she was ravished; but if it were so, her lodging I am
confident was better then mine, for a soft board was my best bed, and God
knows with what sorry coverings and appurtenances.

The Strophades or strivali, are the next, giving only a poor Strivast.
livelihood to some few Greek Colonies or ^ryers.

And then Cursalari, noted only as silent spectators to the battle Cursalari.
of Lepanto, fought in Anno 1571. near them.

Then Corfu the key of the Venetian State, being in the center Corfu.
of their dominions by Sea, of which a word by the way.

CHAP. CCLII.
Of Corfu and the trade thereof.

THis Island having the principal town of that Corfu and the trade thereof.
name, is now reputed to be one of the bulwarks of Christendom, and the key
of the Venetian State, and is a reasonable fruitful Island, specially in wax,
honey, wine, oil, and some other commodities.

Their moneys and accounts as in Venetia.

Their weight is two as in Venice, a sotile and a gross pound, and quintar,
which thus is found to agree together: Weights in Corfu.


100 li. sutle of Corfu, makes sutle Venice, 133 li. and 90. li. London.

100 li. gross of Corfu makes gross Venice.

Their measure in Corfu is a brace, which is () English inches. Measures in
Corfu of Corn.


Their corn measure is a Moija, which is 4 degalatros, which is 1. stai^ of
Venetia, and in England is () gallons.

Wine is sold by the Jar, 4 whereof makes a quart in Cerfu, which makes of
the Sechio measure in Venetia, 6 Sechis, an^ jar^s Wine and
2 and. makes one quart Venetian in wine, which is in England () gallons.

Salt is sold by the M^yetta, 1000 whereof makes in Venice 23. Salt.
in 24 Moya incirca, and in London () bushels.

Then comes in view Saint Maur^, where stood a Temple, famous for curing
unfortunate Lovers, but the medicine was by Saint Maur^.
casting themselves headlong into the Sea, and so I imagine they may be cured
in any Country else whatsoever: the chief town is S. Maur^, inhabited by Jews
only.

There rests yet of note in these Seas, the Islands of Itheca, now called Val
de campare, being 50 miles in compass, and (...).
North-east from the Island of Sephalonia, being 66 miles in compass, and
wherein are found the towns and havens of Argustoli, Guiscard^ and N^llo, and
on the South East thereof, is the Island of Zante or Zacynthus, about 40 miles
in compass, fortified Zefal^ia.
with a strong Castle on the East side, which commands the town of Zante, and
the harbor thereunto adjoining, the trade Zant.
whereof I here for brevity sake comprise together.

CHAP. CCLIII.
Of the Island of Zante, Zeffalonia, and Ithecea, and the trade thereof.

HAving before treated of these Islands, and their situation, I now come to the
trade thereof, as Zante, Zeffalonia, and trade thereof.
found at the times of my being there which was in Anno 1619. and Anno 1624.
with the needful observations remarkable thereupon.

The commodities that these three Islands do yield for merchandise, Commodities
of these Islands.
are Honey, Wax, Oils, Wines, and Corance, of which last here is found
growing such abundance, that some years the English have laden here 3000
tonnes and upwards, besides what the Dutch, French, and other Countries do
export, and is computed to yield to the inhabitants 300000 Chequins incirca
yearly, etc. and to the Signorie of Venice for custom, which is hereon very
great 40000 Chequins.

Of these Corance, Sefalonia does yield the greatest quantity, but is commonly
the smallest, and least esteemed: Zante does Corants in Zant, Seffalonia and
The^ca.
next yield a lesser proportion, but a better and larger sort: Ithaca, vulgarly
Theaca, does commonly produce the best and fairest, but withal, the fewest in
quantity.

The commodities that this place does vent coming from England, is little,
some Clothes, Perpetuan^s, Sarges, Lead and Tin, and some Fish of Newfound
land, also some Herrings and Pilchards, but the principal commodity brought
hither is Rials Spanish, with which these Corance above said are usually
provided and bought, and no other commodity is so welcome amongst them.

Their moneys current are those of the Signior of Venice, as being under their
government, and especially the Rials Spanish, Coins curra^t in Zant, etc.
which is hither by the English brought in great quantity, and also by all such
other nations as have occasion of this fruit.

Their accounts are kept by the Ilanders, as in Venice, but by the Merchants
Strangers here resident, in Dollers, which are those Accounts in Zant, etc.
Rials of (...). and gassets 80 to a doller.

Their weight is the pound of 12 ounces, and the quintart is Weights of Zant,
etc.
100 li. and found thus to agree with Venice and other places.

100 li. sotile of Venice makes here 63 li. in these Islands.

100 l. gross of Venice, agrees with the common 100 l. hereof.

The pound sotile in Venice, makes here 7 ounces, 2 sac. 16 per c.

Corance are here bought by the 1000 li. which by the computation of
concordancie, specified in this tract, should be sutle English 1070 li. which
is gross of London 9. C. 2. 6 li. but either by the deceit of weights, the
falsehood of staying, or the fraud of factors, it commonly produces not so much
by 2 or 3 per cent. and this mischief is increased to that height of late
years, that it is found often times to produce but 9 C. gross, or about 1020
li. sutle English, but let them that are herein guilty, endeavor to amend it
in the future for their credit sake: for the 100 li. gross Venice, is never
found to yield less then 107 or 106 li. in England, and what is found wanting
thereof to their principals, comes by all probability by their default.

Their measure is the brace, and found to be twofold in use, the long brace
being for Cloth, Linnens, etc. agreeing with the Measures in Zante, etc.
cloth brace in Venice, and found to be 27 inches English, and the short brace
for silks to be 6 in 7 per cent. the lesser oil is sold by a measure called
the liver, and should weigh 13 li. English, 10 Of Oiles.
whereof makes a candie barrel.

Wine is sold by a measure called a Jar 3 is a candie barrel. Of Wines.
Corn is sold by the measure called a Bachelo, 3 whereof is a staro, and
weighs 44 li. and 5 killowes make 6 Bachellos, which Of Corn.
Bachello has been observed to be in England gallons, and a Moya of corn here
makes 2 staro in Venetia, and 7 Iarres of wine here, makes 3 quarts in Venetia.
Customs of Zant, etc.


The customs of these Islands some few years past upon Corance, were small,
till the Venetians perceiving the trade of that City to decay, thought to
augment the revenues by the customs of the fruit of these Islands, which
accordingly they have effected, for seeing the English to covet the same
unmeasurably, which at first the vulgar judged they used in the dye of their
clothes, or which was worst, in the feeding of their Swine, and finding on a
time, sundry ships of burden laden therewith, and ready to depart, their
departure was stayed till the Merchants were compelled to pay 5 Ducats, which
is 25 sh. star. the 1000 li. upon which the Merchants English made complaint in
England thereof to his Majesty deceased, and for the taking away of that
custom, it was thought fit to put as much more here in England thereupon, by
way of an imposition, which has been found to be so far from gaining a remedy,
that the same continues in England, contrary to the first intent, and the State
of Venice has added 10 D. more to the former, as imagining England cannot
subsist without this commodity, at what charge or discommodity whatsoever, yet
it is now levied with this proviso, that the Corance be laden in a vessel that
does come hither purposely to lade them, but if she landeth her outward fraught
in Venice, or the^ thereof, and then comes hither, she is freed thereof, as I
have showed in the trade of that City.

CHAP. CCLIIII.
Of the Islands of the Adriaticke seas, and the trade thereof.

THe Islands found in these Seas are many, as Absyrtides; Adriatique Islands.
secondly, Cherso, Vegea, Grissa, Lesina, Cursola, Brassia, Lissa, and Zara,
all the rest are small, and appertaining to the Signior of Venice.

The commodities that are hence exported for Commodities
merchandise, is wood for fuel, Wines, Grain, Cattle, and some ^iles.

CHAP. CCLV.
Zara and the trade thereof.

ZAra being for the goodness of its harbor, conceived one of the best of the
abovesaid, though Zara and the trade thereof.
small in circumference, yet most commodious for trading, therefore I will note
what is observeable therein, and make it the principal of the rest, to which
the trade of all the others may be reduced.

Their moneys I account the same as used in Venice, and the Dalmatian and
Slavonian coins are here passable, by reason of Monyes of Zara.
their situation, which is bordering all along that continent.

Their weights are two, a gross and sotile, as is used in Venetia, Weights of
Zara.
but found thus to agree together.

100 li. sotile of Zara is Venetia sotile 120 li. English, 80 li.

100 li. gross of Zara, is Venetia gross 120 li. English, 128 li.

100 li. sutle Venetia, is gross 83 li. Zara.

100 li. gross Venetia, is gross 83 li. Zara.

Their common measures of length, is a brace 29 inches London, Measures of Zara.
the 100 braces cloth in Venice, makes here 112 braces, and the 100 braces
silk in Venice is here 106 or 107 braces, most of the other Islands concur
with this in weight and measure. Now ^ling hence, and getting out of these
Islands into the Mediterranean Seas, in which survaying the most eminent of the
European Isles therein contained: I find in the first rank the Islands of
Sicilia, Malta, Corsica, Sardinia, Majorque, Minorque, and some others now
coming to be handled, and first for Sicilia.

CHAP. CCLVI.
Of Sicilia and the Cities of trade thereof.

SIcilia, anciently for its fertility in corn, accounted Sicilia and the
Cities thereof.
the granary of Rome, is held to be 700 miles in compass, and is beautified
with sundry Rivers and Cities, which I shall handle in order as my method
requires. The commodities exported Commodities
hence for merchandise, and here abounding, are Wines, Oils, Ho^y, Wa^, (...),
Sug^s, Salt, All^, Coral, Agats, and some other G^es, and wonderful fruitful
in all sorts of grain, also it has some mines of gold and silver, also good
quantity of silk is here made, which is exported, both raw and wrought, into
diverse fabriques: here is also famous the hill Hibla for Bees and Honey, and
Mount Aetna for its continual burning Mount Hibla* Mount Aetna. Division into
3 Provinces.
and evaporating of flames. The Country is divided into 3 Provinces, the first
is Vallis de Notto, wherein the City of Syracusa stands, once containing 22
miles in circuit, and the Metropolis of this Island, and some others. The second
Province is Masara, wherein is the Cities of M^ntreal, 2 Gergenti and Palermo,
now the chief City of Sicilie, whereto I will reduce the trade of this part of
the Island.

CHAP. CCLVII.
Of Palermo and the trade thereof.

PAlermo, anciently Panormus, and a colony of the Ph^icians, is now the chief
City of Sicilia, and Palermo and the trade thereof.
the seat of the Spanish Viceroy, don Ferdinando de Castro, being Viceroy at my
being here in 1619. from whom I and my company received so much honor, that I
cannot without ingratitude, forget in this place to commemorate his nobleness:
the City is situate on the west cape of the Island, and is beautified with large
streets, delicate buildings, strong walls, and magnificent Palaces and
Temples: here I found a Dutch Gentleman attendant upon the said Viceroy, who
was entitled the English Consul, from whom I gathered these my observations
in the trade of this place and Island.

Their accounts are here kept by ounces, taries, and grains. Accounts in
Palermo and al Sicilia.


One ounce is 30 taries.

One tarry is 20 grains.

Their moneys are also ounces, taries, and grains, accounted one Monys
current in Sicilia.
ounce to be 30 taries, which is 5 Florins, of carlins 1^ the Florine.

One tarry to be 20 grains, and is 12 sol. 6 den. small money.

One tarry to be two Carlins.

One Carlin to be 10 grains, and is 12 li^res.

One grain is 6 Picholies, and is 7^ den. money Siciliano:

One poncto is 8 picholis.

A duccat of gold is worth 13 taries.

Note that for the money which they pay by bills of Exchange, they give
allowance 1^. per cent. for bad money.

It is to be observed that throughout all the Kingdom of Sicilia, there is but
one weight in use, only in Mesina excepted, which Weights in Palermo.
I shall show in its due place: now this weight of Sicilia in general is the
Rotolo of (30) ounces, which is 2^ li. Siciliano, 100 Rot. making the cantar,
which 100 li. has been observed to have made in London 173 li. circa, or
properly in gross to say, 1 C. 2 Some have found it to yield 184 lib. English.
quarters 4 li. incirca, and in Venetia sotile, to have produced 260 li. or
Venice gross 163 li. circa, and has been found to render in Florence 225 in
230 li. but yet by the calculation I made, it should be but 221 li. just, it is
in Rhagusa 218 li. in cattarro 78 li. Alexandria Zera, 83 Rot. dito forfori 185
Rot. in Damasco 43. Rot. etc.

Their measure of length is the cane, which is in London about Measure of
length.
80 or 81 inches by the rule, which is 2. yards English; this cane is divided
into 8 palms, which is about 10 inches, the cane making 3 cloth braces in
Venetia.

Corn which is the prime commodity of this place and kingdom, Of Corn.
is sold by the Salmo, of which there is the gross salme, and the general
Sicilian salmo, which is the small salmo, upon which general salme, these
observations have been made, and that the same is found to agree thus with
these countries.

In Ragusa staro 3^. Dalmatia staro 3^. Ancona somma 1. Ric^i somma 1^. R^ine
staro 1^. Bolonia corbe 3. In Andalusia 5 (...). In Portugal 22 Alquiers. In
Florence 11 staios. In Avignon 5 sesteros. In Venetia 3 staros and 1 quarter.
In Pisa 11 18 staros. Bergamo staro 13. Milan mesni 4. Genoa measure 2 (...).
In Ferrara staro 9. In Tripoli cafesi 15. In Tunis cafice 51. Alexandria ribebe
1 li. 1. Candia measures 14. Corfu mosi 2. Catarro staro 3. Verona minali 7
quartero. Vicensia staro 9. Padua staro 9. Treviso staro 3. Modena staro 3
(...). Parma staro 6. Mirandola staro 3 1/7.
The gross salmo of Palermo and Sicilia has been observed to make in

Spalatt^ staro 4. Ragusa staro 3 (...). Segnia quart. 12. Arbe staro 4. Istria
staro 4. Padua staro 12. Vincentia staro 12. Ferrara staro 11. Forli staro 3
quarteroli 14. Belonia corbe 4 (...). Mantua staro 10. Cremona sommas 2.
Bergamo staro 16. Verona minali 8 and 11 quartroli. Brassia sommas 2 (...).
Millan Mesini 5 1/9. Florentia staro 14.

Wherein I have been somewhat the larger by reason of the general use of this
measure in the Levant Seas.

Note that both the gross and general Salmo are divided into 16 Tomelos, and
that the gross Salmo is greater then the general Salmo about 17 per cent. and
observe that the ordinary charges of corn here bought is 3 taries, and 15
grains the salmo, but if corn be above 18 taries per salmo, it pays also a
new impost, which is per salmo.

Salt is also sold by the salmo, which in Trappano is made in Of Salt.
great quantity, where at my being here I observed to be as great as 3 ordinary
salmos, of Corn, divided also into 16 tomelos, which made Sicilia weight about
7 Cantaros.

Oil is here sold by the cantaro, which is 2 bar. of Florence, Of Oiles.
and has made 180 li. English.

The custom of the Island is commonly 9 and 10 per cent. but Customs of
Sicilia.
fish and other commodities for food pays 12 per cent.

Palermo is also a place of great Exchanges, which briefly at Exchanges.
my being there did run thus with other places, always noting that all bills
coming from abroad, pay one Carlin per ounce to make good money: and they
exchange by ponctos as I have noted elsewhere: and they give in Palermo 160
pomutos incirca, With Naples.
to have in Naples a duccat Corrant, and their account is made as in the
particular of Naples is expressed. They give in Palermo 26 or 27 Carlins, to
have in Rome a ducc. de Camera. With Rome.


They gave in Palermo which is 6 taries accounted, and 1 Carlin per With
Valencia.
ounce more, to have in Valentia 10 sold. 3. den. and a crown of 12 taries, is
20 solds, and a duccat of 13 taries, is there estimated for 21 sold.

With Messina and Siracusa, and other places of the kingdom, With Mesina.
they exchange with the crown and the same moneys.

This note of Equality or Par, I also learned here for current.

For Valentia sold 9 dc. 10. per Florin.

For Barselona sol. 11 d. 3. per Florin.

For Majorca sold 14 d. 10. per Florin.: and for the aforesaid places, they
consider the interest, to him that takes by Exchange at the rate of one carlin
per ounce, which they recover accordingly, for the other particular
circumstances thereof, I refer the reader to the end of this tract, where the
Exchanges of this place and Mesina is largely handled, and as the same may more
amply there appear in the Chapters 419. 420. 421. 422. 423. 424. and 425. with
all particular circumstances, whereto I desire to be referred for better
satisfaction.

And in the next place survay the trade of Messina the second eminent City of
traffic in this Island.

CHAP. CCLVIII.
Of Messina, and the trade thereof.

THe last Province of this Kingdom and Island is Mona, wherein are Cities of
Nicosia in the Messina and the trade thereof.
Midland, Milaso on the North Promontory, and Messina in the face opposite to
Reggio in Calabria, which fare has in times past been accounted to be very
dangerous by reason of those anciently accounted perils, Scilla and Charybdis,
the one a Sand, and the other a Rock, opposing each other at the entrance
thereof, now not so much feared by our Seamen by being more expert: this town
is the most eminent town of trade in all this Island, and inhabited by many
Merchants, which the benefit of the Haven does much further, and the
commodiousnesse of the situation, and the privileges and the immunities of the
yearly Fairs much augmenteth.

The Commodities proper hereto, as also to the whole Island, as also the manner
of keeping their Accounts, I have noted, but Moneys finding some variation, and
diversity by reason of trade, I will here briefly touch the same, first then

A crown of gold of Italy, is worth 14 taries. Coins current in Messina.


A crown of the place they account, 12 taries.

A Tarry as in Palermo, 20 grains, is 2 carlins.

An Ounce is as in Palermo, 30 taries.

A Groine is 5 pecholies.

A Florence duccat did pass for 11 taries, 4 gr.

A duc. of Camera of Rome, for 12 taries 6 gr.

A duc. of Carlins of Naples, for 10 taries 16 gr.

A crown of Marcque is 12 taries.

A liver gross of Venice is 3 ounces, 21 taries, and 1 gr.

One pound of gross of Anvers is 1 ^ance and 10 taries.

Marvedes 29 of Spain, is one tarry.

And a pound starlin is here ()

The weights of Messina is found to be two, the first being the Note:
gross Cantar, whereby is weighed all manner of food, as flesh, cavier, fish,
Tonnies, chief, etc. which is noted to be 10 per cent. greater then the second
Cantar, and has produced by computation pound English 196, in 198 pound, and
the smaller Cantar contains as the former 100 Rotolos of 30 ounces, or 2 pound
Sicilano, does agree with the sum mentioned in Palermo, as being the common
weight of all the Island, and accounted (as I said before) to be 173 lib. but
found by experience of some English Merchants, 184 lib. which I refer to
trial, and they account 20 pesos to make a sotele cantar, and 22 peso the
gross, which is the general Cantar of Palia.

Their Measures is the same as mentioned in Palermo, which is Measures in
Messina.
the cane divided into 8 palms for length, and the salmo divided into 16
tomelos for corn and so forth, as I have more at large handled under the
Chapter of Palermo, as serving for great use to the Merchants that traffic in
the Mediterranean Seas.

All Stuffs of Linen or Woollen (measurable) of this Kingdom, Customs of
Messina.
selling or not selling pay at Messina 6 per cent.

All Commodities of weight from without the Kingdom, selling or not selling
pay at Messina 3 per cent.

Remmoving from ship to ship pays, 3 per cent. or 3, all Merchandise that is
conveyed out of the Kingdom, at the Port of Messina, pays 6 per cent. unless
at the Fairetime, when as some Faires of Messina.
commodities pays less then some others, so that Silk then pays only 3 per
cent.

I have noted an old printed observation between London and Messina to be thus,
which I refer to the trial, that the 100 lib. of Palermo is in London, 172
lib. the 100 lib. of Messina in Silk makes silk weight in London 43, and the
Rotolo of Palermo, has made in London, 1 lib. 9 ounces, the 100 yards has
made 44 (...) Canes, and that the Cane has made in London 2 1/4 yards or Else
1 1/2 goad of Freezes and Cottons, and thus I will leave this City and Island,
and sail to Malta.

Malta is the next Island of note in these Seas, famoused more Malta.
by the Knights the now possessors, then by any traffic that is found therein,
it is the place where Saint Paul suffered shipwreck, and where he shook the
Viper from his hand into the flame, which yet the inhabitants would persuade
travelers has left some virtue and relickes thereof behind him, which I
refer to the relation of others, it abounds in Cotton-wooll, Oranges,
Lemons, Citrons, Honey, Wax, and some other fruits, the towns of note are
(...), Saint Hermes, and Malta and some others.

Corsica is the next, and seated opposite to Genoa, to whom it Corsica.
belongs being 300 miles in compane, Bastia is the chief City, and the
residence of the Genoese Governor, with a commodious Haven and a strong
Garrison, the principal Ports for shipping, are Saint Florence in the Northern
part, and Saint Boniface in the South; the commodities thereof are, Oiles, Figs,
Reisins, Wines, Honey, Wax, Allom, Box-wood, Iron, good Horses, and fierce
Mastives, little other Commodities it affords not, their weights and measure
agrees with Genoa.

Sardinia is the next, and accounted 550 miles in circuit, and subject to the
Spaniard, divided into two parts, first, Cape Luggudory Sardinia.
toward Corsica, and secondly Cape Cagliares toward Afrique, it affords for
Merchandise corn in good plenty, and Oiles in reasonable manner, but abundant
of all sorts of cattle, as appears Commodities of Sardinia.
by the great abundance of Hides and cheese, which in an homely manner is made
here, and hence dispersed through Italy, Spain, and other Countries: there is
here many towns, such as is Bossa, Sainta Reparata, Alquilastro, and lastly,
Callary the Metropolis, of which a word: together with the trade thereof.

CHAP. CCLIX.
Of Callary and the trade thereof.

CAllary is the principal City of this Island, opposite Callary and the trade
thereof.
to Afrique, the seat of the Spanish Vice-kings, enjoying a goodly Haven, and
much frequented by Merchants, and is an Archbishops See, and well stored with
eminent Citizens.

Their monyes are generally the monyes of Valentia in the Kingdom Monyes of
Callary.
of Spain, but they have proper to the Island, some Copper or black monyes, to
which the duccats and livers of Valentia are reduced, and their Accounts are
kept in the same manner, as in that City.

The common weight is the pound, consisting of 12 ounces, Weights in Sardinia.
100 li. thereof being their quintar, is English 88 in 89 li. and in Marselia
101 li. in Florence, 125 li. circa.

Their common measures is a Vare and a Brace, the Vare found to agree with
Valentia, and the Brace with Florence, the first used Measures in Sardinia.
in cloth and linen, and the latter in silks, etc.

Further observations on the trade of this Island, has not come to my hand,
therefore I will hence sail to the next Islands, which are those of Majorca and
Minorca.

CHAP. CCLX.
Of Majorca and Minorca, and the trade thereof.

MAjorca is seated also in these seas 300 miles in circuit, Majorca and
Minorca, and the trade thereof.
and 30 miles distant from the continent of Spain, the principal City is
Majorca, an University, and the seat of the Spanish Viceroy.

Minorca is 9 miles distant from Majorque, and 150 miles in compass, wherein
is Minorca and Iava, the principal towns, but Mahon therein is found to be an
excellent Port, able to contain 500 sail of very great ships in safety from
all weathers, whatsoever. This Country affords for merchandise, Commodities
of Majorca, (...) etc.
Corn, Wines, Oiles, this last being the principal commodity of this country,
which the English do here lade above 500 tons yearly, and some times more,
and hence exported by them, if the Spaniard have not otherwise occasion for it
for his own use, for from hence provisions are made for all the Eastern and
Western Navigators. Their moneys have reference to those current in Spain,
and principally in Barselona and Valentia, and they account Monyes in Majorca.
7 Rials Spanish, and two Marvedes to make a liver here, by which their
accounts are kept, being in livers, sold, and denieres, Accounts.
12 deniers to the sold, and 20 sold to the liver, which liver is 3 s. 8 d.
star. but all commodities are here sold by the sold, 20 making a liver, which
may be accounted 3 s. 8 d. starling as aforesaid, and they account 17 doublers
is a Riall Span. Their weight is Weights of Majorca.
in Majorca and Minorca two, the one the Rotolo, which 100 Rotolos makes a
cantar, called the cantar Barbaresco, which is 117 li. of the other weight,
which they call a cantar of Majorca or Majorina, and consists of 104 li.

The cantar barbaresco has made

in Pisa and Florence 141 li. in Venetia, sutle -- 163 li. in Venetia gross --
103 li. in London -- 110 li.
The cantar Majorca which is 104 li. has made in Valentia 116 li.

104 li. cantar Major. in Forence -- 120 li. in Venetia sotile -- 140 li. in
Venetia gross -- 110 li. in Genoa -- 130 li. in London -- 117 li.


Some commodities are also sold by the cargo of three cantares, Car^.
but each cantar contains 104 li. by which cargo is Pepper, Ginger, Sinamond,
Rise, Spices, and other things, and the cargo has made in Venice 420 li.
sotile, by the cantar barbaresco is weighed, wool, hides, skins, metals, lead,
tin, and such gross goods, and fine goods by the other quintar, or the cargo
aforesaid.

Their measure of length is a cane, which has made in London, 67 in 68 inches,
which is 1. yards London measure. Measures in Majorca, etc.


Their measure of Oiles is a quarter, or quartano, 12 whereof is contained in
an Odor or skin of Oil, and 212 quartans I have found here in 1617. to be a
tun of 236 gallons, and 214. a tun of 252 gallons or thereabouts, and 41.
quartans, has made in Venice, one Miara, and in Alexandria has weighed 5
cantars, and 20 Rotolos.

Oiles are commonly laden at Porcupin, and were found in my time to have there
these charges for custom, 8 doublers per Of Oiles, and how they are laden, and
the account thereof made up in Majorca.
lieur, which is 7 Rialls, and 2 Marved. Spanish, and 17 doblers, as I said
before, being a Riall, for part 3 doblers per oder for measuring 3 den. per
oder for pipes at 3 livers the pipe, for sea custom at 9 dob. per liver,
brokered at 1 den. per liver for halledge of the pipes at 5 sh. the pipe,
stoadge at 8 den: the pipe, barkedge to Parcapin 2 sol. 6 den. the pipe,
provision according to the custom of the place, at 3 per cent. A brief of all
which charges may be comprehended in this rule, certainly observe that
accounting 214 quartans to a tun, and for every soldo that a quartane does
cost here first penny, if you reckon 47 sh. 6. d. starling for every the said
soldo, so much infallibly will your tun of oil stand you in clear abord of
all charges, and thus much out of my own trial I have thought good to insert
in lading of Oiles in this place.

Near unto these Islands are the Islands of Ivisa, 100 miles in Ivisa.
circuit, the chief City is Ivisa, the chiefest commodity that it affords,
is salt, of the trade of which a word.

CHAP. CCLXI.
Of Ivisa, and the trade thereof.

THe Island of Ivisa, the chief City whereof* being Ivisa and the trade thereof.
Ivisa, consists wholly in making of salt, which is here sold by a measure
called the Modino, which weighs in summer by the weight of Valentia, which is
here in use, is 33 cantars, and in winter, 36 cantar gross, of the said place
of Valentia, and corresponds with other places thus,

in Majorca it makes cantars 38. Of Salt.
in Florence staros 50 in 52. in Genoa ^me. 9 in 9. in Valentia Caffico 8. in
Flanders, 100 Lutos, which is in Ivisa 13 Modini. in London () bushels.
Their measures and weights I must refer to the better skild.

Here is also Fromentary, Pantcleria and Lipara Isles, with the Les^er Islands
of the Mediterranean seas.
Isles of Naples, as Capra, Ischia, Progitu, Elba, Gades or Cales, and some
others which I pass by, and so sail into the Ocean, and observe the Islands
thereof.

CHAP. CCLXVII.
Of the Ocean Islands, and the trade thereof.

BEing entered into these seas, I will begin with the Northern Islands.
most Northern Islands thereof, and so drawing toward England, the place of
our abode, and there determinate my traffic and peregrination. In the north
then the report is credible, that the end of nature and of the world is,
wherein by late discovery are found these Islands: first, Sir Hugh Willougbbies
Island, who Willougbbies.
by his death gave life and knowledge to us of this Island, searching here a new
way to China, Cathai, and Molluccos: then there is Nova Zembla only discovered,
else not famous for any thing. Nova Zemb^.
Next, Frisland, subject to the King of Denmark, and much Frisland.
frequented by Dutch, English, and French for fish here taken in great
abundance in the summer season only. Then have we Island or Ici^land,
plentiful in Ling; the chief towns are Hallen Island.
and Schasholton, and subject to the King of Sweden. Then Gronland, seated
under the Northern cold Zone, where their Gronland.
longest summers days is 3 months and a half, abounding in fish, of which
there is a society now incorporated in London, by the name of Greeneland
Company: the trade whereof principally consists in the fishing of Whales, for
Fi^es and Oiles, and only lasts the summer season, and no longer, and then
they are enforced to return, by reason of the extremity of the cold and
frosts. Now to come out of these cold Seas to the Ocean, as into more temperate
Regions, I meet in my way with the O^cades, Orchades 32.
or Isles of Orkney, being 32 in number, the principal of which is Pomonia,
stored with Tin and Lead, next (...), then Pomonia.
Shetland, anciently imagined the last Island of the world, and called Thule.

Then the Hebrides, which are 44. the prime whereof is Ila, abounding Hebrides
44.
in red Dear. 2 Iona famous for the Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings. 3 Mula,
whose inhabitants are called the red shankes, the rest as of little note I omit.

Then the Sorlings, which are 145. the principal being Armath, Sorlings 145.
Agnes, Sampson, and Silly, the name-giver to the rest and others.

Here I meet also with 5 Islands, which cannot be comprised within the former
account, first the I Will of Man: which is ten Man.
miles in length, and 10 in breadth, abounding in flax, hemp, ^ates, barley,
and wheat, and some cattle; the chief towns are Ballac^ri and Russin or
Castleto^e.

Then appears the I Will of Anglesey, which is accounted a shire Anglesey.
of Wales, in length 24. in breadth 17 miles, and for its abundant fertility in
all things, is called by the neighboring shires, M^ Cimbri, the mother of
Wales, as having plenty of all food and other provision necessary to preserve
the life of man, out of which is yearly sent 3000 head of cattle to supply
the wants of other Countries adjoining, together with a good quantity of corn,
butter, cheese, etc. the same had in times past 360 Towns and Villages, now it
has but one of consequence remaining, called Beaumares, commodious for trade,
as commanding a fair, Beaumares.
safe, and capacious haven and road, to which as being the place of my birth,
I owe this grateful remembrance. Iarsey is the Iarsey.
next, in compass 20 miles, the chief towns are S. Hillarie and Saint Mollo,
abounding in sheep, etc. Then Garnsey, 20 miles distant Garnsey.
from Iarsey, rich in good harbors, the chief town is S. Peter's. The last is
the I Will of Wight, being 20 miles long, and 12 Wight.
broad; the principal towns being Yarmouth, Newport, and Bradring, it is well
fortified and strengthened against all foreign attempts whatsoever. There be
also some other petty Islands round about this shore, but I will pass them to
come to those of greater note and consequence, which are Ireland and great
Britain, the last I Will and place, both of this my travel and traffic.

CHAP. CCLXIII.
Of Ireland and the Provinces thereof.

IReland stands West of Britain, containing in Ireland and the Provinces
thereof.
length 400 miles, and in breadth 200 miles, enjoying this prerogative by
nature, that no venomous Serpent will neither live here, if brought from other
Regions, nor yet does naturally breed here: it is divided into 5 Provinces,
which according to my former method, I will in order touch, and see what
towns of note they contain.

Munster is the first, wherein is found the Cities of Limerick, seated on the
banks of Shenin, 2 Cork, 3 Kinsall and 4 Waterford: Munster 1.
the first ground that ever I trod on out of my native soil, being about 13 or
14 years old, and then began to be employed by my Parents in trade of
merchandising.

Connaght is the second Province, the chief Cities are Dunrattie and Gall^aie;
the third City in Ireland, both for fairness, Co^ght 2.
largeness, and for pleasant dwellings and situation.

Vlster is the third Province, the chief towns are Dundale, 2 Dungannon, 3
Armath, an Archbishopricke, 4 Dongall, and 5 Lands Uls^ 3.
derry, lately built, and peopled by the City and Citizens of London.

Meth is the fourth, the chief towns are Kelly, 2 Tri^, and lastly, Tredagh, a
fine town, where also I refided in these my younger Math 4.
years of travel and first employment in traffic.

Lemster, is the last Province, wherein is found the Cities of Mer^rge, Philips
town, Kildare and Dublin, of the trade whereof (...) Lemster 5.
word.

CHAP. CCLXIIII.
Of Dublin, and the trade thereof.

DVblin is seated on the liffe, being the Metropolis of Of Dublin and the trade
thereof.
Ireland, and the residents of the Lord Deputy for the King of England, who is
Sovereign here, it being also an Archbishopricke and an University. The
commodities the country does afford for merchandise, Commodities of Ireland.
are these, first, the country abounds in cattle, each affords tallow and
hides in great abundance, which is hence exported to Spain, France, and Italy,
also Salmon is here caught good store in July, August, and September, which is
salted and exported, and in summer, the quantity is so great in some parts of
this Island, that the servants do covenant with their masters, they must not
feed thereon but certain days in the week. Herrings are here also caught,
and accounted the best, as also Pilchards in August, September, and October,
and thence vented to Spain, France, and into the straights of Gibralter; here
is also some butter, cheese, pipe slaves, Calve-skins, and other commodities of
late days prohibited to be exported by the laws of the Kingdom.

The coins of this Kingdom in the standard, carries a concurrence Coins of
Ireland.
with those of England, which also are here current for the value, as being
subject to one and the same Scepter, yet in distinction of the true and real
worth, are found thus entitled.

The pound of Ireland consists of 20 shillings Irish, yet in sterling is
accounted but 15 shillings.

The shilling by this account is but 9 d. sterling, and the six pence Irish is
4 d. sterling.

Here is also an Exchange found and practiced, but not for any Exchanges of
Ireland.
foreign part, saving England, and principally for London and Bristoll,
commonly running at 8 d. upon the pound, and when most, at 12 d. per li. which
is 5 per cent.

Dublin, and in general, all Ireland, has the measures and Weights and
Measures as in England.
weights of England in use in their trassique, and agreeing therewith in all
particulars, I need not insist further therein.

Now a word of the trade in general of Ireland, as it is found observeable in
these days.

The daily conversation of the English nation, and the late unpartiall and
found administration of justice in this country, has Of the trade in general
of Ireland.
redeemed this Island from the jaws of barbarism, wherein it was ready to fall
and suffer a ruin, and since by little and little, peace being firmly
established, has brought the inhabitants to a desire of enriching themselves,
and this desire has so well been seconded by their industry, that I may say it
has brought store and plenty into their dwellings, which has hitherto met
with so good a success, that whereas few years past, this Country was with all
necessaries supplied out of Englands and Scotlands abundance, it now returns
that courtesy, and contributeth some years not only to the wants of both,
but to the wants of Spain, France, and some other adjoining Countries, for now
it is found that the Earth and Seas adds to the inhabitants labor and pains,
as first the Seas and Rivers in their season affords them great plenty of
Cod-fish, Hake-fish, Pilchards, Herrings, and these of both the largest, best,
and in abundance, which they take, kill, and salt, and so disperse as a
merchandise into France, Spain, England, Scotland, and other Countries.

Then the earth yields them a good breed of cattle, especially sheep and
oxen, in such store, that they have thereof in great abundance, as also of
Hides, Woolles, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, and Beef, and the Wool, they by
manufacturies convert into Cloth, Mantles, Rugges, Frises, and Yarne, whereof
it is reported that there comes yearly to the town of Manchester in
Lancashire, to be there woven into stuffes, at least two hundred thousand
weight fine and coarse: besides which, the bowels of the earth yields them
Lead, Iron, and Tin, and by their own industry they have many other
manufacturies, as also pipe-staves, wax, honey, furs, hemp, linen cloth,
salt, and some others: all this considered, what should want here to make them
eminent Merchants, but shipping and skill in the Art of Navigation, and a
desire to employ their talents in foreign Countries, which yet is not seen to
be perfected amongst them: nature having to this end fitted them with many
goodly Ports and navigable Rivers, and will in time I hope fit them with an
inclination to second by their endeavors, what is so plentifully bestowed by
her upon them, which by little and little may be brought to pass by the
conversation and direction of the civilized English, that daily are seen to
come and reside amongst them: and thus leaving Ireland, and my good wishes to
the increase of her traffic, I hence pass over to Scotland, (a part of
Britan) and view the present trade thereof.

CHAP. CCLXV.
Of Scotland, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

SCotland is the Northern part of Britain, and Scotland and the trade thereof.
separated from England, by the River Tweed and Salwaie, and the Chenio^-hils,
extending from thence to the other, which being a Kingdom, and varying in the
manner of trade from England; I have thought good here to insert by it self.

The Commodities that this Country affords for Merchandise Commodities of
Scotland.
are coarse Clothes, Freezes, Fish salted, Hides, Tallow, Lead, Oar, some
Grain, Feathers, and other Commodities, as Sea-coale, Allome, Iron, etc.

This Country is divided into two parts, the high-land and the low-land, and
the same into several Sherifdomes, or Provinces, in which are found these
Towns of consequence.

CHAP. CCLXVI.
Of Edinburgh, and the trade thereof.

FIrst Edinburgh, wherein, is seated the Kings Palace, Edinburgh and the trade
thereof.
and the Court of Justice, consisting principally of one street of a mile in
length, whereto does lead many other pretty Lanes, making the whole near three
miles in circuit, the second Town is Glasco, an Archbishops See, and an
University; the third is Saint Andrews in Fiffe, honored with many
Prerogatives; fourthly, Sterling: then is Perth, Aberdon, Dondes, Saint John's
Town, and some others of lesser note.

Their current Monyes in Merchandise is the proper Coins of Monyes of Scotland.
that Kingdom both in Gold and Silver, which are usually found to be in Gold

Pieces of 22 shill. sterling. Pieces of 11 shill. sterling. Pieces of 5 6 d. sterling.
Pieces of 2 9 d. sterling. Pieces of 4 4^ d. sterling. In Silver, first Pieces of 1
shill. 1 d. sterling. Pieces of the and thereof. Pieces of 9-9 d. being of the 13
d. ster. one Mark. Pieces of which is 4 d. being (...) of the above said.

Again, 13^ d. sterling. is Scotch Mark, or 13 shill. 4 d. Scotch. 6 is a Scotch
Noble, 6 shill. 8. 20 d. sterling. is 1 Mark Scotch. or 1 pound Scotch of 20
shill. 20 shill. sterling. is 18 Soctch Marks.
Besides which are here found current the Coins of England, and he that would
see further into the intrinsecall value and weight of these Coins either of
Silver and Gold, must have recourse to a Proclamation set out by our Sovereign
King James deceased, dated in 1609, which will also show their conformity to
the Coins of England in weight and goodness, and the current value and
estimation thereof through this Kingdom.

Here is practiced for England an Enchange for monyes as is Exchanges in
Scotland.
done upon the Scotch Mark for 12 pence sterling in London, etc.

Their Accounts are now kept several ways, some following the custom of
England, by sterling pounds, shillings and pence, and Accounts in Scotland.
some by their own ancient manner also in pounds, shillings and pence Scottish,
20 pence sterling being their pound, 13 d. being their Mark, and pence
Scottish, of which they had some black or copper Monyes, as Babaes, esteemed by
them for six pence, whereof two made a penny sterling, Placks which they
esteemed for four pence, but three of them made a penny sterling, and lastly,
pieces called hard-heads, esteemed by them at 1 pence, but eight of them made a
penny sterling money, and some of these are yet current amongst them.

They have in general (as is also the custom of England) but Weights of
Scotland.
one weight for weighing of their Merchandise, and for buying and selling
throughout the Kingdom, which is the pound of 16 ounces, 100 of which pound
makes their Quintall, which is found to make. In London and all throughout
England 108 lib. haberdup^is, and the 100 li. London sotile is found to render
here 92 lib. incirca, or the 112 lib. to give 103^ lib. or thereabouts.

Their common Measure in length for Linnens, Cloth, Silk, or Measures of
length.
Stuffs, is an Ell common in use throughout Scotland, which is about 4 per
cent. differing from our English yard, as being greater, 120 for 100.
so that whereas we allow 36 inches to the yard by Rule, their Ell may make
incirca 34 inches, it having been observed by Traders hither, that 75 yards in
London or Else, 60 Else has made here 72 Scotch Else, but in their hundred by
tale in measure they account six score or 120 for 100.

In other Measures of Corn, Coal, Salt, or liquid measures of Beer, Ale, Wines,
Oiles, and such like, imitate the better experienced to supply my defects
therein, for I hasten now toward England, and so to London, the City of my
abode, and the end of my present labors, and by the way will observe that the
Inhabitants of this Country, are much addicted both to Trade and Navigation,
and have many good helps and furtherances there both by the natural and
artificial Commodities of the Country, and the good Ports of the same, so that
in brief I may conclude, this Kingdom, to be more addicted to Traffic and
Navigation then the Irish, and yet not so much as the English, which yet by the
gracious aspect of our Sovereign is seen daily to increase, and may in time
come to a greater perfection.

CHAP. CCLXVII.
Of Britain, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.

HAving now set my foot upon the happy shore, and Britain and the Provinces
thereof.
run through the trade of most of the greatest known Cities of Commerce and
Traffic in the World, give me leave to survay the distinct ports of this
Kingdom, that I may not do less to our own then in this Tract I have done to
other Foreign Countries. Britain then the Queen of Islands is found to be in
circuit 1836 miles, extending it self (comprehending England, Wales, and
Scotland as of one entire Island, which we now know by the name of Great
Britain) 800 miles, being divided into 3 parts, as into England and Wales,
whose trade we have now in hand, and Scotland whose traffic we have already
declared.

CHAP. CCLXVIIII.
Of Wales, and the Cities thereof.

WAles then being the second part of this division, is bounded on all sides
with the seas, except the East, where it is separated from Of Wales and the
Cities thereof.
England by the River Dee, and a line drawn to the river Wie, but by some by
Claud Offa, or Offas ditch, or more proper by interpretation, Offas Hedge or
Rampire, beginning at the influx of Wie, into Severne, reaching unto Chester
for 84 miles, where the River of Dee enters into the Sea.

The Country is in many places mountainous and barren, yet able of its self to
subsist without assistance of any neighborhood, partly by the industry of the
inhabitants, and partly by the plenty of some of the shires thereof, the most
fruitful affording supply to others that are found the most barren and
deficie^t.

The commodities which this Country does yield and vent abroad for merchandise,
are first cattle in abundance, bred in general through the whole Country,
wax, honey, herrings white Commodities of Wales.
and red, butter and cheese in great plenty, woolles also in some measure; also
this Country is well stored with Mines of Silver, Lead, Lead ^are, Cole, and
some Tin, Milstones and good quarries of freestone for building, Hides,
Calfeskins, Frises, Baies, some linnens, and great quantity of cottons, known
by the name of welsh Cottons and plains, which in Oswestry, seated in
Shropshire, is every Monday (as the common ^rie of all Wales) vented in great
abundance, and thence dispersed throughout England, and so thence is shipped
and conveyed to supply the defects of Normandy, Britain, and Picardy, and of
late have found a current vent in Spain, Turkey, and other countries:
therefore I would encourage my countrymen to go on in their manufactures of
woolls seeing that nature has done her part to give them the materials, their
industry must be added, and that will soon bring forward the art, and all these
conjoined, will bring a benefit for a reward of all, and to all of them.

Wales is found at this day to contain 4 circuits for the administration of
Justice, 1 Fl^t, (...), (...) shires being the first, ^nor, Glamorg^, and
Breck^cke shires being the Four Circuits in Wales.
second, Cardigan, C^then, and (...) shires, being the third, Meri^, Ca^narvan,
and the I Will of Anglesey, the fourth, also to contain 4 Diocese for
Ecclesiastical discipline, and these comprehended in twelve shires, wherein is
also found 1 Chase, Four Dioceses. Twelve Shires.
13 Forests, 36 Parkes, 99 Bridges, 230 Rivers, 1016 Parishes, wherein are
noted to be 56 market towns, being no Cities, and in them 41 Castles, and 4
Cities, being the seats of so many Bishops, as 1 Saint David's in Pembrokeshire,
2 Bangor in Carnarvanshire, 3 Assaph in Flintshire, 4 Landaffe in
Glamorganshire: Lastly, the inhabitants are accounted men of faithful carriage
one to another, most especially in a strange Country, and to strangers in their
own, and use a peculiar language that has remained without alteration or
commixture with any other in the world, from the original thereof to this day.

And lastly, to their everlasting praise and commendation, have for many years
valiantly withstood all their enemies by their own proper valor, and being
joined to the Crown of England, have been found to be true and loyal to the
same, and have so continued in all amity, love, and faithfulness.

CHAP. CCLXIX.
England and the Cities thereof.

ENgland is the principal part of Britain and now the last in my labors,
bounded on the East with England and the Cities thereof.
the Germane, on the West with the Irish, on the South with the British Oceans,
and on the North with Scotland, as is before mentioned. The Ornaments of this
Country has in times past been expressed unto us by this verse, Anglia, M^ns,
Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Famina, Lana.
England is stord' with Mountains, Bridges, Woll,
With Churches, Rivers, Women beautiful.


But these are not the commodities that Merchants look after, therefore I will
show you in his proper place, those commodities which England does naturally
afford for merchandise, and in the mean season, it will not be improper that I
run over the Provinces of this kingdom, and the rein see what particulars
may be gathered out of each, conducing other to traffic, or to the honor and
commodity of the Country, and thereto add also the Provinces of Wales,
purposely omitted for this place. The Provinces or more properly the shires of
England and Wales, according to Cam^en, whom I gladly follow in this
description, are these.

The first is Cornwall, in it self a barren and mountanous country, but the
bosom thereof incloseth rich mines of Tin, which Cornwall.
for the excellence thereof, is famous throughout the world, also therewith is
dug gold and silver, and a certain stone is found upon the earth of it
self transparent, and naturally formed into angles and points, which if found
in foreign countries, would be held admirable: here is also upon this coast
taken Pilchards and Herrings in great abundance, which the inhabitants do salt
and dry in the smoke, and so transport into France, Spain, and Italy, to
good advantage: the seacoast is beautified with many Towns, and Havens,
capable of many ships, Famouth being the chief, and here is found that famous
Mount Michael, by the inhabitants called Cana, which has for many ages been
noted for its steepness and antiquity.

The second is Devonshire, no less rich in veins of Tin, and withal
beautified with many Towns and good havens then the Devon. 2.
former, Ex^ being the principal Town, and an inland City, but Dartmouth and
Plymouth the best havens, this last being from a poor fishing village* become
to be a f^ire town, by reason of the Castle and commodiousnesse of the haven,
and the rather it is to be mentioned, as giving birth to Sir Francis Drake,
Knight, who in our fathers days accomplished at Sea so many notable exploits,
and was the chief glory of that age for Navigation.

The third is Dorsetshire, Dorchester being the chief town, and Waiemouth the
chief haven. Dorset. 3.


Somersetshire is the fourth, happy in the fruitful soil, rich pastures,
Somerset. 4.
multitude of inhabitants, and commodity of havens: the chief towns are
Bridewater, next Bath, famous for those medicinal Bathes there found, and
lastly Bristoll, encompassed with a double wall seated on the River Severne,
beautified with many fair private and public buildings, and next to London
and York it is preferred to all other Cities of England, but in amplitude of
traffic, shipping, and eminence of Merchants, next to London it self, and
else in my opinion second to none.

Wiltshire is the fifth, altogether an inland Country, the chiefest Wiltshire 5.
towns are Malmsbury, famous for the cloths of wool made here, Salisbury for
the Bishopric, and Wilton of old, the chief of this County, now a little
village.

Hampshire is the sixth, wherein is found the little fair City of Hampshire 6.
Southampton, Winchester the pleasant, and Portsmouth the only now Garrison
town of England.

Barkshire is the seventh, wherein is found the town of Newbery, Barkshire 7.
famous for clothing, and Windsore for the Kings Castle, and where the ceremony
of the Knights of the Garter is solemnised.

Surry is the eighth, wherein is seen O^lands and Richmond, two beautiful and
stately Palaces, belonging to the Kings of England. Surrey 8. (...)


Sussex is the ninth, Chichester being the chief City, and R^ie the Sussex 9.
chief sea town.

Kent is the next, rich in Medows, Pastures, Groves, Apples, and Kent 10.
Cherries, wherein is found seated the Cinque Ports, Deptford, the Kings yard
for the building of his ships, Rochester the seat of a Bishop, ^ltham and
Greenwitch, two Palaces of the Kings, Dover a famous Sea Port, and one of the
Keys of this Island, and lastly, Canterbury, the prime of this County, and the
seat of the Archbishop and Metropolitan of all England.

Glocestershire is the 11, the principal Towns are Tewksbury, Gloucester 11.
famous for Cloth-making, and Gloucester the chief of the County, here are also
found the famous Hills of Cotswold, upon which great flocks of sheep are found
to feed, yielding that excellent Wool, so much esteemed amongst all nations.

Oxfordshire is the 12. which is a fruitful County, both in Oxford 12.
corn and pasture, and wherein is found Woodstocke, a house of the Kings, and
an enclosed Park with a stone wall, imagined the first in this land, and
Oxford, an Vniversay famous through the world, and chief of this Island.

Buckinghamshire is the 13. wherein is found the good towns Buckingham 13.
of Ailsbury, S^nistratford, and Buckingham, the principal of this County.

Bedfordshire is the next, and shows the town of Bedford for Bedford 14.
the first of this County.

Hertfordshire is the 15. wherein is the stately house of Theobalds,
Hertfordshire 15
a house of the Kings, Saint Albans, a fair through-fare, and Hertford the
principal of the County.

Middlesex is the 16. wherein is found the Kings Palace, Hampton Middlesex 16.
Court, and London, the prime City of this kingdom, and the Chamber of the
Kings of England, so famous abroad in foreign Countries, that it needs no man's
commendation: it is beautified with sundry Colleges, for the study of the
Municiple laws, with the Churches of Westminster and London, besides diverse
others, with the Hall of Westminster, where the Parliaments extraordinary, and
Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench, and other Courts are ordinarily kept, with the
two Palaces of White Hall and Saint James, with an Exchange or Burse for
Merchants to meet in, with a sumptuous and wonderful Bridge of freestone,
besides many other excellent private and public edifices.

Essex is the next, abounding in pasturedge, corn, and saffron, Essex 17.
and in which is found Chelmsford the chief town, Colchester, (...), and
others abounding with ^ayes, says, and other new dropery, and lastly, Harwich,
a safe haven for ships.

Suffolk is the next, which affords quantity of butter, cheese, Suffolk 18.
and cloths, known by the names of Suffolk cloth, wherein is found S. Ed^ds
B^y, and Ipswich, which has a commodious haven.

Northfolke is the 19. a large champaine Country, abounding Norfolk 1^
in C^ies and Sheep, affording the two good haven towns of Linne and
Yarmouth, and Norwich, the first of the County, which deserves to be numbered
amongst the chiefest Cities of England.

Cambridgeshire is the 20, which is found to abound in corn, Cambridge 20.
and wherein is seen the University of Cambridge, and Ely famous for being the
seat of a Bishop.

Huntingtonshire is the 21. the chief town being Huntington. Huntington 21.


Northamptonshire is the 22. abounding in corn, Peterborough Northa^pton 22.
being here the seat of a Bishop, and Northampton the chief City.

Leycestershire is the 23. abounding in corn, Leicester the chief town is
more famous for the antiquity, then for the beauty Leicester 23.
thereof.

Rutlandshire is the 24. and accounted the least County in this kingdom,
Vppingham being the chief town. Rutland 24.


Lincolnshire is the 25. rich in corn and pasture, abounding with Lincoln 25.
fish and foul; Lincoln once a great City, is yet the greatest in this County.

Nottinghamshire is the 26. wherein is Nottingham, the chief Nottingham 26.
town, and the Forest of Sherwood, feeding many fallow and red Dear.

Darbishire is the 27. the chief City is Darby, famous for the Ale thereof; in
this County are also many Mines of lead, Darby 27.
and other minerals.

Warwickshire is the 28. wherein is found Warwick, the prime City, and
Coventry a fair walled City, and accounted the Warwick 28.
fairest inland City of this Island, wherein now great quantity of cloth is made.

Worcestershire is the 29. wherein is found the City of Worster, Worcester 29.
famous now for clothing, and the seat of a Bishop.

Staffordshire is the 30. which affords Salt Pits, and Wels, Stafford 30.
and Coals, taken out of the earth, stone, and Lichfield being the principal
Towns of the County.

Shropshire is the 31. wherein is found Ludlow, of more beauty then antiquity,
honored with a Council and Court of Justice for Shropshire 31.
Wales, and a Palace for the Princes thereof, Shrewsbery the chief of this
County, much enriched by their trade for Cottons and Frises, with their
neighbors the Welsh, whom yet notwithstanding they greatly affect not.

Cheshire is the 32. abounding in pastures, and in excellent Cheeses hence
transported throughout England, it has Chester for the Chester 32.
chief City seated on the River Dee.

Herefordshire is the 33, and boasts to be for its fertility and abundance of
all things the first Shire in England, Hereford is Hereford 33.
the chief City, and Le^ster justly boasts of the sheeps wool, feeding in
those grounds, with which no part of Europe can equallize.

Yorkshire is the thirty fourth, and the largest County of Yorkshire 34.
all England, abounding in corn, pasture, and meadows, yielding clothing by
the industry of the inhabitants in abundance; York being the chief City, and
the second in England, and the seat of an Archbishop, here is a Court of
Justice held for the neighboring Marches, according to that of Ludlow; in this
County is also the town of Hull, seated on the River of Humber, where are
found Merchants of good quality, and here is also the Castle of Scarborough,
where in the adjoining sea is the great fishing found annually for herrings.

Richmond is the 35. in which is found mountains to yield Richmond 35.
plentiful lead, pit-coales, and some brass, and the chief City of this
County is called Richmond.

The Bishopric of Durham is the 36. pleasant in Meadows, Durham 36.
Pastures and Groves, and abounds in sea coals, which is dug out of the
earth, Durham is the chief City.

Lancashire is the 37. wherein is Manchester, an old town enriched Lancashire
37.
by the industry of the inhabitants, by cloth of linen and woollen, the City
of Lancaster being the first of the Shire.

Westmerland is the 38. the chief town is Kendall, famous Westmerland 38
for making of cloth of wool.

Cumberland is the 39. affording Mines of brass, and some Cumberland 39.
veins of silver, and black lead in abundance, Carlisle being the principal
town, here are found apparent ruins of that wall which the Romans built, to
keep out the Picts from making incursions upon the Britans, being as it seems,
then so poor, as they cared not to subdue them.

Northumberland is the 40. wherein is found the sea town of Northumber. 40
Newcastle, which affords such abundance of seacoale, that the same is thence
transported into many kingdoms of the world: here is also Barwicke, one of the
strongest fortified towns of Barwick.
England, formerly strengthened against the incursions of the Scots, by a
strong garrison of soldiers, and now dismissed by the happy union of England
and Scotland.

Having thus briefly run over the shires of England, it will be necessary I
should here add the like cursorie view of woolles, comprehended under the
government of England, and included within the same limit, and omitted to this
place, as being parts of the said kingdom, which I find to be in number these.

Anglesey I account the first, which I have touched amongst Shires of Wales.
Anglesey 1.
the Islands, being esteemed a County of Wales, having Beawmaris for the
principal town of the County.

Flintshire is the second, plentiful in corn and pasture, famous Flint 2.
for the Spring of Holy Well, called here S. Winifreds Well, and Flint town
being the chiefest of the County.

Denbishire is the next, affording some mines of lead, wherein De^igh 3.
is found Wrexham that boasts of its holy tower, and musical Organs, and
Denbigh, the chief of this County.

Carnarvanshire is the next, anciently called Snoden Forest, before Car^van 4.
that Wales was reduced to Counties, wherein is found the high hills, the alps
of Britain, also Aberconwaie, a strong and fair little town; Bangor the
seat of a Bishop, and Carnarvan the chief of this Province, famous for the
birth place of Edward the second, and the first Prince of Wales of English
blood.

Merionethshire is the next, a mountainous Country, affording Merioneth 5.
notwithstanding good pasture for cattle. The chief town is Balla, a poor
town yet principal of these Mountenars.

Montgomeryshire is the next, having the chief town of the Montgomery 6.
same name.

Cardiganshire is the seventh, and has the town of Cardigan Cardigan 7.
for the chief town of the County.

Pembrokeshire is the eighth, Pembroke is the chief town, and here a long
neck of land makes a haven, called Milford Haven, Pembrock 8.
then which Europe has not a more Noble, more safe, or more large, with many
creekes and safe roades, wherein 1000 sail may ride out of sight one of
another, and made the more famous by the landing of Henry the seventh.

Caermardenshire is the next, abounding in corn, sheep, and in pit coal,
Caermarden being the chief town. C^marden 9.


Glamorganshire is the next, Cardiffe is the chief town, having a commodious
haven for shipping. Gla^gan 10.


Monmouthshire is the next, wherein is found Chepstow and Monmouth, Monmouth 11.
the last glorious in giving life to Henry the fifth, Conquer^ of France.

Brecknockshire is the next, Brecknocke being the chief town. Brecknock 12.


Radnorshire is the next and last, wherein is found Radnor for the chief
town. These are in brief the shires of Wales. Radnor 13.


To observe now my former method, having particularly thus surveyed the
continent, let me now search into those commodities which England in general
affords for merchandise, and is thence exported into foreign Regions, as being
the principal motives of trade in all kingdoms which it produces several
ways. First, by manufacturies it yields, woollen cloths of all Commodities
in England.
sorts, broad and narrow, known and called by the name of several shires, also
Perpetuanes, Bays, Says, Sarges, Cottons, Kersies, Buffins, Mocados, Grogram,
Sattins, Calimancaes, Velvets, Plushes, Worsteds, Fustians, Durances, Tukes,
and infinite others; there is made in this Island, yearly 250000 clothes by
computation, and by this may be guessed the quantity of the rest of other
sorts, also Furs and skins, as Cony skins, Squirrell skins, Fitches, Calfe
skins, Hides, and sundry others.

Also it produces by mines, and out of the earth, 1 Tin 1200000 li. yearly,
l^de, 800 fodres yearly, aliome 800 tons yearly, Copperes 500 tons
yearly, Iron of all sorts, 800 fur^aces daily set on work, besides Ordnance
of Iron, and such like, sea coal yearly () chaldrons, salt, () tons, also
all manner of grain, Oats, Pease, Barley, Rye, and Wheat in great plenty,
also linen cloth, all iron wares, Tallow, Leather, Glass, and Glasses of all
sorts, Venice gold and silver, train oil, Salmons, Pilchards, and Herrings,
Hake, Conger, and Haberdine, Hops, Wood, Butter, Cheese, Beer, Saltpeter,
Gunpowder, Honey, Wax, Alablaster, and some other stones, Woolles, Wolfills
Yarne, Yernsey, etc. and to conclude, many other good and rich commodities is
here found.

The beauty and wealth of this kingdom is demonstrated in Beauty of England.
325 Rivers, 8 thereof being great and Navigable for some miles, whereon is
found 857 Bridges, 30 Chases, 55 Forests, 745 Parkes, here are also reckoned
26 Deanries, 60 Archdeaconries, 544 dignities and Prebends, 5439 Parochial
benefices, besides Improprtations Six Circuits.
and Vicaredges, and the whole divided into 6 circuits for the administration
of Justice, into 22 Episcopal Dioces for Ecclesiastical discipline, and into
two Archbishoprickes, under whom the rest are subordinate: and lastly, into 40
shires, over each of which, is a yearly Sheriff appointed, who is to assist
the Itinerary Judges in executing Justice, and to gather in the Kings
amercements: and these shires are divided into hundreds, and these hundreds
into tithings, and to conclude, in England is found 145 Castles, 9527 Parishes,
besides Chapels whereof 585 are market Towns, and 22 Cities, the principal
whereof are these, 1 Oxford, 2 Cambridge, both being Universities, 3 Excester in
Devonshire, 4 Norwich in Norfolk, 5 Bristoll watered by Severne, accounted the
second for trade in this Country, 6 York, on the River Ure, accounted the
second City for beauty and greatness in England; and lastly, London, under
which I will comprise the trade of this whole Island.

CHAP. CCLXX.
Of London, and the trade thereof.

LOndon, the Metropolis of England, the prime City of trading this day in the
world, is pleasantly seated London and the trade thereof.
on the River of Thames, which divides it into two parts, her circuit may be 8
miles, wherein is found 122 Parish Churches, with the Palace of the King, the
houses of the Nobility, Colleges for the study of the Laws, and diverse other
stately public edifices, and may contain 400000 people. Here have their
residencie, the rich and most eminent Merchants of this Island, whom diverse
Princes of Merchants of London.
this Kingdom have incorporated into several societies and companies, partly
to encourage their endeavors, and partly in reward of the discoveries of those
Countries and Regions, whereof they take their name, and by the power and
immunities granted them, do make acts and orders for the benefit of commerce
in general, and of their Companies in particular. The ancientest of which
companies have had their original and continuance since Edward the first his
reign, called the Company Merchant Adventurers, and their original and places
of residencie.
of Merchants adventurers, grounded at first upon the exportations of wool
only as the prime and staple commodity of this kingdom, since which it is
grounded upon clothing, into which this wool is now converted, for he at the
request and being in league with the Cities and Towns of Flanders, made
Brudges, which was then the greatest Mart of Christendom, the staple for (...)
woolls, where it continued for 15 years, when as by some discontent with the
Flemmings, and by experience seeing what the benefit of these staples were,
removed them from Brudges to England, and for the ease, as well of his
subjects, in bringing their woolls into those parts, as of such foreign
Merchants as came to buy the same, he placed his staples at Exon, Bristoll,
Winchester, Westminster, Chichester, Canterbury, Norwich, Lincoln, York, and
Newcastle, for the kingdom of England; at Caermarden for Wales; at Dublin,
Waterford, Cork, and Tredath for Ireland, and enacted that no English, Irish,
or Welshman, should transport this stapled commodity, (nor not by licenses, if
any such should be granted) on pain of confiscation, during the Kings pleasure.

Lastly, he allured over hither diverse Flemmings, which taught our nation the
making of cloth, who are now grown the best cloth workers in the world, and to
encourage them in that Art, in the 27 of his reign, it was by statute enacted
to be felony, to transport hence woolles unwrought. Now when England had thus
for some time enjoyed the benefit of these staples, he removed the same to
Callais, which he had then conquered, and which he desired to enrich: from
hence they were at several times and occasions removed, now to one, now to
another town in Belgium, and still happy was that Town in whaat Country
soever where the said Company kept a house for their traffic and residence,
the confluence of all people thither to buy, infinitely enriching it. Antwerpe
for a long time enjoyed their company, till upon some discontents between Henry
the seventh, and Maximilian, Arch duke, they removed thence, but at their
return again, they were received by the Antwerpians with solemn processions,
Princely triumph, sumptuous feasts, rare banquettings, and expressions of much
joy, and more love: here they continued till the surprisall and sack of this
town by the Spaniards, in Anno () where by reason of the wrongs and hard
measure there received, they removed into two places, the one to Middleborough,
the other to Stoade, afterward from Middleborough to Delph, and from Delph, now
to Rotterdam, where they have lately seated themselves, with many immunities
granted them, and a Palace appointed them for their residence; the other from
Stoade by some vicissitude of change, is now placed at Hamburge, where also
they have many privileges, and the said Company being now enlarged, and all
new Draperie comprised therein, they intend to implant more factories in other
places, and this is the most ancient of all our Societies, which is observed to
be governed beyond the Seas in the said places, by a deputy and certain
assistants, and in England by a Governor, Deputy, and certain assistants, Sir
Thomas Mouls^ Knight, and Alderman, being the present Governor, to whose worth
and government, I owe here this acknowledgement, as being a member of this so
ancient and worthy a society.

The next to these are the Barbary Merchants, which had their original in
Henry the sevenths time, being indeed the age wherein Barbary Merchants their
original and ruin.
our nation did begin, by imitation of the Portugals and Spaniards, to discover
new regions: and this flourished and continued till the end of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, wherein it fell when as civil wars was not in Morocco and
Fesse, amongst the pretenders to that Empire.

Out of whose ashes about that time, did rise the Levant Company, Levant
Merchants and their original.
or Turkey Merchants, and by their Discoveries and Trade first made the
Traffic into the Signorie of Venice, and then to the Dominions of the Great
Turk, including as then within their privileges the East Indies Navigation
which was as then known to them only by Land, and to the Portugals by Sea.
since which the said Indies are raised to a great and eminent Company, and by
themselves incorporated, employing in a joint stock, a great Capitol, by
which trade and stock they have built many warlike Ships, and brought all those
Indian Commodities to our East India Merchants and their original
homes, which before were brought to us by other Nations, both which Companies
now supplyeth our Land, and by their second transportation many other
Countries, with those rich Commodities, which Venetia, Turkey, Arabia, Egypt,
Persia, China, and India yields, and is found governed in England by Sir
Maurice Abbot Knight and Alderman, and by Master Henry Garraway Alderman, the
former Governor of the East India Company, and the latter of the Turkey
Company, to which are joined certain Committees and Assistants, to whose worth
and government I also here do owe this acknowledgment, as being now both a
member, and entrusted with a particular charge in both the said Companies.

Other Countries and Companies in the latter end of Queen Moscovi^, Eastland,
Greenland, French and Spanish Merchants and their originals.
Elizabeth's Reign, and some in the beginning of Kings Iame's Reign have been
discovered, settled, and continued, as to the Northward the Muscovy Company, the
East-land Company, the Greenland Company, and of late days, there is erected a
Company for France, governed here by Sir James Cambell Knight and Alderman, to
whom also I owe this acknowledgment as being a member thereof; and now there is
also in agitation a Patent for a Company for Spain, of which also when
confirmed, I may also entitle my self a member.

These Companies then and Societies, besides others not at all incorporated,
encouraged by sundry Privileges, granted unto them, govern themselves by
settled Acts and Orders, under certain chosen Governors, Deputies, and a
selected number of Assistants, which have been found to be so profitable to
these Kingdoms by exporting the native Commodities thereof, by setting the poor
on work, by building of many brave Ships and by importing hither of sundry
necessaries both for use and ornament, that the benefit thereof cannot here be
certainly expressed. But one particular in the Levant Merchants may in part
demonstrate the great benefit that the rest may produce, for it was found that
in our last Voyage to Cales, and to the Isle of Rhee, they were the Owners of
20 great sail of Ships that served in both those Voyages, and it is probable
that they are Owners of 30 sail more, which one with the other may contain 12
or 13000 tuns of burden, and which may have for further defense 1200 pieces of
Ordnance at the least, and employ about 4000 or 5000 Sailers yearly, besides
Porters, Weighers, Bargmen, Lightermen, Carmen, which cannot be less then 2000
or 3000 persons more, and they are found, if report may gain credit to pay his
Majesty by way of customs and imposts above 50000 li. yearly, partly outward
by their Exportations of Cloth, Tin, and other commodities, and partly
Inwards by the importation of Silks, Cottons Galls, Grograms, Spices, Drugs,
Corance, and other Levantine commodities, this being then briefly to show the
benefit of a well governed trade, and the profits arising thereby to the
Commonwealth, I leave it to others to consider the general good accruing to
this Island, by all the rest of the said Companies and Societies of this
Kingdom, and come in the next place, according to my method, to handle the
other principal parts of Traffic comprised in this City, and generally of
all this Kingdom.

The Coins of this City and Kingdom are partly of Gold, and Coins current in
England of ^lver.
partly of Silver, as in other Countries the principal in use are these.

The Silver current Coins are Pieces of 5 shil. sterling. Crown. Pieces of 26 d.
Pieces of 12 d. called shillings Pieces of 6 d. Pieces of 4 d. 3 d. 2 d. 1 d.
ster. Which are accounted 4 farthings to a penny sterling, 12 ob. to a
shilling, 5 shillings to a Crown, 4 Crowns, or 20 shillings to a pound sterling.

The Gold coins current are Pieces of 22 shill. ster. Pieces of 11 shill.
ster. Of Gold.
Pieces of 5 shill. 6 d. Pieces of 2 shill. 9 d. the (...) of 22 shill. Also
Pieces of 20 shill. Pieces of 10 shill. Pieces of 5 shill. Pieces of 2 s. 6 d.
the (...) of 20 sh.

Accounted also in the former accounts of pounds, shillings and pence sterling,
the goodness and finenesse, and intrinsecall value may be more particularly
known by a Proclamation in Anno 1609, published by our deceased Sovereign
King James, to which I refer the Reader, or otherwise to a Table inserted in
the end of this Chapter of the equality and valuation thereof with the Coins of
sundry other Countries.

Their accounts are kept throughout England, by pounds, shillings, and pence
sterling, accounting 12 pence to the shilling, and Accounts in England.
20 shillings to the pound, but the accounts of the revenues of the Kingdom
have been, and yet are in some Offices kept in Marks, containing 13 shill. 4
pence, per Mark.

CHAP. CCLXXI.
Of Weights used in England.

THe weight commonly used in and through England, is two, the Troy weight, and
the Haberdupois Weights in England.
weight.

The Troy pound consists of 12 ounces, the ounce Troy weight.
of 20 penny weights, the penny weight of 24 grains, and serves only for Bread,
Gold, Silver, and Electuaries, eight pound accounted to the Gallon, and by
consequence 16 li. to the Peck, 32 pound to the half Bushel, and 64 to the
Bushel, and hereby weight and measure is reduced one into another.

Wet Measures are also derived from this pound Troy, both on Weight with
measure.
Land and within Shipboard, as also Corn and Grain, as above is specified, for
first this pound of 12 ounces, made into a concave measure is named a Pint,
eight of the said Pints, or eight pounds make a Gallon of either Wine, Ale,
Beer, or Corn, according to the Standard of the Exchequer, and the Acts of
Parliament of 11 and 12 of Henry the Seventh.

From hence is also drawn the measure Assise of all vendible Assise.
Caske, each Hogshead to contain 63 Gallons, every Terce 84, every Pipe 126,
and every Tun 252 Gallons.

From hence arises also the measure for Fish, the Salmon Butt is to be 84
gallons, the barrel 42 gallons, the Herring barrel to be 32 gallons, the Eele
barrel to be 42 gallons, the Soape barrel to be 32 gallons, and the half,
and firkin of these to be accordingly.

The second weight is the Haberdepois pound, which consists Haberdupois.
of 16 ounces, which are lesser ounces then the former, for these 16 ounces
make but 14 ounces and a half, and 2 penny weight of Troy, used in the mint,
where 136 li. haberdepois subtle, is but 100 li. sutle Troy.

By the haberdepois or averdupois weight, is all commodities weighed, which
bears the name of garble, and whereof issues a garble or waste, also butter,
cheese, tallow, wax, and other commodities, and 7 li. of this weight is
accounted to the gallon of wheat, as is 14 li. the pecke, 28 li. the half
bushel, and 56 li. to the bushel.

The 7 li. averdupois is 102 ounces Troy, according to which Troy and
Haberdupois compared for the weight of bread.
rate the quarter of wheat must weigh 448 li. averdupois, and so 14 li.
averdupois, and 16 li. 11 ounces Troy, do accord in one, or 56 li. averdupois,
and 67 li. 8 ounces Troy, and note that as one penny sterling is the 1/20. part
of an ounce Troy, so thereby is found that 7 li. 12 sh. sterling, is 84 ounces,
and half, and 2 penny weight of Troy, and 6. li. 18 sh. sterling, is 82.
ounces and one penny Troy, from the which two assizes, the white, wheaten, and
household breads are calculated and drawn.

From the averdupois weight is also drawn the true weight of cheese and
butter, called the Waighe, which is 112 li. averdupoi^, Cheese weight
to the hundred, and the two hundred is 224 li. containing 32 cloves, and every
clove is 7 li. the Waighe of Suffolk cheese being 256 li. and the waighe of
Essex cheese 336 li. averdupois.

The sack of wool formerly so famoused by the staplers, did Wool weight.
weigh 364 li. averdupois, two waighes of wool, make a sack, and 12 sacks
make a last.

The last of herrings contains 10 thousand, and every thousand Herrings
measure.
contain ten hundred, and every hundred six score or 120.

Lead, is sold by the foder, the load being 175 li. and the Lead weight.
fother makes accordingly 19. hundred of 112 li. per cent.

It is also to be noted, that of this pound of 16 ounces averdupois, Three
Quintars in England used.
is made in England, three several quintals, for weighing of sundry sorts of
merchandise.

The first is a hundred of five score, or 100 li. just, and this is called the
hundred sutle, whereby is sold, spices, drugges, and other Number. 1 100 li.
fine commodities, which are accounted by the pound, and to which is added by
the seller, an allowance of 4 li. upon 104 li. taken from the overplus received
from Antwerpe weights in times past in spices, as I have said elsewhere, and
called by the name of Tret, yet by some alleged to be an allowance in garbled
commodities.

The second is a hundred of fivescore and twelve, or 112 li. Number. 2. 11^ l^.
the half hundred being 56 li. the quarter 28 li. etc. to which all the
aforesaid weight is adjousted, and by which all commodities are weighed, and
all fine commodities afterward reduced to the sotle hundred, and by this are
sold all gross goods, Grocery, Saltery, etc.

The third is a hundred of sixscore of the said averdupois pound, Number. 3. 120 l
by which Tin is weighed to his Majesty's Farmers, and some few other
commodities, and is called the stannery hundred. This pound averdupois has in
it self a division of 16 ounces, and thereof is formed other weights, as
sometimes a stone of 8 li. 7 li. 10 li. 14 li. 16 li. 20 li. sometimes a todde
of 7 li. 8 li. 10 li. sometimes a clove of 20 li. 28 li. 32 li. and such like,
which is still found to be made out of this pound of averdupois of 16 ounces,
and every ounce of 8 drams, and every dram 60 grains. Raw silk of Persia or
Turkey, is sold also by this pound, but then it is accounted a pound of 24
ounces, or a pound and a half of the abovesaid; all which is requisite his
learning that is either to buy or sell in England, that he may know not only
the true weight of his commodity, but also the denomination thereof, and how
many pound or ounces is contained therein.

Having now showed the distinction of the troy and averdupois weight, and how
they agree together, and having calculated most of the weights of this book to
the hundred sutle, I will also show here how the 112 li. is found to respond
with some other Countries, as being the weight common in use amongst Merchants,
and in notes of commodities observed abroad.

The 112 l. London is in Europa.
Marselia 125 li. Venetia sotile 164 li. Venetiagrosse 104 li. Sicilia 62 li.
Lisb^ne 100 li. Florence 143 li. Anverse 106 li. Lions 118 li. Sivill 110 li.
Dansick 129 li. Bridges 112 li.

Asia, Africa.
Alepp^ 22^ Rot. Aleppo Silk 24 Rot. Tripoli suria 27 Rot. Tripoli barbaria 97
Rot. Alexandria zera 51. 9 Rot. Alexandria forfar 116 Rot. Scio and Constantin^
101 Rot. Rhodes 20. 4. Rot. Acria 18. 1. Rot. Babylonia 15. 6 M. Balsola --
Ormus 108. 7 li.

I need not further enlarge my self herein by reason of the many Tables found
in this Book, whereby the said weight of 112 li. may easily be reduced to any
eminent place of the World, and for as much as our English Gold and Silver is
weighed and valued by the pound Troy, I shall here following insert how the
same concurres and agrees with most of the eminent Cities in the World, in
their Coins both of Silver and Gold.

It is observed then in most Countries abroad as with us in England, that Gold
and Silver is coined and minted by a peculi^ Troy weight for gold and silver
compared with other Countries.
weight only proper thereunto, which in many great Cities and Countries of trade
I have purposely omitted, that I might both ^cilitate this my labor, and in
one place reduce them together to the pound Troy used, especially to that
purpose in England; therefore if I prove here somewhat the larger, it is but
what the seriousness and due circumstances of the matter requires.

The weight then used in this case in England is the pound Troy, and that which
in use in most other Countries is the Mark which as well as (...) can I will
here abbreviate, now this pound Troy consisting of 12 ounces, and the ounce of
20 penny weights, and the penny weight of 24 grains, the 100 li. of these
abovesaid pound^ being used for the Standard of Gold and Silver in this (...)
has been observed to make in Antwerp 112 marks each mark being 8 Ounces. 1
O^ce being 20 penny weight. 1 Penny weight 32 grains.
Adler 86 li. Cairo 105^ Besses. Ancona 116 marks. Aqu^la 79 li. Ausburg 118
marks. Bavaria 116 marks. Bohemia 99 marks. Catalonia 112^ marks. Colen 118
marks. Constantinople 99 marks. Crema 116 marks. Dansick 118^ marks. Florence
158 marks. 1 Mark 8 Ounces. 1 Ounce is 8 grosses. 1 gross is 3 deniers. 1
de^er is 24 g^s.
Frankford 118 marks. Fr^burg 116 marks.

Genoa for Gold 130 Marks 1 mark is (...) ounces. 1 ounce 24 de^iers. 1 denier
is 24 grains.


Genoa for Silver 86 pounds 1 pound is 12 ounces. 1 ounce is 24 deniers. 1
denier is 24 grains.


Hungary 99 marks. Lipsich 118 marks. Lions 1^6 marks Paris idem 126 marks 1
mark in France is 8 ounces 1 ounce is 8 grosses. 1 gross is 3 deniers. 1
denier is 24 grains.
Millain 118 marks. Narsinga 97 marks. Naples 86 pound 1 pound Naples is 12
ounces. 1 ounce is 8 Octavos.
Persia 98 Minas. Peru 99 Cillats. Piemont 111 marks. Meison 118 marks Saxony
idem 118 marks A mark of Mesen is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 24 deniers. 1 denier, or
penny is found to be 24 momenta or grains.
Burgas 120 marks. Franconia 116 marks. N^rrimberg 116 marks 1 mark Norimberg
is 16 loots. 1 loot is 4 quints. 1 quint is 4 pence primes or numulies. 1 penny
is 4 sesterties.
Turkey 98 marks. Turin 111 marks. Vicentia 116 marks. Vienna 98 marks. New
Spain, America, 98 marks.

Spain in general 121 marks. 1 mark Spanish is 50 Castellianos. 1 Castelliano
is 8 tomines. 1 tominos is 8 grains, and this mark is 29700 marks, or 873
Rials, or 792 Ducats.


Trevis^ 117 marks. Vlme 116 marks. Weselburg 115

Venice Verona
116 mark. 1 mark Venice is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 4 quarts or silices. 1 quarta
36 Carrats or Siliquas. 1 Carrat is 4 grains.


Rome 116 mark 1 mark Roman is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 drams. 1 dram is 3
scruples. 1 scruple is 2 obolos. 1 obole is 3 siliquas. 1 siliqua is 4 grains
or primi.


Lisbone 121 mark. 1 mark Portugal is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 octavos. 1 octavo
is 4 grains.


These are all the stan^ards of the coins both of gold and silver that I have
met withal, and the particulars whereto the said weights are distinguished,
which may so far be needful to the traffic of Countries, that thereby
every Merchant stranger may know of what goodness and real value those coins
are stamped and coined for, and what the same will yield and afford him in his
own City or place of residence.

Upon this troy weight does also depend in Physic, all Weights used in
Physic and their parts.
drugs and simples, administered by way of potions, which according to the
custom practiced amongst Physicians, is thus distinguished into parts.

One Ses quilibra is 1. pound. or 18 ounces.

One pound is 2 selibra or 12 ounces.

One selibra is 2 quadrans or 6 ounces.

One quadran is a of a li. or 3 ounces.

One sescuntia is 1. ounce or 12 drams.

One ounce is 8 drams.

One dram is 3 scruples or 60 grains.

One scruple is 20 grains.

One obolus is. a scruple or 10 grains.

Now according to this agreement of the weights of silver The reduction of some
foreign current Coins to the English sterlin.
and gold, I will here reduce the value of some foreign coins, to the
English sterlin.

The crown of Camera of Rome is sterlin -- 00 li. 07 s. o d.

The sols Of Genoa is sterlin -- 00 01 6.

The duccat of Venice of 6 li. 4 sols is sterlin -- 04 6.

The duccat of Naples is -- sterlin -- 04 9.

The crown of gold of Florence is -- sterlin -- 06 0

The 20 sols of Millan is -- sterlin -- 01 0.

The Carlin of Cicilia is -- sterlin -- 00 3.

The sol of gross of Antwerpe is -- sterlin -- 00 7.

The lire of Valencia, Barselona and Saragosa is -- 05 6

The liver or frank of France is sterlin -- 02 0

The florin of Turin and Savoy is sterlin -- 00 3.

The 34 Marvedes or single, Royal of Spain is sterlin 00 6.

The 40 Res of Lisborne in Portugal is sterlin -- 00 6.

The lire of Bollonia is -- sterlin -- 01 3.

The crown of Lucca is -- sterlin -- 05 9.

The florin of Noremburgh and Franckford, sterlin 3 4.

The Chequin of Turkey is -- sterlin -- 7 10.

Where note that in Europe, the exchange ever makes the accounted value of
their coins with us, which are seen sometimes to differ much from the
abovesaid rules, yet according to the estimation of our English minte, this
carries a near concordancy, and therefore I have the rather thought fit to
insert it in this place.

I have in many places of this Book showed how the 100 li. sutle does agree
with London, and in the leaf aforegoing, showed how the 112 li. does also
respond with some of them: now I will show by a new invented Table out of the
Works of Master Hunt Pounds foreign to pounds English redu^.
the Arithmetician, a method reducing the pounds of foreign Counties to the
pound of London, which I find thus.

M D Ancona -- 13 10 Antwerp -- 24 25 Archipelago -- 497 448 Acquilla -- 143
100 Avignon -- 11 10 Ausburg -- 19 20 Barselona -- 91 10 Besenson -- 91 100
Bridges -- 1 1 Burgois -- 23 25 Calice -- 24 25 Castile -- 51 50 Cicilia -- 37
25 Colen -- 19 20 Corfu -- 497 448 Dansick -- 29 24 Deep -- 359 400 Ferrara --
133 100 Florence -- 131 100 Frankford -- 396 448 Genoa -- 141 100 M D Geneva --
81 100 Lipsich -- 99 100 London troy -- 29 24 London averd -- 127 120 Lubeck --
389 448 Lions -- 21 20 Lisbone -- 83 100 Marselia -- 497 448 Naples -- 71 50
Norrimberg -- 396 448 Paris -- 19 20 Padua -- 33 25 Parma -- 34 25 Presla^ --
538 448 Rochel -- 81 100 Roan -- 127 100 Sicilia -- 250 448 Sivil -- 439 448
Tholousa -- 491 448 Venice gross, -- 423 448 Venice sotle -- 151 100 Vienna --
256 448

For the understanding of this Table, note that one pound of London is in
Ancona (...) of a pound, and so in the rest (...) is 1 and (...) first then
against the names of the places are two numbers, as against Avignon, you have
11 for to multiply, and 10 for divis^, or 11 for numerator, and 10 for
denominator, multiply then pounds of Avignon by 11, and divide it by 10, and
they are pounds of London, so do for other places as the Table directs.

CHAP. CCLXXII.
Of measures used in England.

HAving now done with the Weights of England, Measures in England.
whereby all Merchandise of weight is weighed; I come now to those measures
that are in use through the Kingdom of England, which are three: the first is
the yard, the common measure 1 A Yard.
of all woollen cloth, stuffes, silks, and such like, which is composed of
three foot, every foot being 12 inches, and every inch 3 barley corns, so that
the yard does contain 36 inches, and there is in the measure of all
commodities given in measure, an inch, which does make the yard to be 37
inches, when computed with the measure of other Countries.

The second is an elle, wherewith all linnens are measured, 2 An Ell.
and it contains 44. inches, or 45 inches by the rule, and herewith is also
allowed an inch, for measure by custom of the Country.

The third is a goade, only used in welsh Frizes, Frizadoes, and 3 A Goad.
the like, being the ancient measure of Wales, and as some imagine, of England,
before the settling of the yard wand, and by the inch rule is found to be (55
inches) at this time.

In London there is found a custom both in weighing and measuring The
courtesies of London.
of some commodities not found or practiced in any other place, and called
beyond Seas, the courtesies of London; the which is first in commodities
weighed by 4 in 104 li. allowed and called tret, which I have noted before;
next by 2 li. allowed upon Tret.
every draught and commodity, which exceeds 336 li. or three hundred gross,
called cloffe, and lastly in the measure of Cloffe.
broad cloth by retaile in Drapers shoppes, allowing to the buyer, a shaftnet
upon each yard, in lieu of the inch before specified, which is as much as is in
length at the yards end, from the bottom Shaftnet.
of the wrist, to the end of the thumb, which commonly may be about 5 in 6
inches in length, according to the dimension of the hand. I have already showed
what agreement some of these measures, especially the yard has with the
measures of length of many other places: it is requisite I should also here
show how our English Elle is found to respond with other Countries, which I
find to be by the observations of some ingenious Merchants thus, Antwerp 166
Else. Frankford 208 Else. Measures of London compared.
Dansicke 138 Else. Vienna 145 Else. Lions 101 aln. Paris 95 aln. Roan 103 aln.
Lisbone 100 Vares. Sivil 135 Vares. Madera Isles 103 2/7 Braces. Venice linen
180 Braces. Venice Silk 196 Braces. Lucques 200 Braces. Florence 204 Braces.
Millain 230 Braces. Genoa 480 Pal. Bridges 164 Else. Arras 165 Else. Callice
157 alns. Norrimberg 174 Else. Rome 56 Cans. Colen 208 Else. Lisle 166 Else.
Mastriche 157 Else.

How true these observations are I must refer to trial by experience, and
forasmuch as I would not omit any material collection that might add to the
perfection of this knowledge, which does oftentimes so much concern Merchants
in their negotiations; I have here also inserted M. Hunts table of respondency
Measures Foreign to English measure reduced.
of other Countries, Measures of length to the above said English Ell and Yard.

M D Antwerp -- 3 5 Arras -- 23 35 Bridges short -- 25 41 Castile -- 20 27
Calice -- 150 157 Colen -- 25 52 Frankford -- 25 52 Flemmish Else. -- 6 10
French alns -- 6 5 Florence -- 25 47 Gant long -- 50 77 Gant short -- 25 41
Genoa -- 150 721 Lions -- 1 London yard -- 4 5 Lisbone and Lisle -- 50 83 M D
Lucca -- 5 8 Malins -- 3 5 Mastriche -- 100 173 Madera -- 25 26 Millain -- 50
57 Norrimberg -- 100 137 Paris -- 19 20 Roan -- 100 103 Rome -- 14 25 Sivil --
20 27 Venice long -- 5 9 Venice short -- 25 49 Vienna -- 20 29 Vincentia -- 100
133

The use of the former table is threefold, first, to know what proportion one
of our London Else will bear unto any of the Use of the former Table
threefold.
measures of the aforesaid places, which is thus performed, look the place in
the table posito Florence, against it you shall find these two numbers, 25.
under the title of M. which signifies Multiplicate, and 47 under the title of
D. which signifies divisor, divide then the greater by the lesser, viz. 47 by
25. the quotient is 1 and 22 is the remainder, which is numerator to 25. making
the fraction 22/25. so that our Elle at London is at Florence 1 of their
measures, and 22/25. parts thereof, and so in the rest.

Secondly, it reduces foreign measures to the London Elle thus, 2 Use.
posito the question were; how many Else are there in 387 of the measures of
Dansicke, then look Dansicke, against which you shall find two numbers, the
first is 20 your multiplicate, the second 27 your divisor, the order of the
question then is thus,

^

Thirdly and lastly, it reduces Else of London, to any of the aforesaid 3 Use.
foreign measures, posito in 597 Else of London, how many Lucca braces do
they contain? to do this, look lucca in the table, and right against it you
have the two numbers of 5 and 8. and note by the way, that in questions of this
nature that you multiply by the second number under D. and divide by the first
under M. multiply therefore 597 by 8. and divide by 5. and the quotient is 955.
of the braces or measures of Lucca. And this shall suffice concerning measures
of length, the truth of which tables I refer to the inquisition of the
curious.

There is also in use in England, diverse measures, for several distinct
commodities, which orderly I will here observe.

First, a measure whereby land is measured, and this has some Measure of land
in use.
correspondence with all things that are measured by a square proportion in
breadth and length, and this done also by the before mentioned yard, which
beginning from the least part and is thus reckoned.

Grains 3 is an inch. Inches 12 a foot. Foot 3 a yard. Feet 3 inches 9, an ell.
Yards 5 is a perch. Perch 1 in breadth a farthindole. and 40 in length
Farthindole 2 is half an acre. Farthindole 4 is an acre.

40 Rod in length is a Furlong, 8 Furlongs is a Mile English, which is 320
perches, 1760 yards, 5280 foot, or 63360 inches, note that a Rod-land,
Yard-land, and Farthendale is onething.

So that hereby it may be discerned, that a foot being 12 inches every way, as
12 in length and 12 in breadth, making 12 times 12 is 144 inches, and so in the
yard which is 3 foot in breadth, and 3 foot in length, which is 9 foot, is 1286
inches, and Board, Glass, Hangings, etc.
thus is Board, Glass, Pavement, Hangings, Wainscot, and the like Commodities
measured in England.

Next let us observe dry Measures in themselves, for so far Dry measures of
grain.
forth as they concur with weight, I have noted before, dry measure
principally is for grain.

Gallons Potles Quarts Pints. The Gallon is found to be by the Statute of
England, 1 or 2 or 4 or 8 A Peck is 2 or 4 or 8 or 16 Half a Bushel is 4 or 8
or 16 or 32 A Bushel is 8 or 16 or 32 or 64 A Strike is 16 or 32 or 64 or 128
A Cornock is 32 or 64 or 128 or 256 A Quarter is 64 128 or 256 or 512 A Way is
384 768 1536 3072 A Last is 640 1280 2560 5128

It is here to be noted, that several commodities are measured by a several
different measure: as for example, Corn is measured by the quarter, which
contains 8 bushels as above is mentioned, five quarters making a tun lading,
and 10 quarters to a last, but yet 10. or 10. goes for a last of Holland, so
also in salt, which is sold by the weight, which is 40 bushels water measure of
ten gallons; yet note that in Plymouth, and in some other Seaports of
England, they measure by a bushel alien measure, whereof 24 makes a tonne, and
8 does make a quarter, so three quarters make one tun, and every bushel is
18 gallons, so that a tun of salt at Plymouth, is greater than a weigh of
London, by 32 gallons. And note that as in salt, so also in corn, they have 2
measures, the water measure, large for shipboord, and the land for
shop-measure, the difference in some places, as from 6 to 7. also from 3 to 4.
which is to be observed.

The next measure observable is liquid measures, which in England Liquid
measures in England.
are found to vary much, and to be of diverse kinds, both in the quantity it
self, and in the commodity or liquor, which I will here for method sake
collect together thus.

Gallon Potles. Quart. Pints. Of Ale.
Ale the Firkin ought to be Kilderkin of Ale ought to be Barrel of Ale ought
to be
8 or 16 or 32 or 64 16 32 64 128 32 64 128 256 Of Be^
Beer the Firkin ought to be Kilderkin of Beer Barrel of Beer
9 or 18 or 36 or 72 18 36 72 144 36 72 144 288 Of Wine.
Kilderkin of Wine ought to be Barrel of Wine to be Hogshead of Wine to be A
Tertian of Wine Butt or Pipe of Wine Turn of Wine
18 or 36 or 72 or 144 31 62 124 248 63 126 252 504 84 168 336 672 126 252 504
1008 252 504 1008 2016 Of Soap.
A Firkin of Soap ought to be A Kilderkin to be A Barrel to be
8 or 16 or 32 or 64 16 32 64 128 32 64 128 256 Of Ecles and Sal^ on.
A Firkin of Salmon and Eels to be A Barrel ought to be A Butt ought to be
10 21 42 84 42 84 168 236 84 164 236 572 Of O^le.
A Tun of Oil and Honey ought to be A Pipe of Oiles to be A Hogshead to be A
Rundlet to be
252 504 1008 2016 126 252 504 1008 63 126 252 504 18 37 74 148

But note that the custom of London sometimes is found to disagree with the
statute in the measures of some commodities, as in oils it is observed, that
236 gallons which by Merchants is called the civil Gadge, is sold ordinarily
for a tun, and not 252 gallons, as above is mentioned.

Now for as much as cloth, tynne, lead, and some other commodities, A
declaration of the Standard for cloth making made in the fourth year of King
James.
are the staple of the trade of England, and that diverse good laws have been
enacted for preservation of the said commodities in their true nature: It will
not be unproper that I mention here some heads of such orders as have been
made, and principally for the true making of cloth, being the prime of the
native commodities of England. The sack of wool then of which our English
cloth is made, does contain as I said before 364 li. the tod of wool is 28
li. 13 toddes making a sack, every tod being 4 nails, and every nail being 7
li. This sack of wool is accounted to Sack of wool.
make 4 standard clothes of clean wool, called sorting clothes, weighing 60
li. the cloth, and being 24 yards long of 6. quarters broad. Now in the weight
is to be observed that the clothes be well scoured, thicked, milled, and fully
dried: and in the measure that the same be measured by the yard and inch,
within the list, concerning the breadth, all which I will for the benefit of
cloth-traders insert in this following collection.

Breadth. Weight. Measures. Kent, York, and Reading clothes of 6. qu. 86 li. 30
and 34 yds. Suffolk, Norfolk, and Essex clothes of Breadth, weights and
Measures of English clothes.
7 quar. 80 li. 29 and 3^ yds. Worster, Coventry, and Hereford cloths of 6. qu.
78 li. 30 and 33 yds. Wiltshire, Gloucester, Oxen. Somerset of 7 quar. 76 li. 29
and 32 yds. Suffolk sorting clothes 6. qu. 64 li. 23 and 26 yds. All sorting
clothes of diverse shires of 6 qu. 60 li. 24 and 26 yds. Broad cloth, Taunt.
Bridgwaters and Dunst. 7 quar. 30 li. 12 and 13 yds. Broad and narrow of York
shire^of 4 quar. 30 li. 24 and 25 Devonshire, Kersies and dossens of 4 quar. 13
li. 12 and 13 Check. Kersies, strait and plain grayes 4 quar. 24 li. 17 and 18
Ordinary penistons or forests, 5. qu. 28 li. 12 and 13 Sorting penistons of 6
qu. 35 li. 13 and 14 Washers of Lancashire, and others. 17 li. 17 and 18.

See further the said statute for the manner of making of all the said woollen
clothes, and orders for workmen, with the viewing, searching, and all other
needful circumstances there and thereunto belonging, for further direction
whereto I refer you. As for Tin, which is also one of the staple
commodities of this Tin in England.
kingdom: many good orders are enacted for the true casting and assay thereof,
and is accounted as the Princes peculiar commodities, farmed to certain
Merchants, who have the sole prehemtion thereof, and thereto belongs a
peculiar weight called the stannery weight, the hundred thereof making 120 li.
sutle haberdupois, as I said before. Lead is also one of the staples of this
Island, Lead in England.
known throughout all the parts of the world, and is in England sold likewise
by a particular weight called the foder, which is 19. hundred of 112 li. to the
hundred, and making sutle pounds 2184 li. for other the staple commodities of
England, I need not further insist, referring the same to the search of the
inquisitour at his own leisure.

I have already noted that sundry commodities are in England weighed and
measured by sundry and distinct weights and measures, the principal thereof
being of silver and gold. I have already showed as the standard of our English
coins, and showed how the same agrees with other places, then of salt, wine,
and corn, which in the next place I mean here to show, and withal
demonstrate how the same holds correspondency with other Countries, which in
most Cities I have omitted as purposely intended here to be inserted by it
self, as reducing all others to the City of London.

Corn then as the most necessary commodity, is sold, as I have Corn measure
with other Countries.
showed before in England, by the quarter, accounting five quarters for one
tun lading ordinarily, though otherwise 10. quarters, is a last of corn, and
this last then of corn does make:

In Embden 55 Werpes, whereof 61 made a last, there, or 15. barrels of 4 Werpes.

In Hamburgh 83 schepels, whereof 90 make a last there.

In Lubecke 85 schepels, whereof 96 make a last.

In Dansicke 56 schepels, whereof 60 there make a last, the 4 schepels make one
muid, which is the skippound of 340 li.

In Fameran 78 schepels, whereof 96 to the last.

In Haleger haven in Denmark, 80 schepels, 96 to the last.

In Coppen haven 23 small barrels, whereof 16 to the last.

In Ebbetorff Danic 23 barrels, whereof 36 to the last.

In Nelbogge 23 barrels, whereof 42 to the last.

In Sweden 23 barrels.

Conixburgh 6/7. of a last, the 6 last are 7 at Amsterdam.

In Milain (...). of a last.

In Statin in Pomerland, 6/7. of a last.

In Riga 42 loopes.

In Antwerpe 37. Vertules.

In Bruxels 10. mudden, and differing in all places in Brabant.

In Gant 4 mudds, 7 halsters of 12 to one mudd is 55 halsters.

In Bridges 7 hoot.

In Dunkirke 18 Rasiers water measure.

In Middleburg 40 sackes is 41. to the last in all Holland.

In Dort 28 sackes.

In Rotterdam and Delph, 87 atchtelings.

In Schoon haven 88 achtelings.

In Enchusen, Horn, Medenblicke, 42 sackes.

In Groennighen 33 mudds.

In Tenell 58 loopes.

In Callais 18 Rasiers.

In Roven 20 until 30 mines, every mine is 4 bushels.

In Rotchell 128 bushels, 4 to every sestier.

In Bourdeux 38 Boiseaux, whereof 33 to the last.

In Sivil 54 Haneges, a last is 4 Ca^is of 12 Haneg^.

In Lixborne 225 alquiers, whereof 240 to the last, or 4 Moyos of 60 alquiers
to the Moyo, and so in all the Islands of Portugal.

In Venice 32 stares.

In Genoa 23. Minas.

In Sicilia 38 Medinos of 6 Moyos.

In Puglia 32 Cara 36 timans.

In Ciprus 40 Medinos of 2 cipros.

In Amsterdam a last, and it is observeable here, that corn is found so far
to differ in goodness, that the measure of this place will weigh of East-land
wheat 156 li. of French wheat 180 li. of Sicilia wheat 224 li. and of Africa
236 li. and this last o^ Amsterdam is 27 Moyos or Muddens, each mudden is 4
schepels, or every last is 29 sackes, and each sack 3 achtelings, so that a
last may be said to be 108 schepels or 87 atchtelings.

Now for as much as salt is not a native commodity of our Country, we must
borrow the original of the measure thereof Measure of Salt compared with other
places.
from these places which produces the greatest quantity or from those Cities
which hold the principal staple thereof. It will be necessary then we bring it
to the great hundred of Zeland, which is accounted for 4 small hundred, and
because it is the best known in all places, they measure their salt with
barrels, 18 barrels to a last, and 7 last to the hundred, which is 126 barrels.

In Armuyden in Zeland, they reckon 8 (...) weighs for one hundred: every weigh
is 11. sackes, every sack 4 measures, and 15 waighs of Browadge salt, makes
the great hundred. The sack of salt of Arminden, being 122 small barrels, for
the 100 sack shall be my computation, and it makes in

In Browage 4/7. parts of one hundred of 28 moyos, and 12 sackes to the moyo,
also by charges or loads, ten load to the hundred, and 48 moyos or moys to the
last of 21 barrels.

In Lixborne 25 moyos.

In Saint Mary Port 28 moyos.

In Saintubal 20 Cays.

In Calis 22 Cays.

In Saintlucar 21 Cays.

In Gaunt 108 sackes or barrels.

In Antwerpe 144 vertels of 24 to the last, and 6 last to the hundred, and the
white salt is measured with a lesser measure of 12 upon 100.

In Dunkerke 92 water measures, or 104 land measures.

In Ostend 98 measures.

In Damme and Axels 102 measures.

In Bridges 104 measures.

In Ypres 144 measures.

In Rotterdam 100 whereof 6 make one mud of 18 to the 100.

In Amsterdam, Vtricht, Druenter 102 schepels.

In Calis in France 130 barrels, 19 to the last, but 20 by fraighting.

In Roven and almost all France 6. Muyes.

In Hamburgh 7 last, whereof 80 barrels makes 100.

In Denmark, 6. last.

In Sweden 111 tons or barrels, 16 to the last.

In Emden 100 barrels, 14 to the last.

In Lubecke, 7 lasts of 18 barrels.

In London, 7. lasts of 18 herring barrels, but by weighs 11.

In Venice and Prian, 70 Mose.

Pit-coale is a commodity peculiar and native, and is sold by Measure of Sea
coal compared with other places.
the Chalder, which must be taken from the measure of Newcastle, where the
greatest quantity of coals is found, and they measure there by the Chalder,
filled up whereof 7. Chalder is a last, and is measured in giving 21 for 20.
the correspondence thereof is,

The last of Newcastle of 7. chalder is London and Yarmouth 10 chalders. Roven
100 barrels giving 104 for 100. Bridges and Oastend 100 measures for Oats. Dort
12 hort, also by weighs of 144 li. of 24 stone, of 6 li. Gaunt 144 sackes, or
24 muds. Alst 200 muds. Antwerpe 175 Vertils. Condet 44 Muys the 80 makes a
cherke. Zeland 68 herring barrels. Middleburgh by weigh of 180 li. Amsterdam
13. L^ot of 38 measures.


Wines are sold in England by the tun of 252 gallons, and by Measures of Wine.
reason of the diversity of wines of the growth of sundry countries coming to
England, it is fit I should set down how the tun of 252 gallons does
correspond with other places.

It then makes in Antwerp 6 ames, containing 300 stoopes, every stoop weighing
6 li. called a stone, every ^me being 50 stoopes, or 42 gallons, and every
stoop being 9. pintes English.

In Paris and Orleance, 4 hogsheads lacking 10 stoopes, every hogshead 312
stoopes, and at Paris 36 sextiers, each sextier being 4 quarts, every quart two
pints, is 288 pints and each pint is 2 chapins.

In Bordeaux 4. hogsheads.

In Lixborne 5 hogsheads.

In Auxere in Burgundy 3 punchons.

In Poito^ 2. pipes.

In Coniaque 2 pipes or 4 hogsheads.

In Ay and Artois, 4. hogsheads.

In Seres or Canary, 2 pipes of 150 stoops or 1 But and (...). every But is in
Antwerpe, 158 stoopes, they measure by the Rove of 30 li. is 5 stoopes of
Antwerpe, which is about 5 (...) gallons, and every But contains 30 Roves,
and the pipes contain 30 Roves of 28 li. weight.

In Condado is 2 Buts.

In Madrid 2 pipes lacking 16 stoopes, or about 19 gallons.

In Sivil 56. Rove of Romani, a Rove is 8 summers, every somer is 4 quartils,
every quartil is (...). of a stoop, of Antwerpe, which is about 1. pintes
English, and they do deliver 27 and 28 Roves in a pipe, but of oil measure by
40 and 41 Roves in a pipe.

In Ansoy or Bastard 2 pipes 16 stoopes for the said 6 ames.

In Lixborne 37. almudes of 1. Rove of Sivil, every almudas is 12 covados or
somer at Sivill, cavado is 4 quarts oil measure by alqueri or cantar, every
alqueri is 6 covados, every cantar is 4 stoopes of Antwerpe, or 4. gallons
English.

In Algorne 34 star.

In Florence 16. barrels of 20 fiaschi or 18 stoopes of Antwerpe, the 3 barrels
is one star, and each star is 54 stoopes of Antwerpe, or 64 gallons English.

In Rome 7. brontons, every Bront is 96 Bocals or 13. Rubes or stones of 10 li.
of 30 ounces in one Brent, or 42 stoopes of Antwerpe for honey the pound being
44 ounces.

In Candia 80 mostaches in a But of 34 and 35 mostaches of 3. stoopes of
Antwerpe or circa 4. gallos English.

In Bollonia 13 corbes incirca 19. gallons English each corbe.

In Padua 1 and 1/25. Cara, the oil is by the Millier of 1185 li. is in
Antwerpe 1100 li. makes 152 stoopes in a But.

In Venice 80 Mostati, the 38 make one But, and 76 make an amphora, 16. quarti
Besonts measure the 4 one Bigonts, Bigonte is a French hogshead, one quart 18
stoopes of Antwerpe, 15 (...). quar^ measure, Secchio or small measure of 4
Tischaufer.

Amphora 4 Bigonts or Bigontins. 16 quarti bigots measure. 18 (...). quarti
secchio.


Lagol is a punchon, amphora is 2 ames, which is 84 gallons, and for oil, they
measure by amphora also, and for honey, but most by millier of 1210 li.

In Verona 1. cara.

14 Brents, every brent is 16 bases.

Oil by the millier of 1738 li. is 8 brenten and 11 bases

In Ferrara 12 mastilli of 8 sechio, each mastilli is 21 gallons.

In Vicentia 1 1/26. cara, and the oil by the millier of Venice.

In Treviso 11 consi, the 10 consi makes one carra.

In Corfu and Zante 37 Zare or Sare, and each Sare is near 6. gallons

In Istria 15 Venas, near 17 gallons.

In Prian 12 Vrnas, each Vrna is 21 gallons.

In Tunes 60 matali of 32 Rotolos, every matali making about 4. gallons English.

In Tripoli in Barbary 45 metares of 42 Rotolos, and each metara being somewhat
more then 5. gallons English.

In Constantinople 180 alms, each alme being about 20 pintes, and 96 alms of
oil here, is at Venice a Millier.

In Callabria 8 Salmes.

In Puglia 8 salmes, are French barrels, oil also 8 salmes, every salme is 10
star, each star is 32 pignatoli.

Hereto it will not be unfit I should add Malines his observation upon these
wet measures in general.

The Romans in times past, called the wet measure by ounces, as we do now the
weight; accounting ten ounces ponderales, for 12 ounces mensurales, so
Sestarius Bonianorum was 18 ounces weight measure, and 21 (...). ounces
mensurales or wet measure. Now this custom of measuring and correspondencie of
wet measure and weight is yet in use in sundry places:

As at Meyson in Saxony, 20 ounces ponderales, make 24 ounces mensurales.

Also at Lipsich, 32 ounces wet measures, goes to 26. ounces weight measure,
the difference of correspondence being of 5 to 6. This is further demonstrated
in many commodities.

As a hogshead of wine weighs 500 li. the caske 50 li. so that in net wine
there is 450 li.

Also a hogshead of corn weighs 400 li. the caske 50 li. the net corn is
350 li. so that by this computation, the tun of wine weighs 1800 li. and
with the caske 2000 li. and the tun lading of corn, weighs 1600 li. and
with the caske 1800 li. So that for the la^ing of a ship, by weight and
measure, these observations are to be noted.

Two tons are accounted for one last, so two tons of wine Observations for
the lading of a ship by weight and measure.
is 4000 li. and somewhat more, and in hogsheads there should be but. parts of
a last.

At Dort in Holland they call a great vessel, a rod of wine, which weighed
4500 li. as a last of corn, comparin^ these 4500 li. mensurales by reduction of
6 to 5. as above is noted, are 3750 li. ponderales, is 12. ames, now if you
account the gallon of wine of Antwerpe to weigh 6 li. the capacity of this
vessel is 15 ames, being 750 gallons.

The rod is a rod quadrant, of 10 foot long, and 10 foot broad, and one foot
deep, every foot containing 7. gallons Antwerpe measure, or 4. foot Cubice. And
this is as much as I think fit to insert in this place concerning the wine
measures of England, with other Countries, for other liquid commodities, the
table aforegoing will more largely demonstrate.

The Exchanges practiced in England, and principally in London, The Exchanges
of London.
are confined within a narrow scantling, being but as a Riv^let issuing out of
the great stream of those Exchanges that are used beyond the Seas, and
therefore limited but to some few places, as to Antwerpe for Flanders, to Roven
and Paris for France, to Amsterdam and Rotterdam for the Netherlands, to
Dansicke for the East Country, to Venice for Italy, to Edinburgh for Scotland,
to Dublin for Ireland, all the other parts of the Exchanges practiced in
England, have their derivation hence, and he that would exchange for any other
foreign Country (these aforenamed excepted) must first have recourse hither,
and by a secondary exchange, have his desire fulfilled, all which exchanges,
and the manner how the same are calculated, and the places with which London
has in former time been seen to exchange. I have at large demonstrated in the
443, 444, 445, 446, and 447 chapters of this ensuing treatise: whereto for
better satisfaction I will refer the reader.

CHAP. CCLXXIII.
Of the trading in general of England.

WHen I consider the true dimensions of our Of the trade in general of England.
English traffic, as at this day to me it appears to be, together with the
inbred commodities that this Island affords to preserve and maintain the
same, with the present industry of the natives, and the ability of our
Navigators: I justly admire both the height and eminency thereof: but when
again I survey every kingdom and great City of the world, and every petty
Port and Creek of the same, and find in each of these some English prying
after the trade and commerce thereof, then again I am easily brought to
imagine that either this great traffic of England is at its full perfection,
or that it aims higher then can hitherto by my weak sight be either seen or
discerned: I must confess, England breeds in its own womb, the principal
supporters of its present splendour, and nourishes with its own milk the
commodities that gives both luster and life to the continuance of this trade,
(which I pray may neither never decay, nor yet have the least dimination. But
England being naturally seated in a northern corner of the world, and herein
bending under the weight of too too ponderous a burden, cannot possibly
always, and for ever find a vent for all those commodities that are seen to
be daily imported and brought within the ^mpasse of so narrow a circuit,
unless there can be (by the policy and government of the state) a mean found
out to make this Island either the common Emporium and staple of all Europe, or
at least wise of all these our neighboring northern Regions.

The staple commodities of England, such as are Clothes, Lead, Tynne, some new
late draperies, and other English Real and Royal commodities, shipped hence
in former times, yielded by their returns from foreign parts, all those
necessaries and wants we desired, or stood in need of: but the late great
traffic of this Island has been such, that it has not only proved a
bountiful Mother to the inhabitants, but also a courteous Nurse to the
adjoining neighbors: for what in matter of traffic they have lost, we have
been found to have gained, and what they have wanted, or have been noted to
have supplied them with.

Has the proud and magnificent City of Venice lost her great The real worth
of the English trade.
traffic and commerce with India, Arabia, and Persia? England has got it,
and now furnishes her plenteously with the rich commodities thereof. Has all
Italy lost Venice, that fed it with those dainties? London now supplieth her
place, and is found both to cloth and nourish it. Has France almost lost the
excellent commodities of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Aleppo, and generally
of Turkey? London can and does furnish it. Nay, is Turkey it self deprived of
the precious spices of India? England can and does plentifully afford them.
Will you view Moscovia, survey Sweden, look upon Denmark, peruse the East
Country, and those other colder regions, there shall you find the English to
have been, the inhabitants from the Prince to the peasant, wears Englands
woollen livery, feeds in English pewter, sauced with English Indian spices, and
send to their enemies sad English leaden messengers of death. Will you behold
the Netherlands, whose eyes and hearts envy Englands traffic, yet they must
perforce confess, that for all their great boasts, they are indebted to London
for most of their Siria commodities, besides what other wares else they have of
English growth? Will you see France, and travel it from Marselia to Callais,
though they stand least in need of us, yet they cannot last long without our
commodities. And for Spain, if you pry therein from the Princes Palace to the
poor man's Cottage, he will Voto, a dios, there is no clothing comparable to
the English Baye, nor Pheasant excelling a seasonable English red Herring.

The East India Company of London, are yearly seen to visit The East India
Company.
Persia, frequent India, and traffic in Arabia, and the coasts thereof, and
for our English commodities, and some other exported hence, they are found to
import Pepper, Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, Cottons, Rice, Callicoes of sundry
sorts, Bezar stones, Aloes, Borax, Calamus, Cassia, Mirabolans, Mirrhe, Opium,
Rhubarbe, Cinamond, Sanders, Spicknard, Musk, Civet, Tamerinds, precious
stones of all sorts, as Diamonds, Pearls, Carbuncles, Emeralds, Iacincts,
Saphirs, Spinals, Turques, Topases, Indico, and Silks, raw and wrought into
sundry fabriques: Benjamin, Camphir, Sandalwood, and infinite other
commodities, and though in India and these parts, their trade equaliseth not,
neither the Portugals nor the Dutch, yet in candid, fair, and Merchant-like
dealing, these Pagans, Mahumetans and Gentiles, hold them in esteem far
before them, and deservingly have here the Epithete of far more current and
square dealers. And although for the present this trade and Company do suffer
under some adverse clouds, and groan under some unkind losses by the falsehood
of the Netherlanders, and sad accidents at sea, yet their adventures and acts
are praise worthy, and their fair endeavors for Englands honor in point of
trade, meriteth due commendations, and just applause.

The Turkey Company of London, for its height and eminency, is The Turkey
Company.
now second to none other of this land, for not yearly, but monthly, nay
almost weekly their ships are observed to go to and fro, exporting hence the
clothes of Suffolk, Gloucester, Woster, and Coventry, dyed and dressed, Kersies of
Hampshire and York, Lead, Tynne, and a great quantity of the above said India
spices, Indico and Callicos, and in returns thereof import from Turkey, the raw
silks of Persia, Damasco, Tripoly, etc. Galls of Mosolo and Toccat Chamblets,
Grograms, and Mohayrs of Angora, Cottons, and Cotton yarne of Cyprus and
Smirna, and sometimes the Iemmes of India, and drugges of Egypt, and Arabia,
the Muscadins of Candia, the Corance and Oiles of Zante, Zeffalonia, and Morea,
with sundry others, and in all these parts are accounted also second to none,
nor give place to any nation, neither in the greatness of their traffic, nor
yet in their fair and Merchant-like performance.

The ancient company of the Merchant Adventurers of London, The Merchant
Adventurers.
hold the same proportion in the integrity of their dealings, and in the
squarenesse of their performance with both the before named: their excellent
government, and their ancient orders preserved and maintained, is every where
both applauded and commended. The Cities of Hamburgh, Rotterdam, and others in
the Netherlands by their submissive seeking for their residence, and their
privileges and immunities granted them during that time, is a sure testimony
that speaks their welcome every where, and an assured token of that Cities
decay. that they leave from England, they furnish them with clothes of sundry
shires, and some other commodities monthly, as by the shortness of their
navigation they find it needful and proper to their traffic, and from
thence furnish England with Tapestries, Diaper, Cambriques, Hollands, Lawnes,
Hoppes, Mather, Steel, Rhenish wines, and many other manufacturies, as Blades,
Stuffes, Soap, Lattin, Wier, and plates, etc. and here also this nation is
accounted the most current and only Merchant-like nation that traffic or
have commerce amongst them.

The East country Merchants, and the Moscovia Company, do The Eastland and
Moscovia Company.
also challenge a part in this great trade of England, and add some perfection
to the traffic of the City of London: neither does their fair dealing there,
come behind any of their fellow citizens, nor are they there less esteemed
then any other foreign nation there resident. They export hence principally,
cloth, as the best commodity, as also tin, lead, with some other spices of
India, and other Southern commodities, and return thence, ashes, clapbord,
copper, deals, fish, rich furs, masts, pipe staves, rye, timber, wainscot,
wheat, fustians, iron, latin linen, mathers, quicksilver, flax, hemp,
steel, caviare, cordage, hides, honey, tar, ropes, tallow, pitch, wax,
rosin, and sundry others.

What shall I say to the French Company, the Groenland Company, the Merchants
trading into Spain, Barbary, Geanny, Benin, Italy, Scotland, and Ireland, but
that they also challenge a great interest in the traffic of this City and
Kingdom, for the French Merchants carry hence, English clothes, Kersies, and
Bays, The French Merchants.
Galls, Silk, and Cottons of Turkey, and for the same return, Buckrams,
Canvas, Cards, Glass, Grain, Linnens, Salt, Claret and white Wines, Woade,
Oiles, Almonds, Pepper, some silk stuffes, and some other petty manufacturies.

The Merchants trading into Spain, carry hence bays, says, The Spanish
Merchants.
serges, perpetuanos, lead, tynne, herrings, pilchards, salmon, newland fish,
calfe skins, and many other commodities, and in returns furnish England thence
with wines of Xeres, Mallaga, Bastard, Candado and Aligant, Rosins, Olives,
Oiles, Sugars, Sopes, Aniseeds, Liquoris, Soda barillia, Pate, and sundry west
India commodities: neither have the Spanish and Portugal any ill opinion in
the dealing and traffic of the English nation, for though of all other
nations, they have the best conceit and opinion of their own greatness, and
punctual worth, and have of late exchanged the name of Mercader into Cargador,
(how unproper I refer to their own language) yet account they the English
(after themselves) the principal and fairest dealing Merchants in the world.

The Merchants of England trading into Naples, Sicilia, Genoa, Leghorne and
Venice, etc. which here I term Italy, are not observed The Italian Merchants.
to have any joint society or company, yet to the honor and benefit of this
Kingdom and City thereof, transport hence, bays, says, serges, perpetuanos,
kersies, lead, tyn, cloth, and many other native commodities, besides pepper,
indico, cloves, and other Indian commodities in great abundance, and for
returns thence, have clothes of gold and silver, satins, velvets, taffataes,
plushes, tabins, damaskes, al^me, ^yles, glass, aniseeds, rice, Venice gold
and silver, great quantity of raw silks, of sundry sorts, and diverse other
commodities; and here likewise all other foreign nations give willingly place
to the English, as the prime and principal Merchants that either abide amongst
them, or negotiate with them. I need not to insist here upon the relics of
that famous Barbary trade, nor yet mention the petty adventures of the English
to Guyny and Benny, though that otherwise they are concurrent to the traffic
of this nation, neither need I nominate the homeland commerce of this kingdom
to Scotland and Ireland, neither go about to particularise the large traffic
of this Island to their late Plantations of New found land, Summer Islands,
Virginia, Barbados, and new England, and to other places which rightly
challenge an interest in the present trade and traffic of this kingdom.

Therefore omitting what may be further said in this point, and having thus
survayed the trade of this Island in the particular, and showed the commodities
exported and imported by every noted Company and Society, I shall now speak a
word concerning the Navigation of this Nation, which is one of the maine and
principal means by which this traffic is observed to be preserved unto them
at this day.

I shall not need to look back into former ages, nor trouble The navigation
of the English famous,
my self to search after old records that express the worth of the English
nation at sea in the times of old; it suffices me to understand, and know that
these present times wherein we live, is not any ways inferior (in this point)
to the former, nor the real value nor valor of the English any ways decayed
or altered from its former ancient greatness, to its present splendour: what
they have done, let Histories remember, and what they now do, let the world
witness and testify throughout Europe. What Creek or Port in Europe have
they not sought out and throughout Europe.
found? nay how many of them have fought against hunger, cold, and all
extremities, to find new northern passages to the southern Regions, and
though the South Seas, and a great part of America be at this day debarred to
them and to their Navigation, In America.
yet their wills herein are more bou^ded to their Princes pleasure in a
faithful obedience to his treaties and peace with that Don that challenges
those vast Countries, then any way in fear of his greatness, or his navall
power at Sea, as may well witness their Attempts, Navigations, and Plantations
in many parts of that Country not limited or forbidden by that treaty. As for
their Navigations to Africa, begin at Alexandria in Egypt, In Africa.
and so sail to Tunes, Argire and Seuta, and thence along the coast of Guiny
and Benyn, to cape Bona, Esperansa, then to Mombasa, Melinda, Brava, Cape,
Guarde fuy, and into the red sea gulf, and tell me where is it that they have
not been, or what place or Port is not acq^ainted to them. And if you survey
the Maritime shore of Asia, and beg in at Sues in the aforesaid Gulf, an^ In
Asia.
so to Aclon, Dieu, Cambaia, Ormus, Surrat, Goa, Cochin, Mesulapatam, Pegu,
Camboi, Cauch, China, Maccau, and to the utmost bounds of China, and the Isles
of Iapan, and Cathay, and all the adjacent Islands they have all borne for many
years, both well acquainted to our sea men, and not unfrequented by our
Merchants and traders, and for the Casplan Sea, the Euxine and the other parts
of Asia comprised from thence by Constantinople to Scanderone, and so to
Alexandria, every week brings us tidings of the current advises of those
places. To conclude then by what has been said, may be clearly discerned, the
present height and amplitude of our English commerce, and the greatness of
Englands Navigations, the continuation whereof my devotions shall ever second,
and my prayer shall be, that neither our fained friends, nor yet our sroward
foes, may ever have just cause to rejoice at the decrease, nor least diminution
thereof.

Having thus happily ended my peregrination, and drawn out the utmost bounds
and limits of this my Map of Commerce, and concluded there the manner and
matter of the general and particular traffic of most of all the eminent
Cities and Countries of the world, I will now here cast anchor, and finish in
this place my voyage, till the next fair gale does offer and present it self,
to imbarke both my time and pen in the survey and calculation of the Exchanges
of Europe, as at this day they are seen practiced amongst the Merchants of
Christendom.

FINIS.
EXCHANGES.

EXCHANGES,
CHAP. 274.
Of Exchanges in general, and of the Method and manner thereof, and how
calculated in any place in Christendom.

I Have in the tenth Chapter of this Map Exchange in General.
of Commerce, showed, that to make this Treatise absolute and complete, the
Method and manner how all Exchanges are framed and calculated is perfectly to
be known and learned, and there also declared the necessity of this knowledge
with all circumstances depending thereupon.

Now by reason that I have in all the before mentioned Cities of this Map,
(wherein, either custom, time, or commodity of Trade, Exchanges of moneys have
been settled, and where the said Exchanges are daily used and practiced)
omitted the form, manner and calculation thereof, together with all the
particular circumstances rebuisite and necessary to the explanation of this
mystery of Exchanging, I have in this place thought good to allot it (as
worthily meriting) a peculiar discourse at large by it self, which here I
conceive it most proper to be inserted: and because that my experience in the
exactness required may not be peradventure sufficient, to lead me through in
every particular point and needful circumstance; I have therefore judged it no
blemish to my knowledge to be instructed by those excellent and judicious
Bankers, Geo. Baptista Zuccetta, a merchant of Genoa, and Cla^dio Boiero, a
merchant of Lions, whose endeavors herein are worthy commendations, and whose
laborious presidents and preceding labors, where I find my self defective in
this task and Labyrinth, I willingly follow.

Places in use, and those as are apt for exchanges, are such, where Merchants
in some fit and competent number, do meet and are What are places of Exchanges.
assembled for the benefit and behoof of trade and negotiation, which at this
present day are observed to be many, yet withal are noted not to be so firmly
settled, but that the same admits sometimes an alteration and change, varying
according as the dew occasions of Commerce, and traffic in that place
requires, either by the decay of the trade there, or by the increase of the
trade of another place more fit and proper thereunto.

Some places again are observed to be (if I may so term it) the Staples of
Exchanges, and yet notwithstanding has its dependency Some cities are the
Staples of Exchanges.
upon the Exchanges of other places, and which else are not found to comprehend
any other manner of traffic, having only certain times or faires, settled
and confirmed by the custom of Exchangers, in which, and to which Bills of
Exchange, are either dated, expire, or are renewed, in which Nature, and of
which sort Placentia is accounted the most notable for all Italy and other
places, where indeed Exchanges are found to have a certain kind of being,
yetacknowledgeth its real existence from other places and Cities, Besanson in
Burgondie, Spossa in the River of Genoa, Camberay in Pied^d, and some others
were in former times observed to be of this kind, whose Exchanges did totally
depend upon the partidos of Exchanges, made in other countries, and these
sometimes of such, as had the same concordancy in the current coins of the
Exchange, and sometimes a discrepancie.

And for as much as it is observed, that some other Cities where no set
Exchanges are found, sometimes challenges by the necessity The Exchanges of
some cities depends upon the Exchanges of some others.
of traffic and Commerce, a course of Exchanging with these or the like
places, and yet has none settled therein, then and in such cases is it seen,
that the Metropolis, or principal Cities of these countries, prescribes both
the Rule, rate, and condition thereto, as if Vicentia, Verona, or Padoua, would
frame an Exchange with Placentia, it is observable, that the rate of Venice, in
which estate these said places are found to be, and who have their moneys of
one and the selfsame goodness and value, give the rule, rate, and condition
thereto. So in Pavia, Como, and other towns in the Duchy of Millan, as in
Millan it self, so in Bristoll, York, Chester or H^ll, or other towns in
England, as in the City of London, the principal of that Island, so have the
Cities of France, their rule from Lions, all places of Flanders from Antwerpe,
and so have the like in other places and Countries.

Now for as much as Exchanges then are not found current in all places,
Exchangers, Bankers, and Merchants have settled a common The chief cities of
Exchanges.
course of Exchanging, in some certain particular and principal places, the
which are observed in these days chiefly to be these, as namely in Italy
thirteen.

For Italy 13. Rome. Genoa. Millan Naples. Barri. Mesina. Bollonia. Venice.
Florence. Lucca. Lechie. Palermo. Bergamo. etc.


For France 3 Paris. Lions. Roan etc.


For Spain 6 Valentia. Barselona. Alcala. Saragosa. Sivill. Medina delcampo.


For Portugal Lisborne only.

For Flanders Antwerpe only.

For England London only.

For Germany 5 Vienna. Noremberg. Colonia. Augusta. Francford. etc.


Besides which, some others of lesser note, are observed to have an Exchange
current, but by reason, that in some sort, they have in most of the principal
points, a dependancie upon some of these, and a concordance with them; they are
by most Authors neglected, and therefore shall be by me here wholly omitted.

In the next place it is considerable that many of these before Many Cities
practice Exchanges by one and the same monyes etc.
mentioned Cities, are found to practice their Exchanges, in one and the self
same moneys, Coins, and denominations, as does Lechie, and Barry, which are
included in Naples, as Naples it self, Palermo and Mesina comprehended in
Sicilia, Valentia, Saragosa, and Barselona, in Catalonia, Sivil, Alcala, and
Medina del Campo in Castilia, Francford, Noremberge, Colonia, and Augusta in
Germany, and so in some others.

What thing this Exchange is properly in it self found to be, What Exchange
is, etc.
as also what a Bill of Exchange is, and the due ceremonies and strict rules
thereof, together with the commodiousnesse, necessity, and first real intent
of the same, I have showed in the tenth Chapter, which briefly here, may not
unproperly be defined by the word it self, as it is aptly expressed in our
English tongue, which extends it self into two parts; as first, an
Exchanging of one sort of Moneys to another, and secondly an Exchanging from
one City or country to another, in which is also considerable, both a rate
and term wherein, and whereby this is brought to conclusion and perfection,
which are principally observed to be performed Rates, terms, Faires, and
Vsances of Exchange.
by certain faires or usances, accustomed in the Art of Exchanging, and which
are set down, by Merchants, Bankers and Exchangers, at their assemblies and
meetings, in a fair and regular Order, by a certain course of Justice, and by
peculiar laws and ordinances amongst themselves, both which faires and the
rates and terms thereof, have a constant expiration and determination, within
certain months, as the Vsances have, that are likewise included within the
rules of the said Faires, which are found also to end and determine within
certain prefix't days, according to the received custom of those two Cities,
wherein the said Exchanges are found mutually and respectively to be both
settled and placed.

Moreover, in the practice of Exchanging, Bankers and Exchangers, are found to
observe this custom amongst themselves in What is observed in Exchaning in the
usual manner thereof.
the usual manner of Exchanging from one place to another, that is, the One
propounds his Money in a whole number or denomination, and the Other
consequently and necessarily in a fraction, broken Number, or lesser
denomination, in which contract or Bargain, it is imagined, that those two,
either persons or places, would negotiate one and the self-same thing, so that
the one would be the Seller, and the other the Buyer thereof, to perform
which, it is questionless needful, that he that has the thing, makes the
rate and price, the which shall happen without any contract, or difference of
much or little, and as it chances in the sale of any commodity, so falls it
out in the Exchanges of Moneys, for of the two places that would Exchange, the
one propounds a gross sum, and the other the condition and price in a lesser
sum, which may either admit an increase, or decrease in estimation or value,
according as they fall to agreement, upon the lesser or greater esteem of the
said some propounded, the use of which is exemplified thus.

If Placentia would Exchange with any other place, the said Placentia, Example.
or as Exchangers term it, the said Fair, or fiera propounds and gives
always the entire sum, or greater denomination, and by consequence, the
other that would exchange therewith, gives the other which is the lesser
denomination.

This Sum which I thus term an entire or whole denomination, falls in some
places to be, sometimes one Crown, and in other places sometimes 100 Crowns,
Florins or Duccats, the same is likewise found to be practiced between any two
places; Exchanging, for each place gives either a Denomination entire of one
to one other, or of one hundred to another Hundred, or else of a lesser
divident then one, or then one hundred, which I here term the fraction,
broken number, or smallest denomination, as shall be more plainly expressed in
the calculated Tables following.

Now as touching the monyes which are thus given as entire or What an entire
sum Exchanges is, and what a broken number or fraction.
whole sums, Videlicet, One or One hundred, these are either found to be
Crowns, Ducats, Pounds, Florins, etc. according to the received quality of the
gross and whole monyes, which that place is found to have current, that would
give, so in like manner it falls out in the smaller or lesser denomination,
in the places that would take, which in themselves is also various, and
consequently of diverse sorts, as pence, sols, deniers, etc. as shall also
appear by the said Table.

And though it fall out to be the custom, that one place gives Liberty of
Exchanging to the judicious.
an Exchange in gross monyes, and another place in small, (as is before
related,) and that this gross and small monyes be of such or such a quality
and kind, This observation and Rule prescribed notwithstanding, is not always
necessary, but that Exchangers may, (though I confess it is seldom seen) at
their pleasure propound, the one or the other differing or contrary hereunto,
and that the wise and judicious Exchanger may for his profit, ease or
commodity, propound his own intentions, and thereby (if he can) obtain a
beneficial bargain or issue, according to his desired design and plot. As
for example.

If it should be said, that Exchanges may be made in a method Ignorant
exchangers censure the judicious of varying from the custom of Exchanging.
differing from this or the common rule, or contrary to that way that has
been received and taken, some would soon censure him of folly that should be
of that opinion, and conceive such a one to be little versed in exchanging
affairs, that should either propound or seek to perform such a thing, but
yet no great heed is to be taken, to the raw conceits and childish opinions of
such selfe-willd Merchants, which may for the most part, be said to be either
drenched in ignorance, or drowned in Envy; because that a skillful Merchant,
may (as I have alleged) frame his Exchanges as he fees good, and to his own
commodity, the which very oftentimes is observed tobe done by others, and
practiced daily by those of this City of excellent judgments.

In example whereof, posito, I would Exchange Genoa with Naples, Example.
between which two places, the use and custom is, that Genoa gives the
entire sum, or greater denomination, which is the Crown of gold, for the
which Naples gives the Grain 135. a little more or less, I demand, why may
not Genoa give that whole sum, which is the Crown of 4. livers, as it is
accustomed to give with other places, and estimating the same by 120 grains
Naples, and thereby the Exchange will prove to be equal with the first manner
before mentioned. And further, why may not the contrary be practiced, Naples
giving the whole denomination, which may be Ducats, one, for sold 66. 8. d. and
so vary in as many forms as they please, wherein I confess I never yet found
any Exchanges made, neither do I know any true reason that the common customs
should be altered, though I have thought good to note the same here, that each
knowing Merchant, may boldly use which he please, for to him that truly
understands the value and course of both the places Exchanging, there will
appear no difficulty therein, and I wish that those, which know no other
ways but their own, content themselves within the limits of their own manner
and understanding, and suffer others of better judgments, without their
censure, to follow their own, when it is to their benefit or commodity.

CHAP. 275.
The declaration of the Table of Exchanges following.

THE Table of Exchanges of the Cities here following, are formed and disposed
in this nature, first, Declaration of the Table of Exchanges.
in the front thereof there is placed the name of the Town or City
Exchanging, and in what Region or Country seated; secondly, the manner and
method wherein the accounts in that City is kept by Exchangers: thirdly, the
quality of the moneys in use is observed, and in what coin imaginary or real
that City is accustomed to make its Exchange, with the others there mentioned;
fourthly, underneath that, is orderly set down the names of all the other
places, the which by a line, are found to be joined and knit together; and
lastly, in the midst of the line is written the name of the place and City it
self, for which the said Table in the said leaf is made: as for example, in
the first leaf, which is for Placentia in Italy, where besides the name of the
place it self is found these words (Placentia Exchangeth with) the which
words, by reason of the including line drawn from the highest to the lowest,
has reference to every one of the names of the other places which are so
included together, so that it is to be understood, as that Placentia Exchangeth
with Lions, Placentia Exchangeth with Rome, with Genoa, etc. and so in the rest
from one to another. Next to every one of the said names of places, follows
the species or monyes Exchanged either by an entire and whole sum, or by a
broken and lesser denomination, which the place in the Table gives in Exchange
by proportion with the other, to whose name the said monyes are placed and put
unto, as to say, Placentia Exchangeth with Lions 100 Crowns, that is
understood, that in Exchanging between Placentia and Lions, 100 Crowns of
Placentia are supposed and put by an Equivalencie or in Value to that quantity
or sum of money, which is found to be noted in Lions following, as in the
said Example, Placentia Exchangeth with Lions Crowns 100. for Cro. 97.. so
likewise is it to be understood, that in the said Exchanges that for every 100.
Crowns of Placentia, or of Fiera, or of Mark, it is as much to say, as Lions
counterpayeth or gives 97. (...). of his Crowns, that is, of the Sun. Also
Placentia Exchangeth with Genoa Crown 1. for sol. 67. 10. d. that is to say,
that Placentia Exchanging with Genoa it gives (or as I said before, it
sells) Crown 1. of Mark to have in Genoa, Sol. 67. 10d. of Gold, and in the
same manner the rest of the said places are to be understood, and whereas the
rates or prizes of these Exchanges, may here be found to disagree from the
current rates of the same in sundry places, at this very day and time, yet that
cannot take away the benefit that Though the Tables of Exchanges differ from
the present rates, yet the use thereof is not any way lessened.
may redound to Merchants, by the use thereof, nor prejudice the labor or
judgment of him that calculated the said Table, because we see by experience,
that the rates of Exchanges do hourly differ, and the moneys also are found to
rise, and fall daily in sundry places, upon which, these Exchanges have their
groundworke and foundation, and though a Table were calculated precisely to
this present day, and time, yet ere the same could be published it would find a
disagreement in diverse places.

CHAP. 276.
The Use of the Table of Exchanges.

THe Method being thus understood, the use thereof The use of the Table of
Exchanges, by three Examples.
is easily comprehended, which by three examples, I shall illustrate and make
plain, where by the way, it is to be noted, that in the exchanging of any sum
of moneys whatsoever, the rates me ntioned in this Table, are not observable,
save only for the example sake, and for instruction in the contract, that may
be made thereupon, but the rate agreed upon, and by which the exchange is
conditioned by both the giver and taker, is the true and firm rule, whereby the
question is to be wrought, notwithstanding for the first Example, we will
propound a question by a contracted price, according First Example.
to the current rates mentioned in this said Table, and that from Naples, a
Merchant would exchange Ducat. 738. 4. 10. with Placentia, and the price of the
exchange, shall be that which is mentioned, in the Table of Naples, with the
town of Placentia, where it is found, that Naples exchangeth with Placentia at
Grains 133 for a Crown.

By these three numbers in the Tables mentioned, I work thus then by the Rule
of Three, saying, if 133 grains, give 1 Crown, how many do 738 Duc. 4. 10.
give, and working Arithmetically according to the said Rule, it makes 555
Crowns 11, 3. of Mark in Credit to be given in Fiera of the said Placentia.

^ For a second Example, I will propound, that Naples would exchange 500 Duc.
with Placencia at Sold. 18. 2. d. etc. This example Second Example.
considered, will not be found to differ from the former, save that in the
former Naples gave the lesser or broken number, and in this, Naples gives the
whole and entire number, nowithstanding which the rule is not found to differ,
as in other the like questions in simple exchanges, wherein is to be observed
that Sol. 18. and Den. 2. of Valentia, are paid for 1 Duccat of Naples, and by
that price and rate, I would know, how many Livers of that Money of Valentia
the proposed sum of 500 Duc. in Naples come unto, and by that which we find
in the Table by the same Rule of Three, I say, If one Ducat is worth 18 sol. 2
Den. How many shall 500 be worth, and by working the question, it makes 454
livers, 3 s. 4 d. And so much Credit will 500 Duc. of Naples give at the price
before mentioned, thus. ^

All other Exchanges have their resolutions as these two former, but yet
sometimes it is true, some accident may interpose, Third Example.
which may cause the question to have a double working, as if I should say, that
Genoa would Exchange with Venetia Crowns 1000 of Livers 4. to Livers 7 lib. 10
Sol. of that money, and the Credit is required in Duccats. Now then because the
simple Exchange gives the money in Livers, you must make another reckoning to
reduce the same into Ducats; but yet for all this, neither in this, nor in any
other case, would I have but one account made, the which may be done by the
rule multiplied: I say then, if 1 Crown be worth 7. 10. Den. and that 6 s. 4
Den. is worth one Ducat, how many Ducats will a 1000 Crowns make? and by
working the question, it will be found to make 1209 Duc. 13. 6 d. for credit,
which from Genoa will be produced by a thousand Crowns in Venice, the question
being well observed, it will be found to be wrought in this manner. ^

It is to be noted, that in what place soever the Moneys are accounted by
Livers, Sol. and Den. or as we say, in England by Pounds, shillings, and pence,
it is accounted by 20. and by 12. because that Sol. or shil. 20. make a Liver,
or Pound, and 12 deniers or pence makes a Soldo or Shilling, the same rule also
holds in those places, whose greatest moneys are imaginary and feigned, or who
keep not this orderly succession, as are the Ducats of Catalonia, of Castilia,
of Rome, and of Portugal, also those Crowns, who have no proper parts, also
the Ducatons in what country soever, and the F^orins in Germany, all these I
say, which ought to succeed in 20, and 12. That is, in Solds, and Deniers, or
Shillings and pence, and each of the other sorts of moneys shall be accounted
according to the property of that country, and as shall be signified, in the
front of the following table of that place, amongst which there are some which
are commonly resolved, by the more principal of their own moneys, as the
Exchange of Sicilie with Catalonia, Castilia, Portugal, Brabant and England,
and howsoever they make their Exchange, either by the Sicilian Florin, or by
the Duccat, notwithstanding the parcel is resolved in Ounces, Tarins, Grains
and Picholes, which is thoroughly declared in the following Tables.

And lastly, for as much as the terms and days of Bills of Exchange, are found
in many countries, to differ in length of time, and are limited of diverse
days, and that the rates, rising and falling of Exchanges have a course set by
a continual meeting of Exchangers, and their opinions in equality of value, I
have thought good to insert the same with some other needful circumstances of
this Art of Exchanging, at the end of the Tables, to which I refer the learner,
where also he shall find at large, how most of these Exchanges, are cast up,
and reckoned from one place to another, and now I will proceed to the Tables
themselves, as I find them calculated by the said Geo. Bapt. Zucetta, and
others following him.

CHAP. 277.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia, a place of Faires or Fiera of Exchanges in
Italy.

THis Town is considered, as a Fair or Staple of Exchanges, and not as a
City of Traffic; and therefore there is no esteem made of the current The
Exchanges of Placentia.
Money of the place, but only of that which is made by Exchanging, which are
Crowns of Mark; in which Moneys, Bankers and Exchangers do only treat and
account in; and the same is held by Crowns, Sold. and Deniers of Mark. And in
the custom of Exchanges here in use, it gives the entire and whole sum to
all other places, being either Crowns One, or Crowns one hundred.

Placentia does exchange with Lions Crown 100 for 96 Crown Rome Cro. 100 for
99 (...) Ducc. Genoa Cro. -- 1 for 67. 10 Sol. of Gold Millan Cro. -- 1 for
134. 9 Sol. Venice Cro. 100 for 130 Ducc. Florence Cro. 100 for 109 (...) Cro.
Luccha Cro. 100 for 116 Duccatons Naples Cro. -- 1 for 134 Grains Lechie Cro.
-- 1 for 135 Grains Bari Cro. -- 1 for 135 Grains Palermo Cro. -- 1 for 029
Carlins Mesina Cro. -- 1 for 029 Carlins Anu. and Coll. Cro. -- 1 for 128
Grosses London Cro. -- 1 for 81 (...) d. sterling. Valentia Cro. -- 1 for 24 Sold.
Saragosa Cro. -- 1 for 24 Sol. 6 Den. Barselona Cro. -- 1 for 24 Sol. 4 Den.
Siv. al. Med. Cro. -- 1 for 432 Marvedes Lixborne Cro. -- 1 for 482 Raise
Bolonia Cro. -- 1 for 119 Duccatons Bergamo Cro. -- 1 for 118 Duccatons
Francfort Cro. -- 1 for 103 (...) Quarentins.

In the 382 Chapter, the Reader may find how these Exchanges are cast up and
calculated.

CHAP. 278.
Of the Exchanges of Lions, Paris, and Rouen, in France.

IN Lions, Paris, Rouen, and through all France, they keep their accounts in
Livers, Sols, and Deniers, The Exchanges of Lions. etc.
Turnois, and they here do Exchange in Crowns of the Sun, and Deniers of the
Sun, this Liver is also called in some places of France, a Frank, and three
Livers or Frankes is accounted for the said Crown of the Sun, and the Crown
of Italy by a decree and standard of the country passes at 58 Sol. of the
said Crown.

And in the custom of Exchanging, it gives the entire and whole sum or
number, either one Crown, or one hundred Crowns of the Sol.

Lions does exchange with Placentia Crown 100 for 103 Crowns Rome Cro. 100
for 99 (...) Ducc. Genoa Cro. -- 1 for 66. Sol. of Gold Millan Cro. -- 1 for
115. Sol. Venice Cro. 100 for 116 Duc. Banko. Florence Cro. 100 for 106 (...)
Cro. Luccha Cro. 100 for 117 Duccatons Naples Cro. -- 1 for 124 Grains Lechie
Cro. -- 1 for 122 Grains Bari Cro. -- 1 for 123 Grains Palermo Cro. -- 1 for 29
Carlins Mesina Cro. -- 1 for 29 Carlins Antw. and Col. Cro. -- 1 for 096 Gross
London Cro. -- 1 for 62 Pence sterling Valentia Cro. -- 1 for 23 Sol. 10 Den.
Saragosa Cro. -- 1 for 23 Sol. 8 Den. Barselona Cro -- 1 for 24 Sol. Siv. al
Med. Cro. -- 1 for 436 Marvedes Lixborne Cro. -- 1 for 485 Rays Bollonia Cro.
100 for 119 Ducatons Bergamo Cro -- 100 for 118 (...) Ducatons Francford Cro --
1 for 104 Quarentins

Vide chap. 302 and so following of the calculation of the Exchanges of this
place.

CHAP. 279.
Of the Exchanges of Rome in Italy.

IN Rome, the Bankers and Exchangers keep their accounts in Crowns, Iulios,
Baiochs and Quatrins, and The Exchanges of Rome.
they Exchange in Ducats, Sols, and deniers of Camera. The Crown of the
abovesaid money is worth 10 Iulios, or 100 Baiochs, or else 400 Quatrins; the
Iulio is 10 Baioch, or else 40 Quatrins, and the Baioch is 4 Quatrins.

The Duccat of Camera according to the old value, is worth 2 (...) per cent.
more than the Cro. of Gold, so that 100 duc. are 102 (...) Crowns.

In the custom of Exchange amongst Merchants, the place gives the Broken
number to all Italy, excepting to the Kingdom of Naples, to Sicilia, Bollonia,
and Bergamo, and to all others it gives the whole number, which is either by
one Ducat or by a 100 Ducats.

Rome does exchange with Placentia Duc. 97 for 100 Crowns. Lions Duc. 97 for
100 Crowns. Genoa Duc. 97 (...) for 100 Cro. of Gold. Millan Duc. 97 for 100
Cro. of Gold. Venice Duc. 85 for 100 Ducats. Florence Duc. 91 for 100 Crowns.
Lucca Duc. 84 for 100 Duccatons Naples Duc. 100 for 135 Ducca. Lecchie Duc. 100
for 134 (...) Duccats. Barri Duc. 100 for 134 (...) Duc. Palermo Ducat. 1 for
14 15 Tarins. Mesina Ducat. 1 for 14 17. Tarins. Antw. and Col. Ducat. 1 for
125 Grosses. London Ducat. 1 for 87 d. sterling. Valentia Ducat. 1 for 242. Sol.
Saragosa Ducat. 1 for 23 Sol. 8 Den. Barselona Ducat. 1 for 23 Sol. 10. Den.
Siv. al. Med. Ducat. 1 for 440 Marvedes. Lixborne Ducat. 1 for 482 Rays.
Bolonia Duc. 100 for 119 Duccatons. Bergamo Duc. 100 for 119 Duccatons.
Francfort Duc. 1 for 103 Quarentins.

Vide how these are calculated, Chap. 326. and so following.

CHAP. 280.
Of the Exchanges of Genoa, the Metropolis of Liguria.

IN Genoa, Exchangers keep their accounts in Livers, The Exchanges of Genoa.
Sol. and Deniers current, and they exchange in Livers, Sols, and Deniers of
Gold. The Monyes current, is it that is the common in use; of which, the Crown
of Gold is worth Sol. 90. and in times past was worth le^e: The Monyes of Gold
are imaginary, and valued according as the Faires of Exchanges permit; of
which, the Crown of Gold is always worth 68 Sol.

In the custom of Exchanging, this place gives the whole sum to all,
excepting Placentia and Lions, the which are either one Crown, or 100 Crowns;
the which Crowns are accounted of Gold for all the ^laces, excepting Milan,
Venice, and Germanit, to which they are accustomed to give the Crown of 4
Livers current.

Genoa does exchange with Placentia Sold. 66 of Gold for 1 Crown. Lions Sol.
66. 4 of Gold for 1 Crown. Rome Crow. 100 of Gold for 98 Duc. Millan Cro. 1 of
4 Live. cor. for 119 Sold. Venice Cro. 1 of 4 Live. cor. for 7 Live. 10 Sol.
Piccho. Florence Cro. 100 of Gold for 106 Crown. Luccha Cro. 100 of Gold for
118 Duccat. Naples Crow. 1 of Gold for 134 Grains. Lechie Crow. 1 of Gold for
135 Grains. Barri Crow. 1 of Gold for 134 Grains. Palermo Crow. 1 of Gold for
29 (...) Carlins. Mesina Crow. 1 of Gold for 29 Carlins. Antw. and Col. Crow. 1
of Gold for 124 Grosses. London Crow. 1 of Gold for 83 d. sterling. Valentia Crow.
1 of Gold for Sol. 23 9. Saragosa Crow. 1 of Gold for Sol. 23. 10. Barselona
Crow. 1 of Gold for Sol. 23. 8. Siv. al. Med. Crow. 1 of Gold for Marved. 436.
Lixborne Crow. 1 of Gold for Rays 470. Bollonia Cro. 100 of Gold for Ducat.
118. Bergamo Cro. 100 of Gold for Ducat. 118. Francfort Cro. 1 of 4 Live. cor.
for Quarentin. 92.

Vide Chap. 360. how the Exchanges of this place are calculated.

CHAP. 281.
Of the Exchanges of Milan, in Lombardie.

IN Milan, Exchangers keep their Accounts in Livers, Solds, and Deniers
Imperial, and some in Crowns, Sols, The Exchanges of Milan.
and Deniers of Gold. The Monyes current, is accounted the Imperial Monyes:
there is also the Crown of Gold, of no settled price, but now worth Sol. 135.
The Cr^e of 6 Livers, is it which some do use in Exchange with Genoa. The
Crown of 117 Sol, is in use for the Exchange of Venetia.

In the custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken number to
Placentia, Lions, and sometimes to Genoa, and to all the other the whole
number, which is either One or 100 Crowns of Gold, excepting only to Venetia,
which is of Sol. 117. as aforesaid.

Milan does exchange with Placentia Sold. 134 for 1 Crown. Lions Sold. 135
(...) for 1 Crown. Rome Gold Crow. 100 for 98 Duc. Genoa Gold Crow. 1 for Live.
4. 10 current. Venice Cro. 1 of 117 Sol. 1 for Live. 7. 6. Florence Gold Cro.
100 for Crow. 105. Luccha Gold Cro. 100 for 117 Duccat. Naples Gold Cro. 100
for 133 Ducc. Lecchie Gold Cro. 100 for 134 Ducc. Barri Gold Cro. 100 for 133
(...) Ducc. Palermo Gold Crow. 1 for 29 Carlins. Mesina Gold Crow. 1 for 29
Carlins. Antu. and Col. Gold Crow. 1 for 124 Grosses. London Gold Crow. 1 for
84 (...) d. sterling. Valentia Gold Crow. 1 for 24 Sol. Barselona Gold Crow. 1 for
23. 9. Sol. Siv. al. Med. Gold Crow. 1 for 434 Marved. Lixborne Gold Crow. 1
for 465 Rays. Bollonia Gold Cro. 100 for 118 Ducatons. Saragosa Gold Crow. 1
for 23. 10. Sol. Bergamo Gold Cro. 100 for 118 Ducatons. Francfort Gold Crow. 1
for 103 Quarentins.

Vide Chap. 440. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 282.
Of the Exchanges of Venice, in the Adriatique Seas.

IN Venetia they keep their accounts in Livers, Sols, The ^anges of Ven^.
and Deniers of Picchol, and some in Livers, Sols, and Deniers Gross, and
others in Ducc. and Grosses. The Monyes which here is called Piccholi, is the
current Monyes of the place. The Monyes which we here call Gross, is worth 1
Liver, Sol. 62 of Picchols, or 10 Ducats. The Ducat is always worth Livers 6.
Sol. 4 of Picchol, or else accounted 24 Grosses. The Gross is worth Sol. 5. 2
d. of Picchol, and in the Liver of Grosses, it is accounted and reckned as in
Deniers.

In the custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken number only to Placentia,
Lions, Genoa, Millan, and Bolognia, and to all the rest, the whole number,
either by one Ducat, or by 100 Ducat.

Venetia does exchange with Placentia Duc. 129 for 100 Crowns. Lions Duc. 129
for 100 Crowns. Roma Duc. 100 for 77 Ducat. Genoa Live. Pic Duc. 7. 10 for 1
Cr. of 4 Live. current, Millan Live. Pic. 7. 6. 5. for 1 Cro. of 117 Sol.
Florence Duc. 100 for 82 Crowns. Naples Duc. 100 for 101 Ducats. Lucche Duc.
100 for 100 Duccats. Barri Duc. 100 for 09 9 Duc. Palermo Duc. 1 for Tarins 11
2. Mesina Duc. 1 for Tarins 10. 18. Antw. and Col. Duc. 1 for 91 Gross. London
Duc. 1 for 60 d. sterling. Valentia Duc. 1 for Sol. 17 6. Saragosa Duc. 1 for Sol.
17 8 Barselona Duc. 1 for Sol. 17 10. Siv. al. Med. Duc. 1 for Marvedes 320.
Lixborne Duc. 1 for Rays. 350. Bolonia Duc. 115 for Duccatons. 100. Bergamo
Duc. 100 for Duccatons 117. Francfort Duc. 100 for Florins 127. Lucca Duc. 100
for Duccatons 91^.

Vide Chap. 368. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 283.
Of the Exchanges of Florence, the ducall City of Toscany.

IN Florence the Exchangers keep their accounts in Livers, Solds, and Deniers,
Picholi, and Exchange in The Exchanges of Florence.
Crowns Sols, and Deniers.

The Moneys which is here called Pichol, is the money current of the place,
the Crown is always worth Livers 7, Sol. 10 of Piccol. wherein the custom of
other places is diverse, in which the Crown of gold, with the current Moneys,
and here the variety is accorded by the Exchange.

They use also a Duccat which is worth Livers 7. or else Bolonini 70.

In the use of Exchanging it gives the broken number to Lions, Placentia,
Genoa, Millan, and Venice, and to all others the entire or whole number found
to be either one Crown or 100 Crowns.

Florence does exchange with Placentia Crowns 105 for 100 Crowns. Lions Cro.
105 for 100 Crowns. Roma Cro. 100 for 96 Ducats. Genoa Cro. 106 for 100 Cro.
of Gold. Millano Cro. 106 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Venetia Cro. 82 (...) for 100
Ducats Luccha Cro. 100 for 112 Ducatons. Naples Cro. 100 for 130 Ducats.
Lecchia Cro. 100 for 129 Duccats. Bar Cro. 100 for 129 (...) Duccats. Palermo
Cro. -- 1 for 28 (...) Carlins. Mesina Cro. -- 1 for 28 (...) Carlins. Antu.
and Colon. Cro. -- 1 for 118 Gross. London Cro. -- 1 for 80 Pence starl.
Valentia Cro. -- 1 for 23 4 Sold. Saragosa Cro. -- 1 for 23 6 Sol. Barselona
Cro. -- 1 for 23 2 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Cro. -- 1 for 432 Marvedes. Lixborne Cro.
-- 1 for 460 Raise Bolonia Cro. 100 for 115 (...) Duccatons Bergamo Cro. 100 for
115 Duccatons. Francfort Cro. -- 1 for 98 Quarentins.

Vide Chap. 400 how these are calculated.

CHAP. 284.
Of the Exchanges of Lucca, a Republique in Toscanie.

IN Lucca, Exchangers do keep their accounts, in The (...) o^ (...).
Livers, Sol. and Deniers of Piccols, and do Exchange in Ducatons, Sol. and
Deniers the Monyes here called Piccols, is the current Coin of the place. The
Crown of Gold is always worth Live. 7. Sol. 10. of Piccols: as in Florence,
the Ducaton is worth 7. Live. of Piccol, and is commonly called the Crown of
Silver.

In the custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken number to Placentia, Lions,
Genoa, Millan, and Venetia, and to all other the entire or whole, which is one
Ducaton or 100 Ducatons.

Lucca does exchange with Placentia Ducatons 117 for 100 Crow. Lions Ducatons
-- 118 for 100 Crow. Roma Duc. 119 for 100 Duc. Genoa Duc. 118 for 100 Crow. of
Gold. Millan Duc. 118 for 100 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Duc.-92 for 100 Ducats.
^lorence Duc. 113 for 100 Crow. Naples Duc. 100 for 114 Ducats. Lucca Duc. 100
for 114 (...) Ducats. Barri Duc. 100 for 115 Ducats. Palermo Duc. -- 1 for 24
Carlins. Mesina Du. -- 1 for 24 Carlins. Antu. and Col. Du. -- 1 for 102
Grosses. London Du. -- 1 for 67 d. sterling. Valentia Du. -- 1 for 20 Sol.
Saragosa Du. -- 1 for 19. 10 Sol. Barselona Du. -- 1 for 19. 11 Sol. Siv. al.
Med. Du. -- 1 for 365 Marvedes. Lixborne Du. -- 1 for 395 Rays Bollonia Duc.
100 for Ducatons 100 (...) Bergamo Duc. 100 for Ducatons 99 Francfort Duc. -- 1
for 85 Quarentins.

CHAP. 285.
Of the Exchanges of Naples, the Metropolis of that Kingdom.

IN Naples, the Exchangers keep their Accounts in Ducats, Tarins, Grains, and
Cavalls, which are accounted The Exchanges of Naples.
in 5, 10, and 12 foll. The Ducat is 5 Tarins, or 100 Grains, or else 1200
Cavalles; the Tarine is accounted 20 Grains, or 240 Cavalles, and the Grain
is 12 Cavalles. Besides which, there is in use another sort of Monyes current,
which are Carlins, Cinquins, and Torneses. The Carline is 10 Grains, or half
a Tarine; from whence, 10 Carlins makes the Ducat. The Cinquine is 2 (...)
Grain, of which, 4 makes the Carline, and 40 the Ducat. The Tornese is 6
Cavalles, of which, 5 makes a Cinquine, 20 makes a Carline, 40 the Tarine, and
200 the Ducat.

In the custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken number to all Italy and
Lions, Palermo only excepted, and to all others it gives the whole number,
which is either one Ducat, or 100 Ducats.

Naples does exchange with Placentia Grain. 133 for 1 Crown. Roma Ducat. 136
for 100 Duc. Lions Grain. 135 for 1 Crown. Genoa Grain. 135 for 1 Crow. of
Gold. Millan Ducc. 134 for 100 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Duc. 100 (...) for 100
Duc. Florence Duc. 131 for 100 Crowns. Lucca Duc. 113 for 100 Ducatons.
Lecchie Duc. 100 for 100 Ducats. Barri Duc. 100 for 99 Ducats. Palermo Duccat.
1 for 174 Gra. of 8 Pic^. Mesina Duc. 96 of 6 Tar. for 100 Ducats. Antu. and
Col. Duccat. 1 for 88 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 66 Pence sterling. Valentia
Duccat. 1 for 18. 2 Sols. Saragosa Duccat. 1 for 18 Sols. Barselona Duccat. 1
for 17. 10 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Duccat. 1 for 330 Marved. Lixborne Duccat. 1 for
346 Rays. Bollonia Ducc. 114 for 100 Ducatons. Bergamo Ducc. 100 for 88
Ducatons. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 76 Quarentines.

Vide Chap. 342. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 286.
Of the Exchanges of Lecchie in Calabria.

IN Lecchie the Exchangers keep their accounts and The Exchanges o^ ^ie.
have their Moneys as in Naples, the Metropolis of that Kingdom, which is in
Duccats, Tarins, grains, and Cavallies accounted in 5, 20 and 12, and in
Exchanging it differs not much from the customeof Naples, specified in the
former leaf.

Lecchie does exchange with Placentia gra. 134 for 1 Crown. Lions gra. 136 for
1 Crown. Roma gra. 137 for 1 Duc. Genoa gra. 135 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Millan
gra. 134 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Duc. 101 (...) for 100 Duc. Florence Duc.
131 for 100 Crowns. Lucca Duc. 116 for 100 Ducaton. Naples Duc. 102 for 100
Ducat. Barri Duc. 100 for 100 Ducats. Palermo Duc. -- 1 for 22 Carlins. Mesina
Duc. -- 1 for 23 Carlins. Antu. and Col. Duc. -- 1 for 87 Grosses. London Duc.
-- 1 for 61 Pence sterling. Valentia Duc. -- 1 for 17. 10. Sols. Saragosa Duc. --
1 for 18 Sol. Barselona Duc. -- 1 for 18. 1. Sol. Siv. al. Med. Duc. -- 1 for
328 Marved. Lixborn Duc. -- 1 for 348 Rays. Bollonia Grain. 115 for 1 Ducaton.
Bergamo Grain. 114 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Duc. -- 1 for 75 (...) Quarentines.

CHAP. 287.
Of the Exchanges of Barri in Puglia.

IN Barri their Accounts and Monyes are the same as are in use in Naples,
mentioned in the former Leaf, The Exchanges of Barri.
and the custom in Exchanging also, is near conformable thereto.

Barri does exchange with Placentia Gra. 133 for 1 Crown. Lions Gra. 135 for 1
Crown. Rome Gra. 137 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Gra. 134 for 1 Crown of Gold. Millan
Gra. 134 (...) for 1 Crown of Gold. Venice Duc. 101 for 100 Ducats. Florence
Duc. 130 for 100 Crowns. Lucca Duc. 115 for 100 Duccatons. Naples Duc. 101
(...) for 100 Ducc. Lecchie Duc. 100 for 99 Ducc. Palermo Ducat. 1 for 22
Carlins. Mesina Ducat. 1 for 23 Carlins. Antw. and Col. Ducat. 1 for 88
Grosses. London Ducat. 1 for 62 d. sterling. Valentia Ducat. 1 for Sol. 18.
Saragosa Ducat. 1 for Sol. 17. 10. Barselona Ducat. 1 for Sol. 18. 2. Siv. al.
Med. Ducat. 1 for 330 Marvedes. Lixborne Ducat. 1 for 345 Rays. Bolonia Grain.
114 for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Grain. 112 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Ducat. 1 for 75
Quarentins.

CHAP. 288.
Of the Exchanges of Palermo, in Sicilia.

IN Palermo Exchangers keep their accounts in Ounces, Tarins, Grains and
Picchols, the which is successively The Exchanges of Palermo.
accounted in 30, 20, and 6. and others there be that keep their accounts in
Crown of moneys in Tarins, Grains, and Pichols, and these account it by 12,
20, and 6. The Ounceis 30. Tarins, or 600 Grains, or 3600 Pichols, the
Tarineis 20 Grains, or 120 Pichols, and the Grain is 6 Pichols. Besides which
there is a Crown in Moneys which is 12 Tarins or 240 Grains, or 1440 Pichols,
the Ducat is 13 Tarins or else 260 Grains or 1560 Piccoles, The Florin is 6
Tarins, or 120 Grains, or 720 Pichols, the Carlin is a Tarine, or 10 Grains, or
60 Pichol. In the custom of Exchanging it gives the broken number to all
Italy, and to Lions, and to all other places gives the whole number, which is
sometimes one duccat, or one Florin, or 1 Ounce, or one hundred Ounces.

Palermo does exchange with Placentia Carlin. 29 for 1 Crown. Lions Carl. 29
for 1 Crown. Roma Carl. 29 for 1 Duc. Genoa Carl. 29 for 1 Crow. of Gold.
Millan Carl. 29 for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Carl. 24 for 1 Duc. Florence Carl.
28 for 1 Crown. Lucca Carl. 25 for 1 Ducaton. Naplesgra. dipicc. 172 for 1
Ducat. Lecchie Carl. 23 for 1 Ducats. Barri Tarin. 11. 8 for 1 Ducat. Mesina
Ounc. 100 for 101 Ounces. Antu. and Col. Duc. 1 for 106 Grosses. London Duc. 1
for 73 Pencesterl. Valentia Flor. 1 for 9. 8. Sols. Saragosa Flor. 1 for 9, 10
Sol. Barselona Flo. 1 for Sol. 9. 7. Siv. al. Med. Flor. 1 for 185 Marved.
Lixborn Flor. 1 for 196 Rays. Bollonia Carl. 25 for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Carl.
25 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Duc. 1 for 89 Quarentines.

Vide Chap. 419. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 289.
Of the Exchanges of Mesina, in the Fair of Sicilia.

IN Mesina, the accounts are kept, and the Moneys The Exchanges of Mesina.
that are current, are the same as in Palermo aforementioned, only excepting in
the Exchange thereof with Naples, it gives a whole Number, which are found to
be of 100 Duccats.

This place and Palermo, are accounted to Exchange with Placentia or Lions, to
give more one Carlin per Ounce, by the name of making good the moneys, so
that, he that here is to pay Moneys by Exchange for the said places, must pay
61 Carlins per Ounce.

Mesina does exchange with Placentia Carl. 29 (...) for 1 Crown. Lions Carl.
29 (...) for 1 Crown. Roma Carl. 29 1 for 1 Duc. Genoa Carl. 29 for 1 Crow. of
Gold. Millan Carl. 29 (...) for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Carl. 22 (...) for 1
Duc. Florence Carl. 28 for 1 Crown. Lucca Carl. 25 (...) for 1 Ducaton. Naples
Ducc. 100 for 96 Duc. of 6 Tarins. Lecchie Tarin. 11. 14 for 1 Ducat. Barri
Carl. 23 for 1 Ducat. Palermo Ounce 100 for 102 Ounces. Antu. and Col. Duccat.
1 for 107 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 72 Pence sterling. Valentia Florin. 1 for
Sol. 9. 9. D. Saragosa Florin. 1 for Sol. 9. 10. D. Barselona Florin. 1 for
Sol. 9. 8. D. Siv. al. Med. Florin. 1 for 190 Marved. Lixborne Florin. 1 for
200 Rays. Bollonia Carl. 25 for 1 Ducaton. Bergamo Carlin 25 for 1 Ducaton.
Francfort Duccat. I for 90 Quarentines.

Vide Chap. 419. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 290.
Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe, in Brabant, and Collen in Germany the lower.

IN both these places the Exchangers keep their accounts The Exchanges of
Antwerp and Colonia.
in Livers, Sols, and Deniers of Grosses, so that their Grosses are there
accounted, as their Deniers or Pfening.

And in the custom of the Exchanges of these two places, they give the broken
number to all other places, London only excepted, which they give not by the
Gross, but by the Sol. or shilling.

Antwerp and Colonia does exchange with Placentia Gross 125 for 1 Crown.
Lions Gro. 128 for 1 Crown. Roma Gro. 130 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Gro. 129 for 1
Cro. of Gold. Millan Gro. 127 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Venetia Gro. 94 for 1 Ducat.
Florence Gro. 112 for 1 Crown. Luccha Gro. 104 for 1 Ducaton. Naples Gro. 91
for 1 Ducat. Lecchia Gro. 90 for 1 Duccat. Barri Gro. 90 for 1 Duccat. Palermo
Gro. 107 for 1 Duc. Mesina Gro. 107 for 1 Duc. London Sold. 34 1/^ for 1 Pound
sterling. Valentia Gro. 107 for 1 Duc. Saragosa Gro. 109 for 1 Duc. Barselona Gro.
112 for 1 Duc. Siv. al. Med. Gro. 106 for 1 Duc. Lixborne Gro. 102 for 1 Duc.
Bolonia Gro. 104 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Gro. 105 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort
Gro. 78 for 1 Floren. of 65 quar.

Vide Chap. 435. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 291.
Of the Exchanges of London, the Metropolis of England.

IN London, and throughout all England, Exchangers The Exchanges of London.
keep their Accounts in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence Sterling, and cast it up,
as in other places, by Livers, Sols, and Deniers, by 12 and 20. And in the
custom of Exchanging, it gives the Exchange to all places by the broken
number of Pence Sterling. Antuerpe and Colonia only excepted, with which two
places it exchangeth by the Pound of Sterling Money, above specified.

London does exchange with Placentia Starl. Pence 64 for 1 Crown. Lions Pence
64 for 1 Crown. Roma Pence 66 for 1 Duc. Genoa Pence 65 for 1 Crow. of Gold.
Millan Pence 64 (...) for 1 Crow. of Gold. Venetia Pence 50 for 1 Duc. in
Banco. Florence Pence 61 for 1 Crown. Lucca Pence 53 for 1 Ducaton. Naples
Pence 50 for 1 Ducat. Lecchie Pence 50 for 1 Ducat. Barri Pence 51 for 1 Ducat.
Palermo Pence 57 for 1 Ducat. Mesina Pence 56 for 1 Ducat. Antu. and Col.
Pounds sterling. 1 for 34 Shill. Flem. Valentia Pence 57 for 1 Ducat. Saragosa
Pence 59 for 1 Ducat. Barselona Pence 64 for 1 Ducat. Siv. al. Med. Pence 58
for 1 Ducat. Lixborne Pence 53 for 1 Ducat. Bollonia Pence 53 for 1 Ducaton.
Bergamo Pence 52 for 1 Ducaton. Francfort Fence 59 for 1 Florin.

Vide Chap. 443. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 292.
Of the Exchanges of Valentia, the Metropolis of Valentia.

IN Valentia and in all the Kingdoms of Valentia, in Spain Merchants do
keep their accounts in Livers The Ex^ o^ Valentia
Sols and Deniers, the current moneys of the place, are Rials and Deniers, and
Ryals ten are accounted for a Liver, so that half a Riall is a Soldo, (...)
Duccat is here imaginary, and accounted for 10 (...) Rials, and accounted 21
Sols.

In the custom of Exchanges of this place, it gives the broken number, to all
Italy, Spain and Germany, and to all other places the entire number, either
of one Duo. or 100 Duc.

The Castiliano is also here found in use for an imaginary Coin, in the
ancient custom of Exchanging with Sivill, and accounted worth 27 Sol. 4
Deniers.

Valentia does exchange with Placentia Sol. 23. 6 for 1 Crown. Lions Sol. 23.
8 for 1 Crown. Rome Sol. 24. 2 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Sol. 23. 10 for 1 Crown of
Gold. Millan Sol. 23. 9 for 1 Crown of Gold. Venice Sol. 17. 10 for 1 Ducat.
Florence Sol. 23. 0 for 1 Crown. Lucca Sol. 20. 2 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Sol.
18. 0 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Sol. 18. 2 for 1 Duccat. Barri Sol. 18. 1 for 1
Duccat. Palermo Sol. 9. 6 for 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 7 for 1 Florin. Antw.
and Col Ducc. 1 for 106 Grosses. London Ducc. 1 for 72 (...) d. sterling. Saragosa
Duc. 100 for 102 Duccat. Barselona Duc. 100 for 101 (...) Duccat. Siv. al. and
Med. Sol. 20. 3 for 1 Duccat. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 100 Duccat. Bolonia Sol.
20. 3 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Sol. 20. 4 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Sol. 14 for
1 Florin.

Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 293.
Of the Exchanges of Saragosa, in Catalonia.

IN Saragosa, Merchants keep their accounts as in Valentia before mentioned,
and have the same Monyes, saving that the Duccat passes here in account for 22
The Exchanges of Saragosa.
Sols, or 11 Rials.

In the custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken number to all Italy, and to
all the whole number, which is found to be either one Duccat or 100 Duccats.

Saragosa does exchange with Placentia Sol. 23. 8 for 1 Crown. Lions Sol. 23.
11 for 1 Crown. Rome Sol. 24. 3 for 1 Ducat. Genoa Sol. 23. 9 for 1 Crown of
Gold. Millan Sol. 23. 8 for 1 Crown of Gold. Venice Sol. 17. 9 for 1 Ducat.
Florence Sol. 22. 10 for 1 Crown. Lucca Sol. 20. 1 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Sol.
17. 10 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Sol. 18. 1 for 1 Duccat. Barri Sol. 18. 0 for 1
Duccat. Paler^ Sol. 9. 8 for 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 9 for 1 Florin. Antw. and
Col. Ducc. 1 for 105 Grosses. London Ducc. 1 for 73 d. sterling. Valentia Duc. 100
for 103 Duccat. Barselona Duc. 100 for 102 Duccat. Siv. al. and Med. Duc. 100
for 105 Duccat. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 108 Duccat. Bolonia Sol. 20. 2 for 1
Duccaton. Bergamo Sol. 20. 1 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 95
Quarentins.

Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 293.
Of the Exchanges of Barselona the Metropolis of Catalonia.

IN Barselona, the use of account keeping, and the monoyes are the same as is
specified in Valentia, excepting, The Exchanges of Barselona.
that the Duccat is here accounted Sol. 24, which is twelve single Rials.

In the custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken number to all other
places, excepting to Antuerpe, Colonia, London, Lixborne, and Germany, to which
it gives the whole number, which is found to be either one Duc. or 100 Duc.

Barselona does exchange with Placentia Sol. 23. 10 for 1 Crown. Lions Sol. 24
for 1 Crown. Rome Sol. 24. 4 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Sol. 24. 2 for 1 Crown of
Gold. Millan Sol. 24. 1 for 1 Crown of Gold. Venice Sol. 18. 2 for 1 Ducat.
Florence Sol. 23. 0 for 1 Crown. Lucca Sol. 20. 2 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Sol.
18. 3 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Sol. 18. 2 for 1 Duccat. Barri Sol. 18. 1 for 1
Duccat. Palermo Sol. 9. 10 for 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 9 for 1 Florin. Antw.
and Col. Ducc. 1 for 103 Grosses. London Ducc. 1 for 72 d. sterling. Valentia Duc.
103 for 100 Duc. Saragosa Duc. 104 for 100 Duccats. Siv. al. and Med. Duc. 106
for 100 Duccats. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 104 Duccats. Bolonia Sol. 20. for 1
Duccaton. Bergamo Sol. 20 2 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Duc. 1 for 96 Quarentines.

Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 295.
Of the Exchanges of Sivil, Alcala, Medina del Campo, and other places in
Castilia.

IN these parts, and generally throughout Spain, Merchants do keep their
accounts in Marvedes; yet The Exchanges of Sivil, Alcala, Medina del Campo. etc.
notwithstanding, for the benefit of Exchanging, they have an imaginary
Duccat, which Duccat is accounted 375 Marvedes. The Crown of Gold is ever
worth 400 Marvedes, and the single Riall ever worth 34 Marvedes.

In the custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken number to all Italy
and Lions, but to all other places the whole number, found to be either simply
the single Duccat, or 100 Duccats.

There is also of old in use an imaginary Coin, called the Castiliano, where
with these places do exchange with Valentia, and is 485 Marvedes.

Sivil, Alcala, and Medina does exchange with Placentia Marved. 440 for 1
Crown. Lions Marv. 445 for 1 Crown. Rome Marv. 450 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Marv.
442 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Millan Marv. 438 for 1 Cro. of Gold. Venice Marv. 330
for 1 Duccat. Florence Marv. 430 for 1 Crown. Lucca Marv. 370 for 1 Duccaton.
Naples Marv. 337 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie Marv. 334 for 1 Duccat. Barri Marv. 333
for 1 Duccat. Palermo Marv. 180 for 1 Florin. Mesina Marv. 175 for 1 Florin.
Antu. and Col. Duccat. 1 for 105 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 72 Fence sterling.
Valentia Duccat. 1 for Sol. 19. 8. Saragosa Ducc. 100 for 104 Duccat. Barselona
Ducc. 100 for 108 Duccat. Lixborne Ducc. 100 for 109 Duccat. Bollonia Marv. 372
for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Marv. 368 for 1 Duccaton. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 88
Quarentines.

Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.

CHAP. 296.
Of the Exchanges of Lixborne in Portugal.

IN Lixborne and throughout Portugal, Merchants accounts are kept in Raise,
beside which, they have an imaginary Duccat, which is accounted for four
hundred The Exchanges of Li^borne.
Raise.

In the custom of Exchanging, this place gives a whole number to Anuers,
Colonia, London, and Germany, which is only upon the said one Duccat, and to
all other places it gives on Exchange by a broken number.

Lixborne does exchange with Placentia Res 472 for 1 Crown. Lions Res 480 for
1 Crown. Rome Res 483 for 1 Duccat. Genoa Res 476 for 1 Crown of Gold. Millan
Res 475 for 1 Crown of Gold. Venice Res 354 for 1 Ducat. Florence Res 465 for
1 Crown. Lucca Res 397 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Res 350 for 1 Duccat. Lecchie
Res 352 for 1 Duccat. Barri Res 348 for 1 Duccat. Palermo Res 190 for 1 Florin.
Mesina Res 193 for 1 Florin. Antw. and Col. Duc. 1 for 104 Grosses. London Duc.
1 for 69 d. sterling. Valentia Duc. 105 for 100 Duc. Saragosa Duc. 104 for 100
Duccats. Barselona Ducc. 103 (...) for 100 Duccats. Siv. al. Med. Duc. 106 for
100 Duccats. Bolonia Res 400 for -- 1 Duccaton. Bergamo Res 388 for -- 1
Duccaton. Francfort Ducc. 1 for 89 Quarentines.

CHAP. 297.
Of the Exchanges of Bollonia in Italy.

IN Bollonia some are found to keep their accounts in Livers, Sols, and
Deniers, and others in Duccatons, Sols, The Exchanges of Bollonia.
and Deniers. And in the custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken
number to Placentia, Lions, Rome, Genoa, Millan, Florence, and Luccha, and to
all others the whole number, which is the Duccaton, either one or one hundred.

Bollonia does exchange with Placentia Duccatons 117 for 100 Crowns. Lions
Duccat. 119 for 100 Crowns. Rome Duccat. 120 for 100 Duccat. Genoa Duccat. 118
for 100 Cro. of Gold. Mill^ Duccat. 117 for 100 Cro. of Gold. Venice Duccat.
100 for 114 Duccats. Florence Duccat. 116 for 100 Crowns. Lucca Duccat. 101
for 100 Ducatons. Naples Duccat. 100 for 113 (...) Duccats. Lecchie Duccaton 1
for 112 Grains. Barri Duccat. 100 for 112 (...) Duccats. Palermo Duccat. 1 for
24 Carlins. Mesina Duccat. 1 for 24 (...) Carlins. Antu. and Col. Duccat. 1 for
103 Grosses. London Duccat. 1 for 67 Pence sterling. Valentia Duccat. 1 for Sol.
20. 2 d. Saragosa Duccat. 1 for Sol. 20. 0. Barselona Duccat. 1 for Sol. 20. 1
d. Siv. al. Med. Duccat. 1 for 370 Marved. Lixborne Duccat. 1 for 395 Rays.
Bergamo Duccat. 100 for 101 Duccatons. Francfort Duccat. 1 for 87 Quarentines.

CHAP. 298.
Of the Exchanges of Bergamo, in Lombardie.

IN Bergamo, Merchants accounts are kept in Livers, The Ex^s of B^.
Sols, and Deniers of Piccholis, and the Exchangers in Duccatons, Sols, and
Deniers. The Money of Piccholi, is the current Coin of the place, and the same
as is in use in Venetia. The Duccaton is worth 7 Livers of Piccolis, so that 1
Sol. of Duccaton is worth 7 Sol of Piccols, so likewise the Denier of Duccaton
is worth 7 Deniers of Piccoli.

In the custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken number to
Placentia, Lions, Rome, Genoa, Millan, Venetia, Florence, Luccha, Naples, and
Bollonia, and to all other places the whole number, which is found to be the
Duccaton.

Bergamo does exchange with Placentia Duccaton 117 (...) for 100 Crowns. Lions
Duccaton 117 (...) for 100 Crowns. Rome Duccaton 118 for 100 Duc. Genoa
Duccaton 117 (...) for 100 Crow. of Gold. Millan Duccaton 117 (...) for 100
Cro. of Gold. Venice Duccaton 87 for 100 Duccats. Florence Duccaton 111 (...)
for 100 Crowns. Luccha Duccaton 100 (...) for 100 Duccat. Naples Duccaton 88
for 100 Ducc. Lecchie Duccaton 1 for 112 Grains. Barri Duccaton 1 for 110
Grains. Palermo Duccaton 1 for 25 Carlins. Mesina Duccaton 1 for 24 (...)
Carlins. Antu. and Col. Duccaton 1 for 104 Grosses. London Duccaton 1 for 67 d.
sterling. Valentia Duccaton 1 for Sol. 20. Saragosa Duccaton 1 for Sol. 20. 1 d.
Barselona Duccaton 1 for Sol. 20. 2 d. Siv. al. Med. Duccaton 1 for 370 Marved.
Lixborne Duccaton 1 for 390 Rays. Bollonia Duccaton 100 for 100 Duccatons.
Francfort Duccaton 1 for 86 Quarentins.

CHAP. 299.
Of the Exchanges of Francfort, Norimberg, Augusta, and Vienna in Germany.

IN these places, Merchants are found to keep their accounts in Florins, Sols,
and Deniers, as by 20 and 12. The Exchanges of Francfort, Norimberg, Augusta,
and Vienna.
the Florin being 20 Sols, or 60 Quarentines. The Quarentine is in some places
called the Craizer, which is 4 Pfenings, so that 12 Pfening makes one Sol.

In the custom of Exchanging, these places gives the whole number, which is
the Florin, to London, Antuerpe, Colonia, and Valentia, and to all others gives
the broken number, which is the Quarentine.

Francfort, Norimberg, Augusta, and Vienna does exchange with Placentia
Quarentine 102 for 1 Crown. Lions Quarent. 103 for 1 Crown. Rome Quarent. 104
for 1 Duccat. Genoa Quarent. 191 for 1 Cro. of 4 li. curr. Millan Quarent. 102
(...) for 1 Cro. of Gold. Venice Flor. -- 126 for 100 Duccat. Florence Quarent.
96 for 1 Crown. Luccha Quarent. 86 for 1 Duccaton. Naples Quarent. 77 for 1
Ducc. Lecchie Quarent. 77 for 1 Ducc. Barri Quarent. 78 for 1 Ducc. Palermo
Quarent. 90 for 1 Ducc. Mesina Quarent. 89 (...) for 1 Ducc. Antu. and Col.
Flor. of 65 quar. 1 for 80 Gross. London Florin. -- 1 for 50 d. sterling.
Valentia Florin. -- 1 for Sol. 13. 8 d. Saragosa Quarent. 96 for 1 Duccat.
Barselona Quarent. 97 for 1 Duccat. Siv. al. Med. Quarent. 87 for 1 Duccat.
Lixborne Quarent. 86 for 1 Duccat. Bollonia Quarent. 88 for 1 Duccaton. Bergamo
Quarent. 87 for 1 Duccaton.

CHAP. 300.
Of the Terms of payments in general of Bills of Exchange.

TO make these Tables complete, and the Rules of The terms of payment of Bills
of ^xchange, ^e.
these Exchanges to be truly and rightly understood, it is observable, that as
all Exchanges have a settled rate and price, by which the taker takes, and the
giver by covenant gives it; so is there likewise a certain positive term,
and time limited, wherein, and at which day expired, the factor of the taker,
or his assign, repayeth the covenanted sum to the factor, or assign of the
giver thereof, which ^rme or time is of differing space of days prefixed: the
common term or times by which all Bills in Exchanges are made, are found
usually to be five; which is, first, at sight of the Bill; secondly, at Vsance;
thirdly, at double Vsance; fourthly, at half Vsance; and fifthly, at Marts,
Faires, etc. which five Terms in Exchanges are thus understood.

First then, at sight, or so many days after sight, is understood to be so
long a term or time, as the Bill of Exchange will be after the 1. At Sight.
deliverie going to that place, where it is covenanted that the same should be
paid; and upon the show and sight thereof, or at so many days after, as is
specified therein, it must be paid and answered accordingly.

Secondly, at Vsance, is understood to be of a different term and space of
time; sometimes consisting of 8 days, as from Rome (...). At (...).
to Naples; sometimes of 10 days, as from Genoa to Rome; sometimes of 30
days, as from London to Roven, to Antuerpe, to Middleburgh, to Amsterdam, and
so to other places; sometimes of 60 days, or two months, as from London to
Hamburgh, from Antuerpe to Rome, and to Venice, and to Florence, to Naples, to
Palermo, and so to other places: sometimes again, Vsance is understood to be
90 days, or three months, as from London to Venice, Florence, Naples, etc.
according to the several customs of the said distant several places, where
the Bills of Exchanges are made, and ever accounted from the date of the said
Bill.

Thirdly, at double Vsance; which, considering the said places, is understood
to be double the former space of single Vsance, being (...). At (...) V^e.
^ther of 8, 10, 30, 60, or 90 days doubled, according to the custom of the
place where the Bill is made and accounted also from the date of the said Bill.

Fourthly, at half Vsance, this is understood to be half the abovesaid, 4.
At half Vsance.
first limited term or time, according (as I said before) to the common
custom of that place where the Bill is made, and accounted also from the date
of the Bill.

Fifthly, at Martes or Faires, which by Italians and Spaniards is 5. At Faires
and Martes.
called La Fiera, and this space of time for payment of Bills is understood to
be at some certain days, accounted for Faires in the said places, where the
Bills are made to be paiable, as is found in Placentia quarterly four times of
the year; the like observed generally in Lions, and in Castile, at three times
of the year, accounted as in three Banks 1o in las Fieras de Vilaleon. 2o de
Medina del Campo, 3o de Medina del Rio Sieco, which places are as public
Martes, whereto Merchants do use to give and take, sometimes to benefit
themselves by Exchanges, as in the abovesaid places, and sometimes to buy
commodities, and supply their occasions, as is used twice a year for some
Martes in Germany, as I have touched more largely in the description of the
trade of the said Cities.

CHAP. 301.
How the rates and Prices in Exchanges are settled.

THe next thing considerable yet to be handled How the Rates and prizes of
Exchanges are settled.
for the explanation of these Tables of Exchanges, is the rate and price it
self, for seeing that so many Merchants of great eminency, whose estates are
continually traversed from one country to another, and from one Coin to
another, do daily and constantly give and take as their occasion, and the
rates of the Exchanges, conduce to their profit, it may be conceived, that
their great purses, should prescript the rule and rate thereto, which is seen
so variously to alter, and daily to rise and fall by the continual current of
those and others that use this Mystery, yet notwithstanding, it is not found
that they have any determinate power or stroke, in giving the price thereto,
though itmust be confessed, that such have a conducing hand, so far forth as it
may be found, that their opinion concur with the universal opinions of the
rest, interessed in this mystical body of Exchanges, and therefore to explain
my self, it may fitly here be demanded, how these rates and prizes of
Exchanges come to be set, and then continued, or how it coms to pass that the
same are seen so frequently to vary and alter, in foreign parts: whereto I
answer, that the Bankers in Italy, Spain and France, being now adays found to
be the only great takers and deliverers of monyes, have at the times of the
payments of Exchanges, in the principal places aforesaid, (as namely, at Lions
in France, Madrid, and in other places of Spain, Florence, Genoa, Venetia, and
such other places in Italy) a constant meeting, and there by certain tickets
in writing, deliver every man his opinion, what the price of the Exchange ought
to be for all places: Then exchanging for the next Fair or time of payment in
every the said places, and according to the same, the calculation is cast up,
by the Medium; that is to say, if there be seven or more Voices or Tickets, the
said seven are added together, and the seventh part is the Medium; and if there
be ten, then the ten being cast up, the tenth part is the Medium; and so for
greater or lesser numbers accordingly: wherein it is to be noted, that these
Bankers do observe, how the plenty of Monyes lies by Exchange, how the
occasions of Princes may help or hinder, either by great Receipts, or great
disbursements; how the Trade and commerce of Negotiators and Merchants is
concurrent and effective; and therein they are found to concur, in setting
the said Rates and Prices for their own commodity and advantage: and from
this Spring, is observed to arise the Maine Ocean of all the Exchanges of
Christendom; in which, this of our Country of England has but a small share,
as being only a Branch derived from the principal Channel.

CHAP. 302.
Of the Par in Exchanges.

THe next thing observable here, is the loss and gain Of the Par in
Exchanges, which is two.
accruing by these Exchanges practiced amongst Merchants: to distinguish which,
and for the finding out the realitie thereof, every giver and taker applies
his study to find out the true and real Par of Exchanges; whereby it is
manifested, both what the gain and loss is, and who is the gainer and who is
the loser. Now this Par in Exchanges may be here properly (in the general)
said to be of two distinct kinds; the one as appertaining to the State and
Prince, and belonging to the profit and loss of the Kingdom; and the other to
the Merchant or Exchanger, and appertaining to the profit and loss of his
private estate and interest: the first, I hold proper and fit the knowledge of
Counselors and Statesmen; and the other, is proper and fit the knowledge of
the Trading-Merchant: the finding out of both which Par's in Exchanges, is thus.

The first Par in Exchanges, which I term here the Princes Par, 1 Princes Par.
or the Sovereigns Value for Value, is grounded upon the weight, finenesse,
and valuation of the Monyes of each several Kingdom, City, or Place; the
several Standards thereof so equally proportioned, so truly and justly by the
art of the Mint rectified, that each Prince his Coin, in Exchanges, may have
its due allowance, according to the goodness and finenesse, coursenesse and
badnesse thereof: and therefore herein to make and to settle this abovenamed
Par exactly betwixt one Kingdom and another, we are to examine and compare,
not only the weight and finenesse of our own Coins as they are in
themselves, but also the weight and finenesse of those of other Princes and
Countries, with the real proportion that happens therein, not only between
our own Gold and Silver, but also between the Gold and Silver of other
Countries: This examination, comparison, and proportion, duly, rightly, and
really examined, compared, and proportioned, and no difference, inequality, or
disproportion found or admitted therein, then may our Exchanges run at one and
the same price and rate, both for Gold and Silver, taking the denomination
according to the valuation of the Monyes of each Country and Kingdom; hereby
finding how much ^ne Silver or Gold our own Pound Sterling contains, and
what quantity of other Monyes, either of France, Italy, Germany, Netherlands,
Eastland, etc. this Kingdom is to have in Exchange, to countervaile the same,
in the like weight and finenesse, answerable to our own, be it by the P^nd,
Doller, Duccat, Crown, or any other real or imaginary Coin, giving always
a Value for Value, and receiving the like; which, by reason of the great
consequence depending thereon, I here call the Prince his Par, in the exchanges
of his Monyes by Bills of Exchange with other Countries and Kingdoms.

The second Par, I call the Merchants or Exchangers Par in Bills 2 Merchants
Par.
of Exchange, and is grounded partly upon the Sovereign or Princes Par above
mentioned, but principally upon the current value of the said Coins, the
plenty and scarcity thereof, the rising and falling, inhansement and
debasement of the same: and therefore such Merchants as are Exchangers, do
endeavor by certain rules of Exchanges, to equalize the valuation of the
Monyes of one Prince or Country with another: And therefore every man that
delivers his Money in one Country, or Place, to have it in another, is and
ought to be ever curious, to understand either the loss or gain that comes
thereof; which is only and properly distinguished by the knowledge and finding
out of this Par, before mentioned. For finding out of which, it is requisite for
him that remitteth, to know either by his own advice, judgment, or otherwise,
how much the Crown, Doller, Duccat, or Pound whence he remitteth, is worth in
the place whither he would make his remittance unto. As for example, having
Money in Lions in France, which I would remit for Antuerpe, I ought to know how
much the Crown of France is really worth in Antuerpe: as presuppose, that the
Crown of France, of 67 Souls, or 3 li. 7 Souls Tournois, is worth by exchange,
according to the course thereof, 100 Gross there; I would then know that the
real Crown of 60 Souls or 3 li. Turnois (the Crown wherein Exchanges are
made) is worth, multiplying and dividing as the rule requires, it will appear
to be Souls 89 37/67 Gross, which is indeed the true value of the Crown: if
then the Bill of Exchange be made for less then 89 37/67 Gross per Crown of
3 li. Turnois, there is a loss thereby; and if for more, there is a gain
thereby: so that it is hereby evident, that 89 37/67 Gross is the Par in
Exchanges between these two Countries, in the Crown of France, and in the
Gross of Antuerpe; the which rule may serve as example in remittances for all
other places: for it is not otherwise to be imagined, that any positive rule
can be set down herein, considering the diversity of species, which, as I
said before, daily rises and falls, and the price of the Exchanges, which
every day, according to presenting occasions, likewise alters, found to be
sometimes at one rate, and sometimes at another. And this Par is the matter
whereupon all Merchants Exchanges for profit and loss is grounded, and is the
Par, or Value for Value, which in this following Tract I principally and
fundamentally aim at.

Now the last thing considerable in this place, and now to be observed, is the
method, form, and manner, how the Accounts of these diverse Exchanges, from one
Country to another, is between one Merchant and another cast up and
calculated; which indeed principally is the work of the Fen, and the hand of
the Arithmetician; which as a necessary adjunct, and needful furtherance to
the Mystery of Exchanging, I have hereto inserted, and have herein pitched
upon the principal places here mentioned, willingly omitted the least and rest
of them, having fitted (to such as I have conceived the most worthy) apt
questions and their solutions, from one Town or City to another, with the
denomination of their several accounts and species, the manner of the brief
calculations thereof, and the short proof of each prescribed rule and
position, adding for conclusion to each general City of Exchanges, some
examples of orders and Commissions, given and received, in draughts and
remittances, made according to the common custom and use of the place,
omitting some other principal points, wherein I might have enlarged both this
matter and subject, that the ingenious head and hand of the learner may have
room and scope to work upon according either to his desire, capacity, or
inclination.

CHAP. 303.
Of Examples upon the Exchanges practiced at Lions, and how the same are
calculated.

I Have formerly noted, that the payments of Bills of Examples upon Exchanges
in Lions.
Exchanges at Lions is only in use four times a year, which are, first,

1 The payments of Roys, beginning the 6 of March after their style, and
continues the rest of that month. 2 The payments of Pasques, or Easter, the 6
of June. 3 The payments of August, the 6 of September. 4 The payments of
All Saints, the 6 of December.
The acceptance of all Bills of Exchange here, is always made the The custom
of acceptance of Bills of Exchange in Lions.
first day of the month of each payment: which acceptances hold in themselves
both a promise and assurance of the payment of the sum included in the said
Bills so accepted: And because there is no other time accustomed wherein Bills
of Exchanges are accepted, the Merchants here resident have invented, by means
of a little Book, away of registring their several Bills, which they commonly
call in French a Bilan; in which Book, or Bilan, they accustomarily A Bilan.
use to make a little Cross or mark upon each Bill there registered, and thus
orderly accepted. But if the party to whom the same is presented, make a
question whether he shall accept it or not, and demands time to think upon
it, then they placeupon that Bill so there registered the letter V, signifying
in French, Voir la lettre, or the Bill seen; and if in conclusion he refuse
the same, either because he holds not the party that charged the same
sufficient, or solvent, or for any other just occasion, they commonly note the
same in their Billan with S and P, signifying that the same is Soubs Protest,
that is, under Protest: The which Bilan of Acceptations, Draughts, and
Remittances, thus quoted and thus registered, I observed at my residence in that
City, to carry so much credit amongst the Merchants of the place, as if the
same had been done with witnesses by a public Notarie.

The third day of the month of the said payments, the price of The price
settled for the succeeding Faires.
the Exchange is cut and settled, as well for the succeeding course of Eions it
self, as for all the principal exchanging places of Christendom; in all
which it is found, that Lions gives the Law and rule, ordering in some sort the
price of all other places, excepting for Placentia.

The sixth day all the Merchants residing upon the place, appear Descounters or
transferring of bills of Exchange, and debts in L^ns
in certain public rooms near the Burse, or place of daily meeting with their
Book or Bilan, containing both their Debit and Credit, of both depts and Bills
of Exchanges, and there address themselves to one another, and to whom they
are indepted, intimating unto them, to transfer parcels, or as they term it
Virer party, and give for Debtor one or more, who does owe and stands indepted
unto them, the like sum or parcel, the which being accepted by the
Creditors, the sum is respectively registered, and noted in the Bilan abovesaid,
and after that time; that parcel is understood to be transferred, and remains
entirely upon the Risgoe, peril and fortune of the party that did accept the
same, and in this manner here I have observed a Million of Crowns has in a
morning been paid and satisfied without the disbursement of a Denier in money,
and therefore to this purpose all Merchants resident here, or their servants
for them are compelled in this manner, to appear with their Bilon, thus to
satisfy accounts with their Creditors, and make good their paiments, or in
default of this appearance, are by the custom of the place declared as
Bankrupts, and this in brief is the remarkable custom of Lions in matters of
Exchanges upon every payment.

It now remains I should show the rules how the Exchanges Rules of casting up
the Exchanges in Lions.
are made in this place, for at every payment, the current moneys of the place
are found increasing, or decreasing being sometimes worth, from one payment to
another 2 per cent. or 2 (...) more or less, to understand then these rules, I
will first lay down some Examples for the help of those that are not well
acquainted with the custom of this City.

Presuppose that a Merchant has taken in Banco 455 Livers, at 2 per cent. from
the paiments of Roys, as they call it, or Kings, until the payment of Pasques
or Easter, and to know what the Exchange may amount unto, at the rate
abovesaid, do this briefly the (...) of the said 455 Lib. is first to be
taken, and then the of the said tenth, shall be the Exchange, forasmuch as the
tenth of an hundred is ten, and the of ten is 2 which is the Exchange before.
mentioned, At 2 per Cent.
and therefore of the tenth is to be taken, as for example. ^

Again a Debtor owes unto his Creditor Lib. 3141. 16. 6 d. to pay at the rate
of 2 per cent. for Exchange, the which most facilie At 2 (...).
and briefly is thus performed, take the (...) of the said sum, and of the
proceed (...) and of the (...) the, adding the said fifth to the. And thus the
value of the said Exchange is found out, as here follows. ^

The reason of this brevity is, that if from 100, one takes as is before said
of 1/10 and (...) of the said the product of the said (...) with the (...),
gives just 2 (...) as is above specified.

Again at 2 (...) per Cent. how much amounts the Exchange of Lib. 842. 17.
6. you must here take (...) of a 1/10 and a 1/10 of the said adding the two
last products the Exchange will appear, as ^

Again a Debtor owes to his Creditor lib. 1435. 17. 8d. to be paid at the
rate of 2 (...) per cent. for the Exchange, to do this, take At 2.
the (...) part of the said sum, and of his Product (...) and of the (...) the
(...) adding the said (...) to the said (...) and the Exchange will appear. ^

Again at 2 per cent. what will the Exchange of 7661 lib. 17. Sols amount
unto, to do which, the of (...) and the (...) of the said (...) is At 2 (...).
to be taken, adding the and the (...) and it gives the Exchange. ^

Again, at 3 per Cent. I would know the Exchange of 7000 lib. At 3. per Cent.
herein take of 1/10 and of the said, adding the two last products, it gives
the Exchange: as example, ^

Also presuppose, that a Merchant has sold some goods for the At 2 (...).
value of 5312. 10. li. at a years time, conditionally to have the allowance
of 2 per Cent. for every payment, what ought the Buyer to give the Seller at
the said term? in this case consider, that 2 per Cent. for a payment, is 10
per Cent. for the year; and therefore the 1/10 is to be taken, and to be added
to the total, and it gives li. 5843. 15. ^

But I have stayed upon this point too long, and therefore will omit further
Examples, and will only insert a brief Method of these form of Exchanges, in
this place, because the ingenious may make it serve his occasions in any
Country, where Monyes are either given or taken at interest, serving as
compendious Tables, for casting up of any Exchange here, or of interest
elsewhere, for any space and term of time whatsoever, and fitly serves as a
necessary introduction to what I shall here further insert, as concerning the
Exchanges made by Lions for other Countries.

CHAP. 304.
Brief Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for the Rates of Interests
in many other places.

FIrst, at per Cent. take 1/10 of a 1/10, and the of the last (...) shall Rates
of Exchange in Lions and may serve for rates of interest in many other Cities.
be the rate and sum of the Exchange propounded and demanded.

At per Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10, and a (...) of the last 1/10, is the
Exchange.

At per Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10, and of the last 1/10 is the Exchange. At
per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10, and of the last 1/10 is the Exchange. At per Cent. of
a 1/10, and the 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At (...) per Cent. (...) of the
1/10 of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At per Cent. of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall
be the Exchange. At 1 per Cent. (...) of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1
(...) per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10 and (...) of the last 1/10, adding the two last.
At 1 per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10 and (...) of the last 1/10, adding the and 1/10.
At 1 per Cent. (...) of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1 per Cent. of a 1/10
shall be the Exchange. At 1 (...) per Cent. and of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be
the Exchange. At 1 (...) per Cent. 1/10 of a 1/10 and of the last 1/10. At 2
per Cent. (...) of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 2 (...) per Cent. (...) of
a 1/10 and (...) of the said (...), adding the (...) and. At 2 (...) per Cent.
of a 1/10 and (...) of the said (...). At 2 (...) per Cent. of a 1/10 shall be
the Exchange. At 2 per Cent. of a 1/10 and (...) of the said, adding the and
(...). At 2 per Cent. of a 1/10 and the 1/10 of the said. At 3 per Cent. of a
1/10 and of the said, adding the and (...). At 3 (...) per Cent. (...) of a
1/10. At 3 (...) per Cent. of a 1/10 and (...) of the said (...), adding the
and (...). At 3 per Cent. of a (...) and of the said, adding the and (...). At
4 per Cent. of a (...). At 4 (...) per Cent. and of At 5 per Cent. (...) of a
1/10. At 5 per Cent. (...) of a 1/10 and 1/10 of the said (...), adding the
(...) and (...). At 6 per Cent. (...) of a 1/10, and of the said (...) shall be
the Exchange. At 6 per Cent. 1/10 of a of a shall be the Exchange. At 6 per
Cent. (...) or a (...) of one (...). At 7 per Cent. (...) of 1/10 and of the
said. At 8 per Cent. (...). At 10 per Cent. (...). At 12 per Cent. (...). At 15
per Cent. 1/10 and of the said 1/10, adding the whole. At 16 per Cent. (...).
At 17 per Cent. 1/10 and twice the (...) the one of the other of the said 1/10.
At 20 per Cent.. At 22 per Cent. and of (...) of the said adding gives the
Exchange. At 25 per Cent. take the.

The reason why I have been induced to set down the brief The reason and
benefi^ of these rules, as well in Lions as else where.
method of calculating the Exchanges here is, that as it is to be understood
that the rate of the Exchange at the payment is regulalated for the next
ensuing payment from that day, so must it also be understood that the nearer
the time is, to the day of the next payment ensuing, the lesser consequently is
the rate of the Exchange, for that payment to be accounted, and because in many
contracts that are made there in private bargains, between merchant and
merchant, it is oftentimes found that the time of payment prefixed by agreement
is sometimes 2, 3, or 4, or more Fairs or payments to come and succeed, and
thereto is oftentimes to be considered the remaining time running to the first
payment ensuing, therefore in this case, I have for the easier and better
reckoning of him that sels a commodity, and of him that does buy the same, set
down the easiest and briefest way how to make his account of the time to
run, which here I have set down to the common term of 10 payments, which at
2 (...) per cent. makes 25 per cent.

CHAP. 305.
Examples of the Exchanges of Lions, with the profit of the profits thereof.

THe declaration of these rules is best demonstrated by examples, which here
following my intended Example of Exchange, with the profit of the profit
thereof, in the nature of intererest upon interest.
method, for the better understanding thereof, I here purpose to insert, the
question being: That if a Creditor receives not each payment, the Exchange
that is due to him, the Debtor (...) ^o ^ke him good the same, as if it were
the principal, for Example.

I would know what shall Lib. 1560, 15 Sol. give for profit at the rate of two
per cent. for three paiments, valuing the said Exchange, with the principal at
the price abovenamed.

First it is to be noted, that if by the rules above mentioned, the profits of
the said sum at 2 per cent. for one payment coms to Lib. 39. 0. 4. d. that
some is to be added to the principal, and then it does amount unto Lib. 1599.
15. s. 4. d. out of which must be drawn the Exchange of the second payment,
and add that likewise to the principal, and out of that, the Exchange, of the
third, and adding that in the same manner, and it gives 1680-15. as by example
following does appear. ^

And in this manner the account of the profits of the Exchange, of Lions may be
made for any time whatsoever, and forasmuch as the rate of the Exchange, for a
payment in a continued sum, may alter, therefore I will lay down one Example
more, which Posito may be 7450 put out by the Exchange of Lions for a year, or
4 payments: The first payment falling to be at 2, the second at 2, the third at
2 (...) and the fourth payment at 2 (...), which accordingly cast up, and
continued with the profit of the profit added to the principal, it will amount
to 8203 lib. 6. 6 d. as following, shall appear by the example. ^

Now forasmuch as these Rules have affinity with the interest used Interest
paid. upon rebate
in many countries, continued by the year from one to another, called by us,
interest upon interest, it will be needless further to insist thereupon, and
therefore before I proceed to the Exchange of Lions, I must not omit to show
one particular circumstance much in use upon this place, which is the account
of discounting, which falls out in many occasions, but principally when a
Merchant does here sell his commodities at 4, 6, or 10 payments time, and that
he would pay the same at any payment, before the prefixed time, at a covenanted
rate, an example or two in this kind I will also show, serving for other
countries also, where the like manner of discounting is used, with a brief
manner, how the same is easily cast up, contrary to the method of many of our
common arithmeticians.

CHAP. 306.
Of the Account of Discounts or rebates, and the manner thereof, used as well
in Lions, as in many other places of trade.

AMerchant sells a commodity for Lib. 3709, 1259 paiable at a year, to
discount at pleasure at 2 per Accounts of discounts or rebates in Lions, and
elsewhere.
Cent. for a payment, or Fair, now if the buyer pay the same content, or in
ready money, how much ought the seller to rebate him for discounte for the 4
paiments or faires at the said price?

To do this succinctly and briefly, I first draw the discounte of the said
Lib. 3709, 12, 9 at 108 per cent. and then multiply the said sum by 2, and
of the product take of a 1/9 or more facilie, 3 thirds, the one of the other,
the last whereof, shall be the discount of the said parcel, and so much must
the seller rebate to the buyer, the which discount deducted from 3709. 12, d.
6. there rests 3434 Lib. 17, 0 d. which the buyer ought to pay in ready
money, the which for better declaration, I will lay down by example, with the
proof of the rule, for the trial of the certainty thereof. ^

Now the reason why out of 108 per Cent. there must three thirds Example proved.
be taken one out of the other, is, because that 8 (which is the discounte or
Rebate) is contained 13 times in 108, the which 13 doubled, are 27, and
therefore must be divided by 27, or for the briefer and readier way, take of a
(...) or three thirds one out of the other, and therefore to make the proof,
take 1/10 of the said 3434. 17 0. and in drawing of the said (...), the rest
gives 274. 15, 9, Lib. which declares that the rule is well and rightly made.

Because that in this manner of discounting, or as we term it, of Rebating,
the time and price is found diversely to alter, I will set down a brief table
for the casting up of any sum, for any Fair or payment, and an example or
two for the understanding thereof, thereby the better to come to the maine and
principal point of our account of Exchanges.

CHAP. 307.
The Table of casting the Accounts of discounts, or Rebatements.

IMprimis, At 101 per cent, divide by 101. At 101 per cent. divide by 81, or
take (...) ^f a 1/9 A table for casting up all accounts of discounts or
rebatements.
At 102 per cent. divide by 51. At 102 (...) per cent. divide by 41. At 102
(...) per cent. for 38 (...) divide by 77, or take 1/7 of one 1/10 At 104 per
cent. divide by 26, or take of a 1/13. At 105 per cent. divide by 21, or take
of a 1/7. At 106 per cent. for 17 (...) divide by 53. At 106 per cent. divide
by 17. At 107 per cent. for 14 divide by 43. At 108 per cent. for 13 (...)
divide by 27 or take (...) of a (...). At 108 (...) per cent. divide by 13. At
100 per cent. divide by 11, or take (...). At 112 per cent. for 9 (...) divide
by 28, or take of one 1/7. At 112 (...) per cent. divide by 9 or take (...) At
113 (...) per cent. for 8 (...) divide by 17. At 114 per cent. for 8 (...)
divide by 57. At 115 per cent. for 7 (...) divide by 23. At 116 per cent. for 7
divide by 29. At 116 per cent. divide by 7, or take 1/7. At 117 per cent. for 6
5/7 divide by 47. At 118 per cent. for 6 5/9 divide by 59. At 120 per cent.
divide by 6 or take. At 122 per cent. for 5 4/9 divide by 49. or take a 1/7 of
a 1/7. At 125 per cent. divide by 5 or take.
For the better understanding of the precedent Table, note that for Example, to
take the discount at 122, I divide the 22 (...), in 2, Example of discounting
or Rebate.
which make 45, and the like of the 100, making 200, which divided by 45, the
product gives 4 4/9, and so many times 22 are contained in 100, and because
that the discount or Rebate is always upon the 100, one more is to be added
thereto, which makes 5 4/9, so that the said 22 are contained 5 4/9 in 122, and
therefore it must be divided by 4 4/9, the which to do, it is needful, that all
the same be put into ninthes, multiplying by 9, as well the sum out of which
the discount is to be made, as the said 5 4/9, amounting to 49 for Divisor, and
for to divide by 49, as the briefest and shortest way, take the 1/7 of a (...),
because that 7 times 7, makes 49.

Again to draw the discount at 105 per cent. I divide 100 by 5, taking which
is 20, to the which number, I always add one Another Example of discounting
at 105.
for the reason beforementioned, making thereby 21 for divisor, and for to
divide by 21, you must take of the sum, which the discount is to be made of,
and the 1/7 of the said shall be the discount.

Again, for to make the discount at 107 (...) I double 7 in two parts, which
making 15, and so of the 100, making 200, which Another Example at 107.
I divide by 15, taking of, his product giving 13, to which I add 1, making
thereby 14 (...), and so many times 7 are contained in 107, and therefore you
must divide the sum, of the which the discount must be made, by 14, and thus
do in all other sums and parcels.

CHAP. CCCVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Rome.

I Have declared before in the general chapter of the Exchanges Exchanges of
Lions with Rome.
of Lions, how many Cities Lions is found to Exchange with, and there also
showed the common rates how the same does govern, which notwithstanding is
found at every Fair, and payment, to alter, yet it stands the Merchant so
far in stead, that thereby he is able to make the account, both of his
draughts and remittances, though otherwise altering from their noted prices,
which is the thing now rests to be handled, that it may be discerned, how the
Exchange at Lions is cast up with any other place whatsoever, and there
likewise it is observed, how the Merchants Exchangers do keep their accounts,
which for the most part is in Livers, Tournois, Sols and Deniers, 12 Deniers
making a Sol, and Accounts kept in Lions.
20 Sols a Liver, and yet some there be, that keep their accounts in Crowns of
Exchange, called Crowns of the Sun, and is as the L^ ver distinguished into
Sols and Deniers of Gold, accounted by 12 and 20 as the former, this Crown
being accounted worth 3 Livers, upon which the Exchange of the place is made
and marked with Crowns, Livers, Sols and Deniers; the question then upon the
Exchange of Lions with Rome is thus, 100 Crowns of Gold of 3 lib. is given in
Lions, to have in Rome 85 Crown. of Gold, Estampe or de Camera, more or less,
as the Exchange passes, I demand for Cro. 4520 1^ 6d. of Gold of the Sun,
how many Crowns of Estampe shall Lions have at Rome, to know which, you must
multiply the said Crowns of the Sun, by 85, and from the Product cut the two
last figures, the which you must multiply by 20, to make them Sols, and then
by 12 to make them Deniers, which will come to be 3842. 10. 7 of Gold of
Estampe which Lions ought to have in Rome for the said sum of Crowns of
Gold, which this calculation following makes more apparent. Example. ^

The proof of the said account will appear in the same question Proof.
propounded, where Rome Exchangeth at the same terms with Lions.

CHAP. CCCIX.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Florence.

LIons Exchangeth with Florence, and gives 100 Crowns to have in the said
place 95 Crowns of Gold more or Exchanges of Lions with Florence.
less, I demand for Crowns 1324. 15-0. of Gold of the Sun, how many Crowns
of Gold I shall have in Florence, to know which, I multiply the said Crowns of
Gold by 95 in cutting the two last figures of the Product, as I did in the
precedent account, the which are to be multiplied by 20 and 12, to make the
fame Sols and Deniers, and I find I must have in Florence, Crowns 1268 8-11 of
Gold, for the said Crowns of the Sun Example. ^

Facit Crowns 1268-8-11 which shall appear, when Florence Exchangeth with
Lions. Proof.


CHAP. CCCX.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Lucca.

LIons Exchangeth with Lucca, and takes Crowns 100 to pay in Exchanges of
Lions with Lucca.
Lucca, posito 103 of Livers 7 the Crown: I demand for Cro. 1234-5-6. of Gold
of Sun, how much must I pay in the said City of Lucca, to know which, I
multiply the said sum of Crowns of the Sun by Cro. 103 and from its Product
cut off the two last figures, the which I multiply by 20 to come to Sols, and
then by 12 to come to Deniers, and it will make Crowns 1273-7-2, which I must
pay in the said place of Lucca: Example. ^

Note that if in Lions it be paid in money, there is one per cent. given more,
so that receiving in the said place of Lucca, the said P^at made in Money.
Crowns 1273-7-2 in money of the said place, the Debtor shall be bound to pay
more Crowns 12. 14. 8, which is in all Crowns 1286-1-10, as for Example thus
cast up: ^

The proof of the said Exchange, you shall find in the account when Lucca does
Exchange with Lions, made by the rule of three, saying, if Crowns 103 (...)
give 100, how many shall the abovesaid 1273-7-2 d. give, which will be Crowns
1234-5-6. of Gold of the Sun.

CHAP. CCCXI.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Naples.

LIons exchangeth with Naples, and gives crowns 100 of the Sun to have in
that place Duc. 127 more or less of Taries, 5 per ^changes of Lions with
Naples.
Duccat, I would know for crow. 2584. 9. 6. of Gold of the Sun, how much Lions
shall have credit for in Naples: the which to do, you must multiply the said
sum of crowns by the said 127 (...) Duc. cutting the two last figures of the
Product, the which must be multiplied by 5, to make them Taries, and then by
20, to make them Grains, because that the Duccat is worth 5 Taries, and the
Tarry 20 Grains, so that it will give in Naples, Duc. 3295, Tarry 1.

^ The proof of the said rule shall appear in the Exchange of Proof.
Naples back with Lions.

CHAP. CCCXII.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Palermo or Mesina.

LIons exchangeth for Palermo or Mesina, and gives 1 Crown of Exchanges of
Lions with Palermo and Mesina.
Gold of the Sun, to have in the said place posito 38 Carlins. I would know,
for Crowns 4692. 11. 3. of the Sun, how many Ounces shall Lions have credit in
Palermo or Mesina, first multiply the said Cro. of the Sun by the said 28
Carlins, the value of the Crown, and taking the rest of the multiplication for
parts of 10, because the Carlin is worth 10 Grains, and the proceed shall be
Carlins and Grains, to make the which Ounces, you must take* in cutting the
last figure, because that 60 Carlins makes an Ounce, and of that which rests
cut of, add with the last figure, you must take to make Taries, one whereof
being 2 Carlins, and 30 worth one Ounce, and if you find a rest of the said
Taries, you must take which is 10 Grains, because that one Tarry is worth 10
Grains, and of 20 which is 10, to the which must be added the resting Grains,
if any be, so that the said sum of Carlins will make Ounces 2189 Tar. 25,
Gra. 17, and so many Ounces will Palermo or Mesina give, and over and above the
said sum of Ounces, one Carlin per Ounce is given for to make it good money,
and to add the said Carlin per Ounce in the shortest way, it is to be
considered that for the said Ounces 2189 is given the same sum of Carlines
for the Laggio of the moneys as they term it, which reduced into Ounces,
cutting the last figure, and taking of the rest, as has been said before, will
give Ounces 36, resting two tens of Carlins, which is twenty, to which must be
added the last figure cut off, and it will be 29 Carlins, which is 14 Taries,
and there will rest 1 Carlin, which is 10 Grains, to which must be added 8
Grains, for 25 Taries which are with the Ounces, seeing that for 3 Taries
comes one Grain, for Lagio of the said money, and they will be Ounces
2226-10. 15, and so much will the Credit of Lions be in Palermo, and because
that the said Carlin per Ounce comes to 1 per cent. the account may be made in
taking (...) per cent. of the said su^me of Ounces, and it will make the same
sumr; as Example. ^

The proof of the said account shall appear in the Exchange of P^eofe.
Palermo and Mesina back to Lions.

CHAP. CCCXIII.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Genoa.

LIons exchangeth with Genoa and gives one Crown of the Sun, to have in that
place, posito of money in Gold 59 s. 9 d. I demand Exchanges of Lions with Genoa.
for Cro. 9432. 9 of the Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Genoa in
current money, to do which, first multiply the said Crown of the Sun by Sol.
59. 9 d. and it makes Sol. 563588. 10 d. which reduced into Livers, makes Lib.
28179. 8. 10 Money of Gold, which divided by 68 Sol, which is the price of a
Crown of Gold in money of Gold, and that which rests of the division, you
must multiply by 20, to make them Sols of Gold, and then by 12 to make them
Deniers, and they will be Crowns 8288. 1. 5 of Gold, the which multiply by 4
which is the price at present of the Crown of Gold in current money, and of
its product will come Lib. 37296. 6. 4 of money current, and so much Credit
shall Lions have in Genoa, for the said Crown 9432. 9 of the Sun, and you
must note, that the Livers of the money of Gold cannot be reduced into current
money, unless first it be reduced to Crowns of Exchange. ^

The proof of this Rule is seen, when that Genoa does exchange Proof.
for Lions.

CHAP. CCCXIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Millan.

LIons exchangeth with Millan, and gives a Crown of the Sun Exchanges of
Lions with Millan:
to have in Millan posito 118s, I would know how many Livers makes Crowns
1564. 15. 6. of Gold of the Sun in Milan: To do which, you must multiply the
said sum of Crowns by 5 Li. 18. 4. which are the Sols 118, beginning to
multiply the Li. 5 by the 6 Den. and then by the 15 which are with the Crown
of the Sun, the proceed of the multiplication shall be Li. 9258. 5. which
shall be had in Millan for the said Cro. of the Sun: as for example, ^

The proof of the said account shall be manifest in the Example Proof.
of Millan with Lions.

CHAP. CCCXV.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Venetia.

LIons exchangeth with Venice, and gives 100 Crowns of Gold, Exchange of
Lions with Venetia.
to have there Duccats posito 119 of Livers 6 (...) per Duccat; I demand, for
Crowns 3549. 10. of the Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Venice: to
know which, multiply the said sum of Crowns by the said 119 Duccats, and the
remainder produced by the said multiplication, shall be divided by 24, because
that the Duccat is worth 24 Gross, and out of that product cut the two last
figures, the which being multiplied by 24, to make them Grosses, they will make
Duccats 4238 1/12, which Lions shall have Credit in Venice for the said Crowns
of the Sun: as Example. ^

Facit 4238 Duccat. 2 Gross. And the proof of this account shall be
manifested by Example, in the Exchanges of Venetia back Proof.
for Lions.

CHAP. CCCXVI.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Bolonia.

LIons exchangeth with Bolonia, and gives 100 Crowns of the Sun Exchanges of
Lions with Bolonia.
to have in Bolonia Crow. 113 of Livers 4 per Crown; I demand then, for Crow.
3879. 13. 4. of the Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Bolonia: to do
which, multiply the said Crowns of the Sun by 113, and from the product cut
the two last figures, then multiply them by 20. and 12. to make them Sols and
Deniers, and it will come to Crow. 4282. 6. 5. in Bolonia, the which you must
bring into Livers, by multiplying them by Li. 4. 15. which is the value of the
Crown in Bolonia, and they make Li. 20341. 0. 5. which Lions shall have credit
for in Bolonia. ^

The proof hereof serves to know how to make the account, when Bolonia
exchangeth for Lions, and is done by the rule of 3. saying, if Cro. 113 give
100 Crowns, how many shall 4282 Cro. 6. 5 d. give?

CHAP. CCCXVII.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Placentia.

LIons exchangeth with Placentia, and gives 119 posito Crowns Exchanges of
Lions with Placentia.
of the Sun, to have in Placentia Crowns 100 of Marc. I demand, for Crowns
3489. 15. of Gold of the Sun, how many Crowns shall be due to me in
Placentia: to find which, I say by the rule of Three, if Crow. 119 (...) give
100 Crow. of Marc. how many will Crow. 3489. 15. give? the product of which
rule, gives Crow. 2916. 4. 6 d. of Marc. and so much shall be due to me in the
said place of Placentia, for the said sum of Crowns of the Sun: for
example, ^

The proof of this rule is seen, when that Placentia shall exchange with
Lions.

CHAP. CCCXVIII.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Antuerpe.

LIons exchangeth with Antuerpe, and gives one Crown of the ^nges of (...)
with ^rpe.
Sun to have in Antuerpe posito 121 (...) Gross; I demand then, how many
Livers of Grosses I shall have there, for Cro. 6895. 11. 3. To do which, I
multiply the said sum by the said 121 (...) Gross, and it gives Grosses
836661, out of which take (...), to make them Sols, and they make Sols 69721.
9. which to make into Livers, you must cut the two last figures, and take the
of the others, and it will come to li. 3486. 1. 9. of Grosses, which I should
have in the said place of Antuerpe, for the abovementioned sum of Crowns of
the Sun: as by Example, ^

The proof of the said account will appear, when that Antuerpe exchangeth
with Lions: and therein it is to be noted, that in the meaner of the Exchange
that Lions makes with Antuerpe, the calculation will serve in the same manner
with Colonia; because the same Monyes are used in Exchanges in the said City
of Colonia as in Antuerpe, and the same also is in use in Amsterdam, and
throughout the Netherlands.

CHAP. CCCXIX.
Of the Exchange of Lions with London.

LIons exchangeth with London, and gives a Crown of the Sun E^changes (...)
Lions with London.
to have in London posito Pence sterling 58; I then demand, for Crowns 7693.
10. 0 Crowns of the Sun, how many Livers of Pounds sterling shall I have in
London, working the same as the precedent rule, and account from Lions to
Antuerpe, and it will make sterling Pounds 1859. 5. 3 d. And so much credit
shall the same give me in London, as shall appear by Example following. ^

The proof of this account shall appear, when I come to the Proof. (...)
Exchanges of London with this place of Lions.

Here also it is to be noted, that the account is calculated in the same
manner, when either Paris, Roven, or any other part of Paris, Roven.
France does exchange for the City of London, or for any other City in
England.

CHAP. CCCXX.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Francfort.

LIons exchangeth for Francfort, and gives a Crown of the Sun to have in
the said place Quarentines posito 95; I demand, Exchanges of Lions with
Francfort.
for 1500 Crowns of the Sun, how many Florins shall Lions have in Francfort:
to do which, multiply the said Crowns of the Sun by 95, and it makes
Quarentines 143625; to reduce which into Florins, you must cut off the two last
figures, and then take (...) of the others, or else divide them by 60, because
that 60 Quarentines make a Florin, and it gives Florins 2393, and 4 overplus,
which is to be understood for 40, and with the figure cut off, makes 45, of
which, (...) is to be taken to make Sols, because that 3 Quarentines is a Sol,
and then it makes Flor. 2393. Sol. 15. which Lions ought to have credit for in
Francfort. Example. ^

Desiring for proof of the said account, to exchange from Francfort to Eions,
the said Flor. 2393. 15. at Quarent. 95 per Crown, Proof.
I first put the said Florins into Quarentines, multiplying them by 60, and
they will be Quarentines 143625, which divided by 95, makes just Crow. 1500 of
the Sun, as abovesaid.

Note also, that in Francfort is only accounted two Faires; the first, in
Mid-Lent; and the other, in Mid-September; and if the remittance be out of the
Fair, you may stay for the said Fair, and the Money must stay half a year,
which is here two Faires, in satisfaction whereof, is sometimes made good 6,
sometimes 7 per Cent. as Merchants can agree, more or less.

Note also, that when Lions is found to exchange with Norimberg, the account
thereof is made as above is said, with Francfort.

CHAP. CCCXXI.
Of the Exchange of Lions with Sivil.

LIons exchangeth with Sivil, and gives crowns 1 of the Sun, to have in the
said place posito 396 Marvedes: I demand Exchanges of Lions with Sivil.
then, what credit I shall have in Sivill, for Crowns 6792-16-6 d. delivered
in Lions, at the said price: to do which multiply the said Crowns by 396,
and they will make Marvedes 2689958, to which must be added (...) per Cent. for
the Lagio of the money, which is 5 per 1000, and then they will make, Marved.
2703407, and so much shall Lions have credit in Sivill, as Example. ^

Note that when Lions does Exchange with Alcala, the account is made as the
precedent with Sivil, and that the proof of the said Alcala.
calculation is found true by the Exchange of Sivill, or Alcala with Lions.

CHAP. CCCXXII.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Lixborne.

LIons exchangeth with Lixborne and gives 1 Cro. of the Sun, to have there
posito 528 Raise, I demand then for Cr. 7893. 4. 6. Exchanges of Lions with
Lixborne.
of the Sun, how many Res Lions shall have credit in the said place of
Lixborne, and to know which Imultiplie the said Cro. by 528, and find that it
gives in Raes 4167622, which Lions shall have credit in Lixborne, as for
Example. ^

The proof of this rule is manifested, when that Lixborne shall exchange with
Lions.

CHAP. CCCXXIII.
Of the Exchanges of Lions with Barselona.

LIons exchangeth with Barselona and gives one Crown of the Exchanges of
Lions with Barselona.
Sun, to have in the said place posito 22-8- Sols: I demand for 7822. 12. 6.
Cro. of the Sun, which Lions does remit to Barselona, how many Livers shall I
have, to do which, you must multiply the above said sum of Crowns, by lib.
1. 2. 8. which is 22-8 d. beginning to multiply by the Deniers, and then by
the Sols, which are annexed to the Crowns, and the sum will come to
8865-12-10, which you shall have in Barselona for the said sum of crowns of
the Sun. Example. ^

The proof of the said account will appear, when Barselona exchangeth back
with Lions.

It will not be needful I should propound here any Examples, when Lions
Exchangeth with Valentia and Saragosa, seeing that the ^tia and ^gosa.
account is the same as with Barselona above said, and this is as much as I
conceive requisite concerning the Exchanges of Lions with other places, to
which I could add sundry Remittances and Draughts in Exchange hence made to
other places, with other such circumstances, but here being already matter
enough set down, to exercise the pen and head of the ingenious, and of him that
will study the Art and the Mystery of the Exchanges of this place, I will only
add a word of the Orders and Commissions, given and received here in
Exchanges, and an Example for explanation thereof, and leave the rest to the
consideration of the studious.

CHAP. CCCXXIIII.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances by
Exchanges in Lions.

BEfore I enter this vast subject of Orders and Commissions, Of Orders and
Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in Lions.
I will briefly show, how the accounts of these Orders and Commissions are
made, being only ^iven, by the expert and subtle heads of Bankers and
Exchangers, conversant in the course of Exchanging, which sorts of Commission
or Orders, are wrought partly by the Rule of Three Direct, and partly by the
same rule backward, and the better to distinguish, those that are made Direct,
and those that are made backward, it is requisite, that the course and manner
of Exchanging from one place to another be precisely known and learned, and
how that place to which the Commission is sent and given, draw or remit either
by a certain or uncertain rate, and such Commissions ought to be made, by the
Rule of Three backward, taking one of the prices, which are found for Divisor,
and the other two, which are the ordered prices, take for the sum to divide
by, and it is to be noted, that the first price, which is taken for Divisor, be
of the same place as the last, and to know herein what is meant by this word
certain and uncertain, I shall now declare it.

A Certain Exchange is no other, then to give a settled price, which varieth not
in Exchanging, and has no change or alteration, as it Certain price in
Exchanges.
is seen in Lions, or in Placentia, which gives always Cro, 100, or Cro. 1,
to have in N^les Duccats 130 more or less, and this 100 Cro. or 1 Cro. is
(...) found to alter, and therefore termed by Exchangers to be the certain
price.

Incertaine Exchange is a price that is observed unconstant, and Incertaine
price in Exchanges.
which admits of variation, which shall be when the place which Exchangeth,
gives a number of Crowns, Ducats, or Sols, or of any other money which
comes not to the just sum of 100, or else exceeds the same, and therefore
the same not being firm and stable, are named incertaine Exchanges, as subject
to alteration, sometimes more, and sometimes less, which is rightly and well
to be considered and understood in Orders and Commissions of Exchanges given.

When the place then wherein the Commission is to be effected, gives to the
places whereto it ought to remit, and draw, to both of them the Incertaine, the
account must be made by the rule of Three Forward or direct, taking for first
and second number, the prices that have been ordered, and for the last number
of the said rule, take one of the prices that are found, in such a manner, that
the first Exchange of the said rule be of the same place as the latter.
Likewise, when the said place where the Commission is effected, gives to the
places that it ought to remit, and to draw to both of them the certain, the
account thereof is made by the said Rule of Three forward, as by Example.

Order and Commission is given for a Merchant to his friend at Lions, Example
of a Certain and incert^e Exchange.
to remit to Naples at Duccats 126, and to prevail for Rome at 85 Crowns, or
at an other price differing therefrom, provided that it may be done without
loss, it is found to remit to Naples at 125 (...) Duccats, I would now know at
how much might the same be drawn for Rome, to the end that this Commission be
fully and justly effected.

It is here first to be considered, that Lions gives the price certain to the
said two places of Naples and Rome, and therefore by that account, it must be
made, by the Rule of Three forwards, saying, if Ducats 126 (...) give Cro. 85,
the inordered price, how many will Duccats 125 give, the price found for
Naples, and it will come to Cro. 84. 4. 4, and at that price you must draw for
Rome.

By this Commission then it is to be understood, that those of Naples will have
Ducc. 126 (...) in remittance, in that place, and be Debitors in Rome Crowns
85; who finding to remit at Ducc. 125 (...), it gives loss, receiving less
then that which was inordred; and making the account in this abovesaid manner,
it is found, that the Draught ought to be made at Crowns 84. 4. 4. which is to
profit, becoming this way a less Debtor, then that which was inordred, which
comes to recompense the loss which is made in the remittance; As for Example
shall appear.

^ To prove this account, by which may be clearly known, how this
Commission remains perfectly effected, do in this manner. P^.


Presuppose, that those of Naples have given the Commission for Crowns 2000 of
Gold of Estampe, or de Camera, which they would draw for Rome, and remit the
value for Naples: You must first see how much the said Crowns of Estampe are
worth, in Crowns of the Sun, at Crowns 85 per cent. the inordered price,
and it will come to Crowns 2352. 18, 9. of Gold of the Sun, out of which you
must take (...) per cent. for provision, and there will remain Crowns 2343.
10. 7. the which must be remitted to Naples at the price inordered of Ducats
126 per cent. and it will come to Duccats 2964, or thereabout.

So that as it does appear, the said Crowns 2000 of debt in Rome, are made by
remittance to Naples, Duccats 2964.

Now then it is to be observed in the prices (different from the order given)
which are found, that is to say, at Crowns 84. 4. 4. for Rome, and at Duccats
125 for Naples, if for the said Crowns 2000 by Draught to Rome, a remittance
may be made of the abovesaid Duccats 2964; and the better to know it, it must
be seen, how much the said sum of Crowns of Estampe are worth in Crowns of
Gold of the Sun, at Crow. 84. 4. 4. per Cent. which will come to Crow. 2374.
16. 6 Crowns of the Sun; out of which, taking the provision at per Cent.
there will remain Crown. 2365. 6. 7. which must be remitted to Naples at the
said price, which is found of 125 (...) per Cent. and it will make in Duccats
2964, or thereabouts, by remittance to Naples; the which shows the said
Commission is perfectly accomplished, in conformity of the Order given. For
example. ^

I could here add many of these Examples for the illustration of this point of
Commissions, but I forbear to do it, because the examples might prove tedious
and intricate, and the rather because I may publish in this kind some things
that I have already roughly drawn, if I find that my labors this way prove
grateful, and therefore touching other circumstances and questions that may
arise in the Exchanges practiced in Lions, I will refer the same to the
ingenious lover of this Art and Mystery, having set down sufficient, to
exercise both the head and hand of the studious, and which may afford matter
for greater variety in in its season, therefore I will in the next place
survey the Exchanges practiced in Rome, after the same manner.

CHAP. CCCXXV.
Of the Faires of Lions, wherein all Bills of Exchange are thence drawn, and
there satisfied.

LIons is noted to have four Faires: the manner of accepting The four Faires
of ^ions.
of Bills of Exchange therein, I have observed in the 275 Chapter; the times of
the said Bills now rests to be showed.

The first Fair begins in Lions the first Monday after the Epiphanie; and
if the same fall upon a Monday, 1 Foire des Rois.
the Fair does then begin the Monday following; the which lasts fifteen
working days, excluding and excepting Sundays and holy days, the which is
designed for Merchants to do their affairs: at the end whereof (which
oftentimes happens at Candlemas) all parties are made by Exchanges, and all
former remittances are paid and discharged.

The second, is the Fair of Easter, which begins the Monday 2 Foire des
Pasque.
following the Octaves after Easter day, and lasts 15 working days, Sundays
and holy days excepted: at the end whereof, all former Draughts, payable in
this Fair, are satisfied, and all new Remittances and Draughts for other
places, are made and framed from one man to another.

The third, is the Fair of August, and begins the fourth of 3 Foire d'Aust.
the said Month, and continues as the rest, 15 working days, which
oftentimes happens not till the beginning of September; wherein, as above is
noted, the Draughts made hither, and Remittances are discharged, and new
parties by exchange for other places framed and perfited from one to another.

The fourth, is the Fair of All Saints, beginning the third of 4 Foire des
touts Saints.
November, continuing as the former, 15 working days, which sometimes
happens on the beginning of December; and therein the Merchants use to
discharge all former Bills that come hither from other places, and frame new
Remittances and Draughts hence to other Cities, between man and man. For it is
here to be noted, that all Bills of Exchanges, and for the most part all Bills
of Debt have in this City no other time of payment, receipt, or discharge, but
during these four principal aforementioned Times or Faires.

CHAP. CCCXXVI.
Of Examples of the Exchanges practiced in Rome, and how the same are
calculated.

I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Rome, with how many places the same
is found to exchange Exchanges practiced in Rome, and first with Lions.
with; and there also showed the common Rates how the same does govern, which
every day is so observed to alter, that no set Rule can be peremptorily laid
down for the same; yet it is in it self so beneficial, that thereby the
ignorant may make his calculation, either in his Draughts, or Remittances: The
way of making which account, now remains to be handled, observing the same
with so many other places, as may be fit to understand the ground thereof.

It is also there noted, for the understanding of what is to follow, that
Bankers and Exchangers in Rome do keep their accounts in Crowns of Stamp or
Camera, Sols, and Deniers of Gold, named of the Eight Stamp, which are numbered
by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sols of Gold makes a Crown, and 12 Deniers a Sol.

The Crown of Stamp being worth 12 Iulies. The Crown in Money worth 10 And
the Iulio worth 10 Baiocs.

CHAP. CCCXXVII.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Lions.

FIrst then, Rome exchangeth with Lions, and gives Crowns 85 of Gold of the
Eight Stamp, to have in the said City Exchange of Rome with Lions.
of Lions Crowns 100 of the Sun; I demand, for Crowns 3842. 10. 7. of
Estampe, how many Crowns of the Sun shall Rome have in Lions: To know which,
you must say by the rule of Three, If Cro. 85 give 100 Crowns of the Sun,
how much will 3842. 10. 7 Cr. give? and it will come to Cro. 4520. and the
remainder of the Divident multiply by 20 and by 12, to make Sols and Deniers of
Gold, and it will be Crowns 4520. 12. 5 Crowns of the Sun that Rome ought
to have in Lions for the said sum: as for example; ^

The proof of this account is seen, when Lions does exchange Proof.
with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXVIII.
Of the Exchange of Rome with Placentia.

ROme exchangeth with Placentia, and gives posito 99 Crowns Exchanges of Rome
with Placentia:
of Gold of Estampe, to have here Crowns 100 of Marc. I demand, for Crowns
1382. 5. 8. of Estampe, how many Crowns of Marc. Placentia shall have? You
must reduce the price and the sum of Crowns into Deniers, multiplying the
same by 20 and by 12, and adding 15 for the of a Crown, then say by the rule
of Three, If the Deniers come at of the said price, give Crowns 100 of Marc.
how many will the Deniers come of the said sum of Crowns give? and
multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols
and Deniers of Gold, in doing which, they will amount to Crowns 1385. 14. 11.
of Marc. which must be had in the said place of Placentia for the said sum of
Crowns of Estampe, as may be seen by the following Example. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when Placentia does exchange Proof.
with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXIX.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Florence.

ROme exchangeth with Florence, and gives posito Crowns 92 of Gold Estampe,
to have in this place 100 Crowns of Gold; Exchange of Rome with Florence.
I demand, for Crowns 1476. 2. 3. of Estampe, what credit shall Rome have in
the said Florence? To know which, you must reduce (as before is said) the price
and the sum of Crowns into Deniers of Gold, multiplying by 20 and by 12, and
adding 5 Sol for the Crown; then say by the rule of Three, If the Deniers come
of the said price, give Crowns 100 of Gold, how many will the Deniers of the
abovesaid sum of Crowns give? and multiplying the remainder of the division
by 20 and by 12, to have Sols and Deniers of Gold, it will appear to come to
Crowns 1600. 5. 2. of Gold: and so much credit must Rome have in Florence. As
for example: ^

The proof of this account is seen, when as Florence does exchange Proof.
again with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXX.
Of the Exchange of Rome with Venetia.

ROme exchangeth with Venice, and gives Crowns 73 (...) posito of Exchanges
of Rome with Venice.
Estampe, to have in that place Ducc. 100 de Banco of Livers 6 per Ducc. I
demand, for Cro. 850. 15. 8. of Estampe, what credit in Banco shall I have at
Venice: to do which, I must reduce, as in the precedent accounts, the price
and the sum of Crowns into Deniers of Gold, multiplying the same by 20 and
by 12, and add 10 Sols for the Crow. and then say by the rule of Three, If the
Deniers come of the price, give Ducc. 100, how many will the Deniers give me,
that come of the abovesaid sum of Crowns? and multiplying the remainder of
the division by 24, to bring them into Gross, because that 24 Grosses are
worth in the said City of Venice 1 Ducc. of Li. 6, then it will make Ducc.
1157, which Rome has credit at Venice: as for example. ^

The proof of this account may be discerned, when as Venetia Proof.
does exchange with Rome back.

CHAP. CCCXXXI.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Millan.

ROme exchangeth with Millan, and gives posito Crown. 87 (...) of Estampe, to
have in that place Crow. 100 of Livers 5. Sol. 17. Exchange of Rome with Millan.
per Crown; I demand, for Crow. 2140. 16 of Estampe, how many Livers of Millan
shall I have?

First, reduce the price and the Crowns into Sols of Gold, multiplying them by
20, and to the multiplication add 16 Sol. for (...) of a Crown, and then say
by the rule of Three, If the Sols coming of the price, give Crow. 100, how
many will the Sols coming of the abovesaid sum of Crowns give? and
multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols
and Deniers of Gold, they will make Crown. 2438. 5. 4d. the which you must
reduce into Livers, by multiplying them by Li. 5. 17. and they will make Li.
14263. 17. 2d. which I must have at Millan for the said sum of Crowns of
Estampe; as appears plainly by this Example. ^

The proof of this rule is apparent, when Millan shall exchange with Rome.
Proof.


CHAP. CCCXXXII.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Naples.

ROme Exchangeth with Naples, and gives cro. 100. of gold of Excha^ges of Rome
with ^ples.
estampe, to have in that place, posito Ducc. 135, I demand for cro. 2346. 15.
4 of estampe, how many Duc. shall I have, to do which you must multiply the
said sum of crow. by grai. 135 per crown, seeing it is the same grains 135
per crow. as in Ducc. 135 per cent. because the Duccat is worth in Naples
grains 100, and of the product will come grains 318377, of the which you must
cut the two last figures, to make them Duc. and it then makes duc. 3183 Taries
3 grain. 17, and these Taries and grains make grai. 77 because that the Tarry
is worth g^a. 20 and so much you are to have in Naples for the said crow. of
estampe, as appears by this Example following. ^

The proof of the said account is seen when as Naples does exchange this
sum back with Rome. Proof.


CHAP. CCCXXXIII.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Genoa:

ROme exchangeth with Genoa, and gives posito Crowns 101 Exchanges of Ro^e
with Genoa.
of gold of estampe to have in the said place Crowns 100 of gold of Italy, I
demand for Crowns 4000 10. of gold of estampe, what credit shall Rome have at
Genoa, you must first reduce the said Crowns of estampe into Crowns of gold
of Italy, at the rate of Crowns 100 of estampe, for Crowns 102 of gold, and
therefore you must multiply by 102 in cutting the two last figures, the which
you must multiply by 20, and by 12, and they will make Crowns 4100. 10. 3 of
gold of Italy, then say by the Rule of three; if 101 Cro. give 100 cro. what
shall 4100 cro. 10. 3 give, and it will come to crow. 4059. 18. 3 of gold in
gold of Italy, and for to reduce them into livers, you must multiply them by
livers 4 (...) (the value of a Crown of gold) and in so doing, it will come to
lib. 18269. 12. 1 current money, that Rome shall have credit in Genoa for the
said Crowns of estampe, as for Example. ^

The proof of the said Rule is more apparently demonstrated, when Genoa does
Exchange this parcel back with Rome. Proof.


CHAP. CCCXXXIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Palermo or Mesina.

ROme Exchangeth with Palermo or Mesina, and gives 1 crow. of gold of estampe
to have in one of the two said places, posito Exchanges of Rome with Palermo
and Mesina.
carl. 29, I would know then for cro. 4000. 10. 6, what credit in Ounces shall
Rome have in Palermo or Mesina, to do which you must multiply the said crow.
by 29, and the product will be carlins 117348. 7. 2. the which must be reduced
into Ounces, by cutting the last figure, and by taking the of the rest, and the
48 remaining are Carlins, of which taking the, and they shall be Taries, and in
thus working, it will make ounces 1955, Taries 24, grains 7 and picolies 2,
which Rome must have credit for in one of the aforesaid places, for the above
mentioned crowns of estampe, as is aparent by the following Example, ^

The proof of this account is seen when Palermo or Mesina Proof.
shall exchange back with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXV.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Antwerpe.

ROme Exchangeth with Antwerpe, and gives one crown to Exchanges of Rome with
Antwerpe.
have in the said City of Antwerpe posito 114 gross, I demand then, for crow.
2000. 17. 8, how many pounds in gross, or grosses, shall Rome have credit in
Antwerpe, to do this, you must multiply the said sum of crowns by ^14, and
of the product will come grosses 228100, the which reduced into pounds Elemish
will make lib. 950. 8. 4. and for so much shall Rome have credit in the said
City of Antwerpe, as for Example. ^

The proof of this account is demonstrated when this parcel Proof.
is Exchanged back from Antwerpe to Rome, and note that when Rome shall
exchange with Francfort, Amsterdam, or any other part of the Netherlands, the
account is made as in the abovesaid manner of Rome with Antwerpe.

CHAP. CCCXXXVI.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with London.

ROme Exchangeth with London, and gives 1 Crown there to have in the said
City posito 65 pence sterling. I demand then for Exchanges of Rome with Lond^n.
Crowns 4000 14. 8 of estampe, how many pounds sterling shall Rome have credit
in London, which must be wrought as in the precedent account of Rome with
Antwerpe, and it will be found, that it will amount unto 1083. 10. 8 den. which
I ought to have in the said City of London, for the said sum of Crowns of
estampe, as may appear by the Example following, ^

The proof of this Rule will more evidently appear when the sum of 1083
lib. 10 shil. 8 den. sterling. is remitted from London to Proof.
Rome, which I hope is not in these days used in England.

CHAP. CCCXXXVII.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with the Cities of Valentia, Saragosa, or Barselona.

ROme does Exchange with Valentia, Saragosa and Barselona, Exch^nges of Rome
with Valentia, Saragosa an^ Barselona.
and gives 1 Crown of estampe to have in one of the said places Solsposito 25
den. 6, I demand then for crowns 6000 14. 4. of estampe, what credit shall
Rome have in one of the said places, to know which, you must multiply the said
sum of crowns of estamp by li. 1. 5. 6, and they will make li. 7650. 18. 3.
d. which Rome shall have in credit in one of the said places, for the said
sum of crowns of estampe, as shall appear by this Example, ^

The proof of this rule is best seen when this sum shall be remitted back
from these Cities to Rome, and because that the calculation to all these three
places, is made in one and the same manner, I have put them thus together, the
price only giving, the alteration in exchange more or less in each City.

CHAP. CCCXXXVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Sivile.

ROme Exchangeth with Sivile, and gives 1 Crown of estampe Exchanges of Rome
with Sivil.
to have in Sivil, poito 456 Marvides, I demand then for 400 Crowns of
estampe, how many Marvides shall Rome have in Sivil, to do which you must
multiply the said sum of Crowns of estampe, by 456 Marvides, and they make
182400, which Rome must have credit in the said place, and it is here to be
noted that throughout all Castilia, the Exchanges are made in the same manner
as at Sivil, and they likewise keep their accounts in the denomination of
Marvides, and when as the yamount to a million, they term it in Spanish a
Quintos.

Example. ^

At Alcala and other places in Spain, the account is as above Proof.
made, and the further proof thereof is seen, when that Sivil shall exchange
with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXIX.
Of the Exchanges of Rome with Lixborne.

ROme does Exchange with Lixborne, and delivers one Crown ^xchanges of Rome
with Lisborne.
of Est^mpe, to have in the said place posito 513 Res, I demand what credit in
Res shall Rome have in Lixborne for 325 Crowns 9. 6. d. this question is to be
wrought, as in the precedent account is showed, and it will appear that Rome
shall have Credit in Lixborne for Raes 166968 as shall be seen by the working
thereof following. ^

The proof of this account is apparent, when that Lixborne shall Exchange
back Raes 166968 with Rome at 513 Raes per Duccat. Proof.


CHAP. CCCXL.
Of the terms of payments of Bills of Exchange in Rome.

From Rome the terms are To Naples at 8 days sight, and from thence back at
10 days. Terms of payment of bills of Exchange in Rome.
To Brudges and Antwerpe, at 8 days sight. To Palermo at 15 days sight, and
from thence back at 10 days. To Florence at 10 days sight, and so back. To
Venice at 10 days sight and so back. To Avignon at 45 days sight, and thence
at 10 days back. To Valentia at 2 months from the date, and 10 days sight
back. To Barselona at 2 months from the date, and 10 days sight back. To
Lions on the Fair, and thence 10 days sight back. To Genoa at 10 days
sight, and so back. To Pisa at 10 days sight, and the same back thence.


CHAP. CCCXLI.
Of the Aggio of moneys practiced in the Exchanges and payments of Rome.

THis term Aggio common in diverse parts of Italy, is as much as the Valewable
consideration, in the species The Aggio of money paid in Rome by Exchanges.
of sundry monyes* that are made in payments, either for Merchandise or in
Exchanges by bills, and is accounted the difference, between the best money,
used in the terms of Exchanges, and the worst used in payments of goods, and
therefore for the declaration and manifestation thereof, I have made this
question and Chapter, by way of Proposition and Demand. A certain Merchant in
Rome, finding himself to have received for merchandise sold by him to another,
Crowns 3441 and Baiocs 97, of Iulies 10 per Crown, which he desires to reduce
into Crowns of the estampe, or as some term them de Camera, thereby to make
them fit to be remitted into any other place, the Aggio of the moneys being
considered as commonly is seen at 45 Iulios, I demand then how many Crowns of
estampe, the same will produce. To know which, you must first see how much the
100 destampe are worth in Iulies at Iulies 12 the Crown, which will be Iulies
1200, to which must be added 4* 5 Iulies for (...) Laggio thereof, because that
the Crown of stamp, is worth 12 Iulies, and then the Laggio, which comes to be
12 Iulies and Baiocs 4 per Crown, or else 45 Iulies for Crowns 100, and they
will be 1245 Iulies, and so much shall 100 Crowns destampe be worth the Aggio
of the money comprised; likewise in the same manner you must reduce the said
sum of Crowns of money, into Iulies, and they make Iulies 34419 and Baiocs 7,
comprehending 9 Iulies and 7 Baios, for the 97 Baiocs, and this being done,
then work by the Rule of three, and say, If Iulies 1245 give Crowns of gold
of sta^p 100 Cro. how much shall the said Iulies 34419. 7 give, then to
multiply the said Iulios by 100, there is only a cipher to be added after the
7 Baiocs, and prosecuting thus the working of the question it will amount unto
Crowns 2764. 12. 8^ of estampe. Now to prove the said account, you must
multiply the said Crowns of estampe by Iulies 1245 per cent: in cutting the
two last figures, Proof of the Aggios account.
and of the product, there will remain Crowns 3441 and Baiocs 96 and so the
account will appear to be well made, saving a small broken number lost, and in
this manner must be wrought all like accounts, though the Aggio of the money, be
either augmented or lessened, still by adding the Aggio, such as it shall be
found to be, with or to the Iulios 1200, which is the price of 100 Crowns of
gold destampe. The whole question I shall for explanation demonstrate by the
working thereof in this example, and first, ^

CHAP. CCCXLII.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for draughts and remittances by
Exchanges in Rome.

I Will herein, following my first intended method, give you also a proposition
or two of a draught and Orders and Commissions (...) and received for d^ught
and remittances in Rome.
remittance by commission and Order, the manner whereof largely explained by
example, will be full and sufficient for reglement for the like draught or
remittance from this City to any other place.

From Rome then is ^mitted to Venice, at Crowns 97 posi^o, and from thence is
remitted to P^acentia at Duccat. 136 (...), I would now know at h^ much comes
the remittance from Rome for Placentia, to do which work thus.

You must first multiply the said Ducc. 136 being the price of 100 Crow. of
Mark by Crow. 72 per cent. cutting the two last figures, the which being
multiplied by 20 and by 12, to reduce them into Sols and Den. of gold, and in
thus working it will come to Crowns 98. 14. 9. to the which must be added
(...) per cent. for the provision, paid at Venice which is 6 Sols 7 Deniers,
and they make Crowns 99 (...) and so many Crowns destampe is disbursed in
Rome for 100 Crowns of marc of credit at Placentia, as does appear by Example
following. ^

To prove this account, you must see how much the sum of Proof.
Crowns destampe that you would remit, are worth in Duccats in Venice, at the
said price of Crowns 72 for Ducc. 100, out of which to make the remittance to
Placentia, the provision is to be taken out at per cent. then see, how many
will the Crowns of mark give at Ducc. 136 (...) for 100 Crowns of mark, and
the Crowns of mark, which come thereof, must be multiplied by the said price
of 99 (...) per cent. and in thus working, will come the selfsame sum of
crowns of estampe, which are disbursed in (...) (...) ^e remittance made to
Venice, and by the Rule may (...) be made of all other accounts of the
selfsame subject*

But it is to be noted, that the said account cannot serve in any other
occasion, but where the remittance is made from Rome to Placentia, and that the
Exchange is at 100 crown of estampe, for 100 crowns of mark, thereby to
discern, if it be the more profitable, to remit, as they term it, a dritura
or straight, or else to make remittance to Venice, and from Venice to
Placenti^, as is beforesaid at the above said prices, the remittance coming to
be at 99 (...) crowns of ^ampe, so that as i^ is apparent it is more
beneficial to remit to Placentia by the way of Venice, for as much as ^t is
seen by this Example, that for 100 crowns of mark in that ^ace, there is no
more paid and disbursed, but crowns 99 1/11 in Ro^, and making the remittance
straight and a dritura 100 (...) crowns is to be disbursed. And moreover it is
to be noted, that their Exchange is made some times, at a greater or lesser
price, according to the abundance or scarsity of the monyes current, and
therefore these accounts serve only but for instruction sake, and to show how
the Rules thereof are to be reckoned and cast up.

Another example of a commission given to enlighten this point, I will add
hereunto.

There is order and Commission given at Rome to remit to Venice at 73 (...)
crowns, and to prevail for the same from Placentia at crow. 93 (...), but
there is found bills of Exchange for Venice at crowns 74 and money for Florence
at crowns 94, the question is then, if at these prices, the said Commission
and Order may be effected. The which to accomplish and know, I must say by the
Rule of three, seeing, that Rome gives the uncertain to both those said two
places, If crowns 73 give 93 (...) crowns, what will crowns 74 give, and it
will give by the said Rule, crowns 94. 3. 6 d. so that this order and
commission may be accomplished and performed with benefit, because that
remitting to Venice at crowns 74, it ought to be drawn to Florence at crowns
94. 3. 6, and there it is found at more videlicet at crowns 94, as for
Example. ^

And thus much shall serve for instruction and method to the Exchanges and
commissions practiced at Rome, and now I will proceed to the next eminent place
of Exchanges, according to my intended method, which is Naples.

CHAP. CCCXLIII.
Examples of the Exchanges practiced in Naples, and how the same are calculated.

I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Naples, I ^amples of Exchanges pra
ctised in Naples.
with how many other places this City is found to exchange, and there also
showed the common rates, how the same does govern, which every day is so found
to alter, that no set rule can peremptorily be set down for the same, yet it
is in it self so beneficial, that thereby the learner may know how to make his
account, either in his draughts or remittances, the way of making which account
now remains to be handled, observing the same with so many other places, as
may be fittest to understand the ground thereof.

It is also there observed, that the Bankers and Exchangers of the Accounts in
Naples.
place do keep their account in Duccats, Taries and grains, the which are
cast up by 5, and by 20, because that 5 Taries do make a Duccat, and 20
grains a Tarry, also that the Crown of gold, in gold of this Kingdom, is 13
Carlins, or 6 Taries, and the Crown of money or silver is 11 Carlins or 5
Taries, the Ducat of gold being worth 6 Taries, and the Duccat current is worth
5 Taries.

CHAP. CCCXLIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lions.

NAples then Exchangeth with Lions, and gives posito Duccats Exchanges of
Naples with Lions.
127 to have in this place 100 Crowns of gold of the Sun, I demand then, for
Duccats 3295 and 1 Tarry, how many Crowns of gold shall I have in Lions, to
know which you must say, by the Rule of three, if Duccats 127 give 100 Crowns,
how many will Duccats 3295 (...) give, multiplying the remainder of the
division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers, and it will make
Crowns 2584. 9. 4 of gold of the Sun, which I should have at Lions.

^ The proof of this account is seen, when Lions exchangeth back either for
Naples, Bery, Lechi or any other City of that Kingdom.

CHAP. CCCXLV.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Placentia.

NAples exchangeth with Placentia, and gives posito Duccats 132 to have in
this place cro. 100 of mark: I demand Exchanges of Naples with Placentia.
then for Ducc. 3416 Taries 2 and gr. 8. how many crowns of mark shall I have
at Placentia, to do which, I must first reduce the said sum of Ducc. into
grains, and if there were neither Taries nor grains, it were done by the
only addition (...) two ciphers, because that the Ducc. is worth 100 grains,
and because that there is in this question 2 taries and 8 grains 48 grains is
to be added, and take grains 132 for devisor of the said sum, seeing it is
as much at grain. 132 per crow. as at Ducc. 132 per cro. 100, multiplying as
well the one part as the other by 4 to bring them into quarters of grains, and
after division by multiplying the rest of the divisor by 20 and 12 to bring
them into sols and deniers of gold, and all this done, it will come to crow.
2573. 12. 4 of mark which I must have in the said place of Placentia for the
said sum of Ducc. above mentioned, as for Example, ^

The proof of this account is more apparently demonstrated, Proof.
when this sum or parcel is Exchanged back from Placentia to Naples, Bary,
Lecchie, or other Cities of this Kingdom.

CHAP. CCCXLVI.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Rome.

NAples does Exchange with Rome, and gives posito Duccats 135 in this place,
to have in Rome 100 Crowns of gold of Exchanges of Naples with Rome.
estampe: I demand then for Ducc. 3183. 3. 17, what credit in Crow. shall
Naples have in the said City of Rome, to know which, the question is wrought as
is before mentioned in the precedent Exchange of Naples for Placentia, and it
comes to Crow. 2346. 15. 2 of gold of estampe or de Camera, and for so much
shall Naples have credit in Rome, as for Example. ^

The proof of this Rule is manifested, when this parcel is Proo^.
Exchanged back from Rome to Naples, Bary, Lecchie, or to any other City of
this Kingdom.

CHAP. CCCXLVII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Florence:

NAples Exchangeth with Florence, and gives Ducc. posito 119: to have in
Florence 100 Crowns of gold: I demand then for Exchanges of Naples with
Florence.
Ducc. 934. 1. 10, how much shall Naples have credit in the said City of
Florence: this must be wrought as the precedent question of the Exchange of
Naples for the City of Rome, and it will come to Crowns 780. 15. 0 of gold,
and so much shall Naples have credit in the said place of Florence, as
appears by this Example. ^

The proof of this account is declared when this parcel is Exchanged back
from Floren^ to Naples. Proof.


CHAP. CCCXLVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples for Venice:

NAples Exchangeth for Venice and gives posito Duccats Exchanges of Naples for
Venice.
97 to have in Venice Ducc. 100 of Livers 6 of this money (which now is termed
in Banco) I demand then for Ducc. 1799. 1. 13 of Naples, how many Ducc. shall I
have in the place of Venetia, this is to be wrought as the precedent,
multiplying the remainder of the division by 24, to bring the same into gross.
because that the Ducc. of livers 6. 4 shil. makes 24 gross, and it will come
to Duccats 1850 (...), and so many Duccats shall Naples have in the said place
of Venice, as by the Example following, ^

The proof of the said account appearing when this parcel of 1850 5/24 is
Exchanged back from Venice, to the aforesaid place of Proof.
Naples.

CHAP. CCCXLIX.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Milan.

NAples exchangeth with Milan and gives posito Ducc. 98 to Exchanges of Naples
with Milan.
have in Milan Crow. 100 of Livers 5 per Crow. of the money of this place, I
demand then for Ducc. 850, how many Crow. shall I have in Milan: To know which,
I must do as in the precedent exchanges, multiplying the remainder of the
division by 20 and 12, to bring the same into Sols and deniers, and by this
working it will make Crow. 862. 18. 10, and to know how many Livers they are,
they must be multiplied by 5 Livers, beginning to multiply the den. then the
sols, and afterward the Crow. calculating for 12 den. one sols and for 20 sols
in money one liver, and it will make lib. 4314. 14. 2 which one shall have in
the said place of Milan for the said Duccats 850, as for Example. ^

The proof of this account is manifested with this parcel is Exchanged back
from Millan to Naples as aforesaid. (...).


CHAP. CCCL.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lecchie and Bary:

NAples Exchangeth with Lechie and Bari, Cities within that Kingdom, and
gives posito 98 (...) Ducc. to have in the (...) of N^es with L^e and (...).
said places Ducc. 100. I demand then for Ducc. 3850. 1. 15 of Naples, how many
Ducc. shall I have in these two places, This Rule must be cast up as in the
precedent Exchange for Millan, and multiplying the remainder of the division by
100, to bring it into grains, and thereof will come 98 which are 4 Taries, and
grains 18, and in all Ducc. 3908 Tar. 4 gra. 18, which Naples shall have
credit in the said places, and note that when Naples Exchangeth with Montelion,
with Cosense, or any other part of this Kingdom, the account is made as above,
as for Example, ^

The proof of this Rule and account is thus made up. (...).
^

CHAP. CCCLI.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Mesina.

NAples exchangeth with Mesina, and gives posito ducc. Ducc. Exchanges of
Naples with Mesina.
115 (...) to have in Mesina Crow. 100 of Tar. 13 of that money, I demand how
many Crowns of Taries 13 shall I have there for Ducc. 2348. 3. 8, to do which
working, as by the precedent Rules, I say: If grains 115 (...) make one Crown
of 13 Taries, what will grains 234868 make, and multiplying the remainder of
the division by 52, to bring them into half carlins, because that 13 Taries
are worth 26 Carlins, and by this working it makes Crowns 2035 (...) which
abridged are (...), or otherwise multiplying the remainder of the division by
13 and then by 20 to bring them into Taries and grains, which will be the
easier to comprehend, but the reason why I have otherwise demonstrated it, is
because herein I would follow the method and manner of the Merchants of Naples,
who in their accounts are accustomed to do as above is showed, and to reduce
the said Crowns 2035 9/13 into ounces, you must multiply by 13 to bring them
into Taries, adding to the multiplication 9 for the 9/13 and they will be
Taries 26464, from which cutting the last figure and take (...) of the rest to
make them ounces, because that 30 Taries is an ounce, and the remainder of
these thirds are tens of Taries, to the which adding the figure cut off, which
are so many Taries, as must be placed after the ounces, and it will make Ounces
882. 4, and for so much shall Naples have credit in the said place of Mesina
for Duc. 2348. 3. 8.

^ The proof of this Rule is manifested what that Mesina shall Proof.
be found to Exchange for Naples.

CHAP. CCCLII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Palermo.

NAples Exchangeth with Palermo and gives one Duccat to have in the said place
posito 166 (...) pontos, I demand for duc. Exchanges of Naples with P^.
2846. 2. 10, what credit shall I have in Ounces in Palermo, to do which,
multiply the said sum of duc. by 166 (...) pontos per duccats and it makes
pontos 473942 to which add (...) to make them grains, because that 1 Pontos
is 1 grain and (...), and for as much as one grain is worth 6 piccolis, and 1
pontos is 8 piccolis, and it makes grains 631922, to reduce which into
ounces, you must cut off the two last figures, and take (...) of the rest,
because that 600 gra. make an ounce, which in all makes ounces 1035, and there
remains 1 which is worth with the two figures cut off 122 gra. which are 6
Taries and 2 gra. because that 20 gra. is 1 Tarry, and they will be ounces
1053, Taries 6 and gra. 2, and so many ounces by the said exchange shall you
have in Palermo, and note that over and above, they give credit 1 Carl. per
ounce for good Ag^o allowed (...) Palermo.
money, to add which said carl. per ounce, do thus, considering that for the
said ounces 1053, will come the same sum of carlins, for the Aggio of the
money, and to make the said carlin into ounces, you must cut the last figure,
and take (...) of the rest, will make ounces 17 and there will remain 3 tens
of carlins, which are 30 in value, to which adding the figure cut, and it is 33
carlins, from which, taking (...) to make them ^aries, (a carlin being a tarry)
which are 16 taries, and the remainder is 1 carl. in worth 10 gra. and adding 2
gra. for the 6. tar. which is with the ounc. because that for 3 tar. which are
60 gra. the Aggio will be 1 gra. and it will be in all ounc. 17 tar. 16 and
gra. 12 which added, to be abovesaid ounces, it makes 1070 Tar. 22, and gra.
14, and so much credit you shall have in Palermo for Ducc. 2846. 2. 10. in
Naples at pont. 166 per Ducc. Example. ^

The proof of this account is showed when Palermo does Exchange Proof.
back with Naples this same parcel.

CHAP. CCCLIII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Genoa.

NAples Exchangeth with Genoa and gives one Ducc. to have Naples Exchangeth
with Genoa.
posito in Genoa 66 Sols, I demand for Ducc. 1345. 4. 5 how many livers current
money shall I have in Genoa, the which is done by multiplication in taking of
grains 85 which are the 4 Taries, and grains 5. the: seeing that it may be
calculated for one grain of Naples of a Sols, and it will come to Sol. 89723
and deniers 4, which to reduce into livers you must cut the last figure, and
take the of the rest, and if any rest, it will be a tenth, to which must be
added the figure cut off, and it will be Sols, and thus it will appear to be
livers 4486. 3. 4 and so much will your credit be in the said place of Genoa,
as by this Example, ^

The proof of the said Rule is more evident when this sum Proof.
comes to be rechanged from Genoa to Naples, as is aforesaid.

CHAP. CCCLIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Antwerpe.

NAples Exchangeth with Antwerpe, and gives one Duccat, to have in Antwerpe
posito 90 gross. I demand then by this Exchanges of Naples with Ant^pe.
Exchange, what credit shall Naples have in Antwerpe for 3200 Ducc. to do
which, you must multiply the said sum of Ducc. by 90, and it makes 288000
gra. which reduced to pounds Elemish, will make 1200 lib. 00. 0. d. and so much
credit shall Naples have in Antwerpe for the said sum of Ducc. 3200. as for
Example. ^

The proof of this Rule is more apparent when this sum of ^200 lib. Flem. is
rechanged for Naples from Antwerpe. (...).


CHAP. CCCLV.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with London.

NAples does exchange with London, and gives one Duccat to have in London
posito 52 pence starling, I demand then for Exchange of Naples with London.
1528 Ducc. how many pounds starling shall Naples have credit in London: this
must be done as in the precedent account, of Naples and Antwerpe, and it will
be found that the same will give in London 331 lib. 1 sh. 4 d. which is the
sum that Naples shall have credit there for 1528 ducc. delivered, as for
Example. ^

The proof of this Rule will appear when as 331 lib. 1 sh. 4 d. Proof.
shall be rechanged from London to Naples.

CHAP. CCCLVI.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Valentia.

NAples does Exchange with Valentia, and gives one Ducc. Excha^ges of Naples
with Valentia.
for posito 21 Sols in Valentia, I demand then for Ducc. 2306 of Naples, how
much shall I have credit in Valentia, to know which you must do as in the
exchange preceding, multiplying the said sum by 21 Sols, and they will make
2421. lib. 6 shil. which Naples shall have answered in Valentia at the price
above showed, the like is to be observed in the Exchanges of Saragosa and
Barselona, which I here omit for brevity, to which this Example shall suffice. ^

The Proof of this Rule is seen when this sum shall be rechanged from
Valentia to Naples. Proof.


CHAP. CCCLVII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Sivill.

NAples does Exchange with Sivill, and gives one Duccat, to have in Sivill
posito 402 Marvedes, I demand then for Exchange of Naples with Sivill.
2634 Duccats in Naples, how many Marvedes shall I have in Sivill, to do which
you must multiply the said sum of Ducats by 402 Marvides, and they make
Marvides 1058 868 which Naples must have credit in the said place, and moreover
it is here to be noted, that throughout all Castilia the Exchanges are made in
the same manner as at Sivill, and they likewise keep their account in the same
denomination of Marvides, which when amounting to one million, they term it in
Spanish a Quinto, marked thus V. Example. ^

And accounted 1058 V. or Quintos 868 mar. The proof whereof Proof.
is seen when Sivill rechangeth with Naples.

CHAP. CCCLVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lixborne.

NAples does Exchange with Lixborne, and gives one Ducc. to have in Lixborne,
posito 498 Res, I demand for 1200 Exchanges of Naples with Lixborne.
Duccats in Naples delivered, how many Res I shall have credit in Lixborne,
this question is wrought as in the precedent with Sivill, and it will appear,
that Naples shall have in Lixborne the sum of 597 V. 600, as by the following
working thereof. ^

The proof of this Rule is manifested, when that Lixborne shall have occasion
to rechange for Naples. Proof.


CHAP. CCCLIX.
Of the terms of payments of bills of Exchange in Naples.

From Naples the terms are TO Rome at 10 days sight and at 8 days back.
Terms of bills of Exchange in Naples.
To all other places of that Kingdom at 8 days sight, and so back. To
Florence at 20 days after date, and thence at 10 days back. To Venice at 15
days sight and the like thence. To Avignon at 60 days from the date, and
thence at 20 days sight. To Valentia at 40 days sight. To Genoa at 10 days
sight, and thence at 15 days sight. To Pisa at 10 days sight, and so thence.
To Palermo at 10 days sight, and the same back.


CHAP. CCCLX.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Naples.

ACcording to my intended method, I will here add an example or two of
Draughts and Remittances, by Orders and Commissions given and received for
Drau^hts and Remittances in Naples.
Commission and Order, performed in this place of Naples, posito,

To Naples comes Order from Venice, that the Remittance is made to the said
place at Ducc. 98, in drawing from Placentia at Ducc. 135 (...), but there do
bills present for Venice at ducc. 99 (...): I demand then, (considering the
loss that falls out in the Remittance) at how much ought I to draw for
Placentia, to know which, you must say by the Rule of three, If ducc. 98 (...)
give ducc. 135 (...), what will 99 (...) ducc. give, and it will come to 1
Example.
137 ducc. and at that rate the draught must be made for Placentia, in the
Remittance for Venice at ducc. 99, and then the Commission will remain
effected according to the Order given, as for Example. ^

Again, presuppose that at Naples comes Order from Florence, 2 Example.
to Remit to Rome, at 134 and to prevail for Naples at 121 (...), there is
found bills for Rome at 136 (...) and money for Florence, at 122 (...), I demand
then, if at these presenting prices, the Commission may be accomplished, to
know which work by the Rule of three, and say, if Ducc. 134 (...) give ducc.
121 (...), what will duccats 136 (...) give, and it will come to duccats 122
and grains 58, so that, as it is apparent, the Commission may be effected,
because that Remitting to Rome at 136 (...), the draught for Florence must be
at ducc. 122 grains 58, and it is found at 122 (...) which is 60 grains more,
as by the following Example. ^

Again, at Naples comes Order from Palermo, to draw to 3 Example.
the said Palermo, at Pont. 168, and to remit to Placentia, at 134. Now there
is found Money for Palermo, at 166, and Bills for Placentia, at 136. I demand
then, if the said Commissions may be effected, at the Rates presented? To do
which, you must work by the Rule of Three, taking one of the prices which are
found for Divisor, as has been showed by the instruction given upon
Commissions, and say; If Pontos 166 give 134, what will 168 give? And it will
make Duccats 135 (...), or thereabouts. So that it appears this Order and
Commission may not be performed, seeing that drawing to Palermo at 168, the
remittance cannot be made for Placentia at more then 135 (...), and there is
found Bills but at 136; as by this Example. ^

Again, at Naples comes Order from Genoa, to remit for 4 Example.
Placentia at 133; and to prevail from Mesina at 114, clear of charge, there
are found Bills for Placentia, at 131 (...). I demand (considering the benefit
which is given in the remittance) at what price may the parcel be made? To
know which, say by the Rule of Three; If 133 give 114, what shall 131 give? and
it will come to Ducc. 112, and 57 Gr. To the which must be added 44 Grains,
for the provision which is there taken at (...) per Cent. and it will be
Duccats 113. And at a lesser price, may not be taken for Mesina. The Example
will make it evident. ^

And this is as much as I conceive fitting to have said of the Exchanges,
Orders and Commissions practiced in the City of Naples, and next to Genoa.

CHAP. CCCLXI.
Of Examples of the Exchanges practiced at Genoa, and how the same are
calculated.

I Have showed elsewhere, the general Exchanges of Genoa, and with how many
other places this city is Exchanges practiced at Genoa.
found to Exchange with, and there also declared the common rates and prices,
how the same is found to govern, which notwithstanding is sound so subject to
alteration, that it cannot admit of any great certainty, yet so far it is
conducible, to this knowledge, that it may serve as a certain rule for the
calculation thereof, either in the Draughts, Remittances, or Orders, that may
happen to fall within the limit of this City, the forming of which accounts now
remains to be handled, observing the same with some other principal places,
which being well understood, will enlighten the way to what is here by me, for
brevity sake willingly omitted.

To give then introduction thereto, it is to be noted, that Exchangers Accounts
in Genoa.
do here keep their accounts several ways, as some in Livers, Sols, and
Deniers of current money, and others by Livers, Sols and Deniers money of Gold,
and both these accounted and summed up, by 20 and 12, because 20 Sols make a
Liver, and 12 Deniers do make a Sol.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that the Crown of Italy of Gold, in Gold is
worth here in current Money 90 Sols of Genoa, though it is found sometimes to
be worth more, and sometimes less, as Monyes are requested: Notwithstanding,
the said Crown is always given for 68 Sol, Money of Gold.

Again it is to be observed, that in Genoa all or the most part of Exchanges
that are practiced, are effectively for Placentia, Lions, Millan, Venice,
Naples, and Rome; and therefore, in the handling thereof, I shall, to avoid
tediousness, be the briefer.

CHAP. CCCLXII.
Of the Exchange of Genoa with Placentia.

GEnoa does exchange with Placentia, and gives posito Sol. 87 current Money,
to have there 1 Crow. of Marc. I would Exchang^ of Genoa with Palermo.
know then, for Livers 10269. 19. 3 d. current Money, how many Crow. of Marc. I
shall have in Placentia?

First then multiply the said Sol 87 by 4, to bring them into 4/4, 1. Example.
adding the* and they make 351 quarters, and then multiply the said sum of
Livers by 20, to make them Sols, and then by 4, to make them quarters of Sols,
adding to the multiplication (...) for the 3 Deniers, and it will be in all
821597 which divide by 351 the price of the Crown of Marc. and the division
will be 2340, multiplying the rest by 20 and by 1^ to make them Sols and
Deniers, and they will be in all Crow. 2340. 14. 7. of Gold of Marc. which you
must have in Placentia, as by Example will be more evident. ^

To prove this account, you must multiply the said crowns of Marc. by Lib. 4.
7. 9. beginning to multiply by the Deniers, and then by Sols, calculating it by
12 Deniers for one Sol, and by 20 for one Liver, and of the product will come
li. 10269- 18- 11. so that it is evident, that the account is just, the
difference being in some small parts of the division which is lost, as by
Example. ^

At Genoa it is oftentimes seen that the Exchange is made for Placentia in
Sols of money of Gold, and the difference of this money is, that the Crown of
Gold, by decree of the estate is worth 68 Sol. money of Gold, and in current
money 90 Sol, and though that the said price of the current money rise and
fall, the money of Gold never varieth from the said price of 68 Sol. If then I
would know for livers 2816. 13. 4. money of gold, which one exchangeth at 66.
5d. money Another Example of the said Exchanges.
of gold per Crrwne, how many Crowns of marc. shall one have, do thus: reduce
the abovesaid live. into Deners, multiplying them by 20, and the Sols resting by
12, likewise reduce the said Sol 66. 5 Deniers into Deniers multiplying them by
12, and that which will come thereof shall be the Divisor of the sum of
Deniers, come of the said live. the which divided, will be 848 Cro. 3. 7 of
Marc. ^

To prove this rule, multiply this by 5 d. and the product will be 2186. 13. 3,
which shows the account to be just cast. Proof.


In Genoa I would deliver for Placentia lib. 3248. 15. of current Third Example.
money which is Exchanged at 67 Sol. 10 d. of money of Gold, I demand how many
Crowns of Mark they will be, first reduce the said sum of Livers of current
money, into Livers of money of Gold, dividing the same by 90 Sols, the price of
the crown of Gold in current money, and they will be crowns 721. 18. 10 which
must be multiplied by 3 lib. 8 shill. the price of the crown in money of Gold,
and it will come to lib. 2454. 12. money of Gold, which divided by 67. 10, to
see what the crowns of Mark are worth, and they will make crow. 723. 14. 3. of
Mark, and so much shall Genoa have credit in Placentia for the said lib. 3248.
15 of current money, as the Example shall more evidently demonstrate. ^

If in Genoa you would reduce any sum of current money, into To reduce Livers
of current money into Livers of Gold in Genoa.
Livers of money of Gold by a short rule, because that the crow. of Gold in
current money is 90 shil, and in money of Gold 68 s. you must take of the
current money twice placing them, the one under the other, and out of one of
the said take, and of that which comes of the said (...) you must take (...),
and adding these 4 parcels together, will come money of Gold, as will appear by
this Example. ^

For proof of the said account, if by the same method you Proof.
would reduce Livers of Money of Gold into Livers of current Money, you must
add to the said Livers of Money of Gold the ^, and of that which will come
thereof, take (...), adding the said two parcels together, and they will make
Livers of current Money: Example. ^

And thus much shall serve for the Exchange of Genoa with Placentia; wherein I
have thought fit thus far to enlarge my self, by reason of the great
Exchanges continually practiced between the said two places.

CHAP. CCCLXIII.
Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Lions.

GEnoa exchangeth with Lions, and gives posito Sols 59. 9. ^ge of Ge^ with Li^.
Money of Gold, to have in Lions a Crown of the Sun; I would know then, for
Livers 37296. 6. 0 of current Money in Genoa, how many Crowns of the Sun I
shall have in Lions? First reduce the said sum of Livers of current Money
into Livers of Money of Gold, by the former rules, dividing by Sol. 90. the
price of the Crown of Gold in current Money, and they will make Crown. 8288.
1. 4. which must be multiplied by Li. 3. 8. 5. the price of the Crown in Money
of Gold, and it will co^ to Li. 28179. 8. 6. the which divided by Sol. 59. 9.
the price of the Crown. of the Sun, it will be Crown. 9432. 8. 10. And so
many Crow. of the Sun will Lions give for those Livers of current Money, as
above is propounded. Example. ^

The proof of this rule will appear, when this parcel shall be Proof.
rechanged back from Lions to Genoa.

CHAP. CCCLXIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Millan.

GEnoa does exchange with Millan, and gives 1 Cro. of Livers Exchange of Genoa
with Millan.
4 of current Money, to have in this place pos^ Sol. 118 (...); I would know
then, for Livers 3850. 14. 8. of current Money, what credit shall Genoa have in
Millan? First, take the quarter of the said sum of Livers, to make the same
into Crow. of Livers 4, and they will make Cro. 962. 13. 8. the which must be
multiplied by Livers 5. 18. 6d. per Crow. which are the said Sol. 118 (...),
and they will make Li. 5703. 17. 11d. And so much shall the said credit be in
Millan, as does appear by the Example in the work following. ^

The proof of this account will more evidently appear, when Proof.
this parcel is rechanged for Genoa from Millan.

CHAP. CCCLXV.
Of the Exchange of Genoa with Venice.

GEnoa does Exchange with Venice, and gives one crown of Livers 4 current
money, to have in Venice posito 146 Sol. de Exchange of Genoa with Venice.
Banco and of that money. I demand for lib. 8340. 12. 0. current Money of
Genoa, how many Ducats de Banco of lib. 6 (...) per du. shall one have credit
in Venice: to do this then first take the of the said sum of Livers to
reduce them into Crowns of 4 Lib. and they will make crow. 2085. 3. 0, the
which multiply by Lib. 7. 6. 6. per cro. which are the said Sol. 146 (...), and
of the Product thereof will come Lib. 15273. 14. 6. which must be reduced to
Duccats, dividing them by 124, the price of the Ducat of 6 Lib. 4 Sol. and
multiplying the rest of the Division by 24, to bring them into Grosses, because
that 24 Grosses makes one Duccat, and by thus working, the same will be
Ducats 2463. (...), and so many Duccat of Lib. 6 shall you have credit in Banco
for at Venice, as for Example. ^

The proof of this rule is seen, when Venice does Exchange back for Genoa
this said sum. Proof.


CHAP. CCCLXVI.
Of the Exchange of Genoa with Naples.

GEnoa does Exchange with Naples and gives posito 66 Sols Exchange of Genoa
with Naples.
of current money, to have in this place one Du. of 5 Taries, I demand then for
live. 4486. 3. 4 current Money, how many Duc. in credit shall I have in Naples?

First reduce all the said sum of Livers with the said lib. 66 (...) of
current Money into Deniers, multiplying the Livers by 20, and the Sols that
come thereof by 12, doing the same by the Sols, of the price of the Exchange,
multiplying the same by 12, and by the Division thereof, it will make Duccats
1345, and multiplying the remainder of the Division by 100, by reason that 100
Grains does make one Duccat, and there will come Gra. 85, which are worth 4
Taries, and Gra. 5, seeing, as has been before remembered, that 1 Tarry is in
Naples 20 Grains, and by thus working, it will make Duccats 1345. 4. 5, and so
much shall the credit be in Naples, as by the Example. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when Naples shall Exchange back with
Genoa. I could much more enlarge the Exchanges practiced Proof.
at Genoa with other places, but for brevity I willingly omit the same, and
therefore now come to the Commissions and Orders given in matters of Exchanges
at Genoa.

CHAP. CCCLXVII.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Genoa.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will here add one or two Examples of the
Orders and Commissions, Orders and Commissions ^iven and received for Draughts
and Remittances (...) Genoa. 1. Example.
given and received in Draughts and Remittances at Genoa.

First then posito from Venice, there is order given to Genoa, to remit to
Venice, and to prevail for Milan, at such a price that the Draught from Milan
to Venice, comes but to 148 s. clear of all charges, now then there do
present Bills for Venetia, at 149, and money for Milan at 148, I demand if at
these prices, the said Commission may be performed, to do which, say by the
Rule of Three, If Sols 148 of Venice give at Milan, Sols 117, being the price
of the Crown of the said Milan, what will Sols 149 give, the price of the
crown of Livers 4 Lib. at Genoa, and it will come to 117 Sol. the which
without deduction of provision, is apparent that the Commission cannot be
performed, because that the remitting to Venice at 149, the Draught cannot be
made for Millan at more then 117 besides the provision, and the partido is
found at 118 Sols, as the Example shows. ^

Again to Genoa comes order from Antwerpe to buy some Velvets, and to
prevail for the same by Placentia, at such a price, See Example.
that the Palm of Velvets in Genoa, amount not (being bought) to more than
Sol. 8 money of Gross, and the Draught for Placentia at Gross. 123. Now there
is found Velvets at 72 Sols the Palm, and Money for Placentia at Sol. 88. in
current Money: I demand then, if at these prices the said Commissions may be
effected: to know which, say by the Rule of Three, If Gross. 123. the price of
the Cro. of Marc. give at Genoa, Sol. 88. what will Gross. 102. which are the
said Sol of 8 of Grosses give? and it will come to Sol. 72. 11. so that as it
will appear, the said Commission may be performed to benefit, because that in
drawing for Placentia at Sol. 88. the Velvets may be bought at 72 Sol. 11. Den.
the Palm, and it is found at 72 Sol. ^

CHAP. CCCLXVIII.
Of the terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Genoa.

From Genoa the terms of Bills are TO Venetia at 15 days sight, and at 10
days back. Of the terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Genoa.
To Avignon at 15 days sight, and so back. To Barselona at 20 days sight,
and so back. To Valentia at 20 days sight, and so back. To London at 3
months from the date, and so back. To Millan at 5 days sight, and so back.
To Rome at 10 days sight, and so back. To Pisa at 5 days sight, and so
back. To Gaietta at 10 days sight, and so back. To Bridges and Antuerpe at
10 days fight, and thence at 2 months from the date. To Paris the same as to
Bridges and Antuerpe. To Naples and Palermo at 15 days sight, and back at 20
days sight.


And thus much shall serve for the Exchanges practiced at Genoa, together with
the Commissions given and received there, and so proceed to the next eminent
place of Exchanges, Venetia.

CHAP. CCCLXIX.
Examples of the Exchanges practiced at Venice, and how the same are to be
calculated.

I Have showed the general Exchanges used in Venice, and with how many other
places, this city is found ^ges pra^d at (...).
to Exchange withal, and there also showed at large the common rates and
prices the same is found there to govern, which notwithstanding is so subject
to alteration, that the prices there mentioned, cannot be admitted for a
settled rule, and certain rate, yet so far it is conducible in it self to
the understanding hereof, that the same may serve as an undoubted method in the
calculation thereof, either in the Draughts or Remittances, Orders or
Commissions, that may fall within the limit of the Exchanges of this city, the
working of which rules now remains to be handled, observing the same only
with such principal places, as are most notable, which being well understood
will serve as guides to find out what else is here by me for brevity willingly
omitted.

To give first then introduction thereunto, it is to be noted, Accounts kept
in Venice.
that Merchants and Bankers here do keep their account by several methods,
and denomination, some in Duccats and Grosses of Livers 6 the Duccat, the which
they sum by 24, because that 24 Grosses are worth one Duccat: and others
keep the same by Livers, Sols, and Gross, which are worth ten Duccats the
Liver, which is summed up by 20 and by 12, making 20 Sols of Gross to be one
Liver, and 12 Deniers one Sol.

Again it is to be noted, that some few years past, the Moneycurrent paid in
payment of Merchandise, and the Money current paid upon B^ls of Exchange was of
one and the selfsame goodness in value, or little in difference, but now the
moneys paid upon Bills of Exchange, is found to exceed the former 20 in 21 per
cent. and is commonly now called in Banco, as the other is called the current
Money, and therefore when moneys by Exchange is mentioned, it is understood to
be in Banco, as the best and principal.

CHAP. CCCLXX.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Lions.

VEnice does Exchange with Lions, and gives posito duccats 119 (...) of Livers
6 (...) to have in Lions Crow. 100 of gold of the Exchanges of Venice with
Lions.
sun: I demand for ducc. 4238 1/11, how many Crowns of the sun shall I
have in Lions? to do this, say by the Rule of three: If ducc. 119 give 100
crow. of the sun of gold, what will ducc. 4328 1/11 give me, which being
done, accordingly as I have heretofore often mentioned, it will come to crow.
3459, and multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 to make them sols of
gold, and then by 12 to make them deniers, it will come in all to crow. 3549.
9. 8. of gold of the sun, and so much shall you have credit in Lions for the
said sum of duccats 4238 1/12 of livers 6. 4. sols per duccat, as may be
seen by the following Example. ^

The proof of this Rule is seen when that Lions does Exchange Proof.
back with Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXI.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Placentia.

VEnice does Exchange with Placentia, and gives posito ducc. Exchanges of
Venice with Placentia.
134 of livers 6 (...) to have in Placentia 100 Crow of mark: I demand for
duccats 1450 17/24, how many Crowns of mark? first reduce the said ducc. 134
into grosses, multiplying them by 24, and adding 12 grosses, for the half
duccat, and it will make gross. 3228, in like manner you must reduce the said
duccats into grosses, in multiplying them by 24, and adding of 17 gross. for
the 17/24 (it being the same to say one gross, as 1/24) and it will be grosses
34817, saying then by the Rule of three, If grosses 3228 give Crow. 100, what
will grosses 34817 grosses give, and it will come to Crow. 1078, and
multiplying the rest of the division by 20 to make them sols of gold, and by 12
to make them deniers, it will be found to make in all Crowns 1078. 11. 10. of
gold of mark, and so much you shall have in Placentia for the said Duccats
1450 17/24 of lib. 6. 4. sh. as by the Example following. ^

The proof of this Rule is more apparent when Placentia does exchange back
with Venice. Proof.


CHAP. CCCLXXII.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Rome.

VEnice does Exchange with Rome, and gives Duccats 100 of 6 lib. 4 sh. to have
in that place posito Cro. 73 (...) of gold de Camera Exchanges of Venice with
Rome.
for ducc. 1157, I would know how many Crow. shall Venice have in Rome: you
must multiply the said sum of ducc. at the said price of Crow. 73 per cent.
and out of its product, cut off the two last figures, the which multiplied by
20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, and it will make Crowns
850. 15. 3. of gold of estampe, and so much credit shall Venice have in Rome,
as is apparent by this Example. ^

The proof of the said account is more apparent, when this parcel is
Exchanged from Rome back to Venice. Proof.


CHAP. CCCLXXIII.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Naples.

VEnice does Exchange with Naples, and gives (...) (...) E^nger Ve^ Naples.
of lib. 6. to have in the said place posito ducc. 97 (...) ries 5 per duccat.
I demand then for duccats 1850 (...) of ^nice, how many duccats credit shall I
have in Naples? multiply the said sum of duccats by grains 97 per ducc. and
of the product will come grains, out of which cut off the two last figures, to
make them Ducc. because (as has been said before) one duccat is worth 100
grains, and it will make ducc. 1799, and gra. 32, which are one Tarry and
graire 12, and so much credit shall you have in Naples, for the said sum of
ducc. of Venice, as by Example shall appear. ^

The proof of this account will appear when this is rechanged from Naples to
Venice: and note, that when Venice does Exchange Proof.
with Bary, Lecchie, Lausano, or other parts of the Kingdom of Naples, the
account is made as above with Naples it self.

CHAP. CCCLXXIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Florence:

VEnice does Exchange with Florence, and gives ducc. 100 of lib. 6 to have in
Florence posito 81 C^w. of gold, I demand Exchanges of Venice with Florence.
then for duccats 2500 what credit s^ll Venice have in Florence: to do this,
multiply the said sum of ducc. at the abovesaid price of Crow. 81 per cent.
and from the product cut the 2 last figures, multiplying the same by 20 and by
12, to make the same sols and deniers of gold, and they will make Crow. 2037.
10 sols of gold of Florence, as by Example will more manifestly appear. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when this sum is rech ^nged from
Florence to Venice. Proof.


CHAP. CCCLXXV.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Millan.

VEnice does exchange with Millan, and gives posito Sols 148, Exchanges of
Venice with Millan.
to have in Millan one Crown of Livers 5, and 17 Sols of that Money: I demand,
for Ducc. 1486 of Li. 6, what credit in Livers shall Venice have in Millan?
First multiply the said sum of Ducc. by 124 Sol. the value of the Ducc. of
Li. 6 (...), and it will make Sol. 184295. the which divide by Sol. 148, to see
how much the Crowns of Millan are worth, and multiplying the remainder of the
division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will
make Crow. 1241, and 10 Deniers, the which multiplied by Li. 5. 17. the price
of the Crow. to make them Livers, beginning to multiply the Livers 5 by the 10
Deniers, which are worth the Crown, and then with the Sols, if any be,
calculating for 12 Deniers 1 Sol, and for 20 Sols 1 Liver, and of the product
thereof will come Li. 7260. 1. 10. And so much credit shall Venice have in
Millan, for the said Duccats 1486 of Livers 6 (...) of Venice; as by the
Example following. ^

The proof of this rule is seen, when Millan does exchange Proof.
with Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXVI.
Of the Exchanges of Ven^ce with Antwerpe.

VEnice does exchange with Antwerpe and gives one Duccat Exchanges of Venice
with Antuerpe.
of Livers 6 to have in that place posito Gross 92 ^, I demand then for Duc.
3810, how many Livers Gross shall Venice have credit in Antwerpe, you must
multiply the said sum of Duccats by the said Gross. 92, and it will make Gross.
352494, out of which, take 1/12 to make the same Sols of Gross. and they will
be Sols 29374, and Gross. 6, the which must be reduced into Livers, by cutting
the last figure, and by taking the of the rest, and it will come to be Livers
1468, and the tenth that is remaining is ten Sols, and adding 4, the figure cut
off, shall be 14 Sol. so in all 1468. 14. 6, which Antwerpe will give, as for
Example. ^

The proof of this rule is seen when Antwerpe rechangeth this sum with
Venice, and here it is to be noted, that Venice does Proof.
exchange with Colonia, and Amsterdam and the Netherlands, after the same
manner as with Antwerpe, and the account is made up as the precedent, whereto
needs no further example for illustration.

CHAP. CCCLXXVII.
Of the Exchanges of Ven^ce with London.

VEnice does Exchange with London, and gives one Duccat of Exchanges of Venice
with London.
Live. 6 (...) to have there posito 56 (...) pence sterling: I demand then for
Duccats 740, how many Livers or Sterling shall Venice have credit in London:
this must be done as in the precedent account is showed of Venice with
Antwerpe, and it will come to pounds 173, s. 8. and pence 9, which Venice shall
have credit in London, as by the Example more at large appears. ^

The proof of this account is manifested, when London does rechange Proof.
this sum of 173. 8. 9 d. for Venice, and here note, that Vsance from Venice to
London is 3 months, or 90 days, and double Vsance the said time doubled, and
the like accounted back from London to Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Genoa.

VEnice does Exchange with Genoa, and gives posito Sols Exchanges of Venice
with Genoa.
146 to have in Genoa one Crown of 4 Livers money of Genoa, I demand then for
Ducc. 2463 of Livers 6 how many Livers of current money shall I have credit in
Genoa? first reduce the said sum of Ducc. into Sols, multiplying them by 124,
the value of the Duccat, and devide the Sols that shall rest of the said
multiplication by 146 to make them Crow. of 4 Livers, and multiply the
remainder of the Division by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of
gold, and they shall be Crow. 2085. 2. 11, which must be multipyed by lib. 4
per Crow. beginning the multiplication by deniers, and then by the sols,
calculating for 12 deniers 1 sol, and for 20 sols 1 liver, and of the product
will come livers 8340. 11. 8 current money, and so much will the credit be in
Genoa, as for Example. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when Genoa does rechang^ (...).
this parcel for Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXIX.
Of the Exchange of Venice with Norimberg.

VEnice does exchange with Norimberg, and gives Ducc. 100 of Li. 6 (...), to
have in the said place posito Florins 130 of 60 (...) of ^ce w^ (...).
Quarent. per Florin. I demand then, for Ducc. 2645 (...), what credit in
Florins must I have in the said place?

Multiply the said sum of Duccats by Florins 130 per Cent. and the broken
numbers of the multiplication divide by 20, to have an account of the Sols, and
of the remainder cut off the two last figures, the which being multiplied by
20, to bring the same into Sols, and then by 12, to bring them into Deniers;
and in doing thus, there will be found Florin. 3210. 18. 8. which must be had
in credit at Norimberg for the said D^. in Venice remitted: as by this Example
following appears. ^

The proof of this account is manifested, when Noremberg shall exchange this
sum back with Venice: and note, that for Augusta Proof.
and Francfort, the Exchange from Venice is made as with Noremberg, whereto
needs no other Examples.

CHAP. CCCLXXX.
Of the Exchanges of Venice with Bergamo.

VEnice does Exchange with Bergamo, and gives one Crown of 7 lib. to have in
Bergamo Sols 145 posito, I demand then Exchanges of Venice with Bergamo.
for ducc. 4220 (...), how many Livers will it amount unto? multiply the said
sum of duccats by 6 lib. (...), and it will amount to lib. 26168. 2. 8, of
which take the (...) to make them Crowns, and the remainders divide by 20 and
12, and they will be Crowns 3738. 6. 1. the which must be multipiled by lib.
7. 5. 6. which are the said lib. 145 sols, and of the multiplication will come
lib. 27196. 3. 2, which must be had in credit in the said place of Bergamo, as
by this Example following. ^

The proof of the said Rule is discerned when this parcel is Remitted Proof.
back from Bergamo to Venice, and thus much shall serve to have said of the
Exchanges of Venice, a word of the Orders and Commissions here practiced in
matters of Exchanges.

CHAP. CCCLXXXI.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Venice.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will here add an Example or two of
Draughts and Remittances, ordered Orders and Commissions given and received for
Draughts and Remittances in Venice.
by Commission in the City of Venice, posito: Into Venice comes Order from
Francfort, that they may draw thither at Florins 130, and remit thence to
London at 56 pence, not of charges or provision, the partido being for duccats
3500, now there is bills found for London at 57 pence, 1 Example.
and money for Francfort at Florins 132 (...), I demand then at these rates,
whether this Commission without breach of Order may be performed? to do which,
say by the Rule of three, (seeing that Venice gives the certain price to both
those said two places) If 56 pence starl. give 130 Florins the limited price,
what shall 57 pence give, (the price found) and it will make Flor. 132 (...),
from which deduct 10 shil. 7. den. for the provision that is taken at per cent.
there will remain Flor. 132. 7. 5, so that thereby the said Commission may be
performed with benefit, because that remitting to London at 57 pence starl. the
draught may be made for Francfort, at Florins 132. 7. 5, and the money that is
found is at Flor. 132. (...), as appears by this Example. ^

Again, a Merchant of Florence is creditor in Venice posito 2000 2 Example.
Duccats of banco, who orders that the same be remitted unto him at Crow. 81
thence or by the way of Antwerpe at gross 91 and to take the most beneficial
way of the two, and finding, a remittance by both to profit, according to the
limited prices, the order is to take the most profitable of the two, and
finding the remittances produce loss, to accept of the least, now then, there
are bills found for Florence as I said, at 82 Cro. and for Antwerpe at 92 (...)
gro. I would know by which the remittance ought to be made, seeing that by both
the remittance may be made to profit, and desirous to find out the most
profitable, you must say by the Rule of three, if Crow. 81 give gross. 91 the
price limited, what shall 82 Cro. give which is the price found, and it will
make grosses 92 (...) or thereabouts, so that the remittance must be made by
Florence straight, because that remitting by that way at 82 Crow. to make the
price, you should remit to Antwerpe at 92 (...) gross. and there are no bills
found but at gross 92 (...), as it is seen wrought by this Example. ^

Again, posito from Lions the Exchange goes for Venice at ducc. 117 (...) and
for Naples at ducc. 125, I demand giving order to Lions, 3 Example.
that at these prices they make draught to Venice, and remit to Naples, at what
price then will the remittance come out to be from Venice to Naples, to know
which, say by the Rule of three, if duccats 117 (...) of Venice, the price of
100 Crow. of sol of gold of Lions, give at Naples ducc. 125, how many will
ducc. 100 give of the said place of Venice, and it will make ducc. 106 or
thereabouts, and so much credit must be had in Naples for ducc. 100 of lib. 6
which are disbursed in Venice, out of which must be deducted (...) per cent.
for the provision that is paid in Lions.

^ Again, in the said place of Venice, comes order from Florence, to remit
to Placentia at ducc. 136, and to prevail on them at 4 Example.
crow. 80 not of charges, the partido being made for 5000 crow. of mark: now
the said 5000 crow. of mark, is found for Placentia at ducc. 135, and for
Florence may be drawn ducc. 2000 at crowns 80: I would know at what price
must the rest be drawn, to know which, I must first see for the remittance of
the said crow. 5000 of mark, at the price inordered, how many crow. of gold it
is at Florence, and to do this, multiply the said sum of crowns by ducc:
136 per cent. and they make ducc. 6800, without calculation of provision,
seeing that the order is not of charges, you must multiply them by crowns 80
per cent. and they will be crow. 5440 of gold, and so much the draught will
appear to be for the said crow. 5000 of mark by remittance, and afterward
multiplying the said crowns 5000 by ducc. 135 per cent. the price that is
found, it makes ducc. 6750 to which adding ducc. 27 for the provision at per
cent. seeing that the draught must be made for Florence, and they will be ducc.
6777 out of which, deduct ducc. 2000 which were found to be drawn at crowns
80 there will rest ducc. 4777, and for the said ducc. 2000, their disbursement
is at Florence crowns 1605 which must be deducted out of crow. 5440, which
must be drawn, there will remain crowns 3835 of gold, which must be drawn,
for the which I must be imbursed at Venice, duccats 4777, and to know at what
price, say by the Rule of three, if ducc. 4777 give by disbursement at Florence
crowns 3835 of gold, which will ducc. 100 give, and it will make crow. 80. 5.
7. of gold, and at this price the said par^ido of ducc. 4777 may be drawn, and
the other ducc. 2000 at 80 Crow. and so for both these parcels must be drawn
Crow. 5440, as is inordred, and there is imbursed ducc. 6777, there being per
contra disbursed ducc. 6750 for the remittance of the said Crow. 5000 of mark,
at Ducc. 135 per cent. and Ducc. 27 which is imb^rsed over and above,
proceeding from the provision, and in this manner this said Commission will
remain performed as it was by the Committies inordered as by example, the same
will appear evident, following. ^

And note, when the said City of Venice exchangeth for Naples, Rome, Antuerpe,
and London, and that you would know at how much Note.
comes the Money of any one of the said places for Lions or Placentia, the
account is made as in the precedent rule of Florence and Placentia, always
multiplying the price, by which the Exchange goes for Lions, with the price of
the other place from whence it is remitted or drawn: and therefore, for
brevitie sake, it is needless to propound here any further Example.

CHAP. CCCLXXXII.
Of the terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Venice.

The terms from Venice TO Naples and Gaietta at 15 days sight, and so back.
Terms of payments of Bills of Exchange in Venice.
To Palermo and Mesina at 30 days sight, and so back. To Rome at 10 days
sight, and so back. To Florence and Lucca at 20 after date, and 5 days sight
back. To Avignon at 45 days after date, and thence 2 months after date. To
Barselona at 2 months after date, and so back. To Valentia at 75 days after
date, and so back. To Sivil at 90 days after date, and so back. To Lions for
the Fair, and from Fair to Fair. To Bridges and Antuerpe at 2 months after
date, and so back. To London at 3 months after date, and so back. To Paris
at 2 months after date, and so back. To Genoa at 10 days sight, and 15 days
back. To Millan at 12 days sight, and 20 days thence after date. To
Constantinople 5 months after date, and so back.


CHAP. CCCLXXXIII.
Of Examples upon the Exchanges that are practiced in Placentia, and how the
same are to be calculated.

I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Placentia (...) Exchanges practiced
at (...).
with how many other places Placentia is found to exchange with, and there also
set down the common rates how the same is for the most part found to govern
which every day is so subject to alteration, that no positive rules can be set
down for the same; yet it is in it self so beneficial, that thereby the
unexperienced may know how to make up the account thereof, at what rate soever
the same be found to be, either in Remittances or Draughts, the which only now
remains to be handled, observing the same with so many other Towns, as may
be fittest to understand the ground thereof.

It is then first to be noted, that all Bankers and Exchangers A^ts kept in
(...).
here do keep their Accounts in Crowns, Solds, and Deniers of Gold of
Marque, which are cast up by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sols of Gold makes a
Crown, and 12 Deniers make a Sol.

CHAP. CCCLXXXIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Lions.

ANd first then, Placentia is found to exchange with Lions, and gives posito
Crowns 85 (...), to have at Lions 100 Crowns ^ges of (...) with (...).
of the Sun of Gold; I demand then, for Crowns 1516. 12. of Marc. what will
be due to me in Lions? To do which, say by the Rule of Three, If Crowns 85 of
Marc. give 100 Crowns of the Sun, what will the said Crowns 1516. 12. give?
and it will come to Crowns 1773. 16. 0. of Gold of the Sun: And so much will
be due to me in Lions, for the said sum of Crowns of Marc; as by Example
following. ^

The proof of this Rule is seen, when that Lions does exchange Proof.
with Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXV.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Genoa.

PLacentia exchangeth for Genoa, and gives one Crown of Marc. Exchanges of
Placentia with Genoa.
to have posito Sols 67. 10 Money of Gold in Genoa; I demand then, for Crow.
723. 14. 3 of Marc. how many Livers of current Money shall I have in Genoa?
First multiply the said Cro. of Marc. by Li. 3. 7. 10 per Crow. which are the
said 67 Sols, 10 Den. beginning to multiply the said Li. 3. by 3 Den. and
afterward by Sols 14, which are with the Crow. calculating for 12 Den. one
Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver, and of the product will come Li. 2454. 11. 9.
Money of Gold, which must be divided by 68 Sols, the price of the Crown of
Gold, in Money of Gold, to bring them into Crowns, multiplying the rest of the
division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers, and they will make
Crow. 721. 18. 9 of Gold, which must be multiplied by Li. 4 per Crow. the
present price of the Crow. of Gold in current Money, and it will make Li. 3248.
14. 4. And so much in current Money I shall have in Genoa for the said Crow.
723. 14. 3 of Marc. As by Example. ^

The proof of the said account is seen, when Genoa exchangeth Proof.
for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXVI.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Rome.

PLacentia exchangeth with Rome, and gives 100 Crowns of Gold Exchanges of
Placentia with Rome.
of Marc. to have in that place posito Crowns 99 (...) of Gold of Estampe; I
demand then, for Crowns 1385. 15 of Marc. how many Crowns of Estampe shall
Placentia have credit for in Rome? To do which, multiply the said sum of
Crow. of Marque by 99 per Cent. and taking the remainder of the multiplication,
to be divided by 20 Sols, cutting off the two last figures of the production,
the which multiplied by 20, to make them Sols of Gold, and then by 12, to make
them Deniers, and they will make Crowns 1382. 5. 9 of Gold. And so much will
the credit be in Rome: as by the Example following. ^

The proof of the said account is seen^, when that Rome does exchange back
for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXVII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Florence.

PLacentia does exchange for Florence, and gives 100 Crowns (...).
of Marc. to have in that place posito Crowns 110 of Gold: I demand, for
Crowns 4500. 10 of Marc. how many Crowns of Gold shall I have in Florence? To
know which, working according to the preceding Example, and Rule of Placentia
with Rome, and I find it gives Crowns 4973. 1. 0. of Gold, which Placentia
must have credit for in Florence: as for example. ^

The proof of this account is discerned, when Florence does rechange (...).
for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Palermo.

PLacentia does exchange with Palermo, and gives Crow. 100 of Exchanges o^
Placentia w^ Palermo.
Marc. to have in Palermo posito Ducc. 132 of Taries 5 per Ducc. I demand then,
for Cro. 2573. 12. 4 of Marc. what credit shall Placentia have in Palermo? To
do which, you must multiply the said sum of Crowns by Grains 132 per Cro.
seeing as has been said, it is alike so many Grains per Crow. as so many
Duccats per 100 Crowns, and of the product will come Grains; the which to
turn to Duccats, you must cut off the two last figures, and there will remain
Ducc. 3416. and the Grains 47, which are the two last cut figures, which are 2
Taries and 7 Grains: so that for the said Crow. 2573. 12. 4 of Marc. Placentia
shall have credit in Palermo Ducc. 3416. 2. 7 d. As for Example. ^

The proof of the said account is discerned, when that Palermo Proof.
is seen to rechange for Placentia. And note, that when the said Exchanges
with Mesina, the same as with Palermo.
place does exchange with Mesina in this Kingdom, the account is made as above
with Palermo, the price and rate is only found to differ, and to be either
higher or lower.

CHAP. CCCLXXXIX.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Venice.

PLacentia does exchange for Venice, and gives Crowns 100 of Exchanges of
Placentia with Venic^
Marc. to have in the said place Ducc. 134 more or less, of Livers 6 per Ducc.
I say in Banco, I demand, for Crow. 1078. 12 of Marc. how many Duccats shall it
make in Venetia? Multiply the said sum of Crowns by Ducc. 134 per Cent. and
the remainders of the multiplication are to be divided by 24, to bring them
into Grosses, and from the product cut off the two last figures, which are to
be multiplied by 24, to make them Grosses, and it will make Ducc. 1450 17/24 of
Livers 6 per Ducc. And so much will Placentia have in Venetia, for the said
sum of Crowns of Marc. As by this Example. ^

The proof of the said account is discerned, when that Venetia is Proof.
found to rechange for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXC.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Milan.

PLacentia does exchange with Milan, and is found to give one Exchanges of
Placentia with Milan.
Crow. of Marc. to have in the said place posito Sols 133; I demand then for
Crow. 1450. 15. 6 of Marc. how many Livers ought I to have in Milan? Multiply
the said Crowns by Livers 6. 13. 4. per Crow. which are the said Sols 133,
beginning to multiply the 6 Livers by the 6 Deniers, and then by the 15 Sols
which are with the Crow. of Marc. calculating for 12 Deniers one Sol, and for
20 Sols one Liver, and they will make li. 9671. 16. 8. which Placentia must
have in Milan: As by Example. ^

The proof of the said account is seen, when Milan does exchange Proof.
back with Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCI.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Naples.

PLac^ia does exchange with Naples, and gives one Crown of (...) to have in
Na^les Carlins posito 29; I demand, for (...) 2400. 10. ^0. of Marc. what
credit in Ounces shall I have in Naples? Multiply the said Crowns by 29
Carlins per (...), and take the rest of the multiplication to be divided by
(...) ^o the end to make them Grains, and they will make Carlins (...) ^15,
Grains 9. the which to reduce to Ounces, you must cut off the last figure, and
take of the rest, and it will be Ounces 1180. and the tenth of the remaining
Carlins is to be added to the 5 Carlins, which is the figure cut off, and they
are Carlins 15, which are Taries 7, and there will remain 1 Carlin, with the 9
Grains, which are Grains 19, and in all are Ounces 1180. 7. 19. to which add
one Carlin per Ounce for the good Money, which is done as has been before
showed, when Naples does exchange with Palermo, and it will make Ounces 1199.
28. 1. And that is the credit that shall be due in the said Naples, good Money
being therein comprised, as by this Example. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when Naples does exchange (...).
with Placentia. And note, the account is the same, when Placentia Note ^arri
and ^ecchie.
does exchange with Barri and Lecchie in this Kingdom, the rates only
altering.

CHAP. CCCXCII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Sivil.

PLacentia is found to exchange with Sivil, and gives one Ex^ of (...) with
(...).
Crown of Marc. to have in that place posito 428 Marvedes; I demand then, for
Crow. 815. 5. 6 of Marc. what credit in Marvedes shall Placentia have in Sivil?
Multiply the said sum of Crowns by 428 Marved. the Crown, and it will make
Marvedes 348937, and adding per Cent. for the Aggio of the Monyes, at 5
Marvedes per Mill. and they make Marvedes 350681. And so much credit shall
Placentia have in Sivil: as for example. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when that Sivil does rechange for
Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCIII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Valentia.

PLacentia does exchange with Valentia, and is found to give Exchanges of
Placentia with Valentia.
one Crown of Marc. to have in Valentia 23 Sols posito: I demand, for Crowns
926. 19. 2 of Marc. how many Livers shall I have in Valentia? To do this,
multiply the said sum of Crowns by Livers 1, 3, 4 d. per Crow. which are the
said 23 (...) Sols, beginning the multiplication by the Deniers, and then by
the Sols which are with the Crowns, and they will make Livers 848. 2. 4 d. And
so much shall Placentia have credit in Valentia. Example. ^

Note, that when Placentia does exchange with Barselona and Note Saragosa and
Barselona the same as Valentia.
Saragosa, the account thereof is made up, as the abovementioned exchange from
Placentia to Valentia. And the proof of the said Rule is apparent, when that
Valentia shall exchange back for Placentia. Proof.


CHAP. CCCXCIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Antuerpe.

PLacentia does exchange with Antuerpe, and gives one Crown of Marc. to have
in Antuerpe posito 124 (...) Grosses; I demand, Exchanges of Placentia with
Antuerpe.
for Cro. 700. 15. 0 of Marc. how many Livers of Grosses shall I have in
Antuerpe? You must multiply the said sum of Crowns by 124 (...) Grosses per
Crow. and it makes Grosses 87243, from which you must take (...), to make them
Sols, and then it is 7270, and Gross. 3. which reduced to Livers, cutting off
the last figure, and by taking of the rest, and it will make Livers 363, and
the tenth that remains is worth 10 Sols, and then 3 Gross. And so much will
the credit appear to be in Antuerpe: as by example. ^

The proof of this Rule is seen, when Antuerpe does rechange Proof.
for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCV.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Bergamo.

PLacentia does exchange with Bergamo, and gives 100 Crowns of Marc. to have
Crowns 123 posito, more or less, of Livers Exchanges of Placentia with
Bergamo.
7 per Crown. I demand, for Crowns 740. 4. 8. how many Livers credit shall I
have in Bergamo? To do which, first multiply the said sum of Crowns of
Marc. by the said Crowns 123, and the remainders divide by 20, to keep
account of the Sols, and from the product cut off the two last figures, which
must be multiplied by 20 and by 12, to make them Deniers and Sols of Gold, and
they shall be Crowns 912. 6. 8. which to reduce into Livers, multiply by seven
Livers, the value of the Crown, beginning to multiply the said 7 Livers by the
Deniers 8, and then by the Sols 6, which are with the Crowns, calculating for
12 Deniers one Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver, and it makes li. 6386. 6. 8.
which must be had in credit at Bergamo. Example. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when Bergamo does rechange Proof.
this parcel for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCVI.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Lucca.

PLacentia does exchange with Lucca, and gives 100 Crowns of Marc. to have in
Lucca posito 117 Crowns of Livers Exchanges of Placentia with Lucca.
7 per Crown; I demand then, at this rate, for Crowns 406. 10. 10 of Marc.
how many Crowns of Li. 7 shall I have credit in Lucca? First multiply the said
sum of Crowns of Marc. by Crowns 117 per Cent. and of the product cut off
the two last figures, which multiplied by 20, and by 12, to bring them into
Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crowns 477. 13. 8. And so many
Crowns of Livers 7 (...) per Crown shall I have at Lucca. Example. ^

The proof of this Exchange serves to know how to make the Proof.
account, when Lucca exchangeth with Placentia, being done by the Rule of
Three, saying, If Crow. 117 (...) give 100 Crow. of Marc. how much will 477.
13. 8 Crow. give? and it will be 406. 10. 10 Crow. of Marc. And this is to be
observed in the proof of the rest, according to former mentioned rules.

CHAP. CCCXCVII.
Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Francfort.

PLacentia does Exchange with Francfort, and gives Crowns Exchanges of
Placentia with Francfort.
100 of Marc. to have here Crow. 110 (...) of 93 Quarentines per Crown: I
demand for 800 Crowns of Marc. how many Florins of 60 Quarentins per Flor.
shall I have in Francfort. Multiply the said Crow. 800 by Cro. 110 per cent.
cutting off the two last figures, the which multiply by 20 and by 12, to make
them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and it comes to 884 Crowns of Quarentines 93,
the which to make Florins, must be multiplied by 93 Quarentines, and they are
82212 Quarentines, from which cut off the last figure, and take of the rest,
and they then do make Florins 1370, and the tenth remaining, with the 2
Quarentines, which is the figure cut off, and it makes 12, from which taking
(...) to make them Sols, by reason that 3 Quarentines make one Sol, and they
are Florins 1370, and Sols 4, which is the credit that must be rendered in
Francfort, as shall appear by example. ^

The proof hereof appears when Francfort Exchangeth for Proof.
Placentia, and thus much shall serve for the Exchanges practiced a Drotura
from Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCVIII.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Placentia.

ACcording to my method proposed, I will here add some examples of Draughts
and Remittances made Orders and Commissi^ns given and received for Drau^hts and
^ces in Placentia.
by Order and Commission, in this place of Placentia, wherein I will somewhat
enlarge my self by reason that it is the most noted and eminent place of
Exchanges at this day practiced in the world.

To Placentia then is order given, to remit to Venice at Duc. 134 or to
Florence at Crowns 110 where the benefit shall appear to be (...) Example
most, that is to say, that finding to remit to one of the said two places,
with benefit of the limited prices, the remittance be made thither where most
will be given, and if the Remittance be found to be made with loss, to that
which will give the least: for Florence then there is found at Cro. 111, and
for Venice at Duc. 135: I demand whither ought the Remittance be made, for to
both the Remittance is found to be with profit, and to know where the greatest
gain will be, I say by the rule of three, If Duc. 134 give 110 the inordered
price, what will 135 Duc. give, the price found, it will make Cro. 111 (...) or
circa, so that there is more profit to make the Remittance to Florence, because
that remitting at Duc. 135, to make the Par, the Remittance should be for
Florence at Cro. 111 (...), and the partido found is 111 (...) Cro. as for
Example. ^

Again, at Placentia there is order received to remit to Antwerpe at Grosses
123, or to Barselona at Sol 24, where the most advantage See Example.
shall be found, there is found a parcel for Antwerpe at Gross 120, and for
Barselona at Sol 24, I would know to which must the Remittance be made, seeing
that in both places there is loss given upon the prices that are inordered,
and to know where is the least, I say by the Rule of Three, if Sols 24 give
Grosses 123, the price inordered, what will 24 Sols give, the price that is
found, and it makes Grosses 120, so that the Remittance must be made for
Antwerpe, by reason that remitting to Barselona at Sols 24, to make the Par,
the Remittance should be made to Antwerpe at Gross 120 (...), and it is found
at 120 (...). ^

CHAP. CCCXCIX.
Questions upon the Exchanges practiced at Placentia.

AT Florence there is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of the Fair,
posito at Cro. 109 (...), and for Venice at Cro. Questions upon the Exchanges
practiced at Placentia.
81, I would know by the said Exchanges, at what price Placentia does hereby
exchange for Venice, to do which, say by the Rule of Three, If 81 Cro. of Gold
of Florence give at Venice 100 Duc. of Livers 6 (...), how many will 109 (...)
Cro. give, the price of 100 Cro. of Marc. and it will make Duc. 134 of Lib. 6
(...), and at that price should Placentia exchange for Venice, where by the way
it is to be noted, that it is a thing evident, that exchanges are here made at
greater or lesser prices, according to the plenty or scarcity of money to be
found, and the rates incertaine, these rules only serving for instruction to
make up the accounts thereof. ^

Again at Naples is Exchange made for Placentia in expedition Question for
(...).
of a Fair there at Duc. 136, and for Venice at Duc. 1012, I would know by the
said Exchanges at what prices should Placentia Exchange with Venice: I say by
the Rule of three, if Duc. 101 of Naples give at Venice ducc. 100 at lib. 6
(...) howmany will 136 ducc. give the price of 100 Cro. of Marc. and it will
appear to make Ducc. 134 (...), and at that price should Placentia Exchange
for Venice, as by Example. ^

Again, at Venice there is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a
Fair at Duc. 133, and for Naples at Duc. 102, I demand ^ion for (...).
by the said parties, at what price should Placentia Exchange for Naples, you
must multiply the said Duc. 133 which is the value of 100 crow. of marc. by
Duc. 102 per cent. by reason that the said Duc. 102 (...) are the value of 100
Duc. of Venice, and thus wrought, it will make Duc. 137 (...) or thereabout,
and at that price should Placentia exchange with Naples. ^

Again at Naples is exchange made for Placentia, in expedition Question for
^me.
of a Fair, at Duc. 136, and for Rome at Duc 137, I demand by the said
exchanges, at what price should Placentia exchange with Rome, I say then by the
Rule of three, If Duc. 137 of Naples give at Rome Cr. 100 of Gold of Estamp,
how many will Duc. 136 give the price of 100 Crow. of mark, and thus it will
come to Cro. 99 (...) in circa of Gold of Estampe, and at that price should
Placentia exchange with Rome.

^ Again at Rome is exchange made for Placentia, in expedition Question for
Florence.
of a Fair, there at Cro. 99 and for Florence at Cro. 90 I demand by the said
exchanges, at what price should Placentia exchange with Florence, I say then by
the Rule of three, If Cro. 90 of Gold of Estamp, give in Florence Cro. 100 of
Gold, what will Crow. 99 of Estampe the value of Cro. 100 of mark give, it
will be Cro. 110, and at that price should Placentia exchange for Florence. ^

Again at Rome is Exchange made for Placentia in expedition of a Fair there
at Cro. 99, and for Milan at cro. 86, I demand by Question for Milan.
the said Exchanges at what prices should Placentia Exchange with Milan, I say
by the Rule of three, if cro. 86 of Gold of Estampe give at Milan cro. 100 of
lib. 5. 17. 0, what will crowns 99 the price of 100 Cro. of Marc. give, it
will be crowns 115. 2. 3. which being multiplied by Sol 117, the price of the
crown in cutting the two last figures of his product to reduce the exchange to
the value of the crown of Marc. there will remain Sol 134, and at that price
should Placentia Exchange with or for Milan. ^

Again, at Milan is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition Question for
Genoa.
of a Fair there, at Sol 133, and for Genoa at Sol 118 (...), I demand by the
said Exchanges, at what price should Placentia Exchange for Genoa? I say by the
Rule of Three, if Sols 118 of Milan (the price of the Crown of 4 lib. of
Genoa) give Sols 80, what will Sols 133 give (the price of the Crown of Marc.
in money of Milan) and it will be 90 Sols of current money, the which without
making the reduction into money of Gold, seeing it has been already said, that
90 Sols of current money is worth 68 Sols of Gold, and at this price should
Placentia exchange with and for Genoa. ^

Again at Venice is exchange made for Placentia in expedition of a Fair
there, at Duc. 141, and for Lions at 116, I demand by the Question for Lions.
said Exchanges, at what price should Placentia exchange for Lions? I say by
the Rule of Three, if Duc. 141 of lib. 6 (...) of Venice give in Placentia Cro.
100, how many will Duc. 116 give (the value of the Cro. 100 of Gold of the Sun
of Lions) and it will be Cro. 82 (...) in circa, and at that price should
Placentia Exchange with Lions. ^

At Placentia there is exchange made for Lions at Cro. 83, and for Florence at
Cro. 113, and from that place we have advice, that Another.
they exchange for Lions at Cro. 95, I would know by the said exchanges, if it
be beneficial to remit from Placentia to Lions, and to draw from Florence, by
inordering my Factors at Florence to prevail upon Lions at the said price of
Cro. 95, to know which, you must multiply the said Cro. 83 of Marc. being the
price of cro. 100 of the Sun of Gold, by Cro. 113 of Gold per cent. seeing that
the said Crow. of Gold are the value of 100 Crowns of Marc. and from the
product, cut off the two last figures, and there will remain Cro. 94. 7. 1. to
the which adding (...) per cent. for the provisions which are paid, the one at
Florence, the other at Lions, and they will be Cro. 94. 19. 8. so that it will
be profitable, to draw and to remit according to the abovesaid order and
manner, because that at Florence may be taken by exchange for Lions at Cro. 95
in circa, and finding cro. 95, upon which consideration is to be had, what the
moneys of Florence may do by exchange for Lions, which thus I work by
example. ^

Now for the terms of paiments of Bills of Exchanges in Placentia, it is
expressed in the trade of that city in Chapter 383.

And this shall suffice to have said of the Exchanges practiced at Placentia,
where by reason of the great and continued practices here daily made for vast
sums, I have somewhat more then ordinarily enlarged my self, and so I
proceed to the next place of exchanges, which is Florence.

CHAP. CCCC.
Of Examples of Exchanges practiced at Florence, and how the same are to be
calculated.

I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Florence, Exchanges practiced in
Florence.
with how many other places the said City is found to exchange with, and there
also showed the common rates, how the same is observed to rule, which every day
is so subject to alter, that no set price can be peremptorily set down fot the
same, yet in it self it is so beneficial, that thereby the ignorant may be
furthered to make his accounts either in Draughts or Remittances: the way of
making which accounts, upon this place, now remains here to be handled,
observing the same with so many other places, as may make a man capable to
understand the same, with any of the rest here omitted.

And by the way it is observable here, that all Exchangers here Accounts kept
in Florence.
do keep their accounts in Crowns, Sols, and Deniers of Gold, of Lire or
Livers 7 of that money per Crown, the which are cast up by 20 and by 12,
because that 20 Sols of gold do make one Crow. and 12 Den. one Sol.

CHAP. CCCCI.
Of the Exchanges of Florence with Lions.

FLorence then is found to exchange with Lions and gives posito Cro. 95 of
Gold to have in Lions 100 Crowns of the Sun of Exchanges of Florence with
Lions.
Gold, I demand for Cro. 1268. 9. of Gold, how many Crowns of the Sun shall I
have in Lions? I say by the Rule of three, if Crow. 95 give Cro. 100, what will
Crowns 1268. 9. give, and it comes to Crowns 1324, and the remainder of the
division being multiplied by 20 and by 12 to bring them into Sols and deniers
of gold, they will make in all Cro. 1324. 15. of Gold of the Sun, which I
should have credit in Lions for the said sum of cro. of Florence, the
calculation thereof here follows. ^

The proof of this rule is seen, when Lions does exchange with Florence.
Proof.


CHAP. CCCCII.
Of the Exchanges of Florence with Placentia.

FLorence does Exchange with Placentia, and gives posito 110 (...) (...) (...)
(...) Pl^.
Crowns of Gold to have there 100 Crowns of Marc. I demand then for Crowns
4973. 1. 10 of Gold, how many Crowns of Marc. is due to me: first reduce the
said Crowns 110 into Sols of Gold, multiplying them by 20, adding to the
multiplication 10 Sols for the half Crown, and they make Sol 2210, likewise
reduce the said sum of Crowns of Gold into Sols, and it will be 99461, then
say by the Rule of Three, if Sols 2210 give Cro. 100 of Marc. what will Sol
99461 Sols give, to which adding two ciphers for the 100, and then dividing it,
will come to Crowns of Marc. and multiplying the rest of the division by 20
and then by 12, to make the same Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make
Crowns 4500. 9. 11. of marc. and so much must I have credit in Placentia for
the said cro. 4973. 1. 0. of Gold of Florence, as by Example calculated. ^

The proof of this account is seen, when the exchange is made from Placentia
to Florence etc. Proo^e.


CHAP. CCCCIII.
Of the Exchanges of Florence with Venetia.

FLorence does exchange with Venice, and gives posito Crow. 81 (...) of Gold,
to have Ducc. in Banco 100 of Livers 6; I demand Exchanges of Florence with
(...).
then, for Cro. 2037. 10 of Gold, how many Ducc. shall Florence have credit in
Venice? To do which, bring the Crow. 81 (...) into half Crowns, multiplying
them by 2, and so in the same manner of the said sum of Crow. of Gold, adding
half a Crown for the 10 Sols: then say by the Rule of Three, If the half
Crowns produced of the price of the Exchange, give at Venice Ducc. 100, what
will the half Crowns give, proceeded from the said sum of Crow. of Gold?
and so by adding 2 ciphers for the 100, and dividing the same, it will make
Ducc. 2500, which Florence is to have in Venice; and if there were any
remaining of the division, they must be multiplied by 24, to make them Grosses,
because that 24 Gross. make a Ducc. of Lib. 6. 4 Sols. Example. ^

The proof of the said account is more evident, wh^ Venice Proof.
does rechange for Florence.

CHAP. CCCCIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Florence with Rome.

FLorence is said to exchange with Rome, and gives 100 Crowns Exchanges of
Florence with Rome.
of Gold to have in the said place posito Crowns 92 of Gold of Estampe; I
demand then, for Cro. 1600, 2 Sol. 5 Den. of Gold of Florence, how many Crowns
of Gold of Estampe shall Florence have in Rome credit for? First multiply the
said sum of Crowns of Gold at 92 (...) per Cent. and multiply the remainder
by 20 and by 12, to bring them into Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they make
Crowns 1476, 2 Sols, 2 Den. of Gold, which should be had in Rome: as for
example. ^

The proof of the said Rule is evident, when this party is rechanged from
Rome to Florence. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCV.
Of the Exchanges of Florence with Naples.

FLorence exchangeth with Naples, and gives Cro. 100 of Gold, to Exchanges of
Florence with Naples.
have in Naples posito Ducc. 119 of Taries 5 per Ducc. I demand then, for Cro.
780. 15 of Gold, what credit in Ducc. shall Florence have in Naples? To do
which, first multiply the said sum of Cro. of Gold by Grains 119 per Cro.
because it is so many Grains per Cro. as it comes to be Ducc. for Cro. 100.
and they make Grains 93429. of which, cut off the 2 last figures, to make them
Duccats, saying that the Ducc. is worth 100 Grains, and they make Ducc. 934.
and for the Grains 29, Taries 1, and Grains 9. And so much credit shall
Florence have in Naples, as by this Example is showed. ^

The proof of this Rule is manifested, when Naples is seen to Proof.
exchange with Florence.

CHAP. CCCCVI.
Of the Exchanges of Florence with Antuerpe.

FLorence does exchange with Antuerpe, and gives one Crown of Gold, to have
in the said place Gross. 112 posito. I demand Exchanges of Florence with
Antuerpe.
then, for Crowns 1400. 12. 8. of Gold, how many pounds of Gross. am I to have
in Antuerpe? To do this, multiply the said sum of Crowns by the said price
of Gross. 112, and it makes Grosses 157571. of which, take the (...), to make
them Sols, and they make Sols 13130, and Gross 11. which to reduce to pounds,
cut off the last figure of the said Sols or Shillings, and take of the rest,
and it makes pounds 656. and for the tenth that is remaining, it is to be
accounted 10 Sols; and if the figure cut off had been any number, it should
have been added to the 10 Sols: and it thus makes pounds 659. 10. 11. Money of
Antuerpe. ^

The proof of the said Account is seen, when that Antuerpe Proof.
does exchange with Florence.

Note, that when Florence does exchange for London, which is seldom Note
Florence with (...).
in use, the rule of casting up the same in Sterling Money, is this as above
with Antuerpe, in Flemish Pounds.

CHAP. CCCCVII.
To reduce Crowns of 7 l. in Florence into Crowns of gold of Lire, 7.

IF in Florence you would reduce, any sum of Crowns of money of Lire 7 l.
per. Cro. into Crowns of gold of Lire 7 l. (...) you must take the (...) of the
Cro: of money, and the remainder will be Crowns of gold.

And if again you would reduce Crowns of gold into Cro: of money, you must
add contrarily to the Cro. of gold 1/41 and they will be so many Crowns of
money, as for example Cro: 3647 12 6 of money of Lire 7 l. pr. Cro: 1/15 243 3
6. Cro. 3404 9 of gold of Lire 7 pr. Cro. ^

CHAP. CCCCVIII.
Of the terms of payment of Bills of exchange in Florence.

THe term of payment of Bills of Exchange is found to be from Florence:

To Naples at 10 days sight and from thence at 15 days sight. To Rome at 10
days sight and so back. To Venice at 5 days sight and thence at 20 days
after date. To Bollonia at 3 days sight and so back, and so for Pisa. To
Ferrara at 5 days sight and so back. To Perugia and Sciena at 2 days sight
and so back. To Genoa at 8 days sight and so back. To Avignon at 30 days
after date, and thence 45 days after date. To Gaietta at 10 days sight and so
back. To Paris 2 months after sight and so back. To Padova at 5 days sight and
so back. To Palermo and Mesina at 15 days sight and so back. To Ancona at 10
days sight and so back. To Barselona at 2 months after date and so back. To
Valentia at 40 days sight and so back. To Brudges and Antwerpe at 2 months
after date and so back. To London at 3 months after date and so back. To
Ceneva at the faires and thence 15 days sight back. To Lions to the fair and
from fair to fair. To Milan at 10 days sight and so back. To Aquilla and
Sermona at 11 days sight. To Comerino at 8 days sight and so back.
CHAP. CCCCIX.
Of Orders and comissons, given and received for draughts and remittances by
exchanges in the City of Florence in Tuscany.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will here set down, an example or two of
draughts and remittances, Orders and comisons given and received for draughts
and remittances by exchange in Florence.
made by Order and comisson in Florence.

To Florence then comes advise from Venice, that the Exchange for the said
place of Florence comes at Cro. 80 and for Placentia at duc. 135. they
inorder in the said place of Venice, that at this rate, they make a remittance
to Florence and draw from Placentia, at how much then will the draught of
Florence for Placentia come unto, to do this. 1. Example.


Multiply duc. 135 which is the value of 100 Cro. of marc by Cro. 80 of gold
pr. cent, because the said Cro. of gold is the rate of the duc. 100 of Venice,
and it will be Cro. 109 19 from which take pr. cent, for the provision paid at
Venice, and there will rest Cro. 108 12 10 and so many Cro. of gold, is
imboursed at Florence for 100 Cro. of marc for a debt at Placentia, as thus for
example: ^

Again, one of Venice is creditor in Florence Cro. 3000 of gold, who Example 2.
inordereth that the same be remitted unto him at cro. 81 or by Placentia at
cro. 110, where the most advance and profit shall appear to be, that is to
say, that finding a remittance in both places, to benefit of the price limited,
the remittance should be where the profit and benefit is greatest, and finding
the remittance to loss, the remittance be made where the damage is least,
there is then Bills found for Venice at Cro. 82 and for Placentia at Cro. 110 I
demand by which of the two should the remittance be made.

By both the said places there is found a delivery to loss, and to know which
of the two is the least, say by the rule of three, If Cro. 81 give Cro. 110 the
price limited, what will Cro. 82 the price found give, and it will come to Cro.
111 0 2, so that the remittance should be made by Placentia, because that
remitting to Venice, at Cro. 82, to run at the parr: the delivery should be
for Placentia at Cro. 111, and the bills is at Cro. 110 Example: ^

Again one of Rome is debtor in Florence in Cro: 2500 who inordereth that the
draught be made at Cro: 91 or by Placentia at Cro: Example 3.
110 where the most profit shall appear to be, now there is found money for
Rome at Cro: 92 l. for Placentia, at 109 Cro: I demand, whither should this
draught be made, seeing that to both the places, the draughts happen to be to
loss in both the limited prices, and to know which is the least of both, say
by the rule of 3. if Cro: 92 (...) the price found for Rome (seeing that
Placentia receives the uncertain rate from Florence) give Cro: 110 what will
Cro: 91 the price inorderd give, it will make Cro: 109-1-2, so that the draught
should be made for Placentia, seeing that drawing for Rome at Crowns 92, to
run upon a Parr: should be taken for Placentia at the said price at Cro: 109
(...) or there about, and there is found at more, that is at Cro: 109: as by
example. ^

And so much shall suffice to have said of the Orders and Commissons in
draughts and remittances by exchange of Florence.

CHAP. CCCCX.
Of the exchanges practiced at Milan, and how the same are to be calculated.

I Have showed in the general exchanges of Millan, with Exchanges practiced at
Milan.
how many other places, this city is found to exchange with, and there also
set down the common current rates thereof, which every day is found so to
alter, that no positive rule can be observed in the same, yet is in it self
so beneficial, that thereby the unexperienced may know how to make his
accounts, either in his draughts or remittances, the way of framing these
accounts, now remains, observing the same with some few other, the principal
needful hereunto.

It is also to be noted, that Exchangers do there keep their accounts, in lire
sols and deniers, and cast up by 20 and by 12 because Accounts ^pt in Milan.
that 20 sols do make a lire and 12 den: a sols.

CHAP. CCCCXI.
Exchange of Milan with Lions.

MILAN then exchanges with Lions, and gives posit: sols 118 to have in said
place, one crown of the Exchange of Milan with Lions.
sun of gold, I demand then for l. 9258: sol: 5 of Milan, how many crowns
shall I have credit in Lions, first reduce into sols, the said sum of Livers,
of Milan, and they make sols 185165, the which must be multiplied by 3 to make
them thirds of sols, likewise bring the sols 118 unto thirds, multiplying them
by 3 and they make 355, for division of the said sum, and by division it will
come to be crowns, and multiplying the remaynder of the division by 20 and by
12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they will be crowns 1564. 15. 5
of gold of the sun, and so much will be had in Lions for the said sum of l.
9258: 5 of Milan money, as by this example. ^

The proof of the said account is seen when that Lion exchangeth with Millan
as before. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXII.
Of the exchanges of Milan with Placentia.

MILAN does exchange with Placentia, and gives posito sols 133, to have in
Placentia one Crown of Marc: Exchange of Milan with Placentia.
I demand then for livers 9671. 16. 8. of Milan, how many crowns of Marc: must
I have in Placentia.

First reduce into deniers the said 133 sols, multiplying them by 12 and adding
4 deniers for the of a sol, and they make deniers 1600, and then to reduce into
deniers the said sum of Lire, multiply them by 20 and by 12, adding to the
multiplication sol: 16. and deniers 8, which acc. with the livers, and they
make deniers 2321240, the which must be divided by deniers 1600, the price of
the crown of Marc:, and by division they will come to be crowns, multiplying
the rest of the division by 20 and then by 12, to make them sols and deniers of
gold, and they make cro: 1450: 15. 6. of Marc: and so much will the said sum
be in Placentia, example. ^

The proof of the said rule is manifested when that Placentia exchangeth for
Millan. Proof.


CAHP. CCCCXIII.
Of the exchange of Milan with Venice.

MILAN exchangeth with Venice, and gives a Crown of Livers of 5: 178. to have
in that place, posito 148 l. (...) Exchang of Milan with Venice.
sols: money of Piccoli, I demand for l. 7260: 10: 0 of Milan, how many Duccats
of l. 6 (...) shall I have in Venice.

You must divide the said sum of livers, by livers 5: 17, reducing them, and
the other price into deniers, and it will be Cro: 1241. 0. 9. the which must be
multiplied by l. 7. 8. 6. the Crown, which are the above said 148 6, beginning
to multiply the l. 7 by the den: 9: 4 then by the sols, if there were any with
the said Crowns calculating for deniers 12, one sols, and for sols 20, one
Lyre and they will be l. 9214: 14 money of Piccoli of Venice, which to be
reduced into Duccats, must be divided by l. 6 the value of the duccate, and it
will make ducc: 1486 5/24 of l. 6 and so much shall I have in Venice for the
sum above mentioned in livers of Milan, as by example is more apparent. ^

The proof of the said account is seen when Venice does exchange for Milan.
Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXIIII.
Of the exchanges of Milan with Rome.

MILAN exchangeth with Rome, and gives posito Exchanges of Milan with Rome.
Cro: 115 of l. 5. 17. per Cro: to have in the said place Cro: 100 of gold of
Estampe, I demand then for l. 7820. 18. of Milan, how many Crowns of gold of
Stamp shall I have in Rome.

You must first see for the said sum of Milan Livers, how many Crowns they
will be dividing them by l. 5-17 per Crown, and they make Crown 1336 18 1,
then say by the rule of three, if Cro: 115 of Milan give in Rome Crowns 100 of
Stamp, how many Crowns will the said Cro: 1336. 18 (...) give, and it will
amount to Crowns 1157. 9-9 of gold of Stamp, which will be given in Rome, for
the said sum of Milan Livers as abovesaid, example. ^

The proof of this rule is seen when that Rome does exchange with Milan,
Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXV.
Of the exchanges of Milan with Naples.

MILAN does exchange with Naples, and gives Cro: 100 of l. 5 p. Cro: to have
in Naples posito 98 Duccats, Exchange of Milan with Naples.
I demand for l. 4314-14-2 of Milan how many Duccats shall I have in Naples:
first take (...) of the said sum of Livers to reduce them into Cro: of 5 l.
and they make Cro: 862 18 10 which must be multiplied by grains 98 (...) pr.
Cro: seeing it is the same as at Duccats 98 (...) per 100 Cro: and it makes
grains 84999, and cutting off the two last figures, there will remain duccats
849, and for the two figures cut off which are grains 99, will be Livers 40
grains 19 in all duccats 849-4-19 which is to be had in Naples for the said
sum of Livers of Milan, as for example. ^

The proof of the said account is seen when Naples shall exchange with Milan.
Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXVI.
Of the exchanges of Milan for Genoa.

MILAN exchangeth with Genoa, and gives posito Exchange of Milan with Genoa.
sols 118 to have in Genoa one cro: for 4 l. of that money, I demand for l.
5703-18-0 of Milan, how many Livers of current money shall I have in Genoa,
first reduce the said sum into sols, multiplying them by 20 and adding to the
multiplycation the 18 sols which account with the Livers, and then of the sols
produced, and of the said sols 118 taken for devisior, bring into sols and
deviding the same will become crowns, and the remainder of the devision
multiply by 20 and by 12 to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they will
make crowns 962-13-8. of l. 4 money of Genoa, the which to bring into Livers,
must be multiplied by l. 4 per cro: beginning to multiply, the said l. 4. by
deniers 8, and by the sols 13 which are with the crowns, calculating for 12
deniers, 1 sol, and for 20 sols one Liver, it will come to l. 3850-14 8, and so
many Livers of money current, shall you have in Genoa for the said Livers
5703-18 of Milan. ^

The proof of the said rule is seen when that Genoa does exchange Proof.
for Milan.

CHAP. CCCCXVII.
Of terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Milan.

THE terms of payment found to be in Milan, are observed to be from thence to
Terms of payment of bills Exchange in Milan.


To Genoa at 5 days sight, and so back. To Pisa at 10 days sight, and so
back. To Florence at 10 days sight, and so back. To Venice at 10 days sight,
and so back. To Paris at 2 mon. after date, and so back. To Bridges and Antwerp
at 2 mo. after date, and so back. To Barselona at 20 days sight, and so back.
To Montpilaer at 20 days sight, and so back. To Lions for a Fair, and so from
Fair to Fair.
And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the Exchanges of Millan: and now
to Orders and Comissons in use in the said place.

CHAP. CCCCXVIII.
Of Orders and Commissons given and received for draughts and remittances in
Milan.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will here briefly Orders and Comisons given
and received for draughts and remittances in Milan. Example 1.
insert some examples of draughts and remittances made here by Order and
Commisson from other places.

From Naples then coo^eth Order to Milan, to remit for Plancentia at 133 sol.
and to prevail for Genoa at Sol 118, the parcel being for 3000 Cro. of marc:
Now there are Bills found for Placentia at Sols 131. considering then the
benefit, which is found in the remittance, at how much may the draught be for
Genoa. Say by the rule of three, If Sol 133 give Sols 118 the price inorderd,
what will 131 give, the price found for Placentia, and it will be Sol 116, and
at this price the draught must be made for Genoa, in remitting to Placentia at
Sol. 131, and the Comisson will remain effected according to the Order given, ^

Again, from Lions is order given to Milan, that they may draw for Lions at
Sol, 118, and remit to Venice at Sol. 145, the parcel being for ducc: 5500 of
l. 6 per ducc. there is money for Lions at Sol. 119, and bills for Venice at
Sol. 144 I demand if at these prices, the order may be performed, say by the
rule of 3, taking one of the prices which is found for devisor, by reason that
Milan gives (according to my former method) the certain rule to Venice, and
the incertaine to Lions, and say, If 144 the price found for Venice, gave Sol.
118, what will 145 the price inordred give, and it will make 118, so that the
said Commisson at the prices found, may be effected to benefit, because that
remitting to Venice, at the said price of 144 (...), the draught may be made
for Lions at 118 (...), and there is money found at Sol. 119: as by example ^

Again, from Rome comes Order to Milan, to draw on them at Cro. 115, and
remit to Placentia at 132 Sol, the party being for Cro. 4000, there is bills
found for Placentia at Sol 133, and mo. for Rome at Cro. 11 6 (...), I demand
if at these rates the Commisson may be performed without loss, say by the rule
of three, If Sols 132 give, Cro. 115 the price limited, what will 133 give, the
price found for Placentia, and it will come to cro. 116 6 1, so that the
comison may be performed to benefit, because that remitting to Placentia at the
said price of sol. 133 the draught may be made for Rome at cro. 116 3/10, and
there is found at more that is to say at cro. 116 as per example. ^

And thus much shall serve for the Exchanges of Milan, next is Palermo and
Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXIX.
Of Exchanges practiced in Palermo and Mesina and how the same are to be
calculated.

I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with how many
other places these Cities in Sicilia Exchanges practisd in Palermo and Mesina.
are observed to Exchange with, and there also set down the common current
Rates, thereof, which every day is found so subject to alteration, that no
positive rule can be observed in the same, yet it is in it self so
beneficial, that thereby the unexperienced may know, how to make his
calculation both in his draughts or in his remittances, they way of casting the
sum up, is now to be handled, observing the sum hear with some few principal
places, which is sufficient for instruction to those others omitted.

First it is to be noted, that in Palermo and Mesina and generally Accounts
kept in Sicilia.
through out the Island of Sicilia the Exchangers keep their accounts in Ounces,
Taries, and Grains, which are cast up by 30, and 20, because that 30 taries do
make an Ounce, and 20 grains make a tarry, and also it is to be observed, That
the duccat is worth taries 13 which is Carlins 26. The Crown of money is worth
taries 12 which is Carl: 24. The florin is worth taries 6 which is Carl: 12.

so that the Tarry is 2 Carlins the Carlin is 10 Grains the Grain is 6 Picolis

CHAP. CCCCXX.
Of the Exchange of Palermo and Mesina with Lions.

PAlermo and Mesina does exchange with Lions, and gives Exchange of Palermo
and Mesina with Lions.
posito 28 carlins to have in Lions a crown of the sun, I demand then for
ounces 2189 25 17, how many crowns must I have in Lions, first multiply the
ounces by 30, to make them taries, adding thereto the 25 taries, and multiply
the taries that will come thereof by 20 to bring them into grains, and add
thereto 17 which are with the ounces, and then they will be grains 1313917, do
the same likewise with the 28 carlins multiplying them by 10, because the
carlin is worth 10 grains, and they will be 280 gr. the which must be taken
for divisor against the said grain come from the ounces 2189 25 17, and from
the divison will come crowns of the sun, and multiplying the remainder by 20
and then by 12 to make them sols and deniers of gold, and they will be crow.
4692 11 2, as for example. ^

The proof of this account is seen when that Lions shall Exchange Proof.
back with Palermo and Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXXI.
Of the Exchange of Palermo and Mesina with Placentia.

PAlermo and Mesina exchange for Placentia, and give Exchange of Palermo and
Mesina with Placentia.
posito carlins 29 (...) to have in the said place one cro. of marc. I demand
then for ounces 1180, taries 7, and gr. 19, how many crowns of marc. shall I
have in Placentia, herein do as in the precedent account, multiplying the said
ounces by 30, to make them taries, and add the 7, which are with the ounces,
and then multiply, the said taries by 20, to make them grains, and add the 19
and they will be grains 7081 59 do the same with the said 29 carlins,
multiplying them by 10, to bring them into gra. adding 5 for the carlin, and
they make 295 grains, the which taken for divisor, against the said sum of
grains come of the ounces 1180 7 19, and of the divisor will come cro. of marc.
multiplying the remainder by 20, and then by 12, to make them sols, and deniers
of gold, and they make cro. 2400 10 9 and so many cro. of marc. shall I have in
Placentia for the said sum of Ounces. ^

The proof of the said rule is seen when that Placentia does Prrofe.
exchange either for Palermo or Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXXII.
Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Naples.

PAlermo and Mesina do Exchange with Naples, and Exchange of Palermo, etc.
with Naples.
gives posito pomitos 166 of 8 picolis to have one duccat of 5 taries, I demand
then, for Ounces 1053 taries 6 and 2 gr. how many duccats must I have, first
multiply the said sum of Ounces by 30, to make them taries, and then by 20 to
make them gr. adding to the multiplication 6 taries, and 2 gr. which accompany
the Ounces, and then they make gr. 631922, out of which to make them pomitos,
take out the because that the gr. is worth 6 picolis, and the pomito is worth 8
picolis, of which the 2 picols overplus is the of 8, and that they make pomitos
473942 which must be divided by the said 166 the price of the Exchange,
reducing them into picolis both on the one and on the other side, and by
division they will make duccats of Naples, multiplying the remainder by 100,
and adding of two ciphers, to bring them into gr. because that the duccat is
100 grains, and the same will be duccats 2846, and for the gr. 49 taries 2 and
grains 9 of taries 5 per. duccat which is to be rendered at Naples for the said
sum of Ounces of money of Palermo: Example. ^

The proof of this account is seen when that Naples do Exchange Proof.
for either Palermo or Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXXIII.
Of the Exchanges of Palermo, and Mesina, with Venice.

PAlermo and Mesina do exchange with Venice, and gives Exchanges of Palermo,
etc. with Venice.
one Crown, of 12 taries to have in Venice l. 6. 18 posito, I demand for
ounces 1486. 26. 10, what credit in duccats shall I have in Venice of l. 6 per
duc. first reduce the said oun. into crowns of 12 taries, multiplying them by
30, to make them taries, adding to the multiplication the 26 taries, which are
with the ounces, and they make taries 44606, out of which take 1/12, and they
then make cro. 3717 taries 2 and gr. 10, which must be multiplied by 138 Sol
per cro. which are the said l. 6. 18, and they make Sols 512974, which must be
divided by 124 the price of the ducc. and it will make ducc. 4136 (...) and so
much shall I have in Venice for the said sum of ounces in Palermo or Mesina.
Example, ^

The proof of this rule is to see if 4136 21/24 duccat of l. 6 of Venice make
the said sum of ounces 1486. 26. 10. of l. 6. 18 money of Proof.
Venice for one crown of 12 taries in Palermo or Mesina as above said.

CHAP. CCCCXXIIII.
Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with Barselona.

PAlermo, and Mesina, Exchanges with Barselona, and Exchanges of Palermo, etc.
with Barselona.
gives one Florin of 6 taries, money of Palermo, to have in Barselona posito 10
Sols money current of Barselona, I demand then for 300 ounces what credit in
livers is due for the same. First, multiply the said ounces by 5 to make them
Florins, the ounce being accounted 5 Florins, and it makes 1500 Florins, the
which multiplied by 10 Sols, per Florin makes Sols 15750, which to reduce to
livers, you must cut off the last figure, and take of the rest, and it will be
l. 787. 10, which is due at Barselona, ^

For the proof of the said Rule, as above divide the said livers Proof.
l. 787 10 by 10 Sol, to make them Florin, and it is 1500 Flor. and if there
were any remainders, they should be multiplied by 6 and then by 20, to bring
them into taries and grains, and for to reduce the said 1500 Flor. into ounces,
you must take for that 5 Flor. make one ounce, and it will come to 300 ounces,
the rule thus appearing right and just.

And for the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with Valentia and Saragoza, it is
cast up as above, therefore need not insist further as Palermo and Mesina, with
Saragosa and Valentia.
being easily comprehended.

CHAP CCCCXXV.
Of Orders and commissons given and received for draughts and remittances in
Palermo and Mesina.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will hear Orders and comissons given and
received for draughts and remittances in Palermo and Mesina.
briefly insert some examples of draughts and remittances made by order and
commison in Palermo and Mesina from other places: At Mesina, the exchange for
Lions is found to go at Carlin 28, and for Placentia at Carlins 33, and from
hence there is an exchange for Lions at Cro: 81, I demand if at these prices,
there will be a benefit to remit from Mesina to Placentia, and draw for Lions,
to remit from Placentia to said Lions at said price of Cro: 81 say by the rule
of 3, if Carlins 33 the value of a Cro: of Marc: (to reduce the exchange to the
value of 100 Cro:) give 100 Cro: of Marc: what will 28 Carlins give, the value
of the Cro of the sun, and it will be cro: 84 17/20 out of which must be
abated per cent, for provisions payable at Lions, and another at Placentia, and
there will remain cro: 84 3/10, and at this price, the remittance may be made
from Placentia to Lions, to satisfy that debt, and finding to remite at less,
that is at cro: 81, it appears plainly to be to profit to draw and to remitt
according to the aforesaid Order, in which also lies this consideration, that
the money of Placentia for Lions may also vary from the said price, example. ^

Again from Venice there is Order given to Mesina, to draw upon them at l. 6.
14, and to remit to Placentia at Carlins 29, the partido being for crowns 2000
of Marc. now there are bills for Placentia found at Carlins 29, and money for
Venice at l. 6. 12. 6, I demand if at these prices the said comison may be
effected, say by the rule of 3, taking one of the prices, that is found for
divisor, because that from Mesina to Venice, it gives the price certain, and
to Placentia the incertaine, saying thus, if Carlins 29 the price found for
Placentia give sol 134, which are the said l. 6 14. what will Carlins 29 give
the price inorderd, and it will make sols 131 or thereabout, so that the said
comison may not be effected but to loss, seeing that remitting to Placentia at
the said price of 29 Carl. the draught cannot be made to Venice at more then
sol: 131 and money is not sound but at sols 132 which are the said l. 6. 12 6
d. Example. ^

Again, from Naples there is an exchange made for Mesina at duc. 118 (...) and
for Placentia at duc. 132. Now there is order given in Naples, that at these
rates, they draw for Mesina, and that they remit to Placentia, I demand then at
how much will the remittance be from Mesina to Placentia, say by the rule of 3.
If grains 118 (...) make disbursed in Mesina Carl: 26, the price of the Cro.
of taries 13, how many will 132 grains disbursed be the value of the cro. of
marc. It will make Carlins 29 and (...) of a grain, and so many Carlins (and
then per cent for the provison that is paid at Naples) comes to be disbursed in
Mesina for one cro. of marc. of credit in Placentia.

^ And thus much shall serve to have said of the Exchanges that are practiced
in Palermo and Mesina, to which the whole Island of Sicilia has reference.

CHAP. CCCCXXVI.
Of Examples upon the Exchanges that are practiced in Barselona, and how the
same are calculated.

I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Barselona, Exchanges practiced in
Barselona.
with how many other places Barselona is found to Exchange with, and there also
set down the common rates, how the same for the most part is found to govern,
which every day is so subject to alter that no positive rules can be set down
for the same, howbeit the same is in it self so availeable, that thereby the
unexperienced may know, how to make the account thereof, at what rate soever
the Exchange is found to be, either in remittances or draughts, the which
only now remains to be handled, observing the same with so many other
towns, as may be fittest to understand the ground thereof.

It is then to be noted that Bankers and Exchangers here do keep Accounts kept
in Barselona.
their accounts in lire, sold, and deniers, which are cast up in 20 and 12,
because that 20 sols make a liver, and 12 deniers make a soldo, and it is to be
noted that,

The duccat is worth -- sold 24

The Crown is worth -- sold 22 Note concerning the exchange^ practisd' in
Valentia and Saragosa, Sivil and Lisborne.


The Riall is worth -- sols 02

Note also here that the same order which is observed in the Exchanges which
are made in this City of Barselona, with the other places of Spain, should be
observed in the Exchanges which are made in Saragosa, Valentia, Sivil and
Lisborne, seeing that when the said places of Spain Exchange the one with the
other, always that place which Exchangeth, gives ducc. 100, to have the more
or the less, and therefore the money of the place where the Exchange is made,
must first be reduced into duccats, and multiplying the d^cats which come
thereof, (which are of the place to which it Exchangeth) by the price it is
worth, for to reduce the same into the money wherein their accounts are there
kept, and this considered to abreviate my labor the rules being easy, I shall
forbear to trouble my self with any further particulars concerning the said
places of Valentia, Saragosa, Sivil and Lisborne.

CHAP. CCCCXXVII.
Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Lions.

BArselona does exchange with Lions, and gives posito Exchanges of Barselona
with Lions.
sols 22 8 to have in Lions one Crown of the sun of 3 l. I demand then for
l. 8865 12 10 how many Cro. am I to have in Lions, first reduce the said sum of
livers into deniers, multiplying the same by 20, and adding of 12, sols and
then by 12 and adding 10 deniers then reduce into deniers the said sol 22 8 d,
and they make 272, for devisor, against the some of deniers come of the said
livers and multiplying the rest of the devisor, by 20 and by 12 to make them
sols and deniers of gold, and they make Crowns 7822 12 6 of gold of the sun,
which is due to have in Lions,

Example. ^

The proof of this account is manifested when that Lions does Proof.
exchange for Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXVIII.
Of the exchanges of Barselona with Placentia.

BArselona does exchange with Placentia, and gives Exchange of Barselona with
Placentia.
posito sols 23 (...) to have there a crown of marc. I demand for livers 1850.
12. 0 how many cro. of marc. shall I have.

First reduce the said sum of livers into deniers, multiplying them by 20, to
make them sold, and add the 12, and then by 12 to make them deniers, and do
the same with the sols 23 (...) multiplying them by 12, and adding thereto 7
deniers, the deniers come thereof, are to be taken for divisor against the
deniers come of the said livers, and by division they will come to cro. of
Marc. multiplying the rest by 20 and by 12 to make them sols and deniers of
gold and then they make cro. 1569. 8. 3 of Marc. which is due to be had in
Placentia for the said sum of Barselona. ^

The proof of this rule is apparent when that Placentia does exchange for
Barselona. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXXIX.
Of the Exchange of Barselona with Saragosa.

BArselona exchangeth with Saragosa, and gives 10 Exchange of Barselona with
Saragosa.
duccats of 24 Sol per duccat, to have in this place posito 104 duccats of
Sols. 22 per duccat of that money, I demand for livers 6000 of Barselona, how
many livers shall I have in Saragosa, first reduce into Sols the said sum of
livers, multiplying them by 20, and divide the sols coming thereof by sol. 24
the price of the duccat, and it will be duccat 5000, the which duccat 5000 of
Barselona, must be multiplied at the said price of ducc. 104 per cent: and from
the sum cut off the 2 last figures, the which multiplied by 20 and by 12, to
make them sols and den. of gold, will be duc. 5^00 of Saragosa, which must be
multiplied by l. 1. 2 sol. the price of the duccat, and they make livers 5720,
which should be rendered in Saragosa for the said 6000 l. money of Barselona. ^

The proof of this rule is manifest when that Saragosa does again rechange
back for Barselona. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXXX.
Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Valentia.

BArselona does exchange with Valentia, and gives duc. 100 of 24 sols to have
in Valentia, posito ducc. 108 of sols Exchanges of Barselona with Valentia.
21 per. duc. of that money, I demand for l. 7000 money of Barselona, how many
l. shall I have in Valentia.

In this you must do as in the preceding account of Barselona for Saragosa,
multiplying the duccats of Valentia, which shall come thereof by livers 1 1 the
price of the duccat, and it will be livers 6615, and so much will be due in
Valentia for 7000 l. delivered in Barselona. ^

The proof of this rule is apparent when that Valentia does rechange for
Barselona. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXXXI.
Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Sivil.

NArselona does exchange with Sivil, and gives duc. 100 of 24 sol, per. ducc.
to have in this place Exchange of Barselona with Sivil.
duc. 108 posito more or less, of marvedes 375 per. duccat, I demand for l.
7500 how many marvedes must I have in Sivil.

You must do as in the precedent rule of Barselona for Valentia, multiplying
the duccats of Sivil which come thereof, by marvedes 375 the price of the duc.
and it will make marvedes 2531250 which is due to have in Sivil for the said
sum of 7500 l. in Barselona. Example. ^

The proof of this rule is manifested when that Sivil does rechange for
Barselona. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXXXII.
Of the exchanges of Barselona with Lisborne.

BArselona does exchange for Lisborne, and gives duc. Exchange of Barselona
with Sivil.
100 of 24 sols per duc. to have in Lisborne duccats posito 113, of 400 Raise
per duc. I demand for 4000 l. of Barselona, how many Raise shall I have in
Lisborne, hear you must do as in the account precedent of Barselona for Sivil,
multiplying the duccats of Lisborne, which shall come thereof by 400 Raise per
ducc. and they make Raise 1506666, which is due to be had in Lisborne for l.
4000 in Barselona. Example. ^

The proof of this rule is apparent when that Lisborne does rechange Proof.
back for Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXXIII.
Of Orders and Comisons given and received for draughts and remittances in
Barselona.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will here briefly Orders and commisons
given and received for draughts and remittances in Barselona Example 1.
insert some examples of draughts and remittances made in this City by order
and comison from other places.

To Sivil then comes order from Barselona to draw upon them at duc. 93 and
remit to Placentia at marvedes 413, which of all charges, the partido being for
Cro. 3000 of marc. Now there is found money for Barselona at duc. 93, and bills
for Placentia at marvedes 413, I demand if at these rates the Comison may be
accomplished and performed, you must say by the rule of 3 taking one of the
prices, which are found for divisor, because that Sivil gives to Barselona the
certain, and to Placentia the incertaine price, saying, If duc. 93 the price
found for Barselona give marvedes 413, what will duc. 93 give the price
inorderd, and it makes marvedes 415 out of which deduct per cent for provison
which is taken, there will remain marvedes 413 (...) incirca, so that the said
comison may be effected to profit, seeing that drawing to Barselona at the said
price of duc. 93, it may be deliverd for Placentia at m^r. 413 (...) and their
present bills at less that is at 413 marvedes; as by Example. ^

Again, In Barselona comes order from Valentia, that remittance may be made
to them at duc: 108, and to prevail from Example 2.
Placentia at sol 23, the partido made for 3000 Cro. marc. Now there is bills
found for Valentia, at duc. 107, I demand then for the loss then that is given
by the remittance, at what price may the draught be made for Placentia, say by
rule of 3. taking one if the prices found for divisor, because then Barselona
gives the certain to Valentia, and the incertaine price to Placentia, saying
of duc. 107 the price found for Valentia, give sol 23, what will duc. 108 (...)
give, being the price inorderd, and it will come to sols 23 and at less price
cannot be drawn for Placentia, remitting to Valentia at duc. 107 Example. ^

CHAP. CCCCXXXIV.
Of the terms of paymen^s of Bills of Exchange in Barselona.

THe terms of payment found accustomed in Barselona is noted to be thence

To Venice at 2 mo. after date and so back. Terms of payment of bills of
Exchange in Barselona, etc.
To Florence at 2 mo. after date and so back. To Avignon at 18 days sight and
so back. To Bridges and Antwerpe at 50 days after date and so back. To Genoa
at 20 days after sight and so back. To Lisborne at. To Sivill at. To Saragosa
at. To Valentia at. To Lions for the fair and so from fair to fair. To
Placentia for the fair and from fair to fair.
And thus much shall serve to have said of the exchanges in general practiced
in Barselona, Valentia, Saragosa, Sivil, and Lisborne in Portugal.

CHAP. CCCCXXXV.
Examples of Exchanges practiced in Antwerpe, and how the same are to be
calculated.

I Have showed before in the general exchanges of Antwerpe, Exchange practisd
in Antwerpe.
with how many other places this City is found to exchange with, and there
also observed the common current rates thereof, which in it self is found
every day so subject to alteration, that no positive rule can be set down
therein, how ever yet the same is so beneficial to the unexperienced, that he
may easily make his calculation thereby either in his draughts or his
remittances; there rests now to be handled the way, and method how the same
is cast up, which I will only observe with such other principal places, as may
be sufficient for instruction, and as a guide to rule that which is here
omitted.

And the better to understand what shall ensue, it is to be noted Accounts kept
in Antwerpe.
that in Antwerpe, Bankers and Exchangers do keep their accounts in pounds,
shillings and pence Flemish or gross, which are cast up by 20, and by 12,
because that 20 sols or shillings makes a pound, and 12 pence or gross makes a
shilling.

CHAP. CCCCXXXVI.
Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe with Lions.

ANtwerpe does exchange with Lions, and gives posito Exchange of Antwerpe with
Lions.
121 gross to have in Lions one cro. of the sun of gold of 3 l. I demand then
for l. 3486. 1. 9 money of Antwerpe, how many crowns must I have in Lions.
First reduce the said sum of livers into grosses, multiplying the same by 20
and then by 12, adding to the multiplications 1 sol. and 9 pence, which are
with the pounds, and divide by 121 (...) gros. the sum of grosses which shall
come of the said livers, reducing both them and other into thirds of grosses,
and of the divison will come Crowns, and multiplying the remainder of the
divison by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and deniers of gold, they will make
cro. 6895. 11. 1 of gold of the sun, which you shall have in Lions for the
said sum delivered in Antwerpe. Example: ^

The proof of the said rule is seen when that Lions does exchange for
Antwerpe. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXXXVII.
Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe with Placentia.

ANtwerpe does exchange with Placentia, and gives posito gros. 124 (...) to
have in Placentia one Cro. of Exchange of Antwerpe with Placentia.
marc. I demand for l. 363 10 3 mo. of Antwerpe, how many Crowns of marc.
shall I have in Placentia, first reduce the said sum of livers into gros.
multiplying the sum by 20 and by 12, adding to the multiplycation 10 shil.
and 3 pen. which are with the pound, and divide the groses that come thereof by
said gro. 124 (...) the price of the crown of marc. bringing both the one and
the other into half grosses, and by division it will come to Cro. multiplying
the remainder by 20 and by 12, to bring the same into pence, and then they will
be Cro. 700 14 11 of marc. which will be due at Placentia, for the said sum
of livers or pounds in grosses.

^ The proof of the said account is seen when that Placentia Proof.
shall exchange with Antwerpe.

CHAP. CCCCXXXVIII.
Of the Exchanges of Antwerpe with Florence.

ANtwerpe does exchange with Florence, and gives posito Exchanges of Antwerpe
with Florence.
112 (...) gro. to have in that place one Crow. of gold, I demand for l. 656 10
11, money of Antwerpe how many Cro. of gold do they make, and doing as in the
precedent rule, it will appear to be Cro. 1400 12 7 of gold, which I shall
have in Florence for the said pounds Flemish. ^

The proof of this said account is seen when that Florence shall be found to
exchange with Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXXXIX.
Of the exchange of Antwerp with Venice.

ANTWERPE does exchang with Venice, and gives posito 92. (...) gross to have
in that place one duccat of Exchange of Antwerp with Venice.
l. 6 money of Venice, I demand for l. 1648 14 6, money of Antwerp, how many
duccats shall I have in Venice, and doing as in the precedent accounts, it will
come to ducc: 3810 (...) and so many duccats of l. 6 (...) will be due in
Venice, Example. ^

The Proof of this account is seen when that Venice shall exchange for
Antwerp. Proof.


CHAP. CCCCXL.
Of the exchanges of Antwerpe with London.

ANTWERPE does exchange for London, and gives Exchange of Antwerpe with London.
posito Shill: 33 (...) to have in that place one pound starlin, I demand for
l. 748-18. 6 mo: of Antwerpe, how many pound starlin should I have in London,
first reduce as well the said sum of pound starlin as the said sum of pound
flemish into gross and pence, multiplying the pounds by 20, and then by 12,
adding the shillings 18. 6d. which are with the pounds flemish, and the shill:
flem: 33, multiplied by 12, adding 4 gross for (...) of a shill flem:, and the
gross which shall come thereof, must be taken for divisor, against the sum
of grosses, come of the said pounds, and dividing the sum will come pounds
starlin, multiplying the remainder of the divison by 20, and then 12 to make
them shillings and pence starlin, they will make pound starlin 449. 7. 1, due
in London, for the said sum of pound flemish 748. 18. 6. and for proof of
the said exchange, multiply the said pound starlin 449. 7. Proof.
1 by 1 l. 13 shillings 4d. which are the said 33 shillings and it will make
the above said l. 748. 18. 5 pounds flemish so that the account will appear to
be just cast up. ^

And thus much shall serve to have said here of exchanges, now to the terms of
payments of bills in Antwerpe.

CHAP. CCCCXLI.
Of the terms of payment of bills of exchange in Antwerpe.

THE terms of payments of bills of exchange observed in Antwerpe, and to go
from thence to other Cities is: Terms of payment of bills of exchange in
Antwerpe.


To Venice at 2 mo: after date and so back. To Florence at 2 mo: after date and
back the same. To Genoa at 2 mo: after date and thence the same. To Avignon at
2 months after date and so back. To Barselona at 50 days after date and so
back. To Valentia one month after sight and back 30 days after date. To
London one month after date and so back. To Pisae 2 mo: after date and so
back. To Milan 2 mo: after date and so back. To Paris one mo: after date and so
back. To Montpelier 20 days after sight and so back. To Lions for the
succeeding fair. To Placentia for the next succeeding fair. To Roven one
month after date and so back.
Now for the Orders and Comisons given in Antwerp, I will here inserte a word
also according to my Method.

CHAP. CCCCXLII.
Of Orders and Comisons given and received, for draughts and remittances in
Antwerpe.

ACCORDING to my proposed method, for the better understanding of what is
said, I will insert Orders and commissions given and received for draughts and
remittances in Antwerpe.
some examples of draughts and remittances made by Order and Comison in the
City of Antwerpe.

At Venice then is found an exchange for Antwerpe posito at gro: 90, and for
Placentia at ducc: 135, Order being given to Venice that at these prices, they
draw to Antwerpe, and remit to Placentia, I demand at how much will come the
remittance from Antwerpe to Placentia, first you must multiply the said duccats
135 1. Example.
the value of 100 Cro: of marc, at the said price of 90 gross per duccat, and
of the grosses which shall come thereof, you must cut off the 2 last figures,
and there will remain gross 121 (...), and so many ^sse and (...) ^re percent
for provison, which is payable in Venice, is disbu^able in Antwerpe for one
crown of marc in credit in Placentia. ^

Again at Venice is exchange found for Antwerpe at gro. 90 (...), and for
London at 56 pence starlin, there is hereupon Order given 2. Example.
to Venice, that at these prices, they draw for Antwerpe, and remitt to London,
the question is at what price will the remittance be from Antwerp to London,
to do this say by the rule of three, if 56 pence starlin give gross 90 (...)
(seeing that the one and in the other is the value of a duccat of Venice, what
will 240 pence starlin give being the price of the pound sterlin of London, it
will be gros. 387, which reducing to shillings in taking the (...), and it will
be 32 shill. and so many shillings Flem. and more per cent for the provison
payable in Venice, comes to be disbursed in Antwerpe, for one pound sterlin
money credit in London. ^

Again a Merchant of London is Creditor in Antwerpe, 2000 l. Flemish, who
inordreth that it be remitted him at shill. 33 or to 3. Example.
Placentia at 121 gro. where the most profit shall be found, that is, to that
place which shall be most beneficial, or to least loss of the prices
limited, now there are found bills for London at shillings 33 (...) and for
Placentia at gro. 121 I demand to which of the said places should the
remittance be made, seeing that by both there is found remittance to loss, and
to know where is the least, say by the rule of 3, if shill. 33 give gros. 121
the price inordred, what will shill. 33 give being the price found for London,
it will come to gross 121 (...) so that the remittance should be made to
Placentia, because that remitting to London at shill. 33 to go the Par, should
be delivered for Placentia at gro. 121 (...), and there is found bills for
loss that is at 121 (...) gros. ^

And thus much for the Exchanges practiced in Antwerpe.

CHAP. CCCCXLIII.
Of the Exchanges practiced in London and how the same are to be calculated.

I Have showed in the gene^ll Exchanges of London, with how many other p^ces
this City is found to Exchanges practisd in London.
Exchange with, and the ^o set down the common current prices and ^es thereof,
which every day is found to be so subject to alteration, that no positive rule
can be observed rightly, to set down the same, yet it is in its self so
beneficial, that thereby the unexperienced, may know how to make his
calculation thereof and that as well in his draughts as in his remittances, Now
only there rests to conclude this Tract of Exchanges and this Map of
Commerce to handle the way how the same is cast up, and ho^ by Arithmetic it
is performed, which I will observe hear with some other principal places,
which may serve for a sufficient ground and instruction to those here omitted.

It is here to be noted for the better understanding of what ensues, Accounts
kept in London.
that all B^kers or Exchangers do keep the^ accounts in London in pounds,
shillings and pence commonly called sterlin and cast up by 20 and by 12, for 20
shillings makes a pound, and 12 p^ce makes a shilling.

And moreover that London exchangeth in the denominator of pence sterlin with
all other countries, Antwerpe, and those countries neighboring of Flanders and
Holland excepted, with which it exchangeth by the entire pound of 20 shillings
sterlin.

CHAP. CCCCXLIV.
Of the Exchanges of London with Lions.

LOndon Exchangeth with Lions, and gives posito 61 pence more or less to have
in Lions a crown of gold Exchange of London with Lions.
of the sun of 3 l. piece, I demand then for 348 l. 15 shilling sterling how
many crowns of the sun shall I have credit for in Lions, first reduce the
said sum of pounds sterling into shillings, multiplying the same by 20, and
adding thereto the 15 shillings, and then by 12 pence, adding thereto the pence
if any were, and then divide the same by 61 pence, and the divident will make
Crowns, multiplying the remainder of the divison by 20 to make them sols and
by 12 to make them deniers of gold, and then they will make in all Crow.
1372008 pence of the sun of gold, that I shall have in credit at Lions for
the said sum of 348 l. 15 starlin delivered in London. ^

The proof of this rule is manifested when that Lions shall Exchange Proof.
the said sum of 1372 (...) Cro. for London and here also it is to be noted
that the rule is the same when London shall exchange Exchange of London, with
Paris, Roven, etc. in France.
with either Paris or Roven or any other City of the Kingdom of France.

CHAP. CCCCXLV.
Of the Exchanges of London with Florence.

LOndon does exchange with Florence, and gives posito Exchange of London with
Florence.
70 pence starl. more or less to have in Florence a cro. of gold, I demand
then for pound 656 10 6 d starl. how many Crowns shall I have credit in
Florence, this is to be cast up as in the precedent rule of London with Lions,
and it will appear, that for the said 656 10 6 starlin I am to have credit in
Florence the sum of Cro. 2250 (...) -- as per Example, ^

Note that this Exchange is seldom practiced from London, and Proof.
therefore not in use in these days, but when many Florentine Merchants
resided in London it was much in use, yet the rule is right and the proof
thereof is evident, when Florence rechangeth again for London.

CHAP. CCCCXLVI.
Of the Exchanges of London with Venice.

LOndon is found to Exchange for great sums with Venice, Exchange of London
with Venice.
and gives posito 50 d sterlin, to have in the said place one duccat in banco
of l. 6 money of Venice, I demand then for 555 l. 17 6 d sterlin how many ducc.
shall I have credit for in Venice, this is done as in the precedent rule,
reducing the pounds sterlin into shillings, by the multiplycation of 20, and
adding 17 and then multiplying that again by 12, to bring it into pence and
adding thereto 6 d and it will make duc. (2668 (...)) which should be rendered
in Venice for 555 l. 17 6 d sterling. in London as per Example. ^

Note that for distinction of the current money in Venice, which is 21 per
cent. at present worse then the money payable by Exchange, Proof.
it is termed in Banco in which all bills of Exchange are payable, Difference
between money in Banco and current money in Venice.
and the proof of this rule is apparent when that the said sum of 2668 ducc.
is rechanged for London.

CHAP. CCCCXLVII.
Of the Exchanges of London with Antwerpe.

LOndon does exchange with Antwerpe, and gives one Exchange of London with
Venice.
pound sterlin, to have in Antwerpe posito shillings 35. 6 pence or gross,
money of Antwerpe, I demand then for 445 l. 15 and six pence sterlin, how many
pound Flemish shall I have in Antwerpe, first multiply the pounds sterlin by
20. and bring them into shillings, and then by 12 to bring them into pence
sterlin, do also the same with the pounds Flemish, bringing them first into
shillings Flemish, by a multiplication of 20, and then to pence or gross by
multiplication of 12 d, accounting the 35 shil. 6 d for l. Flem. 1. 15. 6 d.
and say then by the rule of 3, if one pound sterlin give 35. 6 d Flemish, the
price proposed, what will 445 l. 15. 6 sterlin give, which will make l. 791. 5.
0. d Flemish for which you must have credit in Antwerpe pounds.

^ The proof of the rule is more manifest when that Antwerpe does Exchange for
London, and note that the account is the same Proof. London exchange with
Amsterdam, Collonia. etc.
when that London does exchange for Colonia, Amsterdam, and other places in the
Low Countries.

CHAP. CCCCXLVIII.
Of Orders and Comisons given and received for draughts and remittances in
London.

ACcording to my proposed method, I will here for conclusion of the Exchanges
practiced in London, briefly insert some Examples of draughts and remittances
made by comison and Order in the City of London.

To London, then comes Order from Venice Example. 1.
to remit to them at 60 pence, and to draw for Placentia at 82 pence sterlin,
the partido being for Cro. 4000 of marc. I find then bills for Venice at 61
pence, I would know considering the loss that presents in the remittance, at
how much should I draw my draught for Placentia, you must say by the rule of
three, If pence 60 give pence 82 the price inordered, how many will pence 61
give the price found for Venice, and it will be pence 83 sterlin or
thereabouts, and at less must not the draught be for Placentia.

^ Again posito, Florence is found to exchange for London at pence 83 starlin,
and say for Placentia at Cro: 108, and that there is Order Example 2.
given to Florence, that at these rates they draw for London and remit to
Placentia, at how much then will the remittance come from London to Placentia?
to do this, I multiply the said Crowns of Florence, which properly are the
value of Crowns 100 of Marc. by pence sterlin 83, as is above mentioned, and
out of the pence that are thence produced, I cut off the two last figures, and
there will remain pence sterlin 89 (...) incirca, and so many pence together
with (...) per cent. for the provison that is commonly paid in Florence, comes
to be disbursed in London, for one crown of marc. credit in Placentia. ^

Again to Antwerpe comes Order from London, to draw thither, and to remit to
Venice, at such a price, that the remittance Example 3.
from London for Venice, come but to 55 pence starlin clear of charges, the
partido being 1000 pound starlin, now there is found money for London at shill.
33, and bills for Venice at gro. 90 (...), I demand if at this price the said
comison may be effected, first reduce the said shill. 33 into gross, and they
make 400, then say by the rule of three, if pence 240, (the value of the pound
starlin) give 400 gro. what will 55 pence starlin give being the price of the
ducc: of Venice, it will make gross 91 from whence must be deducted (...) per
cent. for provison taken and there will remain gro. 91 3/10, so that the said
comison may be effected to profit, because that drawing for London at sh. 33,
may be delivered for Venice at gro. 91 3/10, and there persent bills at less,
that is at gro. 90 example.

^ And this is as much as I conceive needful at this time to insert concerning
the exchanges practiced in London, now there only rests the terms of payment
of bills of exchange in London.

CHAP. CCCCXLIX.
Of the Terms of payments of Bills of exchange in London.

THe terms for the payment of Bills of exchange in London Terms of payments of
Bills exchange in London.
are observed to be with other cities thus:

To Venice at 3 month after date and so back. To Antwerpe at one months after
date and so back. To Genoa at 3 months after date and so back. To Florence at
3 months after date and so back. To Pisa at 3 months after date and so back.
To Lions for the fair and so from fair to fair. To Placentia the same as
Lions. To Roven and Paris at one month after date and so back.
CAHP. CCCCL.
Of the abreviation of Division and Multiplication after the Italian and
foreign manner and method.

FOr as much as I have in many parts of this particular Tract of Exchanges
followed the arithmeticall method Of Division and Multiplication abreviated
after the Italian manner.
and manner of those rules practiced in the calculation of these exchanges by
the Bankers and Exchangers of Italy, it will be here needful for the better
inlightning of the same, and the easier casting up and calculation thereof,
that I show how the Italian Brokers and Exchangers do abreviate their labor,
and shorten their task therein, and the rather I have presumed to add the
same here, and in this place, partly in regard that I have not found it
published by any of our English Arethmeticians, but principally to show the
learner the ways how the same are there wrought and arethmetically calculated.

It is generally confessed by all Arethmetictans that the whole art of
Arethmetick depends upon five principal rules, now commonly in all countries
received and taught, that is, by Numeration, Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, and Division, and that no one proposed question in Arethmetick
can be perfected without the help of some of these, for the three former I find
not any disagreement in the common received manner by them and us, and
therefore I will omit to speak any thing thereof; but of the two later,
whereby is observed that most rules and questions of all exchanges are
perfected and performed, I will here insist upon, induced principally as I said
before to inlighten thereby the preceding examples that I have handled in the
calculatians of the exchanges before mentioned.

I will then in the first place contrary to the custom of our English Masters
in this Science, begin with that part of Arethmetick which we call Division,
and by an example or two of the working thereof explain the same to such as
either shall be desirous to learn it, or such as shall desire to make use of
these before mentioned tables.

A certain merchant then bought 46 clothes, which cost him 673 l. and desires
by a brief way to know what one cloth does Division abreviated in calculations
of accounts.
stand him in, to do which I dispose of the question after the manner of the
rule of three, and say, If 46 Clothes cost 673 l. how much does the Cloth cost.

Now for as much as it would prove to be too difficult, at first sight after
the common manner, to find how often 46 the divisor is found in 673, it will be
more facile and commodious, to take it after their method thus, take then the
first figure which is 4 and see how often the same is included in the figure 6
which is once, the which 1 I write then under the (...) drawing a line between
them, and then multiply it by the whole divisor (...), beginning at 6, saying
once 6 is 6, and next coming to the sum that is to be divided 673 I choose the
second figure 7 from whence I take 6 and there remains one, which I place
under the said 7, and returning again to the divisor, I multiply 1 by 4 which
gives 4, which I deduct from the other figure 6, of the sum to be divided,
and there remains 2, the which I write under the 6, so that 46 taken by this
means out of 67 there (...) ^1, from whence I proceed and put this before the
figure 3 remaining, which thereby makes 213, for the sum that now remaynes to
be divided by 46, saying in 21 how many times 4, which cannot be but 4 times,
for in taking 5 there will remain but (...) which with the following figure
does make 13, (the which number cannot pay 5 times 6, and for this cause I can
take but 4,) multiplying the divisor as at first, saying (beginning always by
the last figure of the divisor) 4 times 6 is 22, and taking the last figure 3
from the sum to be divided 213, the which for payment of 24 I borrow 3 tenns,
which I bear in mind, and say 24 from 33 there ^sts 9 the which I place under
the 3 and then come to multiply the other figure 4 of the divisor by 4 and it
makes 16, which with the 3 tenns borne in mind, makes 19 which must be
deducted from the sum to be divided 21 so there will rest 2 the which I place
un^der 1 as by the example appears more at large.

So that 673 l. divided by 46 Clothes, the quotient gives 14 l. and the rest
is 29 l. which now is to be divided by 46, which cannot be done, and therefore
the same to be reduced to shillings which multiplied by 20 comes to 5^0 sh:
which must now be divided by 46 in the manner before showed, saying how many
times 4, in 5 which is once, the which I write in the quotient at the side of
14 l. proceeding from the first divison, multiplying it by 6 and it gives 6,
which taken from 8 the rest is 2, which I put under the 8, and multiply the
other figure of the divisor 4 by 1 which gives 4 taken from 5 there rests 1,
then 46 subtracted from 58 there rests 12, right with which I put the other
figure 0 resting of the sum to be divided and return to say, how many times
4 in 12, the which I can take but 2 and I place it in the quotient and multiply
(...) by the last figure of the devisor, saying 2 times 6 is 12 which I deduct
from 120, the which to do I say (borrowing 2 tenns which I bare in mind) 12
from 20 rests 8 which I place under the 0 and multiply the other figure of the
divisor 4 by (...) making 8 with the 2 borne in mind, comes to be 10, taken
from 12 there rests 2, so that ^0 sh. divided by 46 the product is 12 shill.
and there remains yet 28 shill. which must be brought into (...), multiplied
by 12 and it makes 336 the which must be divided by 46, saying in 33 how many
times 4, which is 7 times, the which I place in the quotient by the shillings,
multiplying 7 by (...), which makes 42 from 46 there rests 4, the which I place
under the 6, and keep 4 in mind borrowed adding them with 4 times 7 they make
32, which deducted from 33, there rests 1, the which I place under the 3, so
that 336 divided by 46 the perduct gives 7 and there rests 14 d. to divide
which is a thing of a small value.

So that if 46 pieces of cloth cost 673 l. the one will cost 14. l. 12. shill.
7. d. as may be seen by the example here under wrought. ^

To show the brevity of this manner of dividing, I will show Another example.
here another example, which cannot without much difficulty be performed by the
common manner of divison in cancelling the figures, and yet is very easily and
compendiously performed ^is way, by observing the order which is before
prescribed, and therefore to avoid prolixity I shall not need here to put down
any particular explication, the example shall be thus then to, divide
19999100007 by 99999, which by the product does give 199993 without any
remaynder as shall appear by the working here underneath. ^

Division which is wrought by the rule of practice, is done in this manner by
the help of the parts found therein, as for example, if 72 Another method of
dividing by rule of practice.
pieces of sarges cost 169. l. 12 shil. how much will the piece stand in, then
dividing by 72 I find first the parts thereof, and observe that 8 times 9 makes
72, I take then the (...) of the sum to be divided, saying the eighth part of
16 is 2, which I place under a line drawn, and the (...) of 9 is 1, there
remains one pound which is 20 shil. which with the 12 makes 32, the (...)
whereof is 4, so that the eighth of the said 169 l. 12 shil. is 21 l. 4 shil.
of which number I take the 1/9 (which shall be the price of the piece) in this
manner, saying, the 1/9 of 21 is 2, the rest is 3 l. which is 60 shil. and with
the 4 makes 64 shil. of which the 1/9 is 7, then there rests 1, which is 12
pence, and the 1/9 of 12 is 1, so that the ninth part of 21 l. 4 shil. is 2 l.
7 shil. 1 d. the price of the piece as by this example is showed, ^

But when it happens that any broken numbers fall in the divisor, the divisor
and the sum to be divided, must then be reduced to Note another example.
one and the self same denominator, as for example, If 13 (...) pieces should
cast 264 l. 17 shil. 6 d. what would the piece stand in? to do which I reduce
into halfes the pieces 13 (...) multiplying the same by 2 making 27 halfes,
doing the same with the sum to be divided, multiplying it by 2 which comes to
be l. 529. 15, which to be divided by 27, must be considered that 3 times 9 is
27, therefore must be taken (...) and 1/9 of the said third in this manner
saying (...) of 5 is 1, of 22 is 7 and of 19 is 6, and there remains 1 pound
which is 20 shil. which with the 15 makes 35, the (...) of which is 11 and
there rests 2 shil. which are 24 pence, the (...) whereof is 8, and afterward
taking the of (...) the said (...) saying, the (...) of 17 is 1, and of 86 is
9, and there ^s 5 l. which with the 11 shil. is 111 shil. the 1/9 whereof is
12, then rests 3 shil. which with the 8 d remaining is 44 d, the (...) whereof
is 4, so that the product of the said 1/9 gives 19 l. 12 shil. 4 d, the value
of the said piece, as by example, ^

Again, at 34 l. 16 shil. the 21 (...) yards, how much will the yard amount
unto, do this as the preceding rule, putting the yard into Another.
thirds, in multiplying them by 3 they make 64 for divisor to 34 l. 16 also
multiplied by 3 which make 104 l. 8 shil. which to divide by 64, is to be
considered that 8 times 8 is 64, and therefore the of an eight is the price of
a yard, as example, ^

Many other divisions are resolved in the same manner as the preceding, which I
willingly here omit, and refer them to the occurrences of traffic that
shall happen herein, and now I will proceed to Multiplication abreviated, by
which two rules both the golden Rule of three, and many other in Arithmetique
are wrought and performed, commodious and necessary to this Tract of Exchanges
and this Map of Commerce, as being indeed the proper rules, by which the
Exchanges in this book are cast up and calculated.

The method that has been showed in the former Division, may in some sort
serve also in multiplication in this manner, suppose you Multiplication
abreviated.
were to multiply 56 yards by 4 l. 18 shil. 9 d. you must consider that 56 is
composed of 7 times 8, and therefore you must multiply the said 4. 18. 9. by 7,
and its product by 8, beginning with the pence, and saying 7 times 9 is 63, I
write 3 pence, and retain 5 shill. which I ad with 7 times 8 which make 61,
write then 1 and retain 6 which added to 1 times 7 makes 13 which is 6 l. 10
shil. and following the common method of addition, I put down one ten, and
retain 6 l. which I add with 4 times 7, and they make 34 l. the which product
I multiply again by 8, beginning to multiply by the pence which are with the
pounds, and then by the shil. calculating for 12 d, one shill. and for 20
shill. 1 pound they then make 276 l. 10 shil. for the value of 56 yards as
shall be more plainly demonstrated by this Example following. ^

Many other questions may be answered as the above said, but yet note, that to
multiply by an uneven number, such as is 31, 43, Another Example.
and the like, then do in this manner, posito I demand at 5l. 9. sh. 3. d. the
yard, what will 43 yards come unto, now for as much as 43, has no dividable
parts I take 42, multiplying it by 6 and by 7, as has been showed, and for
the yard that does remain I add to the last multiplication 5. l. 9. 3. d.
which is the cost of 1 yard and it makes 234 l. 17. 9. d. the cost of 43 yards
as may be observed by the following example. ^

But when there is any broken number in the yards or pieces, doc Another
Ex-ample.
thus by example, at l. 7. 14. 6 the piece, what will 81 cost, then for 81 I
multiply by 9 the cost of the piece, and its product again by 9 because that 9
times 9 is 81 and I find l. 625. 14. 6 for the value of the said 81 pieces, and
for the piece I take the (...) of 7. l. 14. 6. d. and adding it thereto the
same comes to be l. 629. 11. sh. 9. d. and so much the 81 cost, example. ^

But for as much as this may seem difficult, I will here note another Another
way of Multiplication abreviated.
way of Multiplication abreviated, serving as well in exchanges or in
marchandising posito; I would know what comes 154 yards unto, at 56 shillings
the yard, to do this multiply the said yards, by the half of the said money
which is 28 sh. and in adding its product, double the last figure taking that
for so many shill. and the rest for pounds as does appear by this example
following, which I add in this manner, saying 2. 4. and 9 make 15, and after
the ordinary manner, you must set down 5, and bear 1 ten, but in this
method, you must double it, setting down 10 for 5. the which doubled you must
hold as so many shillings and so proceeding in the addition of the rest, and
adding the tenth borne of 15, it will come to l. 431. 4. sh. the value of 154
yards, and this note is to be observed in all other questions of this nature,
as by example does appear. ^

There is yet another brief way of Multiplication, used in France Another way
of abreviated Multiplication.
and many parts beyond the seas, which is done by taking the parts of 10 or of
100 in this manner, I would multiply 113 yards by 1 I note what part 1 is in 10
and find it to be therefore is 113 yards to be multiplied by 10, or else more
brief by adding an 0 and in taking the (...) which shall be the value of the
said 113 yards, and for to multiply by 1 (...) you must take the (...) of the
sum to be multiplied, after you have added thereunto an o because that 1
(...) is the (...) of 10, and for to multiply by 3 (...) you must add an o and
take (...) because that 3 is the (...) of 10 and so in many others, in taking
always the parts of 10, and note that the same may be done in taking the
parts of 100, as to multiply 137 yards by 8 (...) you must add two oo to the
sum, then take (...), because that 8 (...) is the (...), part of 100 and for
to multiply by 12 (...), you must add two oo and take the because that the
(...) of 100 is 12 (...) as may be seen by these following examples. ^

Again at 3 shill: the pound, what will the 100 l. come unto? to Another
example.
do this in brief a cipher is to be added to the cost of the pound which is 3
sh. and it makes 30 of which sum take the and it makes 15 l. which makes the
cost of the hundred, and so for others by these examples following. ^

Again at 3 d. the pound, I would know how much 100 l. comes Another.
unto, multiply the pence (which the pound is worth) by 5, and out of its
product take 1/12 which shall be the cost of the quintall and to find the cost
of the pound, you must multiply the value of the hundred by 12, and the of the
product is the cost of the pound as follows by these examples. ^

But I have wandered too far, and proceeded farther in this subject than I
intended, therefore here will conclude both the calculations of Exchanges and
these methods of abroviating the rules of Division and Multiplication,
referring what is here by me omitted in both the said subjects to the ingenuous
hand and head of the mysterious Exchanger.

FINIS.
The Printers to the friendly Readers.
GEntlemen, it is found true by daily experience, that one hand does oftimes
ease many men's labor, and as often (it must be granted) that many hands give
ease to one man's pains, and makes, as the Proverb says, light work; the
first Assertion the Author has made good in this Tract by his pains in your
behalfes, the last, we desire you to make good in his right, for being not
well acquainted with the subject, and his public and private affairs not
permitting his daily and continual attendance at the Press, may occasion the
let slipping of some Errors, which unwillingly have past the Correctors hand,
our will, and his knowledge, therefore we entreat you lovingly to amend them
where they are found, and courteously to accept both of ours and his good will
and endcavours therein, so shall you encourage us to do better hereafter, and
endeavor so far to please you in the future, that we may make some
satisfaction to him for the Errors now committed, and rest engaged to you for
your love and courteous acceptance of our pains and care taken therein.

An Alphabeticall Table, comprehending the most notable things contained in
this MERCHANTS MAP OF COMMERCE.
A
AFRICA bounded with longitude and latitude, Chap. 1 Asia bounded with its
longitude and latitude, ib. America bounded, its longitude and latitude, ibid.
Art of Merchandising and the general parts thereof, 2 A Merchant should know
the form of Acquittances, Letters of Attorney, of accountkeeping and
arithmetique, ib. To abbreviate the labor of weighing, 6 How to accord the
weights of any two places, ibid. Of Accounts and accountkeepings, 7 Accounts
kept diversely in diverse Cities and Countries, ib. The method used in accounts
is diverse, ibid. Four rules required in an Account, ibid. Artificial
commodities what, 9 America, and the Provinces thereof, 11 Andalusia nova, 13
Africa and the Provinces, 14 Argier and the trade thereof, containing the
commodities, coins, weights, measures, accounts and customs thereof, 16 Ai^n,
and the commodities thereof, 27 Alexandria 28, and the trade of the
commodities, weights, measures, 30 Asia and the Provinces thereof, 40 Anatolia
or Natolia, 41 Alexandretta or Scanderone, 42 Angora, with weights and
measures, 50 Amasia, 51 Armenia and the Cities, Chap. 67, and 52 Mount Ararate,
ibid. Acria and the trade thereof, 56 Containing weights, measures, and coins,
ibid. Amano, and the trade thereof, 58 Aleppo, and the trade thereof,
containing commodities, weights, coins, measures, accounts, customs thereof,
etc. 63 Arabia, and the Provinces thereof, 68 Assyria, and the Cities thereof,
69 Aden, and the trade thereof, 71 Astracan and the trade thereof, containing
the weights measures thereof, etc. 85 Aracan and Ava, Chap. 95 and Chap 88
Agria, 90 Amadavar, ibid. Adams hills the paradise of Siloners, 102 Amboina
Islands. 103 Achin, and the trade thereof, 105 Andalusia, 112 Alicant, and the
trade thereof, containing coins, accounts, weights, measures, etc. 115 Alcala,
ibid. Aragon, 119 Aquitania, 122 Aniou, 125 Avergne, 127 Avignon, 131 Abruzzo,
139 Apulia, and the trade thereof, 141 Ancona, and the trade thereof, 149 Aste
a great Mart, 168 Antwerpe and the trade thereof, 179 Artois, ibid. Arras ibid.
Amsterdam, and the trade thereof, 180 Albis River in Germany, ^82 Alsatia. 185
An^pache, 186 Ausburg^, and the trade thereof, 194 Austria, ibid. Amber, 209
Archangl^ in Moscovia, 220 Avalona or Valona, and the trade thereof, 243 Argos
in Morea, 245 Arcadian plains, ibid. Achaia, 246 Athens, ibid. Albania, and
the Cities thereof, 246 M^ A^hos the holy mountain, ibid. Adrianopolis. ibid.
Adriatique Islands, 254 Anglesey Island, 269 and 262 Merchant Adventurers their
original and places of residencie of London, 267 Antwerpe Exchanges, 289
Alcala Exchanges, 294 Augusta Exchanges, 298 Custom of Acceptations of Bills
of Exchanges in Lions, 302 Account of discounts and the manner thereof, used as
well in Lions as in many other places of trade, 305 Account - keeping in Lions
how, 307 Aggio of moneys practiced in the payment of Bills of Exchanges in
Rome, 340 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Antwerp, and how calculated, 435
Exchanges of Antwerpe with Lions, 436 Of Antwerpe with Placentia, 437 Of
Antwerpe with Florence, 438 Of Antwerpe with Venice, 439 Of Antwerpe with
London, 440 Of Terms of payment of Bills of Exchanges in Antwerpe, 441 Orders
and Commission given and received in Exchanges at Antwerpe, 442
B
Bartering in use of old, Chap. 2 Bargaining, ibid. Things considerable in
Bartering, ibid. Things considerable in Bargaining, ibid. A Merchant ought to
know the form of a Bill of exchange, ibid. Of Bills lading, ibid. Of Bills of
dept, ibid. The Burse or Exchange, 3 The Book of rates of customs, 4
Bartering and Exchanging before the use of gold and silver, 5 Brasilia, 13
Barbada Island, ibid. Barmuda, or Summer Islands, ibid. Barbary, 14 Barbary
Merchants, 23 Borneo, 25 Boro, 27 Bithinia, and the Cities thereof, 47 Brusia
in Bithinia, the trade, commodities, coins, weights, measures and customs
thereof, 48 Baruti, with the trade of the coins, measures, weights thereof, 59
Babylon and the trade, containing the weights and measures, etc. thereof, 72
Balsara, and the trade thereof, containing the customs, commodities, weight
and measures, 77 Bindamir, 79 Balasia, 88 Bengala, ibid. Barma, ibid. Boroche,
and the trade thereof, 90 Bassain, 92 Bengala, and the trade of that coast, 94
Banda, and Islands of Moluccos, 103 Batavia olim Jacetra, 104 Bantam and the
trade thereof, ibid. Borneo Island, and the trade thereof, 106 Beniermasa, an
English factory, ibid. Baiona and Biscay, 114 Barselona, and the trade thereof,
119 Bordeaux and the trade thereof. 124 Brittanie, 125 Burbon, 127 B^rry and la
Beuse, ibid. Burges and Beavois, ibid. Beaucarre, 129 Burgundy, 132 Bresse,
ibid. Bisanson, ibid. Bollonia and the trade thereof, 143 Bressia and the trade
thereof, 155 Brussels, 178 Breda, ibid. Bridges, 179 Breme and the trade
thereof, 184 Baccrai, 186 Baden, ibid. Bainsberge, ibid. Basil and the trade
thereof, 193 Bavaria, 194 Bohemia, 195 Brandenburge, 196 Brunswicke and the
trade thereof, 200 Beer of Lubeck famous, 205 Baltique Islands, 210 Bornholme,
ibid. Blesida, ibid. Bergen, one of the 4. ancient mart Towns of Europe, 216
Bodia in Sweden, 217 Buda in Hungary, 234 Bulgaria, 235 Bosna, ibid. Beaumares
in Anglesey, 262 Britain and the Provinces, 268 Barkshire, 269 Buckingham
shire, ibid. Bedford-shire, ibid. Barwicke, ibid. Brecknock-shire, ibid. Beauty
of England. ibid. Barbary Merchants of London, their original and decay, 270
Barrie Exchanges, 286 Barselona Exchanges, 293 Bollonia Exchanges, 296 Bergamo
Exchanges, 297 Bilan what, 302 Examples upon Exchanges practiced in Barselona,
and how calculated, 426 Exchanges of Barselona with Lions, 427 Exchanges of
Barselona with Placencia. 428 Exchanges of Barselona with Saragosa, 429 Of
Barselona with Valentia, 430 Of Barselona with Sivil, 431 Of Barselona with
Lixborne, 432 Of Orders and Commissions given and received in draughts and
remittances, in Exchanges made in Barselona 433 Terms of payment of bills of
Exchanges in Barselona, 434
C
The commodity of the knowledge of Geographie to Merchants, Chap. 1 Cancer and
Capricorn Tropiques, ibid. Commutations distinguished into three manners, 2 A
Merchant should know the form of all charter parties, ibid. Cities and Towns
eminent in trade, only mentioned in this Map, 3 Six parts required in a
complete City and Town, ibid. What Cities are found fit for traffic and
Commerce, ib. Two sorts of Cities of traffic, ibid. Sea Cities of trade what,
ibid. Land Cities of trade what, ib. Cities of trade in manual arts, ibid. The
Cities of trade mentioned in this Map of Commerce, ibid. Five places in a City
depending upon trade, ibid. The Custom House, ibid. The customs, impositions,
and other duties paid by Merchants upon goods, 4 Customs not always alike in
all places, ibid. Customs due upon all Commodities, ibid Customs differing,
in regard of times, of places, of Cities, of Commodities, and of weight. ibid.
Coins of sundry Countries used in traffic of Merchandising, 5 Coins made of
silver and gold, ibid. A Capital crime to debase or to alter any Princes
Coin, ibid. Cargos in weights what, 6 Cain the inventer of Weights and
Measures, 8 All Cities of trade have sworn and public measures, ib. Of
commodities used in merchandising, and the knowledge thereof, 9 All commodities
are either natural or artificial ibid. All commodities known by the senses,
ibid All Coins brought into one by exchanging, 10 Castella Aurea, 13 Chilo,
ibid. Cuba, ibid. Caffaria, 27 Cape bona speransa, ibid. Carro 29. and the
trade thereof, 31 Casir in the red Sea, 29 Captus, ibid. Caffa in the Euxine
Sea, ibid. Cilicia and the Cities thereof, 42 Colloso, 46 Capadocia and the
Cities thereof. 51 Celosyria and the Cities thereof. 61 Colcos. 67 Caldea and
the Cities thereof. 69 Cabin and the trade thereof. 76 Cusestam. 77 Cusan and
the trade thereof. 78 Caramania. ibid. Carriage of commodities by Caravans. 81
Capha and the trade thereof; containing the coins, weights, measures and
accounts thereof, 85 Cathay and the Provinces. 86 Cambalu and the trade
thereof. 87 Conanor 88. and the trade. 92 Cambaia. 88 Canora. ibid. Camboia.
ibid. Cauchinchina. ibid. Cambaia and the trade thereof. 90 Chaul and the trade
thereof. 92 Cochin and the trade thereof. ibid. Calicut and the trade thereof.
ibid. Coast of Cormandel and the trade thereof. 93 Custom in India for
deptors. 94 China and the Provinces there of. 98 Commodities of China. ibid.
Cloves in abundance in Molluccos 102 Celebs Island and the trade thereof,
containing coins, weights, etc. thereof. 107 Ciprus and the trade thereof,
containing commodities, coins, weights, measures. 108 Cartagena. 114 Castilia
and the trade thereof, containing exchanges, coins, weights, measures. 116
Catalonia. 118 Callais and the trade thereof. 132 Champagne. ibid. Callabria
and the trade thereof. 140 Crema and the trade thereof. 157 Cremona and the
trade thereof. 166 Como and the trade thereof. 167 Cambray. 179 Charlemond.
ibid. Collen and the trade thereof. 185 Cleveland. ibid. Coins in general of
Germany. 206 Coins of Stoade, Hamburge, and Lubeque. ibid. Coins of Embden,
Breme, Edenburg, Brunswick, Mayenburg, Lipsicke, upper Germany, Bohemia,
Switzerland, ib. Coppenhagen 210. and the trade thereof. 211 Candora in
Moscovia. 219 Cracovia and the trade thereof. 223 Coninburg and the trade
thereof. 226 Corn measures of Eastland, reduced to that of sundry other
Countries. 231 Croatia. 236 Corono and the trade thereof. 239 Cattarro and the
trade thereof. 240 Caranto anciently Corinth, a famous Mart in Morea. 245
Constantinople and the trade thereof. 247 Coos Island. 249 Candia Island, and the
trade thereof. ^51 Cerigo Island. ibid. Cursolari Islands. ibid. Corsu Island and
the trade thereof. 252 Corsica Island. 258 Callarie and the trade thereof. 259
Capre Island. 261 Cadis or Gades. ibid. Conaght in Ireland. 263 Four circuits
in Wales. 268 Cornwall. 269 Cambridge-shire. ibid. Cheshire. ibid. Cumberland.
ibid. Carnarvan-shire. ibid. Cardigan-shire. ibid. Caermarden-shire. ibid. Six
Circuits in England. ib. Cities of Exchanges in Europe. 273 Collen Exchanges.
290 The Captain of Mosambique, the greatest Merchant of that coast. 28
D
Description of Countries conduces to the description of Cities, Chap. 1
Division of the world into 4 parts, ibid. Distance of places how found out,
ibid. Duty of building of a Ship, belonging to the Shipwright, 2 Duty of
Ships provision belonging to Owners and Outreaders, ibid. Duty of Sailing a
Ship belonging to Navigators. ibid. Duty of Employing of Ships belonging
to Merchants. ibid. Denarius how called. 5 The best way of accounts is by
Debtor and Creditor. 7 Diverse Countries have a diversity in their measures. 8
Decaying commodities what. 9 Damietta. 29 Damascus and the trade, containing
the coins, waights, measures, commodities thereof, etc. 62 Derbent. 73 Dellia.
88 Dieu and the trade thereof, and of that coast and the commodities. 89 Damain
in India. 92 Customs in India for Debtors. 94 The Dutch Forts and trade in
Amboina Islands. 103 Denia and the trade thereof. 118 Dolphine. 127 Duke of
Florence a great Merchant. 159 Dry measures of several Cities in the Levant
Seas compared. 161 Dukedom of Millan. 164 Dunkerke. 179 Doway. ibid. Delphe.
ibid. Doree. ibid. Danubius River. 182 Dresden and the trade thereof. 199
Denmark and the Provinces. 210 Dithmar i^ Denmark. ibid. Dansicke and the
trade thereof. 224 Dacia and the Cities thereof 235 Dalmatia. 236 Delos or
Delphos. 249 Dublin the Metropolis of Ireland, and the trade thereof. 264 Four
Dioceses in Wales. 268 Devonshire. 269 Dorsetshire. ibid. Darbyshire. ibid.
Durham. ibid. Denbighshire. ibid. Declaration of the Table of Exchanges. 274
Double usance what. 299 Account of Discounts used in Lions and elsewhere. 305
Days and nights differ according to the Latitude. 1
E
Aequinoctiall what. Chap. 1 Europe and its bounds, latitude and longitude.
ibid. Eclipse of the Sun and Moon when seen. ibid. Exchanging the third
manner of Commutation. 2 Exchanging drawn into a profitable art, and the
reasons thereof. ibid. Things considerable in Exchanging. ibid. Esterlin Moneys
in England. 5 Of Exchanges in general used by Merchants. 10 The excellency of
a Bill of Exchange. ibid. The Exchanger rectifieth the disorders of mints, and
the necessity of prices. ib. Estotiland. 12 Aethiopia and the Provinces. 26
Elephants teeth. 27 Egypt and the Provinces. 29 The trade of Egypt in times
past. ibid. Egypt weights compared with others. 34 Euphesus. 44 Eolis, the
first Merchants. 46 Euphrates. 54 Three excellencies in Casbin. 76 Exendu, and
the largeness thereof. 87 The English the last traders into India. 107 English
Consul at Ciprus. 108 Europe and the Kingdoms thereof. 110 Escuriall. 115
English subjection at Blois upon the River of Gerond. 124 English hall in Roven
for wool. 126 East Frisland. 182 Embden and the trade thereof. 183 Elsinor and
the trade thereof. 212 Elbin and the trade thereof, 225 Epidaurus. 245 Epirus.
246 The English the greatest traders of any Christians into Constantinople. 247
Mount Etna in Sicilia. 256 Elba Island. 261 Edinburgh and the trade thereof. 266
Essex. 269 East India Merchants of London their original. 270 Eastland
Merchants their original. ibid. Of Exchanges in general, with the method and
manner thereof, as practiced in Christendom. 273 Exchanging places. ibid What
Exchanges are, etc. ib. Declaration of the Table of Exchanges. 274 Of the
Exchanges of Placentia. 276 The Exchanges of Lions, Paris. 277 The Exchanges of
Rome. 278 The Exchanges of Genoa. 279 Exchanges of Millain. 280 Exchanges of
Venice. 281 Exchanges of Florence. 282 Exchanges of Lucca. 283 Exchanges of
Naples. 284 Exchanges of Leccie. 285 Exchanges of Barrie. 286 Exchanges of
Palermo. 287 Exchanges of Mesina. 288 Exchanges of Antwerpe and Collen. 289
Exchanges of London. 290 Exchanges of Valentia. 291 Exchanges of Saragosa. 292
Exchanges of Barselona. 293 Exchanges of Sivil, Alcala, Medina del campo in
Castilia. 294 Exchanges of Lixborne. 295 Exchanges of Bollonia. 296 Exchanges
of Bergamo. 297 Exchanges of Francfort, Norimberge, Augusta, Vienna. 198 How
the rates and prices in Exchanges are settled amongst Merchants. 300 Of Examples
upon Exchanges practiced at Lions, and how the same are calculated. 302
Examples of the Exchanges of Lions with the profit of the profits thereof, as
interest upon interest. 304 Certain and incertaine prices in Exchanges what.
323 Examples of Exchanges in Rome, and how the same are calculated. 325
Examples of Exchanges in Naples, and how the same are calculated. 342 Examples
of Exchanges in Genoa, and how the same are calculated. 360 Examples of
Exchanges practiced in Venice, and how to be calculated. 368 Examples of
Exchanges practiced in Placentia, and how calculated. 382 Questions of
Exchanges in Placentia, 399 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Florence, and
how calculated. 400 Exchanges practiced at Millain, and how the same are to be
calculated. 410 Exchange^ practiced at Palermo and Mesina, and how to be
calculated. 419 Exchanges of Ba^lona, Sivill, Lisborne, Valentia and Satagosa,
and how the same is calculated. 426 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Antwerp,
and how calculated. 435 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Lonon, and how
calculated. 443 The excellency of the Palmetree. 30
F
Florida. Chap. 12 Fishing in New Foundland. ibid. Fesse and the Provinces
thereof. 20 The City of Fesse, with the commodities, moneys, weights, measures,
and customs thereof. 21 The manner of farming the Pepper in India by the
Portugalls. 92 The fortune of Siam and Pegu. 96 Firando and the trade thereof.
101 France and the Provinces thereof. 122 French not addicted to trade. 127
Foreign weights compared with the weights of Lions. 129 Farara and the trade
thereof. 144 Florence and the Cities of that Dukedom. 159 Florence and the
trade of that City. 160 Flushing. 180 Franconia. 186 Francford and the trade
thereof. 191 Fountain of Salt in Limburg. 201 Friburg and the trade thereof.
202 Fionia. 210 Fincria. ibid. Finmarke. 216 Finland in Sden. 217 The French
Nation the third eminent traders into Turkey. 247 Fromentarie. 261 Frisland.
262 Flint. 269 French Merchants of London their Original. 270 Florence
Exchanges. 282 Francford Exchanges. 298 Faires and Marts what 299 Faires in
Lions when. 324 Examples of Exchanges used in Florence, and how calculated. 400
Exchanges of Florence with Lions. 401 Of Florence with Placentia. 402 Of
Florence with Venice. 403 Of Florence with Rome. 404 Of Florence with Naples
405 Of Florence with Antwerpe. 406 To reduce Crown of 7 livers in Florence to
Crown of gold of 7 li. 407 Terms of payments of Bills of Exchange in Florence.
408 Orders and Commissions in Exchanges practiced in Florence. 409
G
Geographie delightful, profitable and necessary to Merchants. Chap. 1
Geographie demonstrated in Maps and Sea cards. ibid. Gold and silver the most
excellent of metals. 5 Nova Granada. 13 Guiana. ibid. Goaga. 25 Genin and
Benin, and their trade, with their customs, coins, weights, measures, and
manner of accounting ibid. Gordion. 46 Gallacia and the Cities thereof. 50
Grograme trade. ibid. Galelia. 66 Gasa and the trade thereof. 66 Georgia. 67
Gedrosia. 78 Gombrone and the trade thereof. 80 Ganges the famous River. 88 Goa
and the trade thereof, containing the commodities, coins, weights and
measures. 91 The greatness of China. 98 Granado and the trade thereof. 113
Geneva and the trade thereof. 136 Genoa and the trade thereof. 174 Guelderland.
178 Gante. 179 Graveling. ibid. Gro^eing. 180 Germany and the Provinces
thereof. 182 Grats. 194 Gorlits. 195 Germany accounts and coins. 206 Gothland
in Sweden. 217 Grecia and the Provinces there of. 238 Galipolis or Calipolis.
246 Gallata. 247 The government of the trade of the English into
Constantinople. ibid. Groanland. 262 Garnsey Island. ibid. Gloucestershire. 269
Glamargan-shire. ibid. Green-land Merchants of London their original. 270
Genoa Exchanges. 279 Genoa Exchanges and how calculated. 360 Exchanges of Genoa
with Placentia. 361 To reduce livers of cur^ant money into livers of gold in
Genoa. ibid. Exchanges of Genoa with Lions. 362 Of Genoa with Millan. 363 Of
Genoa with Venice. 364 Of Genoa with Naples. 365 Orders and commissions in
Genoa. 366 Terms of payment of bills of Exohanges in Genoa. 367 Galetta in
Tunes. 15 Granatins or Moro francos. ibid.
H
Hundred weights what. Chap. 6 Hispaniola. 13 Hispahan and the trade thereof,
containing the commodities, coins, accounts, weights, measures thereof, and
Persia. 81 The Hollanders the second traders into India. 107 Holland. 179
Henalt. ibid. Harlem. ibid. Hanstowns in Germany. 182 Hidleberg and the trade
thereof. 189 Helvetia. 191 Hasia. 201 Hamburg and the trade thereof. 204
Holsatia. 210 Hungaria and the Cities thereof. 234 The Hollanders the least
traders into Turkey, of the western Christians. 246 Mount Hibla in Sicilia.
256 Hebrides Isles. 262 Hamshire. 269 Hartfordshire. ibid. Huntington-shire.
ibid. Hereford-shire. ibid. Half Usance what. ibid.
I
A Merchant should know the form of Intimations and protests. Chap. 2
Impositions upon goods. 4 An Instrument to find out the agreement of measures
in any two Cities or places. 8 Jucatan. 12 Isles of Solomon. 13 Isles of
Baccalos. ibid. Island of Beriquen. ibid. Jamaica. ibid. Island St. Thomas. 37
Islands Canaries, and the trade thereof. 38 Islands Tarceras or Asores. 39 Ionia
and the Cities thereof. 44 Jordan the River. 65 Idumea. ibid. Judea. ibid.
Ierico. 66 Jerusalem. ibid. Iasques in Persia. 80 India and the Provinces
thereof. 88 Islands of Afia and their trade. 100 Islands of Iapan and their trade
containing their coins, weights, measures. etc. 101 Island of Silon and the
trade. 102 Inhabitants of Sylon excellent and rare Tumblors and Morisdancers.
ibid. Islands of Molluccos and the trade. 103 Islands of Iava and the trade. 104
Iacettra, baptized Batavia. ib. Iaparra and the trade thereof ibid. Iambe and
the trade thereof. 105 I Will of France. 126 Italy and the Provinces thereof. 137
Imperial Towns in Germany. 182 Iutland in Denmark. 210 Iulin an ancient
Mart. 229 Illvria. 236 The trade of the Islands seated in the Ionian, Egron,
mediterranean and adriatique Seas. 248 Ithecca, and the trade thereof. 252
Iuisa Island and the trade thereof. 261 Iscia Islands. ibid. Island. 262 Iarsey
Island. ibid. Ireland and the trade thereof. 263 Ingland and the Cities thereof.
269 Levant Merchants of London their Original and splendour. 270 Ignorant
Exchangers censure the judicious if varying from the custom of Exchanging. 273
Dates of Exchanges in Lions which may serve for the rate of interest in any
other place. 303 Interest paid upon rebate. 304
K
The Kings beam or waighhouse Chap. 3 How a Merchant may have a knowledge in
all commodities. 9 The Kingdoms now in subjection to the Grand Signior 67
Kent. 26. Kings of Portugal great Merchants into India. 28
L
Latitude how accounted. Chap. 1 The longitude of a place how to be found out.
ibid. The latitude of a place how to be found. ibid. Latitude and longitude
found out by the Meridians, ibid. Lucay Islands. 13 Lybia and the Provinces. 24
Lidia. 46 Liconia and the Cities. 52 Lahoare. 90 Lawi^ander. ibid. L^xborne and
the trade thereof, containing coins weights, measures and customs of
Portugal. 117 Locram^. 125 Limosin. 127 Lions and the trade thereof. 128
Languedoc. 129 Lo^raine. 132 Loretta. 147 Leghorne and the trade thereof. 173
Lucca and the trade thereof. 175 Limburge. 178 Liege. ibid. Luxenburge. ibid.
Lovaine. ibid. Lisle. 179 Laiden. ibid. Lipsicke and the trade thereof. 197
Luneburge and the trade thereof. 201 Lubecke and the trade thereof. 205 Lappia in
Swethland. 218 Livonia. 222 Lituania. ibid. Larta and the trade thereof. 244
Lepanto and the trade thereof. 245 Lemnos. 248 Lesbos. 249 Lipara Island. 261
Lemster in Ireland. 263 Lecester-shire. 269 Lincolne-shire. ibid. Lankeshire.
ibid. London and the trade thereof. 270 Liberty of Exchanging. 273 The
Exchanges of Lions. 277 Lucca Exchanges. 283 Leccie Exchanges. 285 London
Exchanges. 290 Lisborne Exchanges. 295 Examples upon Exchanges in Lions, and
how calculated. 302 Custom of acceptions of bills of Exchanges in Lions. ibid.
The price of Exchanges settled in Lions for succeeding faires ibid. Recounters
in Lions what. ib. Rules of casting up the Exchan ges made in Lions. ibid.
Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for the rates of interest in many
other places. 303 The reason and benefit of the rules of Exchanges in Lions.
ibid. Examples of the Exchanges of Lions, with the profit of the profits
thereof. 304 Account of disaccounts in Lions and in many other places. 305
Exchanges of Lions with Rome. 307 Exchanges of Lions with Florence. 308
Exchanges of Lions with Lucca. 309 Exchanges of Lions with Naples. 310
Exchanges of Lions with Palermo. 311 Exchanges of Lions with Genoa. 312
Exchanges of Lions with Millan. 313 Exchanges of Lions with Venice. 314
Exchanges of Lions with Bolonia. 315 Exchanges of Lions with Placencia. 316
Exchanges of Lions with Antwerp. 317 Exchanges of Lions with London. 318
Exchanges of Lions with Francfort. 319 Exchanges of Lions with Sivil. 320
Exchanges of Lions with Lixborne. 321 Exchanges of Lions with Barselona. 322
Orders and commissions for Ex change in Lions. 323 The faires of Lions. 324
Exchanges of Lixborne. 42^ Examples of Exchanges practiced in London, and how
calculated 443 Exchanges of London with Lions. 444 Exchanges of London with
Florence. 445 Exchanges of London with Venice. 446 Of London with Antwerpe. 447
Orders, and commissions, in draughts and remittances in Exchanges in London.
448 Terms of payments of bills of Exchanges in London. 449
M
MERCHANDISING the first School of the present government of many Countries.
Chap. 1 The use of Mappes and Sea-Cards in general. ibid. Meridian what. ibid.
Meridians and their use. ibid. Merchandising accounted an Art. 2 The materials
of Merchandising are commodities and moneys. ibid. The duty of Merchants.
ibid. A Merchant ought to know I the form of a bill of Exchange, 2 of all
intimations and protests, 3 of Charter parties, 4 bills tading, 5 Policies of
assurance, 6 of bills of debt, 7 of a release, 8 of Le^ters of Attorney, 9 of
account keeping, and 10 arithmetique ib. The Merchants purse and person
supplies many defects in a City. 3 Magazins for commodities. ib. Met-house.
ibid. Merchants must learn what customs are and duly pay them. 4 Moneys of
Leather in Saint Dominco. 5 Moneys of shells in Tombuto. ibid. Moneys of iron
in Massa. ibid. Moneys of lumaches in Congo. ibid. Moneys of glass in Melinda.
ibid. Moneys of Salt and Paper in Cathay. ibid. Moneys of Gansa in Pegu. ib.
Moneys of almonds in Bengala. ibid. Moneys of dead men's skulls in Sumatra.
ibid. Moneys of Pepper and Cocos in India. ibid. Moneys called by three
several names. ibid. Moneta what and how called. ibid. The Merchant must be
versed in all weights. 6 Of measures in general. 8 False measures are
punishable by the Magistrate. ibid. Measures of solid bodies, of dry and liquid
commodities, ibid. All measures to the Merchant must be as one measure. ibid. A
Merchant must be seen in all commodities, and in all trades. 9 A Merchant must
know the value of all commodities. ib. A Merchant must reduce the knowledge of
commodities to a profitable end. ibid. Merchants should know how to preserve
all commodities. ib. Merchants should know how to better their commodities.
ibid. The mystery of Exchanges reduced to profitable principalls. 10 Mexicana
and the Provinces. 12 Mexico and the commodities. ibid Manoa the golden City.
13 Margarita. ibid. Kingdom of Morocco. 22 City of Morocco with the trade,
containing the commodities, coins, weights, measures, and customs thereof. 23
Mosambique, and the trade thereof, containing coins, weights, measures and
commodities thereof. 28 Monomotapa. 27 Manica. ibid Manicongo. ibid Merchants
of six sorts in Cairo. 31 Madagascar, otherwise Saint Laurence. 35 Midium. 46
Medina Talnabi and Meccha. 68 Mesopotamia and the Cities. 69 Mocha and the
trade, containing the coins, weights, measures thereof. 70 Media and the
Cities thereof. 73 Mallavar Chap. 88. and the trade of that coast. 92 Mandoa.
88 Macin. ibid. The Merchants that in general are found to traffic in India.
ibid. Musulapatam and the trade of the coast of Cormandil, with the coins,
weights, measures of that place and coast. 93 Maccau in China. 95 Mallacca, and
the trade thereof, as the weights, measures, coins, etc. thereof. 97 Moonsons
at Mallacca. ibid. Maccau and the trade thereof, containing the commodities,
coins, weights, etc. thereof. 99 Maccassar and the trade thereof, containing
weights, measures, coins, etc. 107 Malaga and the trade thereof, containing
coins, customs, weights, measures. 114 Murcia. ibid. Madrid. 115 Measures of
Spain reduced to the English yard of London. 120 Maine. 125 St. Mallos and
Morlais in Brittany. ibid. Moneys lately inhansed in France. 127 Molins. ibid.
Mart of Lions formerly in Geneva. 128 Marselia and the trade thereof. 131
Modena and the trade thereof. 145 Millan and the trade thereof. 165 Mantoua and
the trade thereof. 168 Mirandola and the trade thereof. 172 Mastricht. 178
Marquisate. ibid. Middleburge. 180 Maclin. ibid. Measures of Netherlands
reduced to the measures of London. ibid. Ments. 186 Meclinburge. 196 Measures
of Germany reduced to London. 208 Measures of Denmark to London. 214 Moscovia
and the Provinces. 219 Mosco and the trade thereof. 220 Massovia. 222 Moldavia.
235 Modona and the trade thereof. 239 Morea and the trade thereof. ibid. Misene
in Morea. 245 Marathron. 246 Megara. ibid. Macedonia. ibid. Migdonia. ibid.
Mastique. 248 Messina and the trade thereof. 257 Malta Island. ibid. Majorca and
Minorque, and the trade thereof. 260 Man Island. 262 Munster in Ireland. 263
Meth in Ireland. ibid. Middlesex. 269 Merioneth-shire. ibid. Mountgomery-shire.
ibid. Monmouth-shire. ibid. Merchants Adventurers of London their Original and
places of residence. 270 Moscovia Merchants of London their Original. ibid.
Measures used in England. 272 Manner of Exchanging. 273 Millan Exchanges. 280
Mesina Exchanges. 288 Medina del campo Exchanges. 294 Exchanges practiced at
Milan, and how the same are calculated 410 Exchanges of Milan with Lions. 411
Of Millan with Placentia. 412 Of Milan with Venice. 413 Of Milan with Rome. 414
Of Milan with Naples. 415 Of Milan with Genoa. 416 Terms of payment of bills
of Exchanges in Milan. 417 Orders and commissions given and received in
Exchanges in Millan. 418 Exchanges of Mesina and Palermo. 419
N
The duty of Navigators. Chap. 2 Nummus what. 5 Natural commodities what. 9
The necessity and commodiousnesse of Exchanges. 10 Nicaragua. 12 Norumbega.
ibid. Nova francia. ibid. Nombre de dios. 13 Numidia and the Provinces. 24
Negrita and the trade thereof. 25 Navigation to India. 28 Nilus River. ^9
Narsinga. 88 Nanquin. 98 Normandy. 125 Nevers. 127 Naples and the Cities
therein. 138 Naples and the trade thereof. 139 Nimingen. 178 Newporte. 179
Namurce. ibid. Norimberge, 186 And the trade thereof. 190 Northgoia. 195
Norwaie and the Provinces. 216 Nodrosia in Norway. ibid. Novegrade in Moscovia.
219 St. Nicholas in Moscovia. 220 Negroponte. 249 Northern Islands. 262
Norfolk. ibid. Northamptonshire. ibid. Nottingham-shire. ibid.
Northumberland. ibid. Naples Exchanges. 284 Norimberge Exchanges. 298 Exchanges
of Naples with Lions. 343 Exchanges of Naples how calculated. 342 Exchanges of
Naples with Placentia. 344 Exchanges of Naples with Rome. 345 Exchanges of
Naples with Florence. 346 Exchanges of Naples with Venice. 347 Exchanges of
Naples with Millan. 348 Exchanges of Naples with Leccie and Bary. 349 Exchanges
of Naples with Mesina. 350 Exchanges of Naples with Palermo. 351 Exchanges of
Naples with Genoa. 352 Exchanges of Naples with Antwerp. 353 Exchanges of
Naples with London. 354 Exchanges of Naples with Valencia. 355 Exchanges of
Naples with Sivil. 356 Exchanges of Naples with Lisborne. 357 Terms of payment
of bills of Exchanges in Naples. 358 Orders and commissions in Naples. 359
O
The duty of owners of Ships. Chap. 2 The original of customs. 4 Officers
fees of custome-houses to be known and discharged. ibid. Merchants should write
down their observations upon commodities. 9 Ocknams brave attempt. 13 Oran,
with the coins, weights and measures thereof. 17 Original of the company of
Merchants of Turkey and East India. 23 Ormus and the trade thereof. 80 Restored
to the Persian scepter by the valor of the English. ibid. Orders of Caravans
from Syria to Balsara. ibid. Orleans. 127 Oils of Provence how bought 130
Oils how measured in Thollon. ibid. Orange. 131 Ottranto. 139 Oversells. 180
Odera River. 182 Ossenbregs. 184 Olmuts. 195 Olympian games. 245 Ocean Islands.
262 Orchades. ibid. Oxfordshire. 269 Orders and commissions given and received
for draughts and remittances of Exchanges in Lions. 323 Orders and commissions
given and received for draughts and remittances of Exchanges in Rome. 341
Orders and commissions given and received for draughts and remittances in
Exchanges in Naples. 359 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in
Genoa. 366 Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Venice. 380
Orders and commissions for draughts and remittances in Placencia. 398 Orders
and commissions for draughts and remittances in Florence. 409 Orders and
commissions for draughts and remittances in Millan. 418 Orders and commissions
for draughts and remittances in Palermo and Mesina. 425 Orders and commissions
for draughts and remittances in Barselona. 434 Orders and commissions for
draughts and remittances in Antwerpe. 442 Orders and commissions for draughts
and remittances in London. 448 Original of Burses, of places for meeting of
Merchants. 181
P
Parallels what. Chap. 1 Poles articke and antarticke. ibid. A Merchant should
know the form of policies of assurance. 2 Pecunia what and how called. 5 A
principal part of merchandising consists in the knowledge of commodities. 9
How to find out the Par of Exchanges. 10 The price of the Exchange, at the
disposal of the Exchanger. ibid. The particulars observed in the MAP of
COMMERCE. ib. Peruana and the Provinces. 13 Panama. ibid. Peru. ibid.
Pamphilia. 43 Phrigia. 46 Pontus and the Cities thereof. 49 Pompey's Pillar.
ibid. Paphlagonia and the Cities. 50 Pisidia and the Cities. 52 Phoenicia and
the Cities. 55 Palestine and the Cities. 65 Place of Paradise. 71 Pigeons
letter carryers. 72 Persia and the Provinces thereof. 75 Persis. ibid. Policies
of Casan. 78 Parthia. 80 Pegu. 88 The manner of farming the pepper in India by
the Portugals. 92 Pegu and the trade of that coast. 95 Pottana and the trade
thereof. 96 Priaman and the trade thereof. 105 Philipine Islands. 107 The
Portugal the first Masters of the trade of India. 107 Portugal. 116 Poitou.
125 Paris and the trade thereof. 127 Perigort. ibid. Provence. 129 Picardie. 131
Papacy and the Cities thereof. 142 Padoua and the trade thereof. 153 Pisa and
the trade thereof. 162 Parma and the trade thereof. 170 Placencia and the trade
thereof. 171 Principalities in Germany. 182 Preslave. 195 Prague and the trade
thereof. 196 Pomerania. 197 plescovia. 219 Permia. ibid. Petrosa. ibid.
Pollonia and the Provinces thereof. 222 Podolia. ibid. Podlasia. ibid. Prussia.
ibid. Trade in general of Poland and East-land. 233 Presberge. 234 Pretras and
the trade thereof. 239 Pernassus Mount. 24^ Pera. ibid. Pathmos Island. 249
Palermo and the trade thereof. 257 Panteleria Island. 261 Progita. ibid. Pomonia
Isles. 262 Penbroke-shire. 269 The Exchanges of Placencia. 277 The Exchanges of
Paris. 277 Palermo Exchanges. 288 The Par in Exchanges what. 301 Princes Par in
Exchanges. 301 Merchants Par in Exchanges. ibid. Examples of Exchanges
practiced in Placencia, and how calculated. 382 Exchanges of Placencia with
Lions. 383 Of Placencia with Genoa. 384 Of Placencia with Rome. 385 Of
Placencia with Florence. 386 Of Placencia with Palermo. 387 Of Placencia with
Venice. 388 Of Placencia with Millan. 389 Of Placencia with Naples. 390 Of
Placencia with Sivil. 391 Of Placencia with Valencia. 392 Of Placencia with
Antwerp. 393 Of Placencia with Bergamo. 394 Of Placencia with Lucca. 395 Of
Placencia with Frankfort. 396 Of Placencia with London. 397 Of orders and
commissions given and received in exchanges in Placencia. 398 Questions upon
Exchanges in Placencia. 399 Exchanges practiced in Palermo and Mesina, and how
the same is calculated. 419 Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Lions. 420 Of
Palermo, etc. with Placencia. 421 Of Palermo, etc. with Naples. 422 Of Palermo,
etc. with Venice. 423 Of Palermo, etc. with Barselona. 424 Of Palermo and with
Sarago^a and Valencia. ibid. Orders and commissions in Palermo and Mesina,
given and received in Exchanges there. 425 Piraticall trade of Tunes and
Argier. 19
Q
Quivira. Chap. 12 Quiloa. 27 Quitiana. ibid. Quinsay. 98 Quento of money what.
116 Quercu. 127 The Quality of money exchanged. 273 Questions upon exchanges
that are practiced in Placentia. 399
R
Roves in weighing what. Chap. 6 Rotolos in weighing what. ib. Rio de la
platta. 13 Regal Contracts. 28 Rosetta on Nilus. 29 Rovenas of Egypt. 31
Rhubarbe. 85 River of Martaban. 95 River of Menan. 96 Rarities found in
Sumatra. 105 Rotchell and the trade thereof. 125 Roven and the trade thereof.
126 Runano and the trade thereof. 146 Ravenna and the trade thereof. 147
Ricanti and the trade thereof. 148 Rome and the trade thereof. 150 Rotterdam a
seat of the Merchant-Adventurers of London. 179 River of Rhine. 182 Rivers of
Moscovia. 219 Rhesian. ibid. Russia Niger. 222 Rhiga and the trade thereof. 227
Revell and the trade thereof. 228 Rasia. 235 Rhagusa and the trade thereof. 237
Rhodes and the trade thereof. 250 Rutland-shire. 269 Richmond-shire. ibid.
Radnor-shire. ibid. The Exchanges of Roven. 277 The Exchanges of Rome. 278
Rescounters in Lions what. 302 Rules of casting up the Exchanges made in Lions.
ibid. Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for rates of interest in
many other places. 303 A Table for casting up the account of Rebatments. 305
Examples of Exchanges practiced in Rome, and how the same are to be calculated.
326 Exchanges of Rome with Placencia. 327 Exchanges of Rome with Florence. 328
Exchanges of Rome with Venice. 329 Exchanges of Rome with Millan. 330 Exchanges
of Rome with Naples. 331 Exchanges of Rome with Genoa. 332 Exchanges of Rome
with Palermo. 333 Exchanges of Rome with Antwerpe. 334 Exchanges of Rome with
London. 3^5 Exchanges of Rome with Valentia, Saragosa and Barselona. 336
Exchanges of Rome with Sivil. 337 Exchanges of Rome with Lisborne. 338 Terms
of payments of bills of Exchange in Rome. 339 Aggio of moneys in Rome. 340
Orders and commissions by Exchange in Rome. 341
S
Shipping distinguished into four parts, as the duty of four distinct
persons. Chap. 2 The (...) duty. ibid. Strictn^sse for not paying customs in
Russia, Denmark, Swed^n, Spain, in England, Scotland, Germany, France.
I^alie, Netherlands and Turkey. 4 Several sorts of moneys in use in several
Countries. 5 Shippon^s in weights what. 6 Stones in weights what. ibid. Staple
commodities what. 9 Sugar-trade. 25 Soffala. 27 Sues in the red Sea, 29 and the
trade thereof. 33 Suachen and the trade, containing the commodities, measures
and weights thereof. 32 Sm^a, with the commodities, coins, accounts, weights,
measures, customs, and the trade thereof. 45 Mineral Salt. 51 Syria in
general. 54 Sidon and the trade, containing coins, weights and measures
thereof. 58 Syrophoenicia and the Cities thereof. ibid Samaria. 65 Sciras and
the trade thereof. 79 Sarmacand. 86 Siam. 88 Surrat and the trade, containing
the coins, accounts, weights, etc. thereof. 90 Ships of pepper depart from
Cochin in December and January. 92 Satagan and the trade of the coast of
Bengala waights, etc. 94 Strange manner of buying and selling in Pegu and that
coast. 95 Spinalls dug at Coplan. ib. Siam and the trade of the coast
thereof, their weights, measures, etc. 96 Ten thousand sail of Ships
belonging to the King of China in one River. 98 A Ship yearly at Maccau from
Goa going to Iapan. 99 Sumatra and the trade thereof. 105 Socodana an English
Factorie 106 Spain and the Cities thereof. 111 Sivil and the trade thereof,
containing accounts, coins, Exchanges, weights, commodities, measures, etc.
thereof. 112 Segovia. 115 Salamanca. ibid. Saragosa. 119 Savoy and the trade
thereof. 133 Sienna and the trade thereof. 163 Seventeen united Provinces. 178
Sidan. 178 Sluis. 179 The ancient Staple of Bridges. 181 Strasburge and the
trade thereof. 186 Stutgarde. ibid. Spiers and the trade thereof. 188 Saxony.
196 Silver Mines in Friburge. 202 Stoade and the trade thereof. 203 Scaland in
Denmark. 210 Scania. ibid. Scandia. ibid. Sweden and the Cities thereof. 217
Stockholme and the trade thereof. 218 Seruca. 219 Smalensco. ibid. Samogitia.
222 Stralsond and the trade thereof. 229 Stettin and the trade thereof. 230
Servia. 235 Sclavonia. 236 Spallata and the trade thereof. 237 Sebenico and the
trade thereof. 241 Scuttari and the trade thereof. 242 Sparta. 245 Salonica and
the trade thereof. 246 Sidrocapse rich in Mines of gold. ibid. Samothracia. 248
Scio or Chios and the trade thereof. 249 Sciros Island. ibid. Salamis Island.
ibid. Samos Island. ibid. Suda a brave harbor in Candia. 251 Strucalli Islands.
ibid. Santo Mauro. 252 Sicilia and the Province thereof. 256 Sardin^a Island.
258 Sorlings Islands. 262 Scotland and the Provinces thereof. 264 Twelve Shires
in Wales. 268 Somersetshire. 269 Surrie. ibid. Suffolk. ibid. Sussex. ibid.
Staffordshire. ibid. Shrop-shire, ibid. Saragosa Exchanges. 291 Sivil
Exchanges. 294 Sight what. 299 Exchanges of Sivil. 426 Exchanges of Saragosa.
ibid.
T
Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorn. Chap. 1 Things considerable in bartering,
bargaining, and Exchanging. 2 Terra Corterialis. 12 Trinidado. 13 The trade of
America by Spaniards. ibid. Tunes and the trade thereof, with the coins,
weights, measures, commodities, and customs thereof. 25 The trade in general
of Argier and Tunes. 19 Of trade in general of Barbary. 23 Tarradant. ibid.
Tombotu. 25 Troyes ruins ruind. 46 Trapesond, Chap. 51, with the weights and
measures thereof. 53 Tire and the ancient trade thereof. 60 Tripoly in Syria,
with the trade, containing weights, measures, etc. thereof. 64 Turcomania. 67
Tauris and the trade thereof. 74 The general trade of Persia. 82 Tartarie and
the Provinces thereof. 83 Tartaria Precopensis. ib. Tartaria asiatica and
antiquo. 85 Tutta. 90 The trade in general of the Seacoast of India. 92 Ticco
and the trade thereof. 105 Trade in general of Asia. 109 Tolledo. 114 Tortosa.
119 The trade in general of Spain and Portugal survayed. 121 Thoullousa and
the trade thereof. 123 Torraine. 125 Thollon and the trade thereof. 130 Turino
and the trade thereof. 134 The trade in general of France. 135 Tarranto. 139
Treviso and the trade thereof. 15^ The trade in general of Italy. 177 Torney.
179 The trade of Antwerpe augmented by three occasions, and decayed by three
occasions. 179 The trade in general of Netherland. 181 The trade in general
of Germany. 209 The trade of Prussia. ibid. The trade of Denmark. 215 The
trade of Moscovia. 221 Transylvania. 236 Thebes. 246 Thermophilae Straights
famous. ibid. Thessalia. ibid. Thracia. ibid. The trade of the Citizens of
Constantinople. 247 Tenedos. 248 Terra Sigillata. ibid. Temple for the cure of
Lovers. 252 Turkey or Levant Merchants their original in London. 270 Though
the Tables of Exchanges differ from the present rates, yet the use thereof is
no way lessened. 274 T^rmes of payments of bills of Exchange. 299 A Table for
casting up the account of discount or rebatements. 306 Tripoly in Barbary. 15
V
Virginia. Chap. 12 Vna and the trade thereof, containing the coins, weights,
measures thereof. 18 The undermining tricks of the Dutch in the trade of
G^iny. 25 The matchless villainy of the Dutch in the Amboina Islands. 103
Valiadolide. 115 Valentia and the trade thereof. 118 Vienne in France. 127
Valencia in France. ibid. Reipublike of Venice and the Cities. 151 Vicentia and
the trade thereof. 154 Verona and the trade thereof. 156 Venice and the trade
thereof. 158 Vrbin and the trade thereof. 169 Valencourt. 179 Vtrecht. 180
Vienna and the trade thereof. 195 Veteravia. 201 Valadomi^a. 219 Volmia. 222
Valona or Avalona and the trade. 243 Venetians the second traders of eminency
into Turkey. 247 Vlster in Ireland. 263 The use of the Table of Exchanges. 275
Venice Exchanges. 281 Valencia Exchanges. 291 Vienna Exchanges. 298 Vsance
what. 299 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Venice; and how calculated. 368
Exchanges of Venice with Lions. 369 Of Venice with Placencia. 370 Of Venice
with Rome. 371 Of Venice with Naples. 372 Of Venice with Florence. 373 Of
Venice with Millan. 374 Of Venice with Antwerpe. 375 Of Venice w^h London. 376
Of Venice with Genoa. 377 Of Venice with Norimberge. 378 Of Venice with
Bergamo. 379 Of orders and commissions given and received in Exchanges at
Venice. 380 Terms of payments of bills of Exchange in Venice. 381 Exchangesof
Valencia. 426 Injurious decrees of Venice against the trade of the English in
Levant Seas. 158 The present trade of Venice survayed. ibid.
W
The World divided into 4. parts. Chap. 1 The Weigh-house or Kings beam. 3. 6
Weights in general used in Merchandising. 6 The difference of Weights in all
Countries. ibid. Two manners of weighing in use. ibid. Weighing by Beam. ibid.
Weighing by Stadiero Weights are authorized by Magistrates. ibid. Weighers to
be sworn. ibid. By what weighs the weights of this Book is authorized. ibid.
How to accord the weights of any two several places. ibid. The weights of
Spain reduced to the English hundred. 120 Woade or Pastell of Tholousa. 123
Weights and measures of France reduces to the English. 134 Weights of Italy,
reduced to the weights and measures of London. 176 West Frisland. 180 Weights
of Netherlands, reduced to the weights of London. ibid. Westfalia. 183 Worms
and the trade thereof. 187 Wittenburge. 186 Westberge. ibid. Wallen a famous
Mart. 196 Wittenberge and the trade thereof. 198 Weights of Germany with
London. 207 Weights of Denmark with London. 213 Warehouse in Norway. 216
Weights and measures of of Eastland, reduced to that of England. 231 Wallacia.
235 Willowbeys Island. 262 Wight Island. ibid. Wales and its bounds. 268
Wiltshire. 269 Warwickshire. ibid. Worcestershire. ibid. Westmerland. ibid.
Weights used in England. 271
Y
Ypres. Chap. 179 Yorke-shire. 269
Z
Zones five. Chap. 1 Zanibar. 27 Zagatora. 36 Zagatai and the Provinces. 86
Zutphen. 179 Zealand. 180 Zuriche and the trade thereof. 192 Zante and the
trade thereof. 253 Zeffolonia and the trade thereof. ibid. Zara Island and the
trade thereof. 255 Nova Zembla. 262
The end of the TABLE.
A Table of the Longitude and Latitude of all the principal CITIES mentioned
in this MAP OF COMMERCE.
A Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. ADrianople 42. 45 22. 45 Alba regalis 46. 48 42. 0
Album castrum 48. 35 50. 45 Amsterdam 52. 40 27. 34 Alexandria in Egypt 31. 00
60. 30 Alexandria in Italy 43. 10 30. 0^ Alsfild in Hassia 51. 00 72. 00
Abevile in Picardy 49. 50 22. 30 Amberge in Bohemia 49. 26 32. 40 Ancona 43. 22
39. 40 Antioch 37. 20 70. 15 Antwerpe 51. 58 26. 36 Acquilla 43. 30 38. 20
Argentina 48. 45 28. 14 Augusta 47. 42 33. 00 Angiers 47. 25 18. 10 Avignon 44.
40 22. 40 Aleppo 38. 00 72. 30 Arm^ig 41. 00 76. 00 Ava 27. 50 142. 30 Agades
30. 0 66. 33 Agasimba 7. 0 24. 0 Algiers 25. 20 30. 0 Almara S. L. 30. 00 63.
30 Angola S. L. 07. 00 45. 10 Asna 25. 00 66. 30 As^ncia S. L 19. 00 363 20
Santa Anna S. L. 27. 30 318. 30

B Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Boriquen S. L 19. 40 273. 20 Bangamodrum 06. 00 62.
36 Bernagasum 13. 00 70. 00 Benomo^apa 26. 00 55. 00 Bona 35. 40 37. 10 Brava
-- 30 74. 30 Bugia 35. 10 34. 30 Babylon 33. 00 82. 20 Bethlem 31. 50 65. 45
Baccu 42. 00 88. 50 Bulgar 54. 30 88. 30 Bengala 21. 20 125. 10 Bensanson 46.
30 20. 30 Burges 46. 20 22. 10 Buda 47. 0 42. 0 Bordeaux 44. 30 17. 50 Bollonia
43. 33 35. 50 Basil 47. 40 31. 00

C Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Constantinople 43. 05 56. 00 Cales 37 05. 10
Conimbre 40. 00 11. 25 Collen 51. 00 30. 30 Copenhagen 56. 50 34. 30 Corinth
36. 55 51. 15 Cracovia 50. 12 42. 40 Cane 49. 42 19. 20 Compostella 20 06.
Caminetsa 50. 40 50. 20 Calicut 10. 30 112. 40 Casan 35. 10 96. 10 Cappha 48.
00 68. 50 Cambalu 51. 10 161. 10 Cambaia 11. 40 142. 20 Cantan 25. 149. 00
Chile S. L. 36. 299. 30 Coanum 31. 259. 40 Canada 50. 20 305. 10 Cartagena nova
20. 10 300. Casco S. L. 13. 30 297. 20 Caxamalca S. L. 11. 30 298. 30 Cuba 31.
40 296. Capua 41. 39. 10. Careuge 31. 50 31. 48 Cairo ^9. 50 63. -- Cesena 43.
40 34. 40 Cephalonia 37. 10 47. 10 Colmar 48. 12 26. 0 Constance 47. 30 28. 30
Cordoua 37. 50 8. 0 Corfu 38. 45 45. 10 Corsico Island 40. 50 31. 0 Crema 44. 20
31. 15 Cremona 44. 40 32. 25 Ciprus 35. 30 65. 30 Cuma 41. 40 41. 0 Cap. bona
speransa S. L. 35. 00 50. 30 Cape varde. 40. 10 9 50

D Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Dabull 31. 00 112. 20 Damascus 35. 69. -- Doway 50.
30 25 -- Dole 46. 10 27. 00 Dublin Dort 44. 00 30. 40 Dansicke 54. 44 44. 15
Dresden 51. 00 23. 45 Diraccium 40. 50 45. 00 Decan 14. 00 113. 20 Delle 5 --
00 114. 19 Damieta 32. 40 69. 00 Dara 12. 00 66. 50 Dancali 17. 10 66. 50

E Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Edinburgh 58. 00 19. 20 Ephesus 37. 40 57. 40
Erford 51. 10 34 -- Epidauro 36. 25 51. 45

F Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Francford upon Oder 50 30 -- 24 Francford upon
Mense 50-30 -- 30 Florence 34 -- 43 -- Ferara 36 -- 44 -- Friburge 48. 13 28 --
Famagusta 30-30 69. 20 Fassum 45. 40 57. 50 Favencia 43. 30 35-20 Fesse 34. 40
5. 30 Flanders 52. 30 22. 45

G Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Guatimala 24. 20 303 -- Guaiachil S. L. 2 30 294.
30 Goa 14. 40 112. 20 Gaza 33 70. 50 Guinea S. L. 9. 10 18 -- Guangala 25. 50
37. 30 Goaga 22. -- 55 -- Geneva 45. 45 28 -- Granado 37. 30 17. 15 Genoa 15.
20 45. 20 Gaieta 40. 50 38. 20 Gallipoli 41. 30 45. 10 Gelderland 52. 20 27. 40
Gotland 60. 00 48 -- Golmon 54. 6 33. 54 Gorlits 51. -- 34. 45 Gulich 52. 0 27.
30

H Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Hidleberge 49. 25 33 -- Havana 20. 00 292. 10
Hochlaga 44. 10 300. 50 Hamburge 54. 20 30. 15 Ham^ia in Norway 60. -- 31. 45
Halbestad 52. 11 35. 20

I Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Jerusalem 31. 40 66 -- Ireland the midst 57 -- 12
-- Ingolstad 48. 42 31. 20 Iamacca 17. 00 298. 30 St. Iaco 32. 10 298. 10
Isabella. 10. 10. 32 India the midst 38 -- 105. 40 Ierico 33 -- 73 --

L Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. London 51. 30 20 -- Leiden 52. 10 27. 20 Lions 44.
30 25. 40 Lovaine 51 -- (...) -- Lisborne 38. 50 (...). 50 Leighe 50. 30 2^ --
Liampo 34. 40 1^. 20 Lima S. L. 23. 30 29^. 40 Lucaio 30. 00 299. 27 Lansano
47. 40 35. 30 Leoburge 54. 10 28. 2 Leghorne 42. 12 33. 10 Lovaine 51. 00 26.
45 Lubecke 54. 48 34. 00 Lucca 42. 40 32. 40 Luneburge 54. 40 34. 20 Lucerne
46. 34 26. 0 Lipsicke 51. 25 34. 45

M Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Maragna 19. 30 281. 30 Margerita 10. 50 314. 10
Martha 10. 40 301. 20 St. Michel S. L. 6. 10 291. 40 S. Micheal 27. 20 327. 10
Mexico 38. 30 283. -- Madagascar S. L. 19. -- 77. -- Madera 31. 30 8. 10
Manicongo S. L. 7. -- 47. 10 Morrocco 30. 30. 30 Melinda S. L. 3. 20 71. 20
Meroe 16. 10 68. 20 Mombasa S. L. 4. 50 72. -- Mandao 125. 25 Mallacca 5. --
136. 30 Mecha 25. -- 75. 30 Medina 27. 20 73. -- Meac^ 23. 15 160. 30 Ments 50.
30 27. 30 Marburg 51. 30 Millaine 43. -- 40. 20 Modena 45. 40 43. 50 Majorca
39. 35 18. 50 Mosco 61. -- -- Machlin 51. 15 26. 50 Maguntia 50. 8 30. --
Madgburg^ 52. 20 34. 30 Mantua 44. 30 32. 20 Marselia 43. 6 24. 30 Manfredonia
40. 45 42. 50 Mesina 38. 50 42. 46 Minorque 40. 10 19. 30 Montpelier 43. 25 20.
30

N Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Naples 39. 30 46. -- N^sia 60. 50 89. 45 Nis^s 42.
30 25. -- Nica 40. 00 57. -- Ninive 36. 40 82. -- Narsinga 18, -- 119. --
Nicod^ia 44. 20 63. 30 Ni^polis 45, -- 56. 30 Nova Albion 50. -- 235. -- Nova
Galisia 2. 40 298. 15 Norumbega 43. 40 315. 40 Nombre de dios 9. 20 294. 30
Navaca 17. 10 300. 20 Narbone 43. -- 19. 20 Nantes 48. 12 16. 20 Nola 40, 45
40. 15 Novaria 44. 30 30. 30 Negroponte 38. 15 53. 40 Norimburgh 49. 24 31. 10
Nursia Italia 42. 44 308. --

O Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Ormus 19. -- 92. 0 Odia 12. -- 138. 30 Oxiana 20.
-- 107. 40 Oxford 51. 30 19. -- Orleans 47. 10 22. -- Orchades Isles 61. 40 21.
-- Ortinge in Sweden 48. 58 28. 3

P Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Paris 48. -- 23. 20 Poitiers 50. 10. 20. -- Padona
36. 10 44. 45 Pavia 33. 5 44. -- Prague 46. 10 29. 10 Persepolis 30. 40 90. 40
Ptolemais 29. 40 66. 40 Palama 28. -- 6. 20 Panama 8. 10 294. 10 Papaia^ 1. 50
297. 30 Palermo 37. -- 37. -- Perpignan 42. 40 18. 30 Pampelon 42. 50 15. --
Parma 43. 30 32. 30 Perusca 42. 56 36. 50 Pisa 43. 45 36. 30. Pist^ia 43. --
33. 20 Pescaro 42. 38 32. 40 Placencia 44. -- 31. 30 Portugal 40. 45 5. 48

Q Latit. D. M. Long. D. M. Quitto S. L. 10. -- 293. 10 Quivira 40. -- 233. 41
Quinsay 40. -- 153. --

(...)
