SPIRITVALL INCREASE: OR, Conclusions for pacifying the perplexed Conscience of
the weak Christian.

To him that has shall be given. LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for William
Lee, and are to be sold at his shop in Fleet street, at the sign of the
golden Buck, near Seriants Inn. 1621.

TO THE GODLY, AND euer-honored Lady, Anna, Lady Caluart, wife to the right
Hon: Sir George Caluart, Knight, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries,
and of the most honorable privy Council.
MADAME:
AS Piety and Righteousness are two noble virtues of the Regenerat part of the
soul, so Humility and Love are the neuer-perishing fruit of such euer-blessed
trees.

The eminency of these in your Honor, has encouraged me (but alas what am I?)
to entreat your Honor to shelter this unpolished Treatise, under the shadow of
your Honors Patrocinie. In it your Honor may find selected medicines out of
Scripture, and the godly and learned of our time, Mr. Hooker.
for the restoring of the Christian his weak conscience: Mr. Deering.
not embellished with deceitful cauillations of humane wisdom, but arrayed
with the Euidency, Nakedness and Simplicity of truth. In it your Honor may
find (I say) the wavering faith confirmed, not with cordialls of foolish
empiriacks, but with the al-curing Balm of Gilead, from Gods Sion; which
dignifieth all men's actions here, and crowns them in Christ hereafter.

Thus (Madame) wishing eternal continuance of your Honors good and happy
beginnings, ever seconded with the favor of God in Christ, I commit your Honor
to him, who is able to do above all we ask or think.

Your Honors remembrancer at the Throne of Grace, B. R.

The Contents of this Book.
A
ASsurance of the perpetuity of faith. fol. 13. Con. 9. and fol. 21. Con. 13.
and fol. 33. Con. 18. and fol. 38. Con. 20. and fol. 66. Con. 32. The true use
of afflictions. fol. 72. Con. 35.
C
Christ dwells in us by faith. fo. 30. Con. 17, and fo. 75. Con. 36. Christ's
obedience is ours. fol 99. Con. 46. To know the sufferings of Christ is our
greatest consolation. fol. 184. Con. 75. Confession of sin a ready way to
salvation. fol. 179. Con. 73. The benefits of Gods chastisements. fol. 196.
D
Doubtfulnesse accompanies our salvation. fol. 4. Con. 3. and fol. 55. Con. 27.
The benefit of desertion. fol. 7. Con. 5. Degrees of faith. fol. 23. Con. 14.
Man must not depend on himself. fol. 89. Con. 41. Doubting accompanies faith.
fol. 147. Con. 62.
E
Great difference of errors. fol. 83. Con. 39. Experience of God is goodness,
strength and faith. fol. 163. Con. 68.
F
The Christian is faithful in weakness. fol. 2. Con. 2. and fol. 58. Con.
28. How faith and fear be in a Christian. fol. 51. Con. 26. The foundation of
faith is Christ. fol. 59. Con. 29. Difference of faith, fol. 62. Con. 30. Faith
sufficient to apprehend righteousness in Christ. fol. 115. Con. 51. Death not
to be feared. fol. 198.
G
God not changeable. fol. 70. Con. 34. God will not forsake us. fol. 79. Con
38. God offers assurance of his favor, in the first entrance to his service.
fol. 91. con. 42. The Elect are Gods free gift to Christ. fol. 182. con. 74.
H
Hunger for Christ is a possession of him. fol. 1. con. 1. A heart to hear, the
gift of God. fol 11. Con. 8. Hope and patience bears the cross. fol. 97.
Con. 45.
L
Faith the fountain of our love to God. fol. 16. Con. 11. They live to God*
who appear in themselves to be dead. fol. 76 con. 37. By the Law of faith God
pardons sin fol. 105. con. 48. God will have them that walk in light, to
feel what it is to sit in darkness. fol. 151. Con. 64. Excellent love
appeared in Christ's sufferings. fol. 192. Con. 77.
M
Gods mercy. fol. 47. Con. 24. Marks of our election. fol. 64. con. 31. and
fol. 68. con. 33. Christ's merits most seen in our unworthiness. fol. 102.
con. 47. Ordinary means must be used for the strengthening of faith. fol. 167.
con. 70.
O
There is a remainder of original corruption, while we are here. fol. 112. con.
50. Our faith has privy operations secret to us. fol. 154. con. 65. Preaching
increases faith. fol. 9. con. 7. Particular apprehension. fol. 15. con. 10.
Faith assures prayer. fol. 26. con. 15 and fol. 49 con. 25. Particular
application requisite to salvation. fol. 95. con. ^4.
R
One righteousness here, and another in the world to come. fol. 43. con. 22.
Remission of sin is justification before God. fol. 108. con. 49.
S
Salvation hangs not upon any sufficiency in us. fol. 17. con. 12. and fol.
28. con. 16. and con. 23. The holy Spirit is given to the Elect. fol. 36. con.
19. and fo. 60. con. 29. No man void of sin. fol. 41. con. 21. Sanctification
and justification ever go together. fol. 1^8. con. 52. The Serpent labors
to pervert the simplicity of faith. fol. 156. con. ^6. We need not fear
sin, for Christ has abolished it. fol. 169. con. 71.
T
Trouble shall be rather matter of joy, then of displeasure. fol. 174. con. 72.
V
Weak assurance argues weakness of faith. fol. 8. co. 6. Unbelief is
natural to us. fol. 6. con. 4. Salvation not of our works. fol. 86. con. 40.
and fol. 92. con. 43. By our union with Christ we are faultlesse before God.
fol. 188. con. 76.
Conclusions for pacifying the perplexed Conscience of the weak Christian.
CONCLUSION 1.
Hunger and thirst after righteousness and faith, is a sure possession of some
measure of them.

EXPLANATION.
IF man be grieved for his unbelief, and wish, and strive that it may be
otherwise; he has the root of faith in him, from whence comes this? but
from a secret love and liking which he had of those things that are believed:
no man can love things which in his own opinion are not* and if they think
those things to be, which they show that they love, when they desire to believe
them: then must it needs be, that by desiring to believe, they prove themselves
true believers; for without faith no man thinks that things believed are:
This Argument all the subtilty of infemall powers will never be able to
dissolve.

CONCLUSION 2.
Man may remain faithful in weakness, though weak in faith.

EXPLANATION
Such is our weak and weaning nature, that we have no sooner received grace,
but we are ready to fall from it, for many and grievous downe-falls have
believers, yet still continue invincible though we find in our selves a most
willing heart to cleave inseparably to God, even so far, as to think
unfeignedly with Peter, Lord I am ready to go with thee into prison and death:
yet how soon and how easily, upon how small occasions, are we changed, if we
be but a while let alone, and left unto our selves, for the higher we flow,
the nereer we are to an ebb, if men be respected as mere men, according to
the wonted course of their alterable inclination, without the heavenly support
of the Spirit.

CON. 3.
The assurance of our salvation is many times accompanied with fears and
doubts, which do perplex the soul of the most righteous.

EXPLA.
The true work of Faith, is, to assure us of Gods love, and to enjoy that
comfort, without let to cherish the same, and resist the contrary, but the
weakness of our faith, and strength of corruption is such, that we do not
always attain these, but as in the practice of good actions we sometime
rejoice, and finding great infirmity in sinning, we mourn for them, (such
change by turns are in the most regenerate) so in faith, wherein we receive a
Testimony of Gods love, there is a change, because we apprehend not this
assurance immediately, as a principle, but by collection or conclusion: so the
alteration is in apprehe^ding of the premises whereupon the co^clusio^ arose:
for Gods promises and effects of grace appear not always the same: yea,
sometimes contrary.

CON. 4.
The seeds of unbelief are naturally sown in us, which ever casts up
objections.

EXPLA.
Our heart by nature is full of mire and dirt, which trouble the springs of the
water of life, Ioh. 4.14.
and therefore the days of faith are like the days of the year, some fair,
some foul, some times in hell as it were, sometimes mounted to heaven, some
times triumphing, sometimes striving, ever counting what it has felt, striving
to the same again, ever in fears running unto God, expecting better seeing a
glimpse of light in darkness, of hope in despair, of comfort in distress, of
life in death, of heaven in hell, and if they lose the sight hereof, yet
recovered it soon again.

CON. 5.
Often God leaves us to our selves, that we may take the faster hold when we
return again.

EXPLA.
The taste of love is the sweeter, and the joy the larger, when we come to it
out of the floods of tentations, For afflictions brings forth patience, Romans
3.5.
and patience experience, and experience hope; while by this means the love of
God is spread abroad in our hearts, by the holy Spirit which is given us: the
more trees on the tops of hills are blasted, the deeper root they take.

CON. 6.
True faith ever gives assurance, which is the greater, by how much our faith
is the greater, and weakness of our assurance argues the weakness of faith.

EXPLA.
Even in the true faith, there Romans 12.6.
is degrees ( for there is variety of gifts) which how little soever it be,
Math. 17.20.
yet is able to save us: that thou may learn what it is whereunto thou art
to strive, Mar. 12.13
rejoicing in that thou have atttained to already, and to pray for that which
is behind, that God would increase thy faith: feeling of imperfections is the
common frailety of all Gods children: and faith, that it may be strong, must
have time to grow, Col. 1.9. 2. Pet. 3.18
and happily seems weak to thee, when it is strong to God: Can. 4.12.
For the joy of the faithful is as a garden enclosed.

CON. 7.
As faith is by hearing, so it is ordinarily increased Romans 10.
by preaching, whereunto the weak believer must attend.

EXPLA.
Act. 13.26 Ephesians 3.29. 2. Cor. 5.20.
Preachers are Proclamators, which teach every believer their interrest in the
matters of salvation, which apprehend the promises upon conscience of their
own repentance, Romans 9.33
and faith: for where the seed shall grow, there it shall bring forth the
fruit of faith, and it shall bring forth eternal life, for this assurance is
given by the mouth of the Minister, by the word of Christ, which the faith of
the hearer apprehends: the man warmeth the bed, and the bed warmeth him:
every man has not access to the privy seal, but by the imprint there of in
wax, he knows it to be the privy Seal.

CON. 8.
It is the Lord that gives a heart to hear the voice of Christ delivered by
the minister out of the Gospel.

EXPLA.
My own heart could never minister comfort unto me, which is deceitful above
all things, and is rather cast down with acknowledgement of misery, and
therefore we must dicerne betwixt the true assurance of the heart, from
carnal presumption, and floating fancies swimming in the head: for true
assurance is accompanied with the Spirit of grace and prayer, Psalm. 27.8.
by which the heart is conformed to the voice of God, with joyful acceptance
and affectionate desire of that which is uttered thereby, which is the fruit
of the spirit of adoption, Zach. 13 9 Mat. 9.23. Ps. 40.7.8.
which bears witness unto our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and
bears record that God has given us eternal life, for he is God that does
neitherly nor change whose foundation is sure, Romans 8.16 John 5.6.
for he knows them that are his.

CON. 9.
Thou may be assured of the perpetuity of thy faith; for God will not forsake
the work which he has begun. Phil. 1.6


EXPLA.
The reason is: because that he who believes in Christ, Romans 9.33 Ioh. 10.28
Ier. 32.40
shall never be confounded, and his sheep shall never perish, but he will give
them eternal life: and although the godly often times fall, yet God is faithful
in his promise to them, Phil. 3 12
I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me:
resting in this, that they not only apprehend Christ, but much more, that they
are apprehended of Christ, Romans 11.29, and 14, 8, and 8, 23.
and not that they know God only, but that they are known of him, for the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Ps. 23, 6
so that whether they live or die, they are the Lords, for nothing can separate
them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, and therefore do they
boldly say, thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, and I shall dwell in the house of God for ever.

CON. 10
Faith takes hold of the particular apprehension, as to believe, that God is
my God, my life, peace, strength, deliverance, and my salvation.

EXPLA.
We must not believe only, that he is these things in himself, but that he is
indeed, the same to us: for because God is ours, whatsoever is his, is ours,
for us, and for our use, his mercy, his power, his providence to watch over us,
both in life and death, for by covenant he bound himself to the heirs of
promise, I will be their God, Ier. 31, 33 Esa. 25, 9
and they shall be my people, and again, Lo, this is our God, and we have
waited for him, and he will hear us, we will rejoice and be joyful in his
salvation: for that Christ has already done for thee, is a greater matter then
that he promised: so thou believe not only that thy sin may forgiven thee, by
his mercy, (which is a beginning or foundation of Christ) but also that thy
sins are forgiven thee.

CON. 11.
Faith is the fountain of our love toward God: for while we believe he is so
merciful unto us, it swalloweth up our affections, and draws our love to him.

EXPLA.
The love arising of faith so much felt in us, assures us that we are beloved
of God, who loved us first, and therefore place we the confidence of our
salvation in him only, to whom we are united and made one with him, in whom
we are incorporated, as members of his body: we dwell in him, Ioh. 6.54.55
and he in us, and as a faithful Mediator, will perform the will of his
heavenly Father: Ioh. 6.35
For of all that he has given him, he will lose nothing, but shall raise it
up at the last Day.

CON. 12.
Our salvation hangs not upon the sufficiency of our faith, repentance, or
righteousness: for they are never such as they ought to be.

EXPLA.
It is not the value or worth of any thing in us, that can merit pardon, but in
faith there is a sincerity and truth required: For we are Justified freely by
the grace of God, Romans 3, 34 Rom: 4, 16
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth for
an atonement for us by faith in his blood, only by faith I say tha^ it may
be of grace that the promise may be sure to the seed, Gal. 3, 10
that through the name of Christ every one that believed in him, shall have
forgiveness of sins: for as many as are under the works of the Law, are
under the curse, for it is written, Gal. 5, 4
cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the Law, to do them: now the Law is not of faith, but (he says) he
that does these things shall live in them. Romans 4, 14
Ye are voyded of Christ: ye are fallen from grace, that will be justified
by the Law, for if they which be of the Law be heirs, then faith is made
void, and the promise is made of none effect: Gal. 3, 18
if the inheritance be by the Law, it is no longer by promise: but God has
given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

So eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Neither yet
shall we ever have that fullness of grace here, to keep perfectly the
commandments: yet as grace increases, so we increase in keeping of them in
this life, and in the end, sin being wholly abolished for ever, we shall be
fully conformed to the Image of righteousness, that God desired in the Law.
Now Christ was circumcised for us: and he that is circumcised, Gal. 5.3
is made debtor to the whole Law, in the which circumcision he entered bond for
us, and shed few drops of blood, as a pledge he would shed all the rest for
us thereafter.

CON. 13.
By the grace of God begun in us, though mixed with many imperfections, our
faith received further confirmation, that he which wrought this beginning of
life, will go forward therewith to the end.

EXPLA.
God, who made us partakers of one part of his promises, will also make us
partakers of the other, while we take these first fruits of sanctification,
Mat. 5.6
as a pledge from him of the performance of the whole: for if we hunger and
thirst for righteousness, hate sin, groan under the burden of it, Heb. 12, 1
hanging so fast on, this light of salvation shining in us, though not fully
clear, may be ouercast with clouds, yet never shall have any night, for God
does accept our endeavor, and pardon our defects, and not only by Christ's
death, as by the death of our sacrifice, by the blood of his Cross, Exo. 12, 15
as by the blood of the Paschall Lamb, the destroyer passes our us, and we
shall not perish, but also by his death, as by the death of our high Priest
(for he is Priest and sacrifice both) we are restored from our exile, Numb.
15, 28
even to the former forfeited estate, to the la^d of promise.

CON. 14.
Our faith it self, is as infallable as the word of God that assured us of it,
but not always so in our apprehension and feeling, for though the principal
be true which we believe, yet are we jealous lest we have mis-applyed it to
our selves. Act 16, 31


EXPLA.
There are diverse degrees of faith, little faith, great faith, Mat. 8, 26 Mat.
15, 20 Romans 4, 21
and full assurance of faith, even as a weak eye and a strong eye, he weak eye
sees weakly, and imperfectly, and the strong eye sees strongly, and more
fully discerns the thing seen: a little faith believes faintly, though
truly greater faith believes more steadfastly: full assurance of faith
believes under hope against hope: they were as well saved from the biting sting
of the venomous serpents, which were young and could not well perceive, and the
old which were bleare and sore-eyed, when they looked upon the brazen Serpent,
as they that were vigorous strong, and of most quick sight. This we see in the
Apostles, We believe (say they) and know that thou art Christ, John, 6, 99
the Son of the living God: which (...) was soon shaken, and therefore our
Savior tells the^, that he did forewarne them of his death, and
resurrection, Ioh. 14, 29
that when it was come to pass they might believe, not with a new faith, but
repaired and increased. Peter upon Christ's word believed that he should be
saved in the water, Mat. 14, 28, 31
but the faintness of his faith made him begin to sink, and said, Master save
me: to whom he answered, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?
and so another time to the Disciples, which said, Master, save us, we perish:
Mat. 8, 25,
Christ answered, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? So this little
faith is not void of doubt or fear, which is yet true faith, and makes us run
to Christ; for sometimes the godly by hasty cogitations, questioned their
faith, and are ouer-taken, as David in that case said, I am cast out of the
sight of thy eyes: Psalm. 31, 22
and therefore we ought to pray, Luke 17, 5 Romans 5, 1. 1. Ioh. 5, 13
Lord increase our faith, that we may rejoice under the hope of the glory of
God, which is the proper effect of faith, and to know by faith that we have
eternal life, howbeit by occasions we bewray great infirmity in the
apprehension thereof.

CON. 15.
Always pray, and by faith rest assured, 1. These. 5, 17.
that undoubtedly we have that for which we pray according to his will.

EXPLA.
We pray for forgiveness of sins, not for that we have not assurance
thereof, but for that we desire greater assurance, that our hearts may be
enlarged, that the testimony of the Spirit may more freely sound into us, Thy
sins are forgiven thee; for our faith has sometimes a full, sometimes a
wane: as Peter confesses Christ to be immortal; another while he is afraid
Christ should die. 2. Cor. 5.7.
Now here we walk by faith, and not by sight, and do pray for the sight of
that which we have but by the comfort of faith and hope: so do we believe that
we are redeemed both in body and soul, and still yet we sigh in our selves,
Romans 8, 23 2. Sam. 12, 13.
waiting for the ^^demption of our bodies. So the Lord has taken away David's
sin, and yet he prayed, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, Psalm. 51, 1.
according to thy great goodness, according to the multitude of thy mercies
do away my offenses: then do we pray we may enjoy by realitie and
possession, that which we believe, we already have in Gods affection.

CON. 16.
We must withdraw our eyes from our selves, and assuredly believe, that we
shall receive in him that promised.

EXPLA.
If we consider our meri^^ we must despair; but we must depend upon his
promise, and his oath, Heb. 6, 18,
that by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we
might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to lay hold upon that hope
that is set before us: and this is a commendable presumption when we challenge
God upon his own bond, and not upon any sufficiency of our works. Wherein,
notwithstanding faith receives comfort and strength, by the good fruits and
effects of grace, in the fear and love of God, in faithful care and
conscience and duty toward God and men, tokens of Gods secret election,
fore^^kens of future happiness: so that a man called to God by fear, and
framed to righteousness by love, presumes that he is of the number of them
that shall be blessed.

CON. 17.
To prove whether we be in the faith, is to prove whether Christ be in us,
for truly, faith is that whereby Christ dwells in our hearts.

EXPLA.
We 1. Cor. 2, 12
have received not the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is of God,
that we may know the things that are given us of God. The origin^^^ of all
other gifts, is the giving of Christ unto us, For unto us a child is borne, and
unto us a Son is given, Isa. 9, 6
in whom all the promises of God are, yea, and amen: and for his sake first
made, and in him performed, 2 Cor. 1, 20
whom the Father giving to us, and for us, had Romans ^, 32,
altogether with him given us all things 1 John 4, 13.
, the gift of the Spirit, the Act. 5, 31
gift of repentance, the gift Ephesians. 2.8.
of faith, the gift of Romans 5, 17.
righteousness, the gift of 2 Timothy 1, 7
love, the gift of suffering Phil. 1:29
for Christ, the g^ft of 2 Pet. 1, 3
all things pertaining to life and godliness, the Romans 6, 23.
gift of eternal life; yea, all manner Ephesians. 1, 3, and 3, 5.
spiritual blessings in heavenly thing, these be the unsearchable riches of
Christ, preached ^^to the Gentiles, a mystery which from the beginning of the
world was hid in God, and not opened to the sons of men; nay, not to the very
Angels was it known, so that when it was done, they did even desire and
delight to look unto it; 1. Pet. 1, 12
the accomplishment of which riches, is in the joy of heaven. And so now we are
the sons of God, but yet we know not what we shall be: for sins deprived
us of Paradise, a place on earth; but by the purchase of his blood, we are
entitled to a far higher, even the Kingdom of heaven: and his blood is not
only the blood of remission, to acquit us of our sins, but the blood of the
Testament to bequeath us, Mat. 26, 28
and give us estate in that heavenly inheritance: and all these things we have
by faith in him, by which he purified our hearts, and dwells therein by his
Spirit, whose Temples we are.

CON. 18.
As we have a measure of true righteousness against sin, wherein we doubt
not but God accepted us, so have we also a measure of true assurance against
all fear and doubt, whereby our hearts rests persuaded, that God will for ever
preserve us.

EXPLA.
God our wise father, both gives comfort to his children, and also provides
to keep them within their bounds, that tasting of the joy of salvation, and
finding it thence-forth bitter and grievous unto themselves, to be distracted
by perplexities and fears from the quiet enjoying thereof, they may the more
carefully endeavor to cleave fast unto him, and beware of any thing that should
interrupt their joyful peace. We are ready by corruption to abuse comforts,
and therefore God so orders the same, that they are ever out of our own
nature or afflictions, nipping and snipping us, that we grow not proud, and
rely on our selves to the destruction of our selves. God makes sin the
whetstone of righteousness; and affliction and trouble of mind, by distress
and fearful doubts, whetteth and sharpeneth our faith and assurance, which by
fighting increased, and the longer it wrastled, the stronger it waxed: as a man
in danger of drowning, catches for hold to save himself, so God sends
variety of disturbances, that the mind should not gnaw and waste it self
away; whereof the one is drawn away with the other, that we should not be
steeped and dissolved with sorrow, Job 2, 8. Ier. 1, 1. 2. Cor. 6, 4
for if God correct with the rod of men, his mercy he does never take away.

CON. 19.
By this we may know, we are in God, and God in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit; which promised to men fellowship with himself, immortality to
us mortal, Justification to sinners glorification to us being abiects.

EXPLA.
The original of all this consisted in Gods election, wherein he has made us
his children and heirs touching the hope of everlasting life, Tit. 3, 7.
which we expect by title of inheritance, not by purchase of merit, having
received for earnest and pledge thereof the spirit of Christ, sanctifying and
preparing us thereto: Ephesians. 1.11.
for not of the works of righteousness which we have done, but of his mercy
has he saved us. John the Baptist said, he was not worthy to loose the lachet
of his shoe, who can then be thought worthy of that heavenly Kingdom? The
Centurion of whom Christ gave testimony, that he found not so great faith, no,
Mar. 1, 7.
not in Israel, confessed of himself, Mat. 8, 10.
I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof, who then is worthy
to enter under the roof of heaven? but every faithful man may say with
Daniel, To thee, O Lord, Dan. 9, 7
belongs righteousness, but unto us belongs confusion of face: and with
David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm. 143, 2
O Lord for in thy sight no man living shall be justified: and again, If thou
straightly mark what is done amiss, Psa. 130, 3
who shall be able to stand?

CON. 20.
By what our faith assures us of present standing, Romans 8, 28
by the same, and as far it secures us against future falling.

EXPLA.
Faith looks upon God as a Father, who himself teaches all his children,
that they may be sure to learn: Isa. 54, 13 Ier. 31, 33 Ier. 23, 54
as a good shepherd, that so gathered the sheep, that none of them shall be
lacking: as a good husbandman, that so senced his vine, Isa. 27, 3
and keeps it night and day, that none assault to hurt it: as a Rock, strong
and sure, Mat. 16, 18
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church of the faithful,
that are founded and builded upon it. It looks upon Gods promise, I will put
my fear into their hearts, Ier. 32, 40
that they shall not depart from me: It looks into the Mediation of Christ,
who had not prayed for Peter only, That his faith might not fail, Luke 22, 32
but for all that believe in him, Ioh. 17, 11, 20.
Holy father, keep them in thy name; wherefore we are kept by the power of
God, 1. Pet. 1, 5,
through faith unto salvation.

He that keeps us by faith, must be understood to keep our faith, not by
any power of ours, but by his only power; for the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance; whom he called and justified, them he glorified: because
he called and justified none, but whom he had predestined to glory, and
therefore gives them perseverance for the attainement of the same glory: Yea
and they also account all things but loss, for the excellent knowledge of
Christ Jesus our Lord, and do judge them but dung, Phil. 3, 8
that they may win Christ, and be found in him, not having their own
righteousness which is by the Law.

CON. 21.
There was never any mere natural man (for Christ was God also) void of all
sin.

EXPLA.
Surely, if any at any time was, it must be she, who by special prerogative
nine months together, entertained Christ within the closet of her slesh, the
hope of all the ends of the earth, the honor of the world, the common joy of
men, but he of whom all things had their beginnings had his beginning from
her, of whose body he took the blood which was to be shed for the world, yet
of her he took that, which for her he paid.

The world cannot show a righteous man, much less perfectly righteous; but
Christ is made to us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1, 30
revealing his Fathers will; Justice in offering himself a sacrifice for
sin: Sanctification because he has given us his spirit: Redemption, because
he had appointed a day to vindicat his children out of the hands of corruption,
Romans 8, 21
into a glorious liberty.

CON. 22.
There is a glorifying righteousness in the world to come, as there is a
justifying and sanctifying righteousness here.

EXPLA.
The righteousness wherewith we shall be clothed in the world to come, is
both perfect and inherent: that whereby here we are justified (such as is the
faith of Abraham) is perfect but not inherent; Rom 4, 5
that whereby we are sanctified (the works of Abraham) is inherent, 1. Ioh.
3, 7
but not perfect: for the righteousness wherein we must be found (if we will
be justified) is not our own; for in Christ God finds us; and the man
altogether unrighteous, being found in Christ, through faith God puts away
his sin, by not imputing the same, takes quite away the punishment due
thereunto by pardoning it, and accepted him in Christ Jesus as perfectly
righteous, as if he had fulfilled all that was commanded him in the law, for
God made him sin for us, 2. Cor. ^ 21,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him;
that is, such we are in the sight of God the Father, as is the very Son of
God himself; this is, all men had sinned, God had suffered, God had made
himself the son of man, and men are made the righteousness of God; Romans 11,
6
and the grace which elected us is no grace at all, if it elect us for our
works sake.

CON. 23
There is no man's case so dangerous as his, whom Satan had persuaded, that his
own righteousness shall present him pure and blameless in the sight of God.

EXPLA.
The more we have our fruit in holiness, the more we abound therein, the
more need we have to crave that we may be supported and strengthened: our
very virtues are snares unto us, it is harder for Satan to overthrow an humble
sinner, the^ a proud Saint: if we could say (as we cannot do) we are guilty
of nothing, God sees farther into our hearts, then we our selves can do: with
hands we never offered violence, yet a bloody thought does prove us murderers
before him, our secret cogitations are laid in the eyes of God, and our best
things intermingled with many defects. God respects the intention of the doer,
which is seldom upright: our best actions are prayers, but how in them are we
distracted? little reverence to the great Majesty of God, little remorse of
our own miseries, little influence of his mercies, do we feel, unwilling to
begin, and glad to make an end: wherefore we must ever say, Lord bear with
our infirmities, and pardon our offenses. Mat. 6.


CON. 24.
Only man can escape the judgment of God, by appealing to the seat of his
saving mercy.

EXPLA.
God had fixed the limits of his saving mercy within the compass of these
terms:

God sent not his Son to condemn the world, Ioh. 3, 17.
but that the world through him might be saved, and thereafter mercy is
restrained to believers, for he that believes, shall not be condemned, he that
believes not is condemned already, because he believes not in the Son of God:
and in another place mercy is restrained to the penitent: Of Iesabel and her
sectaries, thus he spoke, I gave her space to repent, Reu. 2, 22.
and she repented not, behold I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit
fornication with her, into a great affliction, except they repent them of their
work^s, and I will kill her children with death. If thou be therefore not
altogether faithless and impenitent, there is mercy in store for thee
abundantly.

CON. 25.
Faith is the fountain of prayer, and God in keeping of our faith, continues
our prayer, because the stream cannot fail so long as the fountain fails
not.

EXPLA.
Prayer is the breath of faith, which never cease to breathe so long as it is
alive. Prayers are the beams of faith, if the light of faith be not quenched,
it certainly sends forth these beams of prayer: wherefore they never give
over to pray, that it may be fulfilled in them which is promised, Every one
that calls upon the name of God shall be saved. Romans 10.13
God uses instruction of the word and Sacraments, and correction of crosses
and tentation, to preserve both faith and prayer: by afflictions he fretteth
off the rust, and blotteth away the ashes of carnal ^ecurity. Wherefore it is
said, Lord in affliction they visited thee, Isa. 26.16.
they have powered out a prayer when thy chastisement was upon them. Thus God
keeps the fire of his Spirit continually burning in our hearts, opening our
ears by his corrections, Job 33.16.17.
to cause us to cease from our evil enterprises, and to heal our pride, and
to keep back our soul from the pit. 1. Cor. 11.
Wherefore when we are judged we are chastned of the Lord, that we may not be
condemned with the world,

CON. 26.
Doubting or distracting fear, cannot stand with assurance of faith, but
awful and regarding fear is an undivided companion of true faith.

EXPLA.
As fear is opposed to faith, we hear God appointing his Ministers to call
his people from it: Isa. 35.4.
Say unto the fearful, be thou strong, fear not, behold our God comes
with vengeance, and he will come and save you: and again, Fear not, for I am
with thee, be not afraid, Isa. 43.1.
for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee and help^ thee, and sustain thee
with the hand of my Justice: And again, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I
have called thee by name, thou art mine: And again, Isa. 54, 14
Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed nor confounded: in righteousness
shall thou be established, and be far from fear; for it shall not come
near thee: this is the heritage of the Lords servants, whose righteousness is
of me: (for Christ's merit is our righteousness.) And all this is, because we
should rest in full assurance of safety without fear or doubt, because he
promised to prevent all occasions whence any fear should arise: And so he
delivered them out of the hands of their enemies without fear: Luke 11, 74.
and Christ died that he might deliver them, Heb. 2.15.
who for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage: and now
we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, Romans 8, 15.
but the spirit of adoption to cry abba Father; for God has not given us the
spirit of fear, but of power, 2. Tim. 1.7.
and of love, and of a sound mind: for there is no greater bondage then that
fear, when we are uncertain what shall become of us: but he said, Fear not
little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

Now that other commendable fear does not shake assurance of salvation, but
the faithful finding that in him, does gather the greater assurance to
himself. For the punishment of God is fearful unto him that dreades Gods
judgments, Job 31.23.
abhors wicked courses, labors in righteousness, is strong in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.10
and in the power of his might, and do work their salvation with fear and
trembling, with humility, and acknowledgement of their own frailety, and never
to commit themselves to themselves, but to him who has Isa. 26.12.
wrought all our works for us; 1. Sam. 2.9
for by his own might shall no man be strong.

Now there is difference betwixt absolute doubting, weak assenting, and
interruption in assent with some fear; for the seeds of all impiety land in
the corruption of the heart, whereby we are assaulted with doubt of the
principal points of our belief; the wisdom, power, justice, mercy of God;
and yet do not wholly relinquish the assent thereof*

CON. 27.
In application of our general faith to particular occasions, we many times
go halting and lame, and stagger somewhat at that, whereof our faith should
give us full assurance by the will of God.

EXPLA.
Thus did Sarah cast doubt of Gods promise touching the having of a child, Genesis
18.12
who yet is said through faith to have received strength to conceive when she
was past age, Heb. 11.11
because she judged him faithful that had promised. Thus did Moses call in
question the power of God, as touching providing flesh for the people of
Israel, Number. 11.24
when God promised so to do. So David and Habacuck staggered as touching the
providence of God, Psa. 73, 2, ^ Hab. 1.2.13
and his care of the just and righteous men. So did the Disciples murmr
concerning the Godhead of Christ, and the hope of redemption by him, which
before they had embraced: surely when we look unto our selves in our greatest
perfections, we are subject to that amazed distraction, as to say, Romans 10, 6.
Who shall ascend into heaven? as if Christ were not ascended to make way for
us: and Who shall descend into the deep? as if Christ had not died to deliver
us from thence: we can never satisfy our selves, how either to escape the one,
or to attain the other.

CON. 28.
They are not faithless which are weak in assenting to the truth.

EXPLA.
As many as hold the foundation, which is precious, though they hold it but
weakly, and as it were with a slender thread; although they frame many base and
unsuitable things upon it, things that cannot abide the trial of fire, 1. Cor.
3.15
yet shall they pass the fiery trial, and be saved, which indeed, have
builded themselves upon the Rock, which is the foundation of the Church. Ephesians.
2.20.


CON. 29.
The foundation of faith is not only the general ground whereupon we rest,
when we believe the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, but also it is the
principal thing which is believed, that is Christ.

EXPLA.
There is a foundation of our faith, God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit; 1. Tim. 3.16
and this, Thou art the Son of the living God, Ioh. 1.49.
thou art the King of Israel: and that of the inhabitants of Samaria: This is
Christ the Savior of the Ioh. 4.24.
world. Which, who directly does deny, does utterly raze the very foundation of
faith: for Christ in the work of man's salvation, is all, without our works:
for he is that seed in whom all the Nations of the world shall be blessed;
and among men there is given no other name under heaven, Act. 4, 12. 1. Cor. 3.
whereby we must be saved; other foundation can no man lay.

CON. 29.
The holy Spirit in the very moment when first he is given of God, brings
with him infused virtues, proper and peculiar to the Saints of God.

EXPLA.
There be two kinds of christian righteousness, the one without us, which
we have by imputation; the other in us, which consists of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; as Abraham had not only the one, Romans 4, 23.
because the things believed was imputed to him for righteousness, but also
the other, because he offered up his son. They are both Gods gifts, and the
first by accepting us for righteous in Christ; and the second by working
christian righteousness in us, by the spirit of adoption, which we have
received into our hearts; which makes two kinds of sanctifying
righteousness, habitual and actual.

CON. 30.
The wicked have not such faith as that wherewith a Christian man is justified.

EXPLA.
It is the Spirit of God which works faith in the Elect; the things which
they believe, are not apprehended only as true, but also as good, and that to
us: as good they are not apprehended by the wicked, as true they are. The
Christian the more he increases in faith, the more his joy and comfort
abounds: but they, Is. 2.19.
the more sure they are of the truth, Hos. 10.8. Luke 23.30
the more they quake and tremble at it; for the wicked do rather wish that
they might then think that they shall cease, when they cease to live,
because they hold it better that death should consume them into nothing, Reave.
6.16 Ps. 51, 12.
then God revive them unto punishment. On the contrary, to the Elect there is
no grief nor torment greater, then to feel their persuasion weak in things,
whereof when they are persuaded, they reap such comfort and joy of the Spirit.

CON. 31.
Faith gives us the comfort of salvation, because it believes that, which the
word of God has delivered, concerning them, in whom the signs and marks of
our Election are found.

EXPLA.
Faith gives assurance of salvation by the Word of God, not only by
apprehending the promise of life and salvation, but also observing such marks
and tokens as the Word of God sets down, to discern them, unto whom this
salvation does appertain: and therefore it does not only look to that which
Christ says, that whosoever believes shall have everlasting life; Ioh. 3.16.
but because Christ also says, he that is of God hears Gods word: Ioh. 8,
47.
therefore the faithful man delights in the word of God, believes concerning
himself that he is of God, because the Apostle says, Romans 10, 13
Every one that calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved: and this also
does the faithful man unfeignedly, calling on the name of God, believe of
himself, that he shall be saved. And also the Apostle says, that we know that
we are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren: and all
those things we know, because our faith believes all that which the word of
God has taught us in this behalf.

CON. 32.
The effect of faith is, to give assurance of the present state, and of
perseverance also to future glory.

EXPLA.
As many as received Christ, to them he gave power to be sons, even to them
that believe in his name. Ioh. 1.12.
Now to receive, is to take in particular to a man's self, to apply to himself,
to apprehend or lay hold of him with all his benefits, to make particular use
of Christ; so that true faith (according to the measure of it) assures
infallibly, not in general only, by principal, but in particular also, by
conclusion, and application to it self: and as of his own good will he has
begotten us by the word of truth, Iam. 1.18.
that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures, so by the same true
grace of God, that comfort is ministered unto the faithful, to say, 1. Pet. 5.12
Behold what love the Father has given unto us, 1. Ioh. 3.1.
that we are called, and are even now the Sons of God! and we know, that when
he shall appear, we shall be like unto him: For through faith we receive the
promise of the Spirit. That is, Faith is the very hand, into which, being
holden forth unto God, he gives the Spirit which he had promised.

CON. 33.
When God gives us this light and feeling, that he is our Father, there
follows necessarily a certificate, that we are his children; this testimony
cannot be counterfeited.

EXPLA.
Neither the spirit of man himself, nor any other spirit can give man that
spiritual eye of the inner man, whereby to look upon God as a Father, that
sincere and pure affection and invocation, wherewith the faithful soul
tendereth it self unto God; but only the Spirit of God himself, Romans 8,
15.16.
which bears witness unto our spirit that we are the Sons of God: and
because we are the Sons of God, he has sent forth the spirit of his Son
into our hearts, crying, Abba Father. Now this Spirit that bears witness is
truth, being the Spirit of Truth, and therefore being sent for a comforter,
Ioh. 14, 17.
surely in comforting he tells and testifies nothing but the truth: if then
the Spirit of God bear witness unto us, that we are the Sons of God, we
know that it is true, and we are sure we are the Sons of God. And this
witnessing properly stands in the true spiritual invocation, and calling on
the name of God; whereby, upon all occasion, as children to a Father, make our
recourse unto him: for it is not incident unto us, to have in our hearts and
conscience that familiar and lovely access unto the Throne of Grace, but upon
conscience of the spirit dwelling in us: for this spirit of prayer does
witness unto the elect, Zech. 12.10
that they are the Sons of God.

CON. 34.
If God has once given thee assured signs of his favor, he will never
change.

EXPLA.
The Testament of Christ is still new; yea, though it were from the beginning,
yet it is still the same, and the day passes not in which it was given, but it
endures still with the age of man. And thus it is not possible that our works
should justify, which wax old, and are forgotten, So that the righteous man
of an hundred years old, Eze. 18.24.
if he leave his righteousness, it has no account: the salvation of the
world is not thus, but always new. If once I be in the covenant, it is an
everlasting covenant, I was not taken under condition of time, nor no time
shall prevail against me; the salvation it self is not changeable (as Adam
was in Paradise) but it is made sure in the body of Christ, united with the
person of his Godhead. So the ways also in which we are led unto it, they are
i^mutable; our faith is not quenched, our love not extinguished, our hope
fails not, nor the holy Spirit can never be taken from us, but still they are
new even to eternal life.

CON. 35.
We are ioynt-heires with Christ, and must attain to our inheritance that same
way which he did, being first partakers with him in suffering, as we shall be
afterward in glory.

EXPLA.
Faith expects all these things from God, because it is given unto us for
Christ's sake not only to believe in him, Phil. 1, 29
but also to suffer for his sake, being strengthened with all might through his
glorious power, to all patience, and long suffering, with ioyfulnes. Col. 1, 11,
To this end, as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so he causes their
consolations to abound through Christ, and their hope is steadfast in this
behalf, because they know, 2. Cor. 1, 5, Heb. 13, 5,
that as they are partakers of the sufferings, so they shall be of the
consolation, for faith rests upon that which is written, he has said, I will
not fail thee, nor forsake thee: therefore we may boldly say,

The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me; he has
predestined us to be made like to the Image of his Son: and therefore
having received the spirit to reveal unto us this secret of predestination,
we stand assured, that accordingly he will accomplish in us the Image of his
Son, that together with him we may bear the cross, and together with him
also wear the crown; and therefore shall so order all things, that there
shall be nothing to come that shall separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

CON. 36.
The cause of life spiritual in us, is Christ, not carnally nor corporally
inhabiting, but dwelling in the soul of man, as a thing which (when the mind
apprehends it) is said to inhabit or possess the mind.

EXPLA.
The mind contains Christ by hearing and believing the Doctrine of
christianity, with particular apprehension, as the light of nature does cause
the mind to apprehend those truths which are merely rational, so that saving
truth which is far above the reach of humane reason, cannot otherwise then by
the Spirit of the Almighty be conceived, as in these sentences, Romans 8, 10,
Phi. 2, 15, Col. 3, 4,
The Spirit is our life, or the Word is our life, or Christ our life, the
meaning is, that our life is Christ, by the hearing of the Gospel apprehended
^s a Savior, and assented unto by the power of the holy Ghost.

CON. 37.
The motions and operations of life are sometime so indiscernable and so
secret, that they seem stone dead, who notwithstanding are still alive unto
God in Christ.

EXPLA.
The first intellectual conceit and comprehension of Christ, Ephesians. 2, 5,
is the seed whereof we be borne new; our first embracing of Christ, is our
first reviving from the state of death and condemnation: He that has the
Son has life, 1. Ioh. 5, 12
and he that has not the Son has no life: therefore if he which once had
the Son, may cease to have the Son, though it be for a moment, he cease for
that moment to have life; 1. Ioh. 5, 13
but the life of the^ which have the Son of God, is everlasting in the world
to come: Romans 6 10 Ephesians. 3.6.
and because as Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no
more power over him: So the justified man being allied to God in Christ Jesus
our Lord, does as necessarily from that time forward, always live, as Christ,
by who^ he has life, lives always: for as long as that abides in us, Ioh.
14.19.
which animates, quickneth and gives life, so long we live, and we know,
that the cause of our faith abides in us for ever. If Christ the fountain of
life, may flit and leave his inhabitation, where once he dwelled, what shall
become of his promise, I am with you to the worlds end? Mat. 28.20.
If the seed of God which contains Christ, may be first conceived and then
cast out, how does he term it immortal? How does he affirm it abides, 1.
Pet. 1.23 1. Ioh. 3, 9.
if the spirit which is given to cherish and preserve the seed of life, may be
given and taken away, Ephesians. 1, 14
How is he the earnest of our inheritance until redemption? How does he
continue with us for ever? Ioh. 4, 14


CON. 38.
We are apt, prone, and ready to forsake God, but God is not as ready to
forsake us.

EXPLA.
Our minds are changeable, so is not Gods, For who^ God has iustisied, Number.
23, 19
Christ has assured, it is his fathers will to give them a Kingdom.
Notwithstanding, it shall not be other wise given them, then if they continue
grounded and stablished in the faith, Col. 1, 23
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 2.15
and if they abide in love and holiness. Our Savior therefore when he spoke
of the sheep effectually called, and truly gathered into his fold, Ioh. 10.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hands; in promising to save them, he promises no doubt
to preserve them, in that, without which there can be no salvation; as also
from that, whereby it is irreuokeably lost. Every error indeed in things
appertaining to God, is repugnant to faith; every fearful cogitation, unto
hope: unto love, every straggling and inordinate desire: unto holiness, every
blemish whereby either the inward thoghts of our minds, or outward actions of
our lives are stained; which by earnest repentance mercy does restore to life
again in them, whom sin had made the children of death. But infidelity,
extreme despair, hatred of God, and all goodness, obduration in sin, etc.
does not stand where there is the least spark of faith, hope, love, and
sanctity: even as cold in the coldest degree cannot be where heat in the
highest degree is found. 1 Ioh. 3, 9
It is true, no man lives that sins not: Yet the man that is borne of God,
has a promise that the seed in him shall abide, which seed is a sure
preservative against obstinate heresy, and and pining discouragement of the
heart: for greater and cleerer assurance we cannot have of any thing then this,
that from such sins foresaid, God shall preserve the righteous as the apple of
his eye for ever: for if the justified err (as he may) and never come to
understand his error, God does save him through general repentance; but if he
fall into herisie, he calls him at one time or other by actual repentance:
but from infidelity, which is an inward direct denial of the foundation, he
preserves him by special providence for ever.

CON. 39.
We must put a difference betwixt them that err of ignorance, retaining
nevertheless a mind desirous to be instructed in truth: and them which after
the truth is laid open, persist in the stubborn defense of their blindness.

EXPLA.
Heriticall defenders, froward and stiste-necked teachers of circumcision, the
Apostle calls dogs: silly men, who were seduced to think they thought the
truth, he pitied, he took up in his arms, he lovingly embraces, he
kisseth, and with more then Fatherly tenderness, does so temper and qualisie
his speech he uses toward the^, that a man cannot easily discern, whether did
most abound, the love which he bare to their godly affection, or the grief
which the danger of their opinion bred him. Their opinion was dangerous, Was
not theirs also, who thought the Kingdom of Christ was earthly? Was not
theirs, who thought the Gospel only should be preached unto the Jews? What
more opposite to prophetical doctrine, concerning the coming of Christ the^
the one: Act. 15.5.
concerning the catholic church then the other? Yet being admonished, found
the mercy of God effectual in converting them from their error.

So was there difference betwixt Pharisees: And the Pharisees which believed.
Of the Galathians which were yet weak (he says) You know God, Gal. 4, 25, 28,
31.
or rather are known of God, how turn you again to impotent rud^ments?

The Law engenders servants; they which are gotten by the Gospel are free: we
are not children of the servant, but of the free woman; and will ye be under
the Law? Yet (he says) if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;
as many as are justified by the Law are fallen from grace: and why? Because
they know, that in grace and in Christ their salvation dothly, and so their
hearts shall tremble and quake within them: he knows man's imbecility, he
has a feeling of our blindness and weakness, how great it is.

CON. 40
Our salvation is not upon uncertainty, if we do thus or thus, but God ^ramed
us to be, and to do, whatsoever belongs to the attainement thereof.

EXPLA.
The Spirit, as he is the reuealer of the mystery of our election unto us, so
is he the earnest of the effect of Gods predestination, by the gift whereof,
God gives unto us, the certain assurance of all the rest that remains to be
given; for he is the pledge of the inheritance promised, and as a handwriting
or bond of assurance of everlasting salvation, making us the temple and house
of God; being the worker of holiness in us, that he may bring our bodies to
eternity, and so the immortality of the Resurrection, whilst in himself he
accustomes them to be tempered with heavenly virtue, and to be accompanied
with the divine eternity of the holy Ghost. And this earnest God never takes
back again, because it is so the earnest of our inheritance until the
redemption of the possession; Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.21 22. and Cha. 5, 5.
as that it is an earnest also, that in the mean time God stablishes us in
Christ, and that he has created us for this, namely, to clothe us with
immortality and eternal life; for God giving earnest for the assurance of the
end, does thereby undertake against all lets and impediments, that should
hinder the atchieuing of that, that is earnested thereby: and therefore the
things present, which thou have attained already, do assure unto thee those
things that are yet to come.

CON. 41.
If man depend upon himself, he has just cause to fear and doubt his own
perseverance.

EXPLA.
The faithful do say with the Apostle, I know whom I have believed, and I am
sure that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day: even my self, my faith, my hope, my prayer, my soul, my life;
knowing my self to be a very unsure keeper of my self.

Thus faith yields a man to say, Behold O Lord, for I am thy servant, Ps.
116, 16 Ps. 119, 125 Ps. 143, 2
I am thy servant, O give me understanding that I may keep thy commandments;
enter not into judgment with thy servant. And because the faithful is willing
to believe that he shall have that that he prays for, he prays for
perseverance, because Christ says, Believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto you. For God gives to them that believe, so that he that
receives, believes himself to receive; For this is the assurance that we have
in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us; and if
we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions that we have desired of him. 1 Io. 3, 4, 15


CON. 42.
God even in the very first entrance to his service, offers us assurance of
his favor, and our salvation.

EXPLA.
At the first entrance he says to thee, as to the Iaylor, Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved: Act. 16, 31 Romans 1, 27
And from the beginning as our faith is greater or less: so either strongly or
weakly apprehends and embraces this assurance: and in this assurance we
labor and endeavor to grow, and to go on from faith to faith, from strength
to strength, till we learn to set the world at defiance, Ps. 84, 7,
saying, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Romans 8.33
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

CON. 43.
Our faithful service or good behavior, can never make us assured of our
salvation.

EXPLA.
God made that promise by former covenant, He that does these things shall
live in them: and it auailed not, for they continued not in my covenant: Gal.
3, 13, Heb. 8.9.
And I regarded them not, says the Lord. Therefore the Lord made another
covenant or promise, not like the former, or conditional upon faithful
service or good behavior, but absolute and without condition, the performance
whereof should depend wholly, and only upon mercy: So that he would not expect
as of us, but does undertake to give us, and to work in us, whatsoever
faithful service, and good behavior should be necessary thereunto.

Therefore he says, I will put my Law in their minds, and in their hearts will
I write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people; they shall
all know me, for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will
remember their sins and their iniquities no more. And so if we entirely
consider the whole work of our salvation, it issues absolutely out of the
purpose and promise of God,: who intending the end, disposes and works
himself whatsoever belongs to the accomplishment and attainement of the end.

CON. 44.
By believing the Gospel, I believe that Christ is given a Savior unto me, to
save me, being one of his people, from my sins, Mat. 1, 21 1 These. 1, 10
and from the wrath to come.

EXPLA.
The Gospel is the glad tidings of great joy, Luke 2, 10.11.
that unto us a Savior is borne, unto us a child is borne, Is. 9, 6
unto us a Son is given; that is, unto us that believe: and how believe I unto
us, if I believe not unto me? The Gospel is, that through the name of Christ,
every one that believes in him, shall have remission of sins; every one that
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. If I believe the
Gospel, Act. 10.43. 1. Ioh. 5.10
I believe this. For he that believes not God, makes him a liar, because he
believes not the record, that God witnessed of his Son; and this is the
record, that he has given unto us, eternal life: and this life is in his
Son. If then I believe in the name of the Son of God, and do not believe
that God has given me eternal life, I make God a liar in not believing the
report that God has witnessed of his Son. Therefore he adds, These things
have I written unto you that believe in the name of the Son of God, that ye may
know that ye have life eternal.

CON. 45.
Faith believes the promises of God concerning our happiness; and hope
waits and looks for the Lord, to reveal his righteousness, and to make
the truth of his word and promises fully to appear: and in this expectation is
content with patience to bear the cross which is incident to the profession
of the name of Christ.

EXPLA.
Confidence and rejoicing of hope, grows from the full assurance of faith,
Hebr. 3, 6, and 10, 22.
whereby seeting aside the respect of our own impeachments, of our self we
believe with Abraham under hope, Romans 4, 18
against hope, resting upon his promise, who had taken upon him to be the
shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and is able to do exceeding abundantly, 1.
Pet. 2, 25
above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Ephesians. 1, 20
according to the power that works in us. Whereby as he has already wrought
in us, the like great work as he has wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, Ephesians. 2, 5.
in that he has raised us up, being dead in sins and trespasses, unto the
life of God: So we rest persuaded, that having begun this good work in us,
he will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, not for our sakes, but for
my own sake will I do it, Eze. 36,22
says the Lord.

CON. 46.
Christ immediately and wholly is our salvation and righteousness, in whom,
and not in our selves, we are made the righteousness of God; 1. Cor. 5, 21
his obedience was wrought in our name, and for our behalf is imputed unto us,
by faith in his blood. Romans 3.25


EXPLA.
For Christ's sake and in him, Ephesians. 1, 3, 1. Cor. 1, 30
God blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, for he is made
unto v^ of God wisdom, righteousness sanctification, and redemption, that
is, all in all; that he that rejoiced may rejoice only in the Lord. And this
salvation unto which he entitled us by faith in Christ, consists not only
in the remission of sins; Romans 3, 25 Romans 6, 6 Ephesians. 4, 24
but also in destroying the body of sin, and restoring in us the Image of
God, in righteousness and holiness of truth; he having given himself, to
purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself; and to make unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle, or any such thing. And all this is
begun and in doing, but is not yet finished, and done in us, it shall be fully
perfected in us, at the Resurrection of the dead. In the mean time, he gives
not unto us a full immunity from sin, that he may take away from us all
rejoicing in our selves; Tim. 1, 2, 4
that we may know at that day, that not for the works of righteousness which
we have done, Ephesians. 5.25
but of his own mercy he has saved us. 2 Ti. 1, 3, 5
And yet no man is justified by the righteousness of Christ, who is not also
sanctified by the Spirit of Christ. Yea, and the elects sins do even work
for their good, which are made a Triacle or preservative against sin: for
they never so fall, 1. Ioh. 3, 9
but that his seed remains in them, and his hand is under to lift them up
again. Psalm. 37, 24 Ier. 33, 16.
Thus the Lord is our righteousness, Christ is to us a Jesus, a Savior, by
saving us immediately himself, not by giving us power to save our selves, or
to be our Saviors.

CON. 47.
The worth of Christ's merits is most clearly seen in the true acknowledgement
of our unworthiness.

EXPLA.
Gods light is most clearly seen in our darkness, his power in our
weakness, 2. Cor, 12, 9
his goodness in showing us mercy, that are evil; Dan. 9, 7,
his righteousness in the confession of of our shame, Ephesians. 1.6
God has appointed us to be for the glory of his grace, and therefore he
disposes that no flesh shall rejoice in his presence, 1 Cor. 1, 29
and that he only may be exalted in that day, and rejoice that we have found
mercy with the Lord, Is. 2.11.
who covers our sins with the mantle of his righteousness; who sees no
iniquity in Jacob, nor beholds transgression in Israel. God sees sin with
the eye of his knowledge, but by reason of that couerture, 2 Timothy 1.18
will not see it with the eye of his judgment: he sees it with a discerning,
but sees it not with a revenging eye: for the justified man delights in the
Law of God as touching the inner man, Romans 7.23 Heb. 12, 1 Gal. 5, 17
yet he has still in his members the law of sin hanging f^^st on, and
lusting and rebelling against the Law of the spirit of life. For though he has
within him an army of vicious desires, yet has he a will and desire of
righteousness; he hungreth and thirsts, waiting to be satisfied, because
according to his promise, 2. Pet. 3, 13 Mat. 5, 6
we look for a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein righteousness dwells:
the purpose of his life tends wholly to it, it is grieuance to him that he
failed to perform it, and makes him to cry out, Romans 7, 24,
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of death? And
therefore though he sin, he sins not maliciously, purposely, and with
desire and delight in sin; but of ignorance and infirmity, by occasion, and
by the creeping and stealing of sin upon him.

CON. 48.
By the Law of faith God pardons sin.

EXPLA.
God is a just judge, as well when he judges by laws of mercy, as when he
judges by the laws of extremity; as well in the law of faith, as in the law
of works: by the law of faith God forgiueth and considers with favor, Romans
3.27
and if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has,
2 Cor. 8.12.
not according to that that he has not. And all this he does as a just
Judge, because by law he does whatsoever he does; but in the rigor of the Law,
which is the law of works, he remitteth nothing, but requires all, Mat. 5.26.
to the uttermost farthing; nothing pleafeth but what is exact and perfect, and
fully answerable to the rule. Ps. 103.4


2. Tim. 4
So Paul expected, that God as a just judge, would yield unto him the Crown,
not by the Law of works, but by the Law of faith, wherein God crowns in mercy
and loving kindness, because his crown is a crown of Justice, not of Paul's
own Justice, but of the Justice of God; for it is just with God to pay that he
owes, and he owes that which he has promised, which is mercy to the
believing penitent, for Christ's sake: Is. 53.6.
For all we like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has laid upon him the
iniquities of us all for he bore our sins in his body upon the tree. 1 Pet.
2.24
Thy righteousness covers in me a multitude of sins; but in thee O Lord,
what but the treasures of piety, the riches of Goodness?

CON. 49.
We are reputed just by the forgiveness of our sins, and this is
justification in the sight of God.

EXPLA.
What are we but just in the sight of God, when there is taken from us the
imputation of all sin? To be just, is the same, as not to be a sinner: and in
the way of faith, they to whom their sins are not imputed, are accounted not
sinners, and therefore are accounted just: for all the commandments of God are
reputed to be done, when that which is not done is pardoned; and he who is
reputed to have done all the commandments of God, is reputed just. He
therefore to whom God pardons that which he has done, is reputed just, and
that which God determines not to impute, Romans 3, 24 Ephesians. 1, 7, Col. 1, 14, To.
4, 6, 7, 8 Tim. 1, 2, 14.
is all one, is if it had never been: for we are justified through the
redemption which is in Christ; and redemption is by forgiueness of sins; and
the not imputing of sin, is the imputing of righteousness without works:
now forgiveness of our sins is yielded unto us by virtue of the merit and
righteousness which Christ has wrought for us, who was given for us, and gave
himself for us, Gal. 4, 5, Luke 22, 10
who was made under the Law to redeem us, and therefore is just and righteous
for us; and whatsoever he has done, he has done for us, he has shed his
blood for us, 1. These. 5.10.
died for us, rose again for us, and has fulfilled all righteousness and
obedience to his Father for us, Act. 3.26.
and so very justly is accounted ours. Mat. 3, 1^
Whatsoever he has done for us, is no less then if we our selves had
performed the same for our selves. And thus by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, our sins are covered, pardoned, and forgiven, and we are
reputed just by the righteousness of Christ; because in the righteousness of
Christ is the forgiveness of our sins, and thereby no accusation is liable
against us, either as having done that which we ought not to have done, or done
that which we ought not to do: for who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? Romans 8.33
And as Adam did bear the person of all mankind, and we all were that one
man; and therefore what he did, was as done by all and every one: So did
Christ bear the person of all the Elect and faithful, and was accounted as
them all in one: not one that made the forfeiture, and another the
satisfaction, because one Christ is both the head and the body: and therefore
what he did, is likewise as done by all and every one of us.

CON. 50.
In the Elect with sanctification, there is still a remainder of original
corruption.

EXPLA.
Justification in the sight of God, by the imputation of Christ's merits, is
always accompanied with the sanctification of the holy Ghost, whereby the
inward quality of the man, though not wholly, yet in part is altered and
changed; and is thenceforth further to be renewed from day to day. In part, I
say, because together with their sanctification, there is still remnants of
original corruption, by the touch and stain whereof, the holiness and
newness that is wrought in us is defiled: for although original corruption
has received a deadly wound, yet it is not wholly dead; it is dead indeed
touching the guilt, but it is not yet dead as touching corruption and
infection, and therefore does infect the works of the most regenerate, for none
is perfect as long as he continues in this life. Indeed, God has quickened us
together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and has made us sit
together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus: but that is not yet really,
but in hope: yea, in our prayers there is much weakness and imperfections, and
distractions; yet God respects the truth, and not the measure of our faith,
pardons the same for Christ's sake, who is our high Priest, Exo. 28.38
to bear the iniquity of our offerings to make them acceptable before the
Lord: therefore the godly say, Ps. 143.2
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight no man
living shall be justified: The righteous fall seven times a day, Pro. 24.16.
and daily prays for forgiveness: and when by frailty he does fall, God does
in mercy look upon him, as he did upon Peter, Luke 22.61
and cause him to rise again.

CON. 51.
Faith created in our hearts, is the only sufficient supernatural instrument
to apprehend the free covenant of grace in Christ that is, Christ's
righteousness for our justification.

EXPLA.
Faith is the instrument to receive, because it is the hand which we stretch
to heaven, to take hold of Christ, and to hold him sitting there: it is the
mouth whereby we eat and drink Christ, because to believe is to eat: it is
the stomach whereby we digest him, for he is to be digested by faith: it is the
foot whereby we enter in possession of the benefits of Christ, and possess so
far as we stretch the same: it is the vessel whereinto God puts the oil
of his mercy: it is by faith we touch him, and look how much faith we bring
to receive, so much we draw out of the abundant grace of God. Now that whereby
we are justified, is the obedience of Christ, for by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous; and his obedience is his righteousness, and we are
made the righteousness of God in him, by apprehending and receiving the
righteousness which is in him. Romans 5, 15 2 Cor. 5, 21 Ier. 23, 6.
He is called the Lord our righteousness, not who makes us righteous only,
but who also himself is our righteousness: and how should he be our
righteousness but by his righteousness? therefore in apprehending and receiving
Christ by faith, we apprehend and receive the righteousness of Christ, to be our
justification before God; which is that merit and obedience of Christ imputed
unto us. The efficient and final cause of justification then is, God in Christ
Jesus, for our salvation, and the glory of his name: the Material is the merit
and obedience of Christ: the Formal cause is Gods imputation apprehended and
received by us; the instrument of this apprehension is faith alone.

CON. 52.
Justifying faith is ever accompanied with godliness, and care of godly life.

EXPLA.
As natural birth draws not only guilt, but also corruption, so faith
wherein is our new birth, gives not only forgiveness of sin, to
justification; but also sanctification to holiness and newness of life. In
the justified man faith only is the seat and fountain of spiritual life;
because as the quickening faculty and power of the living soul, dwells in the
heart, so Christ who is our life, dwells in our faith, or in our hearts by
faith. But yet we consist not spiritually of faith only, but many other
virtues and graces are required, to make up the perfection of a Christian man;
to which as to the other members from the heart, so from faith life is imparted
and communicated, that in them we may be alive to God: which are signs and
tokens of a justified man, not any causes of justification, but a declaration
and testimony of his being formerly justified by the faith of Jesus Christ. So
good works follow a man being justified, but are not precedent to
justification: and nothing that man can do, either by nature or grace,
concurreth to the act of justification as any cause, but faith alone; for our
hearts are purified by faith; Act. 15, 9.
by faith we reeiue the promise of the spirit; and the Law of the Spirit of
Christ, Gal. 3, 14.
which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2.
delivered us from the law of sin and of death. Neither is the very act of
faith any part of our righteousness, but only the merit and obedience of
Christ, apprehended and received by faith, but as the heart gives life to the
body, not by the substance of it self, which is but flesh, as the rest of the
body is but by the vital and quickening power of the soul, that is seated
therein: and as the hand feeds the body, not as being it self the food of
the body, but by receiving and ministering unto it meat, whereby it is
sustained: even so faith justifies and gives life by receiving Christ, to be
our righteousness and life, in him receiving forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them that are sanctified unto eternal life.

CON. 53.
When God promised, and tied the effect of his promise to the believing of it:
not to believe that, in believing whereof, we are partakers of that which we
believe: is to make God a liar, and to frustrate that which he has promised.

EXPLA.
By faith only we accept of a promise, in all the benefits of God: we are
Gal. 4, 28
the children of promise, Cha. 3.29
heirs by promise, Heb. 6.17
heirs of promise, expecting all things by the gracious promise of God, 2 Pet.
14.
by promise to be partakers of the divine nature, Gal. 3.14.26.
the blessing by promise, Ephesians. 1.13.
the spirit by promise, Gal. 3.18
the inheritance by promise, 1. Ti. 1.2.
life eternal by promise, 2 Pet. 3.13
by promise a new heaven and a new earth, wherein righteousness dwells: all
which be promises in Christ, and are yea, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and in him amen, that is, for his sake first made, and for his sake to be
performed also. Now seeing God has taught us that by faith Heb. 11.13
we obtain the promises, that we receive Gal. 3.14
the promise of the spirit by faith, Ibid. 22.
that the promise of blessing is given by the faith of Jesus Christ, to them
that believe, that as Mat. 8.13
we believe, so it shall be unto us, Mat. 21.
that whatsoever we desire when we pray, if we believe we shall have it, it
shall be accordingly unto us. Why should we then not believe such? God has
promised Christ to be our righteousness, and that by the faith of Jesus
Christ, that is, by believing in him, to be that unto us which God has
promised: surely in believing him to be our righteousness, he is our
righteousness; and we are made the righteousness of God in him.

CON. 54.
The righteousness and merit of Christ is spiritually and really ours, within
and without, in spirit and body, and soul, to sanctify and cleanse us unto
God.

EXPLA.
And this is indeed, not by receiving Christ's righteousness really into us, but
by having righteousness imputed unto us, for his sake: for we receive the
righteousness of God, even as we receive himself, who so becomes ours, as
that we abide in him, and he in us; we are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones: Ioh. 6, 56. Ephesians. 5, 30.
we are really and truly by the power of his Spirit, one with him, and he with
us; and yet he is not personally and bodily brought unto us: faith seeks
Christ and finds him, and holds him, in the Virgins womb, in the manger,
in the garden, upon the cross, in the grave, in his Resurrection, and
ascension to heaven, and in his now sitting at the right hand of God, making
intercession for us. Every where faith embraces him, and in every of these,
sees him to be ours, as having undertaken and achieved al these things for
our sakes.

CON. 55.
For a special aptness in faith, has God appointed it, to be the instrument
for applying unto us the whole benefit of Christ.

EXPLA.
The will and ordinance of God, does not without cause appoint one condition,
when as well it might appoint another; neither appointed any thing to be done,
which is not more fitly to be done that way that he appointed, then any other
way. But beside this, our justification is by faith, that it may be by grace;
for faith is the fittest means to set forth the grace of God. Secondly, that
the promise might be sure to all the seed: for no otherwise can we rest
assured of the promise of God, but as it is of Grace, who in our works can
find nothing to assure our selves. Thirdly, faith is specially appointed to
exclude boasting, Romans 3, 27
that no man should glory in his own doings, but that God should have the glory
of man's salvation.

CON. 56.
That man cannot have fellowship with Christ by justification, who by
sanctification also has no fellowship with him.

EXPLA.
Do not think, that he that has such a faith, as whereby being justified,
he has to rejoice with God, can together therewith have unrighteousness: for
if he that believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God, and he that is
borne of God sins not; and if he do sin (that is, give himself to sin)
it is certain that he believes not; certain it is, that he that truly
believes, does work the work of faith and righteousness, and all goodness.
The root of all is faith, by which alone we are justified, and so the bar of
sin is taken away, that before divided betwixt God and us: that so the
sanctifying Spirit of God may have access unto us, to work in us the good work
of God so to prepare us to that inheritance, to the hope whereof he has
called us.

The thief in his short time being upon the cross, had with his faith many
good works; the fear of God, hope, repentance, confession of sins, love
toward God and his neighbor, in reprehending his fellows blasphemies, and
defending of Christ's innocence. The good works of the godly are glorious and
acceptable in Gods sight, for Christ's sake, being done in his name and offered
upon the Altar of faith in him; the imperfection thereof is accidental, and
takes not away the nature of a good work, but makes it an imperfect good
work, which imperfection notwithstanding were sufficient to make the work to
be rejected, if in rigor and extremity God should weigh the same, which he
does not, but mercifully pardons it for Christ's sake.

CON. 57.
The righteousness whereby we are to be justified before God, admits no
increase as sanctification does.

EXPLA.
It admits no increase, because it must be perfect, and the righteousness
of Christ is always uniform and alike: if any thing be taken from it, it is
not perfect, and if it be not perfect, it cannot justify before God: but to
the first grace of sanctification, and all the succeeding increase thereof, is
of grace: for God to the thankful receiving and using of his gifts, does add
greater measure thereof; Mat. 2, 29
for to him that has shall be given, yet that which is added is grace for
grace, and the rendering of one gift for another gift. God giving occasion
himself by one gift of the bestowing of another, as he gives faith: and to
faith that which we believe, as he gives us to pray, and so prayer gives that
for which we pray: so in all the rest he gives grace, and gives to use well
the grace he has given, and to the well using thereof, he gives also further
measure and increase of grace, that both in the gift and in the increase, al
praise and glory may redound to him. The means in us whereby this increase is
wrought, is faith, which, as it first receives the spirit, so receives also
the increase of it, whilst by the growth thereof, we grow more into Christ,
and thereby more and more partakers of his life. By imputation of the merits
and obedience of Christ, a man is a righteous the first day of his conversion,
as he is in the end of his life, howsoever as touching sanctification and
inherent righteousness, he grow much, and therein be renewed from day to day,
in putting off the old man, and putting on the new, and still cleansing from all
defilement of the flesh and of the spirit, and finish his sanctification in the
fear of God; for every one that bears fruit in me, my Father purges, that
he may bring forth more fruit. We must then grow in grace and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, not as though I had already attained, or
were already perfect; but one thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and
endeavor my self to that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark:
the price of redemption in the shedding of the blood of Christ, one, and alike
to all and every faithful man, but yet it is not alike apprehended by every
one. There is perfect righteousness required of us, and the same is yielded
unto us in Christ: there may be a difference in us, but Christ cannot be
divided, neither is there in him any difference from himself, where he goes
he goes whole; and therefore what he is to the strong, the same he is to the
faint and feeble soul: there is greater and less assurance, but the matter
whereof each does take assurance, is the whole mercy of God in Christ.

CON. 58.
When we teach Christ alone, we exclude not our faith unto justification, or
Christ excluding our own works unto sanctification; for charity is inseparably
with faith in the man that is justified.

EXPLA.
Faith is the only hand which puts on Christ unto justification, and Christ
the only garment, which being so put on, covers the shame of our defiled
natures, hides the imperfections of our works, preserves us blameless in
the sight of God, before whom otherwise the weakness of our faith were cause
sufficient to make us culpable; yea, to shut us out from the Kingdom of
heaven, whither nothing that is not absolute can enter; so Christ without any
associate, finished all the parts of redemption, and purchased salvation
himself alone: yet for conueyance of this eminent blessing into us, these
things are required as most necessary.

CON. 59.
Our salvation is given to us by Christ alone, yet to our justification faith,
to our sanctification the fruits of the Spirit, etc. are necessary.

EXPLA.
For our salvation it is requisite to be chosen and known of God, before the
foundation of the world; in the world to be called, justified, sanctified;
after we have left the world, to be received into glory. Now Christ in every
of these, has somewhat which he works alone, through him according to the
eternal purpose of God before the foundation of the world, borne, crucified,
buried, raised, etc. we were in a glorious acceptance known unto God long
before we were seen of men. God (I say) knew us, loved us, was kind to us in
Christ Jesus, in him we were elected to be heirs of life. Thus God in Christ
has wrought in such sort alone, that our selves are mere patients, working no
more then dead and senseless matter, wood, or stone, or iron, does in the
artificers hands; no more then the clay when the potter appoints it to be
framed for an honorable use: nay, not so much for the matter whereupon the
tradesman works, he chooses for the fitness which is in it, to serve his
turn: in us no such thing.

Now touching the rest, which is laid for the foundation of our faith,
imports further, that by him we are called, that we have redemption and
remission of sins by his blood, Gal. 5.8.
health by his stripes, justice by him: that he does sanctify his Church, and
make it glorious to himself, that entrance into joy shall be given by him
alone; yea, al things by him alone, howbeit not so by him alone, as if in us,
to our vocation the hearing of the Gospel; to our justification faith; to our
sanctification good works; to entrance into rest, perseverance in hope, in
faith, in holiness, were not necessary; which works have no power of
satisfying God for sin, or of virtue to merit both grace here, or glory in
heaven; for works are a thing subordinate, without which our sanctification
cannot be accomplished: yet God does justify the believing man, not for the
worthiness of his belief, but for the worthiness of the person which is
believed, that is, Christ; and God also rewards every one that works, not
for any meritorious dignity, that is or can be in the work, but through his
mercy, by whose commandment he works.

CON. 60.
That which we know either by sense, or by infallible demonstration, is not so
certain as the Principles, Articles, and Conclusions of Christian faith.

EXPLA.
If the things which we believe be considered in themselves, it may truly be
said, Faith is more certain^ then any science; and that mere natural men do
neither know nor acknowledge the things of God, is no marvel, for they are
spiritually to be discerned, and they in whose hearts the light of grace does
shine, and are taught of God, are so yet weak in faith, and their assenting to
the law scrupulous, mingled with fear and wavering: for the foggy dampe of
original corruption is so great, that no heart can be so inclined in the
knowledge, or established in the love of that in which his salvation stands,
as that he does not doubt; and if any were such, what does let, why that man
should not be justified by his own inherent righteousness? For righteousness
inherent being perfect, will justify, and perfect faith is a part of perfect
righteousness inherent: yea a principal part, the mother and root of all the
rest: and if it were thus, what need we the righteousness of Christ? wherefore
we must learn to challenge a strength which we have not; lest we lose the
comfortable support of that weakness which indeed we have.

CON. 61.
All men have not equal certainety of faith, but some believers are more
scrupulous and doubtful then others

EXPLA.
The reason is, there is ^ double certainty: a certainty of evidence, as when
the mind does assent to this or that, not because it is true in it self, but
because the truth is clear and manifest to us: for things most certain in
themselves, except they be also most evident, our persuasion is not fully
assured, as it is of things more evident, although in themselves they be less
certain: it is as certain that there be spirits, as that there be men, but
we be more assured of these then of them: Now if there were equal evidence
and truth there should be equality of faith: Yea, that we see by the light of
grace, though it be indeed most certain, yet it is not so evidently certain,
as that which sense or the height of nature will not suffer a man to doubt of;
as that the fire is hot, etc. Therefore God labors to confirm us in the
things were believe, by things whereof we have sensible knowledge, for proofs
must be more certain, then is the thing proved.

The other is a certainety of adherence, as when the heart does cleave and
stick to that which it does believe, and this certainty is greater in us then
the other, because the faith of a Christian does apprehend the words of the
covenant, and promises of God, not only as true, but as good: and therefore
when the evidence which he has of the truth is so small, that it grieueth him
to feel his weakness in assenting thereto; yet is there in him such a sure
adherence unto that, which he does but faintly and fearfully believe, that
his spirit having once truly tasted the heavenly sweetness thereof, all the
world is not able quite and clean to remove him from it, but he strives with
himself against all hope of believing, Job 13.
For though he would kill him, yet will he trust in him. For why? This is his
lesson, It is good for me to clean unto God. Psalm. 73.


CON. 62
Doubting does always accompany faith, yea in the most faithful that ever did
believe.

EXPLA.
If God did work in us like a natural agent: as the fire does inflame, and as
the Sun enlightens, according to the uttermost ability which they have, to
bring forth their effects, there should be nothing in the believer but the
incomprehensible wisdom of God, does limit the effects of his power to such a
measure, as seems best to himself. Wherefore he works that certainty in
all, which suffices abundantly to their salvation in the life to come: but to
none so great as attaines in this life unto perfection; which is fittest for
us, that feeling still our own infirmities, we may always pray, Lord help
our incredulity: Lord increase our faith. Indeed it is said, Abraham believed
and doubted not; which Negation does not exclude all fear, all doubting, but
only that which cannot stand with true faith; it freeth Abraham from doubting
through infidelity, not from doubting through infirmity: from the doubting of
unbelievers, not of weak believers, as is evident, Genes. 17.17.

CON. 63.
The faith whereby we are justified cannot fail.

EXPLA.
The seed of God, that is, the first grace which God powers into the hearts of
them that are incorporated into Christ, because it is an adversary unto sin:
we do therefore think we sin not, but otherwise, by a distrustful and
doubtful apprehension of that which steadfastly we ought to believe, we are
amazed: yet they that are borne of God do never so sin, as it does extinguish
quite grace. Our faith when it is strongest is but weak, yet even then when it
is at the weakest, is so strong, that utterly it never fails, it never
perishes altogether, no not in them who think it extinguished in themselves:
howbeit through extremity of grief, many times in judgment the Elect are so
confounded, that they find not themselves in themselves; for that which
dwells in their hearts they seek: it abides, works in them, yet still
they ask where; still they lament, as for a thing that is past finding; they
mourn as Ra^hel and refuse to be comforted; as if that were not which indeed
is, and as if that which is not, were; as if they did not believe when they
do; and as if they did despair quite when they do not: For truly, where
faith makes any doubt, there the sense is never satisfied.

CON. 64.
God will have them that still walk in light, to feel now and then what it is
to sit in the shadow of death.

EXPLA.
A grieved spirit is no argument of a faithless mind: men judging by
comparison either with other men, or themselves: at some other time, being more
strong, they think imperfection to be a plain deprivation; weakness to be
utter want of faith; and therefore in heaviness of spirit suppose they lack
faith, because they find not the joy and delight, which indeed does accompany
faith. The Apostle Paul prayed, The God of hope fill you with all joy in
believing, which is not an inseperable companion therewith: for the light would
never be so acceptable, were it not for usual intercourse of darkness: too
much honey does turn to gall, and too much joy even spiritually would make us
turn wantons. Happier a great deal is that man's case whose soul by inward
desolation is humbled, then he whose heart through abundance of spiritual
delight, is lifted up, 2 Cor. 12.
and exalted above measure: better it is sometimes to cry, my God, my God, why
have have thou forsaken me? then to say with the Pharisey, I thank God it is
not with me as it is with other men. God will have them that should walk in
light, to feel sometimes what it is to sit in darkness: yea, God sends
variety of disturbances, that the mind should not gnaw nor waste it self away,
that we should too much with Job and Jeremy, Job 2.8. Ier. 11.
grieve and lament. Thus he drives away grief often with joy, that we
should not be steeped and dissolved in sorrow.

CON, 65.
Our faith here may have and has her privy operations secret to us, yet known
to him by whom they are.

EXPLA.
Men do fasten their minds upon the distrustful suggestions of the flesh,
whereof finding great abundance in themselves, they gather thereby, unbelief
has full dominion and plenary possession of the^; not marking the things of
the spirit and of the flesh; because they be buried and overwhelmed with the
contrary: when notwithstanding the Apostle does acknowledge the spirit groans,
and that God hears when we do not. A man deceived by a too hard opinion of
his faith, will scarce be comforted; yea, it does augment his grief, and will
say, I have sifted all the corners of my heart, and I see what there is in me,
never seek to persuade me against my knowledge: reason not with flesh and
blood, dispute never with Satan, never do yield, much less give over: believe
the word, and give place to prayer and exhortation, and thou shall find light
in thy greatest darkness. The comfort of the spirit may for a season be
intermitted, but never the spirit of comfort shall leave thee.

CON. 66.
Besides our corrupt nature, the serpent labors continually to pervert the
simplicity of faith, which is in Christ.

EXPLA.
I am jealous over you (says the Apostle) with a godly jealousy, for I have
prepared you to a husband, a pure virgin, unto Christ; but I fear lest as the
serpent beguiled Euah through his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ.
This simplicity of faith takes the naked promise of God, his bare word, and on
that it rests: which simplicity the Devil ceasseth not to overthrow,
corrupting the mind with many imaginations of repugnancy, and contrariety
between the word of God and his promises therein, and those things which sense
or experience, or some other fore-co^ceiued opinion and persuasion had
imprinted. The word of promise unto his people is, I will not leave thee, Hebr.
13.
nor forsake thee: upon this the simplicity of faith rests, and it is not
afraid of famine. But mark how the subtilty of Satan does corrupt the minds
of that rebellious generation, whose spirits were not faithful unto God: they
beheld the desolate state of the desert in which they were, and by the wisdom
of their sense concluded the wisdom of God to be but folly; Psalm. 78.
Can God prepare a table in the desert? Again, the word of the promise unto
Sarah, was, Thou shall bear a son: faith is simple, and doubted not of it;
but Satan to corrupt this simplicity of faith, entised the mind of the woman
with an argument drawn from common experience to the contrary, An old woman,
Sarah, will she be acquainted with forgotten passions of youth? So the word
of the promise of God by Moses, and the Prophets, made the Savior of the world
so apparent unto Philip, that this simplicity could conceive no other Messiah
then Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph: but to stay Nathaniel to come and
see, and should also believe, and so be saved; the subtilty of Satan casted a
mist before his eyes, put in his head against this the common conceived opinion
of all men against Nazareth, Is it possible that a good thing should come from
thence?

Thus he bereaueth men for the time of all perceiuance of that which should
relieve them, and be their comfort: yea, it takes all remembrance from them,
even of things wherewith they are most familiarly acquainted The Israelites
might know, that he that led them through the Red Sea, was able to feed them
in the wilderness. Sarah was not to learn, that with God all things were
possible. Therefore diligently mark the conceit of repugnancy; believe not
those things which are object to the eyes, but that which faith upon promise of
God does look for.

CON. 67.
The promises of Grace, protection and favor, which God in his law makes unto
his people, do not grant any such immunity, as can free and exempt them from
all chastisements.

EXPLA.
God has said, I will continue my mercy for ever toward them: Psalm. 89.
so has he likewise said, Their transgressions will I also punish with a rod:
it cannot stand with any reason that we should set the measure of our
punishments, and prescribe to God how great or how long our sufferings should
be; we are blind and altogether ignorant, what is best for us: we sue for many
things very unadvisedly, and unwisely against our selves, thinking we ask
fish, when indeed we crave a serpent; when we think we ask that is good, and
yet God seems slow to grant it, he denies not, but defers our petitions, to
the end we may learn to desire great things greatly.

CON. 68.
We must learn to strengthen our faith by experience which heretofore we have
had of Gods great goodness toward us.

EXPLA.
By those things you have known performed, learn to hope for those things
that are promised: if thou know that thou have received much, thou may be
sure to receive more; for to him that has shall be more given. When thou
meditatest what thou would have, then search what thou have had at Gods
hands; make this reckoning, that the benefits thou have had, and he bestows
upon thee, are bills obligatory and sufficient sureties, that he will bestow
further: his present mercy is still a warrant of his future love, because whom
he loves he loves to the end. Ioh. 13.


CON. 69.
The frailty of our nature, the subtilty of Satan, the force of our deceivable
imaginations are such, as do threaten every moment the subversion of our
faith, yet it is not hazarded by them.

EXPLA.
If we could reckon up, as many evident clear undoubted signs of Gods
reconciled love toward us, as there are years, yea days, yea hours past
over our heads; all these set together, have not such force to confirm our
faith, as the loss, and sometimes the only fear of losing a little transitory
goods, credit, honor, or favor of men: a small calamity or a matter of nothing,
can bre^d a conceit, and such a conceit, as cannot easily be removed; as that
we are clean cast out of Gods Book, Psalm. 31.
that he regards us not; that he looks upon others, but passes by us,
like a stranger, to whom we are not known.

When we think, looking upon others, and comparing them with our selves, Their
tables are furnished day by day, earth and ashes is our bread* they sing to the
Lute, their children dance before them; our hearts are heavy in our bodies as
lead, our sighs are many, our tears do wash our beds wherein we lie: the
Sun shines fair upon their foreheads, we are hanging like bottles i^ the
smoke, cast into corn^rs, like sheards of a broken pot, etc: This is our great
weakness, and policy of Satan, which makes us measure God and good things
according to our corruptions, when there is no such thing.

CON. 70.
The faithful must use ordinary means, for the strengthening and kindling of
his faith.

EXPLA.
Simon, Simon, satan has desired to winow thee as wheat; Luke 22.
here is our painful tentation; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not: this is our safety, no man's condition so sure as ours. The prayer of
Christ is more then sufficient both to strengthen us, be we never so weak, and
to overthrow all adversary power, be it never so strong and potent: Yet his
praye^ must not exclude our labor^ their thoughts are vain who think that
their watching can preserve the City, which God himself is not willing to
keep; and are not theirs as vain, who think that God will keep the City, for
which they themselves are not careful to watch? The husband man must not burn
his plough, nor the Merchant forsake his trade, because God has promised, I
will not forsake thee: Hebr: 13.
and the faithful Christian must attend hearing, reading, praying, that he
fall not into temptation. The meaning of Christ in these words, Father, keep
them in thy name, is not, that we should be careless to keep our selves;
and so happy is he whose faith has made him the child of God: nothing shall
change his heart, overthrow his faith, alter his affection toward God, or the
affection of God to him. Who can make a separation between him and God? Romans 8.
He knows in whom he has believed, and who has shed his blood for him.
Labor then to keep the assurance of thy faith unto the end, and by labor
through the gracious mediation of Christ keep it.

CON. 71.
We need not fear sin, for Christ has abolished it for ever.

EXPLA.
This is true, and everlasting verity has folded it up; for howsoever we
fear and tremble, yet before the Lord, Col. 3.4.
with whom our life is hid, there is not peril, but peace; not fear, but
righteousness without end: let our sins be never so great, neither we nor
our sins can change the new Testament, that God is merciful to our sins,
Ier. 31.
and will remember our iniquities no more. Therefore this care is past, that
our sins be many; the more they are, the greater is his mercy who has forgiven
them. And this is the token which God has given us, that we are his, because
we are grieved with our sins; for Christ overcame sin with sufferings
which belong unto it: Hebr. 2.
and this is the badge of our redemption, to be made like him in afflictions:
Romans 8.
we have sin and abhor it, we have sense and feeling of Gods anger against
it, and hell gapeth upon our souls because of it; all is well, this is a
blessed state, this was the Image of Christ when he overcame sin; a mark of
my redemption in my own flesh, that I should not faint: for as the Sun
makes day, and the night darkness, so this affliction for sin, is the badge,
and cognizance of our certain forgiveness. And now see the good of God, which
turns all things to the best to those that love him: Romans 8.
through fear of sin the Devil fights against us; without fear of sin
we could never have boldness: through anguish of heart the Devil would
ouerwhelme us with sorrow; without anguish of heart we could never have joy.

In feeling Gods anger, the Devil would make us to despair: without feeling
his threatening, and trembling before him, we could never have strength of
faith, that his mercies are for ever. In all sufferings I am like to Christ:
they are marks of my adoption, that I am his child; for if we be without
chastisements, Heb. 12.
then are we bastards and not sons: and what chastisements be these? He
says, Romans 6.
If we be planted with him in the similitude of his death, then shall we be
also partakers of his Resurrection.

Then as thou need not care for sin, for it is abolished; so needst thou
not care for hell, for the nearer we feel it, the further we are from it.

Let them fear sin that feel it not, and let them be afraid of condemnation
that know not what it is: our eyes have been kept waking, and we have feene our
sins; our hearts have fainted before the anger of the Lord, and we have not
despised our heavenly calling: therefore in the day of trouble we shall have
rest, when destruction shall come upon the secure like an armed man; and God
most glorious Lord of lords although he make sickness his messenger, and
death his minister, till he shall destroy them both: yet his mercies are
unspeakable that forgiueth us all our sins, Psalm. 103.
his goodness is great who has regard to the children of men. Psalm. 8.


CON. 72.
All trouble should be rather matter of joy, then displeasure.

EXPLA.
This is our prayer, thy will be done, Mat. 6.
we must be contented with all he has done, that our hearts may bear us
witness, that of all things the Lord is most dear unto us: for if we give
our heart to love the Lord, our troubles shall seem neither great nor strong
unto us; for what can be great if our heart be prepared to say, We rejoice in
afflictions, Romans 5.
because they shall breed in us a hope which shall never make us ashamed? o^
what can be great, if God has taught us, that the momentany afflictions of
this world, Romans 8.
they are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed unto us: or what can
be great if we can rejoice in afflictions, Iam. 1.
rejoice exceedingly when we fall into many and great tribulations? All is but
vanity, what should dismay us? Nay, how should we not be glad if death were
even at our bed sides, that we might even once see the utmost malice of the
Devil, and after for ever be delivered from him? O! how God is delighted with
us, when we be faithful to abide these light chastisements! Heb. 12.
How many things have all the ^odly suffered? are we not ashamed to refuse the
cross which they have borne? yea, weight well thy case what it is, and thou
shall fee little cause of sorrow in it; or if thou compare it with others, none
at all: and it all things were as evil as thou could imagine, what then?
Where is our love to Jesus Christ, that gave his precious blood to the death
upon the Cross for our sakes, if we will not leave all for him? One hair
cannot fall from our head but at his commandment; He is head of his Church,
and all things happen they not unto us as he will?

Only when we sin, let us be sorrowful to offend such a Savior, let it
grieve us more then death it self; but to remember again so ass^red hope, we
cannot but rejoice in the Lord, Ph^l. 4.
and always rejoice: so let Gods will pe^swade you, that whether you live, or
whether you die, you may be wholly his. The world has taken up enmity against
us, and strives daily to separate us from the Lord: but there is no joy to
this, that we know our selves to be the children of God, to be joined to
Jesus Christ, and made a chief member of a glorious body, with whom we shall be
joined for ever. And what is this world to immortality? What are fullness of
delights to the grace of God, the fellowship of Saints, the forgiveness of our
sins, the love of Gods countenance, the assurance of our life, the brightness
of his glory, and these unutterable eternal blessings? Let us count then all
things dung, that we may win Christ, desire to be dissolved and be with
Christ, that we may say, O death where is thy sting? All things of the world
are but servants of death, and serve to make his power more fearful unto us:
vanquish death, and thou have vanquished all: height and depth, life and death,
all is ours, and we are Christ's.

CON. 73.
To confess sin and not to hide it, is a ready way to salvation, and
advancement of Gods glory.

EXPLA.
Satan is enemy to us, and his sleights are many: tread Satan under foot, and
triumph with Christ, so shall thou shame the Devil: For he that hides his
sins shall never prosper, Prou. 28.
but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. To Achan Joshua
said, I beseech thee give glory to God, and show me what thou have done. This
is to give glory to God, to confess. So did David acknowledge his iniquity:
the Israelites before their absolution and forgiveness, confessed to the
Priest, and thereafter their sins were laid on the beasts. Adam did cloak
his sin, but we must be borne anew: So did Cain, but we are of a better kindred
then he. God will once reveal the ^ecrets of hearts, and then we shall
rejoice, that there is nothing of ours hid: better to receive the reproach of
flesh, and after receive the glory of God. John his preaching began at
confession: the prodigal Son called heaven and earth to witness his impiety:
Paul did ever tell us he was a persecutor: the Thief entered not into
Paradise, til he first in the hearing of Israel, said, We are rightly punished,
and receive things worthy of that we have done. This then touched the glory of
God, and therefore we must fors^ke the love of our self; we must not
dissemble with him that cannot be mocked, in the midst of the congregation I
will praise thee, I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, says Christ. Gods
graces must neither be locked up in our hearts, but will burn within like
fire: I have believed, therefore I spoke. A fire (I say) shut up in our bones,
we shall be weary with forbearing; I will speak thy name before Kings, and
will not be ashamed.

CON. 74.
God has given his Elect, as a free gift to Christ.

EXPLA.
The Apostle tells us, Behold the children which thou have given me: Heb. 2.
This teaches us to acknowledge his gift and grace, and not any wisdom in
us, why he would choose us; or any constancy in us by which we would cleave
unto him; but God in his grace drew us, that we might come unto him, and with
his power he strengthens us that we should abide with him: All that my Father
gives unto me, comes unto me; and the reason is, because my Father has
given them to me, and he is greater then all: and he prays oftentimes in
that long prayer, for them that believe, because his Father has given them
unto him: that we may be taught humility, that in us, that is, in our flesh,
there dwells no goodness, but that he chose us, he did it of his free grace
and mercy, which he would show unto us: and as we know, that once God has
freely given us unto Christ, so we know our election stands sure, because it
is according to his promise who has loved us for ever.

CON. 75.
To know the sufserings of Christ aright, is our greatest consolation.

EXPLA.
Christ suffered the death, over which the Devil had power; the same death
which is the reward of sin, by bearing it, he overcame it, and he conquered
no more then he submitted himself unto; for by death he overcame death: Heb.
2.
and he has broken the force of it, no further then he had felt the sting of
it in himself; for body and soul he was made a sacrifice sor our sins, My
soul is heavy unto death: Mat. 26.56
yea he was astonished at his grief, at the very entry at it, for his sweat
was drops of blood falling from him, Mar. 14.33
and God sent an Angel from heaven to comfort him. Luke 22.44.
Was this for the death of his body? His servants that receive of his fullness,
do they not easily despise this death? that either they desire to be with
Christ, or rejoice in the midst of it before the persecutor. The Apostles did
sing in prison; Paul gloried in his tribulations, which were many. And did he
cry out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Here is no comparion, that
which made him tremble would have crushed them; that which made him sweat
blood, would have made them sink into the bottom of hell; and that which made
him cry, would have held both Angels and men under everlasting woe. But Christ
was as water powered out, Psalm. 22.
and all his bones out of joint; his heart like wax molted in the midst of
his bowels; his strength was dried up like a potsheard, and his tongue cleaued
unto his jaws; he was brought with his sorrows to the dust of death, 1. Pe
1.2.24
for he bare our sins in his body; he submitted himself to the death of
them, and by the wounds of his stripes we be healed. For our sins deserved
not only a bodily, but also a second death in hell fire: he suffered the
torments of body, and the anguish of the soul: the wrath of his Father, which
wounded his flesh and spirit unto death, would have holden him in that
condemnation for ever, if he had not been stronger then we, that had deserved
it: but being the Son of God, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelled
bodily, the eternal Spirit that was within him, did loose the chains of death
and hell, of which it was impossible that he should be holden; and has left
his enemies the Devil, death, and hell, in ignominy and darkness, and has
abolished them for ever.

CON. 76.
We are presented faultlesse before the presence of Gods glory, by being made
one with Christ.

EXPLA.
Of Christ only is it true, This is my well-beloued Son in whom I am well
pleased: this is the Salvation we have by him, to be grafted in him, and made
partakers of his life. All the faithful before Christ, were righteous in him;
for we must leave all our works in the earth where they were done, and they
must dye with the corruptible hands and feet, with which they are wrought: we
must go naked and bare, and offer nothing but that which is Christ's; yea, our
selves we must present in his body, for in our own persons we cannot
possibly be accepted. Even as the Vine branch can have no life except it abide
in the body of the Vine; no more we either life or righteousness, except we
be, and abide in Christ.

He is our substance, and being in the inheritance of glory; his righteousness
is ours, his love ours, his life our life, his Spirit our spirit, of his
fullness we receive all. This is a great mystery which the eye sees not, nor
heart can understand: yet it is a real joining with him, faith comprehends
it; and when we shall see that wisdom which is called unity in one person,
God and man, we shall see the wisdom which has made us all, the body of
that head and members, one of another; In him he is well pleased (I say) with
us. If that covenant wherein it was once promised to Abraham, to give a land
unto the Jews; and all their rebellion could not falsify his promise; in him
we have a covenant greater and better, therefore let us trust unto his
promise, which cannot change his grace, nor repent him of his mercy for ever;
for this is a holy covenant which shall not be broken: but God will make all
our enemies our footstooles, 1. Cor. 15.
and will surely take us up into his glory: and briefly, the presence of God to
which Christ leads us, is a throne of Grace; Heb. 4.
for by his merits we be brought unto God as before a Judge, who from his
tribunal Seat does acquit us for ever, of his own grace and free mercy: For
whosoever looks to be justified by any other thing, the Lord can no more
show mercy unto him, then he can change the property of his Judgment seat, to
make it no more the Throne of Grace.

CON. 77.
A perfect beauty of all excellent love, appears in the great work of
Christ's mediation; for he became man. Secondly, He was ordained to accomplish
whatsoever was between God and man. Thirdly, This was given to Christ by God,
both by word and by oath, and all was to have compassion on us.

EXPLA.
Neither Angel, nor Archangell, nor Principalities, nor Powers, can do this
work, to present flesh and blood unto the Majesty of God, when themselves are
but spirits. He took not the Angels nature, Hebr: 2.
but the seed of Abraham. But in his sufferings his love is most evident, in
that it was so fervent, and so deeply rooted, that neither fear nor
trembling, nor any anguish of spirit, could make him shake: nor the force of
death, nor any bloody sweats, could pull it out of his bowels: and this is the
depth of the Gospel, which the Angels do desire to behold: it skilleth not
how many our sins are, and how great in our eyes; the Lord will scatter them as
the clouds from the heavens, and they shall not turn away his loving
countenance from us: if our sins be as scarlet, and not ours only, but the
sins of the whole world, they rested all upon Christ; he prays for
deliverance, and has obtained: and therefore we may say with boldness,
forgive us our trespasses. We then which are laden but with our own sins,
should lift up our hearts in the great assurance of hope, and hear with
ioyfulnesse the word of promise, I Heb. 8.12.
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins
and iniquities no more. There is nothing comparable to his passions, by whose
stripes we are healed, and therefore may be fully persuaded, Romans 8.
that nothing shall separate us from the love of God in Christ: for the Lord
has appointed to give to all that mourn in Sion, beauty for ashes, the oil
of joy for mourning, Esaias 61.3.
the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness: for he was wounded
for our transgressions, Esaias 53.5.
and broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him: his
prayers are ours, his supplications for us, availeable for more sins then we
are able to commit. This is the victory that shall overcome the world, even our
faith. For his Father has broken him with one breaking upon another, so he
kindled his wrath against him, and accounted him as one of his enemies; he
cried out aloud in silence, he could find no ease, his face was wrinckled with
weeping, and the shadow of death was upon his eyes: when he was the
brightness of glory, and the Sun of Righteousness, that shined in the
world; yet to see his days as it were at an end, and his enterprises broken,
his careful thoughts to be so deep graven in his breast, that they changed
even the day into night unto him, and al light that approached into darkness.

When his excellency was such above all creatures, that the world was not
worthy to give him breath, yet he to be made a worm and not a man, a shame
of men, Psalm. 22.
and contempt of the people, all that saw him to have him in derision, and to
shut up his life in shame and reproaches, so unworthy a reward of so precious a
servant. He was righteous above measure, yet was he accounted among the wicked:
and briefly, he was called a glutton, but had his appetites bridled with all
holy moderation; his behavior without all reproof, yet slandered as a friend
of Publicans: he loved the Law of his Father, that he would not suffer one jot
or title unaccomplished, yet accused as enemy to Moses: he loved his Father
with all his heart, and was obedient unto him to the death, even the death of
the Cross, yet they said he blasphemed: He was an enemy to Satan even to
death, and by death overcame him that brought death into the world: Heb. 2.
he hated him with so perfect hatred, and held steadfast the enmity that was
between them, until he had spoiled his principalities and powers, and
trampled over them in an everlasting victory; yet they said he had a devil:
such a loathsome sink was covered in the heart of man, and now the thoughts of
many hearts made open. Luk 2.


And if Moses, Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Paul, had sorrow for the Jews of their
time, how did Christ's great love boil in sorrows of heart, to see their
destructions over whom before he had wept, but prayed still, Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do?

Behold therefore his person here, and know his love: it was grief to see all
virtue trodden under feet by them; and yet it was more infinite to behold Satan
to prevail against man to his everlasting condemnation: and which is more, the
sin that he hates be must take it upon his own body, and bear the wrath of
his Father that was powered out against it: the anger of his Father burned in
him, even unto the bottom of hell: O! who can stand before his wrath, Nah. 1.6.
or who can abide the fierceness of his wrath? his wrath is powered out like
fire, and the Rocks are broken before him! Yea, makes the forlorn
wilderness to tremble! For thus the Sun is darkened, the Moon does not show
her light, the Stars of heaven does fall away, and the powers of heaven are
shaken. Here then is the picture of perfect love; being full of goodness, is
rewarded of evil; full of obedience, is punished as wicked; full of faith, yet
had the reward of a sinner; Lord of all, yet nothing to do him duty; the God
of glory, yet compassed with shame; the Author of life, yet wrapped in the
chains of death; the only begotten and best beloved of the Father, yet cast
off as a stranger; the beauty of the highest heavens, yet thrown down into
hell; well might he say, The snares of death compassed me, and the pains of
hell took hold upon me, I have found trouble and sorrow: he did say, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me?

CON. 78.
We know then best, how we love the Lord, when we feel by experience, what we
will suffer for hts sake.

EXPLA.
It is an easy thing to be valiant before the combat; to dream of a good
courage before the heart be tried: but indeed, to be unshaken in the midst
of the tempest, and to stand upright when the ground trembles under thee: this
is to know assuredly thou art strong indeed. The heaven, earth, elements, were
Christ's enemies; his Father in whom he trusted, showed him an ang^y
countenance: yet said he still, Thy will be done, O Father. We must account it
for an exceeding joy when we sal^ into sundry troubles: for what can be more
joyful to the heart oppressed, then to give this in experience, that neither
height nor depth, shall remove him from the Lord? This was Abraham's glory,
that he would forsake his Country, and kindred, Genes. 12.
and fathers house, at the commandment of God, to go whither he would show
him. Job his patience was not thoroughly known, till all his goods were spoiled:
and we must have witness that our election is sure, when we may speak by
experience, that neither life nor death can remove us from the love of God.
Thus the good ground is known what it is, when the heat cannot scorch it, nor
briers and thorns turn the good corn into weeds, but through all storms it
will give nourishment unto the seed, till it give greater increase to Gods
honor and glory. This is a profitable experience, for before it come unto us,
we know not how great the rebellion of the flesh will be.

The Apostles bragged, they would never forsake their Master, he alone had the
words of eternal life, and they would not change him for another: they
believed him, that they knew him to be the Christ, the Son of the living God,
and there was no other Savior: but when they saw the Cross at hand, their
courage fell down, they forsook him all. Peter said, he would dye for him,
drew his sword, that he had almost slain one, but this boldness was but a
blast of words, he swore he knew him not. So experience is the greatest
warrant to know what our selves can bear. The Lord and our duty requires,
that we should approve our selves the witnesses of the Gospel, in patience, in
afflictions, in honor, in dishonor, in shame, in life, in death; but how
violently the flesh will fight against us, we cannot well declare till we
have made the trial.

And therefore in grief of body learn to say with patience, I have held my
peace, O Lord, because thou have done it: If thy mind be full of sorrow, say,
I will wait patiently upon the Lords leisure, he will hear my prayer.

CON. 79.
We should not be discouraged under the Cross, since Christ is the pattern
whose similitude we bear.

EXPLA.
Those whom God has fore-knowne, he has also predestined to be made like
unto the image of his Son. Death once reigned through sin, and he has
found a way to rise from it again, into greater glory. This victory because it
was too great for Saint or Angel to obtain, he had appointed it to be the
work of his only begotten Son: he took upon him our nature, to make, and
in his own person he filled it with the fullness of miseries, with all
sorrows of flesh, with all anguish of mind, with persecution, with death,
with sin, with hell, with condemnation: and from all these, by the mighty
power of his Godhead, he is risen again in our flesh, ascended up into glory,
and sits on the right hand of Majesty, being a mighty Savior unto every one
that shall follow him.

So that this is our glory in afflictions, we are fashioned by them into the
similitude of Christ, and we are made like unto him. So it pleased God when
he would bring many children unto glory, to consecrate the Prince of their
salvation through afflictions, Heb. 2.
and to make both him that sanctifies, and them that are sanctified all one,
that they that suffer with him, should also live with him.

So we when we feel many troubles to rest upon us, we may say, now we are like
unto Christ; especially when we feel the greatest trouble, the mind
oppressed, it makes us like unto him: and to say, Now we supply in our flesh
the remnant of the afflictions of Christ, in nothing in this world, as wealth,
honor, etc. can I behold the lively Image of Christ.

Affliction and trouble, a mind broken with the remembrance of sin, a
troubled spirit, horrors of death, and a conscience burdened with the wrath of
God: here light shines out of darkness, and hope out of despair.

When I think my self furthest off from the Lord, them am I nearest unto him:
and when I think my self fullest of confusion, then the Image of Christ is
most lively within me. The Lord may hide his face for a while for a moment in
his anger, a^ he did from Christ, but he will return unto me with everlasting
mercies, for the Image of his Son is clear within me.

2. Cor. 4.
We are afflicted one every side, but not so as that we are shut from hope;
we are in poverty, but not overcome with poverty: we are persecuted, but not
forsaken; we are cast down, but we perish not; we are troubled in all things,
fightings without, and terrors without, but God that comfort the abiects,
he will comfort us. Unto this he has predestined us, that we should be like
unto his Son in afflictions, and so be glorified with him in the day of honor.

CON. 80.
God sends us sundry chastisements, especially the anguish of heart, and
affliction of the soul, that we should be warned, how to be free from the
plague, when it comes.

EXPLA.
The judgments of God daily preached unto us, pierce deep into the hearts of
the true believers, and the word that they hear, it works mightily in them,
Heb. 4.
more sharp in their ears then a two edged sword, and it enters through them
even to the dividing asunder of the soul, and of the spirit, and of the
joints, and of the marrow, and examines all the thoughts and the intents of the
heart: so that it is impossible that any part of the^ should be hid, but they
are al open unto judgment, and hear the voice of the Lord. Then their sin
is revived in the midst of their bowels, their conscience has no rest, they
feel death working in their hearts, and hell is before them: they see sin on
their right hand, and Satan on the left; shame under their feet, and an angry
Judge above them; the world full of destruction without, and a worm gnawing the
heart within: the poor sinner knows not what to do, to hide himself it is
impossible, and to appear it is intolerable: then he breaks out into loud
crying, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Romans 7.
He gives no rest unto his eyes, nor sleep unto his eyelids, until he find
that, which is able to save him from this wrath. In his bed by night he
seeks him whom his soul loves: Can. 3.
in the streets and open places he enquireth after him, and after many days
in which he cannot find him, Christ shows himself at the last, a
perpetual deliverer, a victorious Lion of the Tribe of Judah, in whom he has
strong salvation: when he has mourned because of the plague that was before
him, Christ will approach near, and wipe away all the tears from his eyes. So
said he: When I heard the word of God, my belly trembled, Hab. 3.16
my lips shook at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled
in my self that I might find rest in the day of trouble.

So is it with us all, the plagues of God because they are pronounced against
iniquity makes the child of God to fear, that foreseeing the harm he might
pr^pare himself.

For though Christ hi^ himself at the first, the wounded spirit and troubled
spirit must needs find him out. We are full of grief, but we are chastised of
the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world: we dye with
Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
because we should live with him; we lament and weep, but because Christ might
wipe away all tears from our eyes: we are delivered unto death for Jesus
sake, but because the life of Jesus should be manifest in our slesh. We bear
about us the mortification of our Lord Jesus, but because also the life of
Jesus might be manifest in our bodies. We have anguish of spirit and vexation
of mind, for this cause, that when destruction shall come upon the careless
world, we might lift up our heads, and behold our redemption at hand: let us
then in patience poffesse our souls, for, for these causes we are now
afflicted, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of
need: and for this cause we tremble and are afraid, that after many prayers
we might be delivered from the things which we have feared.

CON. 81.
That our life is in the hand of God, that we should not be pleased with it, but
as it pleases him, ready to lay it down when it pleases him.

EXPLA.
This is the great commandment, to love God above all, and this is the
greatest obedience required of man, to be ready to dye at the will of God.

Against this commandment the nature of man strives, the delights of this
life rise against it, we are loath to make our beds in the dark: we would see
the Sun, our ears would hear worldly elements; our flesh indeed is grass,
yet grass has a flower, and our frail bodies have vanishing fantasies,
agreeable unto them, from which we cannot be pulled away. So Patriarchs and
Prophets were afraid: yea, Peter and Paul loved that life which they saw in
hope, but they did feel the death, which did fight in their members; they were
men as we are, yet obtained at last, to be dissolved and be with Christ. If
we be weaker then they, the graces of God shall be more exalted in us, and we
shall also say at the last, Let thy servant, O Lord, depart in peace. And
^^ough we fear for a little ^^ile, yet fear shall be cast out, and we shall
say with a free spirit, O death, where is thy sting? Our greatest enemy and
last, is trodden under our feet; what else can hurt us? The Lord of life has
crushed him in pieces under us.

It is a blessed day that brings us into this battle, a blessed sickness
that makes us endure this fight; and most blessed end, in which we get
victory. This does he who said, O death I will be thy death; for while we
live, we live in him, and no man can take our joy from us: and when we dye, we
dye in him and then death shall be no more death; for then the burden of
sin, the malice of the Devil, and terror of hell shall cease. All things
that fill with joy shall be full within us; as the fellowshippe of Saints and
Angels, the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting, etc. yea, and the God of glory. Our eyes shall be enlightened with
a pure faith, and we shall think our time weariness, if then our time were
prolonged, and be a soiourner in this body, in which we are strangers from the
presence of the Lord.

And the nearer our time approaches, the gladder we shall be of the end of
our journey, when our heart shall feel it: For when the earthly house of this
Tabernacle shall be destroyed, we have a building given of God, a house not made
with hands, but eternal in the heavens, where the God of al mercy, and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be before us for ever.

There we shall see the Patriarchs of whom we have heard so much; the
Prophets whom we have loved; the Apostles whose society we wish for; where our
time shall not be tedious, and glory have no change: O happy days that shall
never end! O blessed inheritance that shall never waste! There shall be no more
sorrow, nor crying, etc. For the first things are past, and what have we here
that can please us? Fear of our enemy, grief in poverty, pain in labor,
care in riches, vnstedfaftnesse in friendship, envy in Authority, emulation in
Honor, change in Nobility, fear in a Kingdom, what but vexation of spirit in
all things that is under the Sun? So true it is, Vanity of vanities, and all
is but vanity.

What then can disquiet us, if in the face of Christ Jesus, we see our rising
again from the grave? Who has given us inheritance in pleasant places, and
our portion in a happy lot: the dead man fears no evil, he is only bitter to
them that have peace in their riches: then we shall be bold to say, Surely the
Lord will deliver me from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence: Ps. 91. etc.
I shall not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the arrow that flies
by day, nor of the pestilence that walks in the darkness, nor of the plague
that destroys a^ noone: I have set the most high to be my refuge, and there
shall no eu^ll come near my tabernacle. For among the dead I have seen Christ,
and in the grave I have found the glory of God; and therefore do say, Let me dye
with the righteous, and let my latter end be as unto him: for Christ is my
life, and death is my advantage: why then should we not desire to see the
loving kindness of the Lord, which is better then life: Yea, Psalm. 42.1.
as the Heart longs after the water brooks, so our souls long to see the
Lord. Lord grant we may have even here our conversation in heaven, from thence
looking for a Savior, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who shall change this
corruptible body, to make it like to his glorious body, in that blessed time
which shall scatter away all affliction, and seal within us the happy
assurance of immortality, which shall be in the presence of the God of Grace.
Amen.

FINIS.

