A MANVMISSI ON TO A MANVDVCTION,

OR ANSWER TO A LETTER INFERRING Public communion in the parrish assemblies
upon private with godly persons there.

Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. Gal. 5. 1. Be
not partaker of other men's sins: keep thy self pure. 1. Tim. 5. 22. By John
Robinson.

Anno Domini. 1615.

To the godly reader.
ALbeit I be justly sorry for all oppositions against the truth, yet not so for
this occasion of further manifesting that my formerly professed persuasion,
that public communion with the parrish assemblies cannot be inferred upon
private with godly persons though members there: the constitution and estate of
the same assemblies rearing up a partitio^ wall, neither so transparent as may
be seen thorough, m^^h less so open as may be passed, no not in the best
charity, as this manuducent supposes: but on the contrary, so gross, and
entyre in evil, as that no engine of wit, or art can so batter it, as to make
a safe passage through it for a good conscience.

Needful it were in a matter of this nature, and weight, that the manuducent,
or hand leader should guide men by the plain, and open way of the s^riptures,
as is the way of the Lord in them laid down, open, and plain, as the King* high
way: and beaten by the feet of the Apostolical churches: and not by subtle
Quaerees, and doubtful Suppositions, and such under hand conveyances, as may
lead the unwary into a maze, and there loose him, but cannot clear the way for
an upright conscience. Of the way of Christ it was prophesied of old: Isa: 35.
8.
An high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness:
the unclean shall not pase over it, for he shall be with these: the wayfareing
man, though fools, shall not err therein. But so many and doubtful are the
wyndeings of this man's way, as that he who finds it, had need be no wayfareing
man, but a town-dweller, and well acquainted with all the secret turnings
thereof: nor a fool, as the Prophet speaks, but one having wit indeed more
then a good deal. But let them psalm 84. 6, 8.
in whose hearts are the highwayes of the Lord, that they may go from strength
to strength, till they appear unto God in Sion, let them, I say, not suffer
themselves to be led by the turnings of man's devise whatsoever, but by Pro: 8.
8. ^.
the words of the wisdom of God, which are all in righteousness; and in which
there is nothing wreathed, or perverse: but they are all plain to him that
will understand, and straight to him that would find knowledge.

Now for my persvasion about public, and private communion, it is the same
which I have manifested in my other book: and that, wherein (so far as by the
weak light, which God has given to shine in my heart, I can discern) I neither
wrong the good in that Church; (person, or thing), nor partake in the evil of
either. My trust is, that God who has given me my part (though in great
infirmity) in the Prophets comfort, Ps. 119. ^^.
with all my heart have I sought thee; will also fulfill his request upon me,
let me not wander from thy commandments,

IT was some addition of honor to 1 Samuel, 17. 51.
David's victory over the Philistime, that he slew him with his own sword: upon
which hope, mine opposite, as it seems, enterprizeth the beating down of the
partition wall of our separation from the parrish assemblies in their public
communion, government, and ministry, by the engine of mine own acknowledgment,
of private communion with the persons and pe^sonall graces os many christians,
though otherwise members there: upon which acknowledgment, he therefore
propounds certain Quaerees or Demands in number seven: the first whereof is.

Suppose one of those many so qualifyed as that in the judgment of those that
can dis^^rn he is competently fit to be employed in the public ministry, 1.
Quaere.
having his own (...) given to that work, and the hearts of many ^^a^ing his
help, suppose, I say, that such a man (not fyndeing means for the present of a
comfortable entrance into that calling) shalby leav in a public assembly,
where many like himself, and many unlike are gathered togather, without any
further calling for a ^yme perform the actions of prayer and pr^p^^sying,
without any addition, de^ract^ion, or alteration of that which he had lawfully
done in private, my demand is, whether it be not lawful to communicate with
him in his work?

I answer, Answer.
that these exercises of religion not performed by this person, by any public
calling, or authority, but only by his personal gift, and desire to do good,
are not public or Church actions, but private, and personal: nor communion
with him therein, public, but private communion: no not though performed by
him in a public place: which no more makes the action to be of public
nature, or a Church action, which in my whole book I make (as they are) the
same; then did the private chambers where the Apostles administered the word,
Act. 1. 13. etc. and10. 30* 47. and (...) 7.
and sacraments to the Churches, make these their administrations private, or
personal, Reason it self teaches that public actions are only such as are
performed by public authority. See Mr. Perkins in Treatise of Christian
equity, for this purpose.

The same answer serves for the 2d Qu: which supposes only a longer
continuance of time in the same course by co^nive^^y of them in authority; 2.
Quaere. An^w.
since mere continuance in the same course (especially as an ordinate means ^o
the same end) alters not the nature thereof. And so this, as the former
Quaere, is besides the purpose in hand. Only I ad, that no man can continue
thus preaching in a public place especially some years, but under the cloak
and appearance of a Bishops minister, though he be not such indeed.

Suppose yet the same man obteyneth a license from the L. Bishop of the
Diocese without any unlawful condition for to continue in that his course; 3
Qu:
I ask, whether that leav, or license given does pollute the actions: seeing a
man may ask leav of the great Turk to preach the Gospel within his dominions?

This Supposition conteyneth a contradiction: Ans.
for the very obteyning, and receiving of the Bishops license (which yet I
think no man does before he have received orders as they are called) is a real
acknowledgment that the Bishop has a lawful power to grant it, which is an
unlawful condition. John Claydon a martyr of Christ was otherwise minded then
this man, 14^5. Mr. Fox.
when he witnessed that the Bishops license to preach the word of God, was the
true character of the beast. i. e. Antichrist. Rev. 13. 15. 16. 17. and 14 9.
10.
Neither is there the like reason of procuring the Bishops liecence to preach
the gospel in his Province or Diocese, and of asking leav of the great Turk
to preach in his dominions. For 1. he minceth the matter too much, in making
this obteyning of the Bishops license to be nothing but the asking him leav, as
a man may ask leav of the great Turk, that is, desire him not to hinder him.
For to obteyn license of the Bishop is to obteyn public authority of the
public officer, and according to the public laws, of the church, to
exercise a public ministry. 2. The great Turk is a lawful civil
Magistrate in his Dominions, with whose civil authority it is lawful to
partake: but so is not the Bishop a lawful Ecclesiastical officer in his
Province or Diocese, with whose spiritual jurisdiction Gods servants may
communicate. And is this to lead men by the hand, to take for granted the mayn
question in controversy, to wit, that the Bishops jurisdiction in their
Provinces and Diocesses is lawful: which I have also by sundry arguments
proved unlawful, and antichristian. Act: 9.
Surely they who suffer themselves thus to be led must be as destitute of
spiritual sight, as was Saul of bodily, when men led him by the hand to
Damascut. Their authority then being proved (and so confessed by this mine
opposite else where) antichristian, Rev. 18. 4.
and so consequently one of the sins of Babylon; whether excercised by
themselves or by others; either Officials in the Co^sistories, or ministers in
the Parochial churches, may not by Gods people be partaken with, no not in
actions though otherwise lawful, under the peyn of Babylons plagues.

And this answer also serves to the 4th demand, 4 Qu: Ans.
or Supposition of this persons taking besides his license, the form of
admission called orders, of the Diocesan. And so, that which I bring page: 15.
Arg: 2. of my book, is here misapplyed. I there speak of lawful actions
performed merely by the personal grace of faith, and the Spirit in a godly
man, though of infirmity remaining in an estate, and standing otherwise
culpable: but here of actions, though in themselves lawful, yet performed
immediately by virtue, or vice rather of that very unlawful state, and
standing.

Suppose after this that being desired, 5 Qu:
and so chosen by some assembly wherein there are many fearing God apparently,
he takes a Pastoral charge of them, having the Bishops, and Patrons
admission, but chiefly, and professedly grounding his calling upon the peoples
choice: and that he do nothing but the same he did before, besides the
administration of the Sacraments to such as are in charity, and discretion to
be esteemed worthy, what hinders from communion here?

Indeed if men may take liberty in disputeing first to suppose what themselves
have a mind unto, Ans:
and after to suppose, that others are also of the same mind with them, and
yet have little reason either for the one or other, they may then easily
conclude their purposes. But.1. I deny that an assembly gathered, and
consisting of many fearing God, and many (which must also be supplied) without
the fear of God, is a lawful Church-assembly, having a right in communion, or
common right, to call, and enjoy a pastor, and his pastoral administrations.
2. I deny that any does, or can truly take a pastoral charge in the parrish
assemblyes. It belongs to the pastors charge not only to teach, and minister
the sacraments, but also (and that as a mayn part, or duty thereof) to
govern, and rule the flock: which no parochial minister does, o^ can take upon
him. Act. 20. 17. 20 1 These: 5. 1^. 1 Timothy: 5. 17.


3. The Church of England; does acknowledge no such calling as is chiefly
grounded upon the peoples choice: but only that which is grounded upon the
Bishops ordination at the first, and to the ministry at large: and
determinately, either upon the Bishops license, or upon the patrons
presentation, Bishops institution, and Archdeacons induction, confirmed by the
public laws of the same Church, both ecclesiastical, and civil. According
to which public laws, and orders (especially submission unto them being
publicly professed and given, as is by the minister here deciphered) we are
to judge of the public ministry of the Church, and not according to the
private intendiments, and underhand professions of particular persons. And let
God, and all reasonable men judge between me and mine opposite, whether a man
goeing to the public governers of a Church, and desyreing of them a public
office, or public orders, and so receaving them according to the public
laws of the same Church, and therewith authority to preach the word, and so
preaching publicly in the same Church, whether I say such a man be not to be
esteemed as called to that work by these governers; and so by consequence,
whither al men pertakeing with him in that work of preaching for which he was
so sent, do nor partake therein withal what in them lies in the authority of
the sender. And for such a man (except he have publicly renounced his former
calling) to pretend in secret unto his friends whom he dare trust, and who, he
thinks, will again trust, and believe him, either that he preaches not by that
calling, or by an other principally, is but to put on a cloak of shame, and to
walk in craftines, ^ Cor. 4. 2.
more like in truth to a disguized familist, then a minister of Jesus Christ.
And if any ministry grounded, as this man supposes, be to be found in any of
the assemblyes, I deny the ^ame to be the ministry of the Church of England,
about which our question is. And howsoever men do build much upon the peoples
acceptance of, and submission unto their ministry, yet is this a very sandy
foundation whereupon to build such a weight. If they be not the lawful
ministers of those Churches before, it is their syn to accept of them, Rom: 15.
31 Heb: 13 17
and submit unto them, as such. The peoples acceptance, and submission are not
causes, but consequences of the ministers calling, and duetyes, which they ow
unto them all their life long. 4. The supposition is but an imagination, that
any parochial minister does administer the sacraments only to such as are, in
charity, and discretion, to be esteemed worthy. He is by his parochial cure
(and show me the man whose practice is not answerable) to administer the
sacrament of Baptism to all the infants born in the parrish, though neither
parent can, no not in the most enlarged, if ^ot overstretched charity, be
judged to be of the faith, and so in the covenant of Abraham; according to
which covenant Baptism is to be administered. Lastly, I would know of this man
(and so of others who would bring the presbiteriall government upon the parrish
assemblyes without a separation) what should be done with such men of years in
the parrish, as are to be esteemed incapable of the L: Supper. It should seem,
as the common opinion is, that such should be suspended, and so consequently
(remaining obstinate and incorrigible) excommunicated. But by what law of God,
or reason of man, do the Censures of the Church apperteyn unto such, as had
never right to be of the Church, nor were within Gods Gen: 17.
covenant made only with their faithful, and their seed? And since the Church
is only to 1 Cor: 5. 12.
judge them which are within, and the same fallen from their former holiness, at
least, external; how should not excommunication be greatly profaned upon
such, as never came under that condition of eternal holiness?

Suppose at length that he be deprived by that prelate, ^ Qu:
which formerly admitted him, for not conforming to humayne corrupti^ns, and
his people for fear of (...) forsake him, if he I say now rejected by the
prelate, and witnessing against his corruptions, shall without seeking any new
license find place to preach the gospel in occasionally else where, why should
any refuse to hear him?

First this his deprivation (especially for well doing or not doing evil) by
the prelates spiritual jurisdiction, Ans:
shows his spiritual bondage unto the Anticristian H^erarchy: as does also
his forsakeing his flock when ^he wolf thus comes, Ioh: 10.
declare (by the testimony of Christ himself) of what Spirit he is. And very
fadeing is the color, which here he sets upon the ministers cess^ation from
their ministry: which is the peoples forsakeing them for fear of da^nger:
whereas the contrary is most true, and that the ministers did universally, for
fear of danger, forsake the people: and that in sundry places, where the
people offered to suffer persequution with them at the magistrates hands. But
mine answer is, that this man remaining by the prelates ordination a minister
of the Church of Engl: and as he was before his institution, or license, and so
preaching by that calling, communion cannot be had with him therein, without
submission unto and upholding of the Prelates Antichristian authority, which in
that work he exercises.

Suppose lastly that the some man does besides the good actions which God has
commanded, admit of some thing at man's command, which is not lawful, 7 Qu:
yet houlding the faith, and building faithfully in the mayn things of the
Gospel, and it may be repenting also of what he has done at his admission: is
no communion lawful with him in those very things, which if they were done by
another after the same manner were heavenly duties? May not his fault be an
humayn infirmity, in an external ordinance? May not some faults of his
entrance be circumstantiall personal actions by which his calling is not
abolished.

This Quaere is in effect comprehended in the former, Ans:
in whose answers it has also been answered. But for more full satisfaction I
further ad; that I may not partake in the sins, though of hum^yn infirmity, 1 Timothy: 5
and of persons otherwise go^ly: whether those sin^s be in the work done, or in
the unlawful calling of the doer: of which we here speak, and not of any
personal, or circumstantiall action, as is in vayn insinuated. And he that
breaks down the partition wall which an unlawful especially an antichristian
calling sets up in the Ch:, Numb: 16.
not making conscience of partaking therewith in duetyes how heavenly soever in
themselves, makes way for all Babylonish confusion: neither is Israel now to be
blamed for communicateing with Corah in the heavenly duty of burning ince^se
to the Lord, to whom only a lawful outward calling was wanting: he so
ministering by an Anti-mosaicall, as do the men of whom we speak, by an
Antichristian calling. And for the ministers repenting of what he has done at
his admission, it may well be called (as truly being) a supposition, but of an
impossibility, and contradiction. He cannot repent of his sin, which is his
re^^eaving authority from the Bishop to preach, but he must forsake, and
renounce the same authority, as he received it, which if (...) indeed and
truth, he cease to be a minister of the Church of England.

And thus it appears, how this Author is so far from leading a good
conscience by the hand a^ ^e promises, as that he does not so much as point
out with the finger any passible way into public communion with the parrish
assemblyes as they stand: but rayther having framed a plot of ministry, and
other devise in his study, sends men by doubtful suppositions to seek they
know not what, nor where. It remaynes we now come to his removal of the bars
which I in my book set in the way: the first whereof is, that, such a
parrishional minister is a branch of the prelacy / as receaving power from it /
by which it does administer / and therefore all communion with it to be avoided
by Gods people.

His answer is, that in proper, and accurate speech the minister, whom he
formerly described, is no branch of the prelacy, nor does receave his power of
ministering from any prelate.

The question is not whether the minister which he describes, or rather
Supposes, be a branch of the prelacy, and so minister or no: but whether the
ministry of the parrish assemblyes, being parts of the Diocesses, and
Provinces, be such or no.

He adds, that the power of right he (that is his supposed minister) had
before ever he had to do with any prelate, which power is from God by the
Church: but a power of external legal abillity to do that, which from God by
the people he had formerly right to do, this he may be said to receav from the
prelate.

He loses himself in the labyrinth of his own devise: for even his supposed
minister had to do with the prelate, both for license to preach and orders of
ministry before this supposed right conveyed to him by the people, as appears
in his Quae: 3. 4. and 5 compared together. 2. None of the parrish assemblyes
have in their hands, as Churches, power of right to choose their ministers, nor
are the Lords free people in that case: but do, on the contrary, stand in
subjection and bondage spiritual to the prelate, and patron, by whose
appointment they must receave them, will they, nil they. Indeed some of them do
by favor, or money get ius patronatus into their hands, and so do agree
amongst themselves what person they will present unto the Bishop for their
Clark: but this they do not as a Church, neither will, or may the Bishop so
receave him from them, or appoint him over them, but as a patron, (which right
any one profane person may have and enjoy as well as they): nor, that such a
person may be ordained a minister in, and of that Church, Act. 6, and 14
accordeing to the order Apostolical: but that being before, or first, a
minister at large of the Bishops making, and ordeyning, he may by the same
episcopal authority, in way of license, or institution conveyed, be determined
to that particular parrish, according to the Popish order. So that if there
were any thing in the distinction between the power of right, and of freedom,
he has the power of right, or authority by the Bishop at the first, in his
ordination: and the legal ability or freedom afterward by the patron, and
prelate presenting, and appointing him to his place: and so the parrish, as a
Church only receaves him so appointed by others. But the distinction is more
subtle then sound: and i^ not a distinction without a difference, yet a
division of things inseparable in this kind. No man has external spiritual
power of right, to minister the holy things of God, but by a lawful calling:
and no man having a lawful calling wants external spiritual power of ability
or freedom to minister them: and of this power we speak, as being that which
the Bishops as the spiritual governers of their Prove: and Dioc: do confer. I
know a man may be restreyned by viol^nce, or other bodily impediment from the
use of this spiritual freedom, but then he is restreyned from the use of his
power of right also. Whosoever has the one has the other by the same act, and
whosoever has a lawful calling, has both. Of his great mistakeing (upon
which notwithstanding he builds the weight of his answer, both in this, and the
former part of the book) which is that the Bishops Provincial, and Diocesan
authority and administrations are civil, and derived from the king, I shall
speak hereafter.

He ads that it cannot stand with my plea, that such a man preaching
diligently, and professing that to be his mayn office should in this work be a
branch of the prelacy, and d^^t by his power received by him. For. 1. this is
not any part of the prelates power (as he is a prelate) to preach the word.
Which he also would prove by an affirmation in my book, which is (though he
weaken the evidence of the truth thereof in relateing it) that the prelates
office / and order is founded upon their usurpation of the rights / and
libertyes wherewith Christ the Lord in his word has endowed his Church (the
Elders for their government / and the people for their liberty) for the calling
of officers / and censureing of offenders. Power therefore (says he) of
preaching can be no part of it.

First that which he admits in mine affirmation has enough in it to overthrow
his consequence. For if it belong to the prelates to call ministers, and that
in calling them, they give them power and Book of ordering of Priests.
authority (though no absolute charge) to preach according to the order of that
Church; then follows it undeniably, that those ministers thus preaching do
therein exercise the prela^es power: and that it may be said of the ministers,
and Bishops, Mat. 10, 40,
as Christ said of his disciples and himself, that whosoever receaves them
which are sent, receaves them which send them. In submitting unto, or
withdrawing from him that is sent by the king, in a work of his office, men do
submit unto, or withdraw from the king himself, and his authority; so is it in
all estates, and subordinations, whether Ecclesiastical, or civil; as every
one that dimms it not in himself, may see by the light of nature.

And if unto this be added, that, as the whole nation is divided into two
provinces under the two Archbishops / and the Provinces into ^^ndry ^^o^eses
under the Bishops / and they into their several parrishes under the ministers
thereof / so the Archbishops / and Bishops do share out unto the parrish
preistes in their ordination / and other assignementes / a parts of their
charge, to wit / so much as concerns the ordinary service of the parrish: as
unto their chancelours, commissaryes, and Arch-deccors on other parts for
inferior government reserveirg to themselves the Lordship ever both for the
best advantage of their own honor, and profit, it will then evidently appear,
(as that the part is a branch of the whole), that the parochial ministry is a
branch of the di^^es^n and provincial p^^lacy. By which ministry we are not
to understand (as does mine opposite) the work of preaching, or any other work
whatsoever, but the office, and power exequuted, and used in these works. For
if we will exactly weigh things in a just balance, we must consider of these
three distinct points in the ministry. 1. The office. 2. The power. 3. The
works. The office is the very state, and function conferred upon a man by his
calling: from which office arises immediately power, and charge to minister,
and to perform the works of that office: in the performance of which works
the office is exequuted, and power used. And if preaching diligently and
faythful^y were the pastors mayn office, then should Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, have the same mayn office with pastors, for they all do that work
of diligent preaching, 1 Cor: 16. 10.
one as we ^as an other: besides that this work is lawfully performed by him
that has no office at all, Quae: 1, and 2.
and therefore cannot be the Pastors office mayn, or mean.

2ly, It follows not because the office of the prelates is founded upon
their usurpation of the Churches rights in calling of officers, and consureing
of ^fferders^, that therefore power of preaching is no part of their office.
Men may by their office have power to do more then the very things upon which
their office is founded: otherwise the parochial ministry should be very
slightily founded, considering how many trifles, and superstitions the
ministers have not only power but charge also to perform. By this man's
reasoning their office should be founded upon the wearing of a surplice,
making a cross, etc. for these they have power to do, yea not power to leav
undone, by their office.

There are among men many lawful offices or orders, and those lawfully
founded, and yet not so perfitly but that some evil actions are (through humayn
fraylty) done in and by them: so on the contrary is the office of prelacy
unlawful, and unlawfully founded, and yet not so absolutely, but that the good
work of preaching may be and is performed in, and by it. Which preaching being
also an inferior work of that office, and order (which is principally set up
for government): and that wherewith the Bishops do little trouble the Churches,
it man well be excluded from the foundation of their office, though a work
thereof: (as there are also many doctrines of Christian religion, Heb. 6. ^.
besides those which are properly called the foundations thereof) and though a
work good in it self, yet in the extent of their power to preach when and where
they list in their provinces, and diocesses, exorbitant, and antichristian; and
so a part of their usurpation, whether of the foundation, or building, it
matters not: a part of which power they also share out unto the ministers in
their several parrishes. An other argument he bring upon an affirmatio^ in my
book, (p. 29) that preaching is no natural, or necessary part of the
parochial ministers office.

This mine assertion in the first place he reprocheth as an intemperate speech
proceeding from an impotent sickness of mind, which yet (says he) may be used
against my self.

If I were sick of any such impotency of mind, as he in his potency of mind
pronounces, I should surely find him a physician of no value: which brings no
other medicine then a reproach to cure me withal. Only he insinuates a reason
against that I say, which is, that, preaching the word is expressly mentioned in
the ministers ordination. And is it not also mentioned in the ordination of a
Mas-preist, of whose office notwithstanding it is no necessary or natural
part? yea is it not evident that one, and the same ordination serves both for
a Mas-preist, and parochial minister, being given, by a popish Bishop? and so
by consequence, that there is one, and the same office of both, though
exercised in some different works? So also is ministering the disciplyne of
Christ, as the Lord has commanded, expressly mentioned in his ordination: and
is it therefore a necessary work of the Parochial minister? or is he any more
then the Bishops man's man in publishing his court censure? The Bishop also
expressly bids his ordained one, Receav the H: Ghost. Does he therefore so
receav it? Or know we not that it is Antichrists guise, and that not a little
advantageable to the mystery of his iniquity, to keep the forms of good words
without the substance of things, and so under the name of Christ to subvert
Christ's truth, and ordinances? I would to God the notorious ignorance, and
utter inability to preach the gospel in the greatest part, by far, of the
parochial ministers, to the destruction of so many 1000 souls for which
Christ dyed, did not cry out unto God, and men against both that Church,
Prelacy, and ministry, that preaching is no necessary part, or work of their
office. There is but one order, or office of preisthood in that church: and how
can that be a natural, or necessary part of that office, which the most of
those officers want, this especially being by the constant practice of the
puqlique governers, and according to the constitution, and state of that
Church, ministry, and government; the public laws thereof also both
ecclesiastical, and civil approveing it; as otherwise, so by appoynting
homilyes to be read by such as are unable to preach.

Such a one the patron may present for his Cl^rk to any parishonall charge, and
may also compel the Bishop, will he, ^ill he, to institute him by process of
law: Quare impedit.
whom the people also are bound to receav, as their minister, and with him to
communicate under penaltyes civil, and spiritual. Let Baal then plead for
himself: even the wearing of a surplice, and signeing a babes forehead with the
cross are more natural, and necessary to the parochial ministry, considered
both in the common practice, and public laws, then is preaching of the
gospel. For inability to preach (though most ordinary) no minister is, or can
be deposed: but for not conforming, how many in a few years? Mine affirmation
then (how licenciously soever mine opposite censureth both it, and me) is so
appare^^tly true, as it cannot be denied without loss of credit both to the
person, and cause of the denyer, in the eyes of all reasonable men.

Upon which affirmation of mine his inference notwithstanding is of no force,
viz. that such ministers as give themselves to preaching do not in that
buesines exercise any power received from the prelate as a branch of him,
because that power must then have been a natural part of his office.

It follows not. For as some parts, or works of the parochial ministers
office are natural, and necessary, as to read divine service etc. so are other
works or parts thereof but casual, and arbytrary, as is this of preaching,
as the person can, or will. It is not by any absolute necessity required of
every minister to preach, but yet he that does preach, does it by authority of
the prelate, in his parrish, as in a part of the prelates province, or
Diocese. And where he speaks of the ministers not excercis^ing the power
received from the prelate in that buesines of preaching, it is, as a poor
shift, so a vayn insinuation, that though in other buesinesses he did exercise
the prelates power, yet not in that of preaching. Whereas he both preaches, and
reads divine service and does whatsoever he does publicly, by one and the
same ecclesiastic, power, and office. He is not one officer in the desk, and
another in the pulpit, though his works be diverse; ^ut the Bps minister in both.

He ads (as opposite to an affirmation of mine, page: 30.) that though the
prelacy were pluck^d up, yet the parochial ministry might stand still, as
reason (he says, but shows none) will teach, and experience shows in
Denmark, Saxony, H^ssia, and other parts of Germany.

But wherefore does he lead me to Churches so far off, whose estate I neither
can easily know, nor he happily justify? Why does he not rayther insist in the
better both known, and reformed churches in the low countries? I perceav if I
follow him in his Manuductio^ he will lead me compass enough.

Well, I deny, and marvel he would affirm, that the same parochial office,
and power of ministry does remayn in those Churches, which was in use before
the extirpation of the prelacy there. The office it self was the order of
Mas-preisthood, and the power derived from the Pope, and popeish prelacy. That
the works of preaching, and prayer, performed by many of the parochial
ministers, and also by some of the Masse-preists) may remayn, though the
prelacy be taken away, (and with it the parochial preisthood also) is without
doubt; as they do in the reformed Churches, and with us, where there is neither
prelate, not parochial minister: but our question is not about some particular
works, as mine opposite makes it, but (as has been often observed) about the
very function it self, and the power by which it is given, and used.

And for the point: since all the ministers of that Church are made, and
appointed by the Bishops authority, take away the same Bishops authority, and
how can the ministers remayn the same ministers? Take away the correlative, and
the relation cease. 2. Take away the prelacy, and how possibly can such a
ministry continue (as is the parochial) whereof the one of the two parts
(though the inferior) which stands in fee^ing the flock by ruling, shall be
usurped, and possessed by the prelates and their ordinaryes. 3. Take away the
Provin: and Dioc: Prelates, and with them the prove: and dioc: churches: and
then the parochial churches as parts of them must fall with them their whole:
and with the churches the ministers, as parts of them. 4 It is not possible
that the prelacy being abolished, such an office of ministry (of which office
the reader must still remember our question to be) should survive, as whereof
men utterly unapt to teach should be capable, as it is with the parochial
ministry. Can such stuff pass thorough any but Bishops fingers? or will the
Lord ever wipe away so much of their shame as to suffer any other hands but of
prelates, and their chaplayns to be laid upon the heads of such Idoll-preists?
Or is it possible that in any other then the Episcopal government the
ministry of ^o many zealous, and learned teachers should hang upon the
cop-web of conformity to Cross, Surplice and such vanities, and be in danger
every day for refusal thereof to be broken asunder? Can this web be woven by
others then Bishops, or of other stuff then comes out of their bowels? Lastly
is it possible that in such light of the truth, as now shines in Engl: all the
profane parrish without difference should be compelled to be of the Church, and
the minister of them to take charge, as his flock (as the parochial ministers
do): but as the same is a part of the Bishops flock, and well serving for to
supporte his lawless Lordship? Now no man weighing these things with an equal
hand will judge them light, and sleighty matters, but weighty, and as he
speaks, substantial, in *and about the ministry. Which therefore cannot
stand, as now it does in the several parrishes, when God in mercy to that
nation, shall root out that plant of the prelacy, which his hand never planted.

Where after to mine objection, and charge, that all the parochial ministers
are subject unto the jurisdiction of the prelates spiritually, in their
citations, suspentions, and exco^munications, he for answer alleges, that
prevate Christians are subject to the same jurisdiction personally, and for
personal and private opinions, and behaviors also, it is that which I say,
and upon which I infer a separation from the formal state, and government of
that Church every manner of way, since with the sins of Babylon (whereof I
have proved in my former book the Hierarchicall government one) no man may
partake. But if herevppon he would conclude the unlawfulness of private or
personal communion with the godly, as well as of public, or Church
communion, I must deny his consequence; and because I would not repeat the same
things again, do desire the Reader to take knowledge of the double difference
about this matter showed in my former book.

But he gives a 2d* answer, Page: 10. Ans: to the 3 object:
upon which also the lawfulnes of the Bishops authority is much pleaded,
throughout the whole book. Which by the way, I desire the Reader to observe, and
withal how such as go on in opposeing our separation, are driven in the end,
to justify the Bishops authority, though diversely. His answer, and defense is.

The greatest part of their jurisdiction being external and coactive or
forcing, is from the king derived unto those that do exercise the same: and
therefore must of necessity be a civil power, such as the king might as well
perform by other civil officers, as it is indeed exercised in the
high commission, and some other courts also, ^he laws of the land do so esteem
it, as Sir Edward Cook now L: chief justice of Engl: has largely showed in the
first book of his reports.

Diverse pleas for the prelates have been made by men diversely minded touching
them: but that their jurisdiction in their provinces and Diocesses should be
civil, and coactive (for external we grant it to be, which is ill joined as
the same with civil, and coactive, since even 1 Cor: 10.
spiritual ordinances are external also) this I say is a plea, which to my
remembrance I never heard of before. The Author in the front of his book
proclaymes the unreasonableness of our separation: but I hope the Lord will give
me grace, and modesty, never to defend, or continue in that state, and
standing, for which I shall be driven, to make so unreasonable a defense: which
is indeed an argument of an ill cause, and of no good consideration, that I say
no more, in the writer.

For the better then both clearing of this point here and els^where in the
book, and help of others otherwise: it must be considered that the Bishops have
in their hands a double authority: the one civil as magistrates: the other
spiritual, as Church Officers: and so do perform works of diverse kinds
according to these their diverse callings. By the former they sit with other
Barrons in the parliament-howle for the enacting of laws, and statutes, under
bodily punishments: some of them also being of the kings p^ivy council, and
some of his high commission, having therein joint authority with other Lords,
and Magistrates civil. They are generally, in the Countyes and Shyres where
they live, Iusticers of peace, in the same Commission with other honorable,
and worshipful personages and thus they sit upon the bench at Assizes, and
Sessions: and have authority civil jointly with the other Iusticers, and so
severally as they, at other times, to apprehend, imprison, fine, and punish
bodily, malefactors, according to the common laws of the land, and their
office of Iusticeship: and all these their administratio^s they perform
expressly in the kings name. In which also they are to be honored, and obeyed,
as are other civil magistrates whatsoever, by all the kings subjects, and
wherein, for my self, I profess communion with and submission unto their
authority, and power.

But besides this their civil authority they have also ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as they are the Arch-Byshops of Provinces, and Bishops of
Dioceses. And thus they with the rest of their triumphant Church, and Clergy,
sit in the convocation house, frameing Canons, and constitutions
ecclesiastical, under spiritual penaltyes. Thus they ordeyn ministers, and
institute them to their several charges; and give them licenses to preach
within their provinces, and Diocesses. Thus they keep their spiritual courts
by themselves, and their subordinates, Chauncelours, Commissaryes,
Archdeacons, and other their officials: citeing men thither by their
Apparitours; as on the contrary in their civil administrations (though in
matters ecclesiastical) they use Pursivants, and Constables. There, and thus
they suspend, depose, and degrade ministers, as at the first they ordained, and
appointed them: as they also excommunicate, and absolv both ministers, and
people as they see cause: proceeding in all these, not in the name of the king,
as in the former, but expressly in the name of God: in and unto which their
usurpation of the name or power of God, and Christ, no communion may be had, or
submission yealded.

And where he affirms that the greatest part of their Jurisdiction (to wit
in their Provinces, and Diocesses) is derived from the king, which he might as
well perform by other civil officers, and that the laws of the land do so
esteem it, alleging to that end S. Edw: Cook L; chief Justice, there is a
great mistakeing in the matter. No only the greatest part of, but in effect,
their whole Jurisdiction in their provinces, and diocesses, stands, in their
ordeyning of ministers and excommunicateing of offenders with their
apurtenances, and in their contraryes, of the same nature? Now to make the
power of excommunication and of ordination of ministers civil, or these such
works as may be performed by civil magistrates, the king, or others, is to
confound heaven, and earth; and to make Christ's kingdom (whereof these works,
John. 16. 39.
in their nature, are administrations) to be of this world. This power of the
prelates is in it self, and nature, spiritual: and in the extent of it over an
whole Province and Diocese, and all the Congregations therein (to the
abolishing of the power both of officers and people) papal, and antichristian,
Of which the kings civil authority is no parent, but only a nurse^ otherwise
the king should be not the d^fender only, but the author of the Churches
says in her government, and ministry. Papists have made of Popes kings, by
deriveing from them civil governments: and will protestants make of kings,
Popes, by deriving spiritual authority from them? And because Popeish kings
have given their power to the beast, shall Christian kings therefore take the
beasts power unto them: which they should surely do in making themselves the
spring-heades from whence flows the power of making ministers, and
excommunicateing offenders which the Prelates use in their Provinces, and
Diocesses?

And albeit for want of the books I cannot exactly set down the judgment of
the laws in this case, yet may I safely affirm, that they no where derive from
the kings civil authority, the power of these spiritual administrations, but
do only make the king the establisher, and vphoulder civily of this power. The
same ecclesiastical jurisdiction which had been in use in popery, and a great
part of the popish Hierarchy, was confirmed Eliz: pri: and so continues at
this day: and in vayn men apply their industry and ar^ in the washing of this
blackmore. Neither yet does it follow, though the laws of the land did esteem
this Jurisdiction civil that therefore it were such indeed. They may, and do
misesteem many things especially of this kind. They esteem the Cross,
Surplice, etc. indifferent, yea comely, and ^dificative ceremonies: and are
they therefore such, or so esteemed by this author? So for those corrupt
usurpations, and abuses, which he affirms to be mingled with the Bishops (so
seeming unto him) civil power, do not the laws of the land esteem even them
also lawful, and laudable ordinances, and orders? The Arguments therefore from
the laws esteem to the nature of the thing is of no force.

Now that the prelates Jurisdiction in their Prove: and Dioc: is not civil, but
ecclesiastical, and a spiritual external power, appears plainly by these
Reasons.

First where he makes it civil, because it is coactive, or bodily enforceing,
I conclude on the contrary, that because it is not so coactive, therefore it is
not civil. The furthest the Bishops can go, as Bishops, is to excommunicate a
man, or to pronounce him an heretic: which done they may deliver him to the
secular power, or procure a civil coactive De exco^municato capi^n^o.
process against him from the L: Chauncelour, in certain cases.

2dly. Where he affirms that the king might perform the works of their
jurisdiction by other civil officers, there neither can be stronger, nor need
be other Arguments to prove the contrary, then the very consideration of the
nature of those their works: which are for substance, the making of
ministers, and excommunicateing of offenders with their contraryes, and
app^rtenances: which to call civil works, what is it but to make a civil
religion?

3dly, Let their consecration to their byshopricks be looked into, Consecration
of Bishops.
and feeding of the flock and doing the work, whereunto the H: Ghost has
called them: such scriptures also being thereunto applied, as conteyn in them
only the callings, offices, and works of the ministers of the Church.

4ly. Their civil authority, whether that which is peculiar to some of

Lastly whereas all civil proceedings are made in the name of the king; In the
name of God, though too often verifying the old saying, In nomine Dei incipit
omne malum.

And by these reasons that which I did not suspect that any would have denied,
is confirmed, to wit, that the Prelates power in their Provinces, and
Diocesses, is not civil, but a kind of external spiritual power which I
have also in my former book proved Antichristian, as vsurpeing upon Christ's
royal prerogatives, subverting the order of true Christian government, and su
allowing up, as with full mouth, both the peoples liberty, and Elders
government, wherewtih Christ the Lord has invested the true Church.

He proceeds. But if this be so, then (says Mr Rob:) those ministers are
under no spiritual government: and so be lawless persons, and inordinate
walkers etc.

His answers are. 1. that they so govern themselves, as that no honest man has
cause to abhor from their communion. 2 that they are subject to civil
government, even in spiritual actions: and in the larger acception of the word
to external regiment merely spiritual. 3. that they are no more lawles
persons, then I my self was when I had no elder joined with me, or am now with
mine one Elder, since I exclude the people from all government.

In these answers he neither deals with me, nor the cause of the Lord, as is
meet. For first, I do not in my book inter this exception upon the former
ground, as he sets it down for his advantage, as will appear in the examination
of the 3. answer. 2. I do not alledg it to prove communion unlawful with them,
as he insinuates, but to reprove, and that upon their own plea, their
Church State, and standing, as such, as wherein they neither do nor can enjoy
the spiritual external government of Christ in his Church: and so neither
have that conscience, which is meet of the commandments of Christ by his
Apostles, 1 Timothy 5. 17
to give due honor to them who rule well: and to submit themselves to those
who are over them in the Lord: Heb* 13* 17.
nor of their own frayltyes, and in what need they stand of the Lords
ordinances, and of this in special, for their guidance, and conservation in
his ways. And though he pass by this reproof, not mine, but the H: Ghostes,
turning it off another way, yet let the godly Reader with good conscience
remember that the disciples of Christ are to observe whatsoever he has
commanded his Apostles: and withal that it was the Prophets comfort, that he
should not be confounded, when he had respect to all Gods cammaundeme^ts: Mat.
^8. 20.
3. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 6. 1. 2.
In his 1. and. 2. answer he speaks not at all to the purpose in hand: our
question not being about the personal government, Psalm: 119. 8.
which a man has over himself; nor about civil government, though in
spiritual actions, nor about government at all, in the larger acceptance of
the word: ut only as it is taken for the outward guidance and ordering of the
Church in her public affayrs, by the Bishops, or Elders. And thus, and in
this regard all in the parrish assemblyes (if not under the Prelates
spiritual jurisdiction, as many would make themselves, and others beleev) are
lawless persons, and inordinate walkers: neither is this mine assertion either
lavish, or lawless, but a just and necessary testimony against their
transgression: of which I wish them from the Lord more conscience, and for that
purpose, better counsayl, then in this manuduction they find. Lastly, to make
way to a touch of wit, unto which he cannot get by my words, and meaning
truly related, he takes liberty to change the one and other, for his
advantage. I do p: 30 propound sundry defenses made by such both ministers, and
people, as dislike the prela^y: and the first, of the people, to wit, that they
are not subject to the prelates government. And that I intend this of the
people, is evident by my reply in the same place: the words whereof I have
formerly noted down in the 2d consideration of his answer. This by me spoken,
and intended of the people, he misapplyeth to the ministers, putting, as my
words, These ministers are under no spiritual government: and so would (in
wantonness of wit) fasten the same reproof upon my self as having been
formerly with none, and now with one Elder, without government also, and so an
inordinate walker.

The truth then is, that the people professing themselves (though most
untruly) to be from under the Prelates Spiritual government, do therein
profess themselves to be from under all christian church government: and that,
both ministers, and people professing themselves to be from under the prelates
spiritual power, do therein profess themselves to be from under all power of
Christ for the censures; and in those respects, and considerations (of which
only I speak though he streach my words further then he should either in
charity or equity) to be lawless persons and inordinate walkers, 1. Cor. 5. ^*
^.
and without the yoke of Christ, and one special means of their salvation.

And thus much for the confirmation of my testimony against communion with the
parochial assemblyes, in the particulars (though far from all in my former
book, as mine opposite pretends) wherein he has endeavored to weaken it:
where I also desire the Reader well to note, that whatsoever either he
pretends, or others conceav of public communion following upon private,
yet the issue unto which things come between him and me is in these two
questions. 1. whether the Bishops jurisdiction in their provinces, 1 Cor. 5. 4.
^*
and diocesses be lawful, or no? 2. whether the parochial ministers being
ordained, instituted, and licensed by the Bishops, do preach by their
authority, or no?

The other two stumbling blocks (as he calls them) viz. that all are urged to
communion by poenall laws; and that a set form of prayer i^ appointed, he
neither purposes, nor thinks it needful to deal about, seeing 1. there are
many excercises of religion where none are present by constraynt, nor the
service book so much as appears: for which he instanceth in Mr. Parkins his
exercise.

And wherefore does he still after his (but an evil) custom change the state
of the question? which is not about men's being preson^ by constreynt at the
excercises of religion, but about Churches gathered by constreynt of all the
profane parrishioners with the other handful; as was that parrish church
whereof Mr Perkins was a member, and where he taught: and that by authority
from and under the prelates.

My being once at his successors sermon since I professed separation, is
neither pertinently, nor truly objected by him. I was there as in many other
places since I made question of it, and disputed for it, but had not otherwise
professed it. And upon this occasion I think good to note down the work of
Gods providence toward me in this matter. Comeing to Cambridge (as to other
places where I hoped most to find satisfaction to my troubled heart) I went
the fore-noon to Mr Cha* his exercise: who upon the relation which Mary made
to the disciples of the resurrection of Christ, delivered, in effect, this
doctrine; that the things which concerned the wh^le church were to be declared
publicly to the whole Church, Math. 28.
and not to some part only: b^inging for instance, Mark. 16.
and proof the words of Christ, Mat: 1817. Tell it to the Church: confirming
therein one mayn ground of our difference from the Ch: of Engl: which is that
Christ has given his power for excommunication to the whole church gathered
together in his name as 1 Cor: 5: the officers as the governers, and the people
as the governed in the use thereof; unto which Church his servants are
commanded to bring their necessary complaynts. And I would desire mine opposite
either to show me how, and where this Church is, having this power, in the
partish assemblyes: or else by what warrant of Gods word I (knowing what Christ
the Lord commanded herein) may with good conscience remayn a member of a Ch:
without this power (much less where the contrary is advanced) and so go on in
the known transgression of that his commandment, Tell the church?

In the afternoon I went to hear Mr B: the successor of Mr. Perkins, who from
Ephesians: 5. and v: 7. or 11. showed the unlawfulness of familiar conversation
between the servants of God, and the wicked, upon these grounds, or the most of
them. 1. that the former are light, and the other darkness, between which God
has separated* 2. that the godly hereby are endaungered to be levened with the
others wickedness. 3. that the wick^d are hereby hardened in receaving such
approbation from the godly. 4 that others are thereby offended, and occasioned
to think them all alike, and as birds of a f^ther, which so flo^k together.
Whom afterward privately I desired, as I do also others, to consider,
whether these very Reasons make not as effectually and much more agay^^^th
s^irituall communion of Gods people, (especially where there wants the means
of reformation) with the apparently wicked, to whom they are as light to
d^rknes.

To that which he alleges in the 2d place of the reformed Churches generally
vs^^ng a stint form ^f prayer, with whom yet I will not refuse all public
communion, I answer, that for the very use of a set form of prayer, or other
the like failing I will not refuse communion with a true Church in things
lavvfull: but between the set form of prayer used in the reformed Churches, and
in the unreformed Ch: of Engl: I put great difference; not only in the matter,
and sundry orders thereof, but especially in the manner of imposeing it: which
in the reformed Ch: is not by compulsio^, nor in the first place, as in the Ch:
of Engl: where the reading of it is preferred before, and above the preaching
of the gospel: and where more ministers (and those of the best sort) have
been deprived of their ministry in a few months for the not reading, and
observeing it in manner, and form, then have been ever since the Pope was
expelled, not only for not preaching (for which no man is so censured) but for
all other wickedness of what kind soever, though abounding in the ministry
there. By which, that their set service is advaunced above all that is called
God, and made a very hateful Idol, to which both great and small are compelled
to bow down, and it to honor. Which Idol-servi^e also vpholdeth an
Idol-ministery: which, as it is truly so called, would without it be well
nigh as dumb, as the Idols of the heathens, Psalm. 115.
which have mouths, and speak not.

For conclusion, he affirms, that by the laws of Geneva like strictnes, (to
wit, unto that in Engl:) is used toward the inhabitants of that city, though
I unadvisedly deny it in mine assertion of the Engl: assemblyes difference
therein from all ^mue Churches in the world. page: 20.

In that place of my book I observe two mayn differences betvveen the Churches
of Christ, as the scriptures testify of them; and the parrish asse^bl^es in
their very constitution. With these differences thus propounded he medleth not,
either by showing how the assemblies agree therein with the Apostolical
Churches, or how disagreeing from them in the one, and other, they can be true
visible Churches rightly gathered and constituted. But where by the way for
amplication I mention the reformed Churches, as in^eressed in the same
differences from Engl: he there st^ps in and takes me by the hand, and leads
me along to Geneva: as b^like rayther hopeing to make the Church of Engl: agree
in some thing with the laws of Geneva, then with the laws of Christ's
testament. But was the Church of Geneva indeed gathered of all the apparently
wicked, and fl^gitious persons in the city, amongst the rest, scarce sensible
in so vast a heap as were, and are the English parrochiall assemblies? If the
state of Geneva did in a politic r^spect expel out of the city such the
inhabitants, as were not well affected toward the religion, and that the
Church were gathered of the rest, being judged in charity capable of the holy
things of God, upon their personal confessior; how then stands this
agreement between the Genevean, and Engl: assemblies? And if the Church of Gen:
had been gathered after popery (as the Engl: assemblies were, and it was not)
of all the unhallowed rowt in the city, without separation, I should confess
mine unadvisednes in my better judgment of it, then it deserved.

And thus much for this letter, which the Author might more fitly have called
^n exercise of wit, then ^ Manuduction, as he does. And for that it is in
effect intended for the justification of the Ministry, it shall not be amiss
for the better help of the Reader, and furtherance of the truth, briefly to set
down such particulars, as by the scriptures and good reason thereunto
agreeable, are of absolute necessity for a true ordinary Church Officer, and
minister of Christ; which for order sake I will reduce to four heads.

The first is, that there be a true visible Church, in which he is to be
appointed 1. Cor. 12. 28.
God having set in the Church, Apostles, Prophets, Teachers etc: and mention
being made every where of the Act. 14. 23 and 20. 17. 28
making and ordeyning of Elders, or Bishops in the Churches. Whereupon 1. I
desire to know how the ministers of the Church of England can be true
Ministers, not being made, 1 Timothy 3, 1.
and ordained such in and to any particular Church? Tit. 1. 5.
2. Since, as is rightly acknowledged in the former part of the book, Every
true visible Church is a company of people called and separated out f^o^ the
world, I would know how many, and which of the parrish Churches consist of such
a separated people, and are not both (at the ^est) in their persons mixed of the
people of God, and the world, and also mixed in one national, provincial, and
diocesan Church, or body with all the godles multitude, and part of the world
in that land? 3. I ad, that since a separated people from the world is but the
matter of the Church, and that for a true Church a true form is also required,
it must also be showed how that can be found there. This form cannot be any
particular act, which is transeunt, and passes away, but something constant,
and permanent, without which resydeing actually in the whole and all the parts
thereof, the Church cannot consist one moment; neither yet can it be any
personal thing either disposition, or other relation whatsover: nor other, as
I conceav, then a public orderly covenant, and union of a particular
assembly, by which it has in it self entyre right to Christ, and to all the
means of enjoying him: which I rayther wi^h could be, the^ belief can be (for
the present) found in any parrish Church in the land. Lastly, if the
Provincial, and Diocesan Churches be not true visible Churches (which I
suppose is this Authors judgment) I would know how the parrish assemblies
being parts of the other, and so parts of false Churches, can any more be
reputed true Churches, then could a particular Jewish Synagogue be reputed a
true Church, which should have made it self an entyre, and independent body in
respect of the national Church, and Temple?

But now if any of the parrish assemblyes be thus separated in their personal,
and church estate, and formed accordeingly (though with defects, and wants) we
desire to take knowledge of them, and which they be, that we may rejoice for the
grace of God toward them, and perform unto them the duties of Christian
fellowship, as is meet.

1 Timothy: 3.
in whom ap^nes to teach, and vnreproveablenes in conversation is found: even
reason teaching that whomsoever God calls to any estate he fitteth
co^pe^ently for the mayn works thereof. In whom also for his own comfort with
God, is required an inward calling, which with Calvin I conceav to be an holy
disposition, and desire to administer the gospel of Christ to the glory of
God, and furtherance of man's salvation. Which inward calling as a true minister
before men may want as did Indas, so for that they in Engl: much pretend it
when they ca^no^ justify their outward, I demand whether a man thus inwardly
called of God, and forefitted accordingly, and being withal persuaded in his
heart that a lawful outward calling, and without sin in the entrance, and
continuance, cannot he had in the Ch: of Engl: whether, I say, such a man be
not bound in conscience to seek out, or procure an other Church then the Church
of Engl: in the present state thereof; by, and unto which he may la^fully
enter, and administer: and how otherwise he does not either carelessly neglect,
or sinfully profane the Lords inward calling in his heart?

1 Cor: 12. 5 Ephesians: 4. 8. 11. 12, 13.
there being, as the Apostle teaches, diversityes of administrations, but (and
by) the same Lord, even the L: Jesus: who when he ^scended on high gave gifts
unto men, some Apostles, and some Prophts, and some Eva^gelists and some
Pastors, and Teachers. Now this office, and order not being a matter of
dignity, 1 Timothy: 3. 1.
as the order of knighthood, or the like, but of work and service; and this
work standing summarily in feeding the flock, 1 Timothy 5. 17
Act. 20. 28. and this feeding, in teaching and ruleing, as the two mayn parts
thereof, I demand how that can possibly be the true, and lawful function, or
office of a Bishop or Pastor, unto which preaching to the flock is not
necessarily required, not ruleing so much as permitted; as we all know the
case stands with the English ministry?

calling of the ministers by those in whom the Lord has left that right, Heb:
5. 4. 5 Act. 1 etc and 14. and 1. Tim: 3.
and power: which (if the scriptures may bear sway) are the particular
congregations in, and unto which they are to administer. And of such force is
this true and lawful outvvard calling, as that by it, and none otherwise, this
fi^, and lavvfull person becomes properly, and immediately, a true pastor. And
how then can he be a true pastor, whose calling unto his function, or office
of preisthood in the Ch: of Eng: is merely by the prelate of the province, or
Diocese; by whose license or institution he is also afterward designed to
his more particular charge?

These 4 conditions and every of them are necessarily required to the
constitution of a true pastor: and are none of them (to my knowledge) save the
2d to be found in the parochial ministry. Let mine opposite either disprove
the former, or manifest the latter, and how, and where such a ministry is to
be found* but let him do it in that godly simplycity, which becomes the
gospel, and the things thereof: p^escribeing to himself with due reverence of
God in whose work he deals, the sacred bounds of the Apostle saying, we
can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. In* and into which the
God thereof guide both him, and my self, and all his alvvayes.

Amen.

