A TREATISE OF THE LAWFVLNES OF HEARING OF THE Ministers in the church of
England: penned by that learned and Reverent divine, Mr. John Robinsz. late
Pastor to the English church of God in Leyden. Printed according to the Copy
that was found in his study after his decase: and now published for the common
good. TOGETHER WITH A LETTER written by the same Authore: and approved by his
church: which follows after this Treatise.

JOHN 7. 24. Judge not according to pearance, but Judge righteous Judgment.
Printed Anno 1634.

THE PRINTERS TO the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader. How ever the very naming of the Author of this following
Treatise, were sufficient reason for us to publish this same unto the world,
in regard of those large abilities above many others, which the Lord had
bestowed upon him, and in regard he being now at rest, with the Lord, and so
having finished long since his course in this his pilgrimage, we cannot expect
to have any more use of his help this way, and although it were great pity
that such a work as this should be concealed for so long time, considering
the work was perfected, and vvritted by his own hand, and so found after his
death (which is nine years since) in his study, yet have we thought it good
all this while to conceal it, in respect of that desire we had to the peace
of that church, whereof the Author of this Treatise was for so many years a
Pastor. In regard we did perceive that some though not many were contrari^
minded to the Authors judgment expressed in this Trtatise: And this we judge
to be a sufficient reason of our so long delaying of publishing this Treatise
to the world: Yet to our grief we have now just cause to put this same on
foot; For as when a city is in danger of enemies to be surprised, it is then
high time to take up all those vvarrlike Munitions which happily before that
time were cast aside and not regarded, that so they may the better maintain
their city, and the privileges of it against their enemies: so we judge it
as necessary if not more when we see the enemies of Gods church to incroach
upon the privileges of the same especially when they aim at the utter
ruinating of it, that then it is high time for us to defend the cause of
Christ, and it was the vvisdome of Iehojada the High Priest perceiving the
malice of Athalia, seeking to destroy the whole seed of Iehosaphat, to hide
Ioash the right heir of the Kingdom, and when he saw a fit opportunity
then to reveal him, and make him known, so we who have observed Athalias
spirit in part to be in some, who have labored to assume the power to
themselves, which is proper to the church, and so Diotrephes like would cast
out whom they please, and retain whom they thought good, and rather then
they will be hindered in this their attempt, they will labor to rent that
church in pieces in which they have lived for many years together, and that
we may not seem to accuse them of any thing without just reason, we desire
the Christian Reader, and themselves to consider this that follows*.

First, their schism or as they call it their leaving of the church, does
arise upon this occasion, to wit, that 2. which were members of the same
church with them having upon some occasion heard some of the Ministers in
England preach, and it coming to the knowledge of some of these who have now
made this rent the church, they would presently have these persons dealt
vvithall as for sin, and if they did not repent after dealing, they would
have the church to proceed to excomunicate them ipso facto, which the church
not willing to consent unto, these men could not be satisfied, but they would
have their own vvilles done or else they would rent from the church, which
proceeding of theirs, if it were approved of and followed no church could long
continue together in peace, for what these four or five men have done, that
may any other man do, so that if any man do conceive any of his brethren to
walk in any such sin, which he judges does deserve excomunication, if the
church will not thereto consent, he may rent himself from the same; Although
the Author of this Treatise have taught them otherwise, to wit, that if the
church, see not that to be sin, which I see to be a sin, I having informed
the church thereof according to my place, I have disscharged my duty, and the
sins lies upon the church (if it be a sin, and not upon me; but it seems
these men do look for that in the church on earth which is only to be found
in heaven, for themselves have affirmed, and that before diverse witnesses that
there is no sin small or great that is to borne vvithall, and that the very
speaking of a word through fraylty about worldly businesses upon the Sabbath
day, should have as severe a sentence, as he that shall openly and profanely
transgress against the 4. Commandment, the very naming of with their
opinion, is sufficient to discover their weakness, and that we may yet further
discover these men's folly to the world more fully, we will show you how
contrary they are to themselves in this their judgment, for as they say, and do
affirm that there is no sin which is to be borne withal in the church, yet
themselves, or at least the chief of them do practice the contrary, as for
example, one in stead of many may serve the turn: The chief of Author of
this trouble does hold, and so has for many years together, to wit, that it
is unlawful for the members of one church to have communion with another
church, and yet not vvithstanding this his judgment, he can bear with one,
who has contrary to this his judgment practiced, and so professes still to
do upon occasion, and yet not vvithstanding his so practizing, and so
professing, he is received among them, and is their chief if not their only
Teacher which they have: So that we may here easily perceive, that though this
man does use Iehu's peace against the sins of others, with whom he desires to
be alienated, yet he can bear with as great sins in others, in his
judgment with whom he desires to walk, we could show many more reasons to
prove his partiality, but then we should exceed the bonds of an Epistle only
we desire to give the Reader to take notice of those two things: First, that
this practice of hearing the Ministers of the church of England, is not against
any Article of faith, which is by this church professed, whereof the Author
of this Treatise was a Pastor, it being no Act of Church Communion, for if
hearing simply were an Act of Communion, then every h^^^tique, or Atheist,
or whatsoever he were that should come into the church of God, should have
Communion with them, which if it were true, as this following Treatise
proves the contrary, then it were good for every church that will avoid
communion with profane men, to meet in private, and then to shut their door
when their own compagnie is meet together: else I cannot see how they can avoid
having communion with wicked men: to wit if bear hearing be an act of
communion: Secondly, as this hearing is not against any Article of their faith,
so likewise it was not in the judgment of the church esteemed as a thing that
might not be borne withal, The letter you shall find after the Treatise.
and this may appear by a copy of a letter which we have here following
published where the church in the counsel which they give to the church of
London do sufficiently make it appear, that their judgment did manifestly
differ from those which now have made this breach, and which is well to be
marked by the reader how that the church when this letter was write: enjoyed
the Pastor, and their company was five times greater then it was when this
breach was made: and because these men in his their error are vvilling to
retraine it, and not being able to make any sufficient reply to the answer
made in this Treatise to their objections, though the manuscript thereof has
been in their hands for many years, yet because they will find something to
say, more then others have done heretofore, though of less force, therefore
they have joined some new objections which both the seducer and the seduced do
think are unanswerable, therefore it will not be amiss for us to propound
them, and to give some answer to them that so if their stomachs serve they may
reply to all at once: First, they object and say that we hold the church of
England to be a false church, and the Ministers thereof to be Antichristian,
and yet we go thither to worship the true God.

Before we answer directly to this objection, we shall entreat the Reader and
themselves to consider of this that follows.

First, A church may be said to be false in diverse respects, and according to
those respects, we are to have diverse Considerations thereof, as first, a
church may be said to be false in respect of outward order, to wit, when a
church is gathered together, not according to the rule of Christ neither, in
their outward government, do they conform thereunto, now this church cannot
be said to be the church of Christ being thus erected, and governed contrary to
the rule of Christ, but is false and Antichristian, and yet notwithstanding the
faith professed by this church, and the doctrines, taught in this church may be
sound, and according to God.

Secondly, a church may be false not only in respect of outward order, but
likewise in respect of faith and doctrine.

Now to this latter, we counsel no man to go, because from thence no good can
be expected, and that is the esteem we have of the church of Rome.

But now as in a true church in respect of outward order, there may be many
false doctrines taught, so in a church, that is false in respect of outward
order, there may be many sound, and seasonable truths taught, and this esteem
we have of the preaching in England: Namely, that the doctrine there taught
according to the Articles of their faith is sound, and the effects of it has
appeared, in the vvorking of faith in the hearts of many thousands.

For the outward order, or meeting there as a church, that concerns
themselves, and those that are in union, with that church estate, but not all
that hear them.

Now that worshipping of God which consists in hearing his word is warrantable
for us to do in England, we prove it by this argument.

That preaching which ordinarily begets men to the faith of Christ may lawfully
be heard.

But the preaching of many Ministers in the Church of England has, and does
ordinarily beget men to the faith of Christ.

Therefore the preaching of many Ministers in England may lawfully be heard.

The first part of this sillogisme is proved out of Rom 10. where the Apostle
telling what is the ordinary way God uses to beget men to the faith of Christ
tells us, it comes by hearing of the word of God preached, if faith comes by
hearing the word of God preached (to wit, if that be the outward means) then
there is no question but that a man may hear such preaching, and any man may
blush for shame, that shall deny this: so that the major part of the argument
is clear:

And for the Minor part they cannot deny it, no more then a man at noon day
can deny the sun to shine: for if any man make question whether faith comes
ordinarily by the preaching and hearing in England, it is a great question
weather they ever had faith or no: yet because some are so gross as to deny
this, we will therefore: prove the contrary by this Argument.

That preaching and hearing which makes them which were altogether carnal, and
so not capable of a church estate, to become saints and so fit for a
church estate: That preaching must needs beget men to the faith:

But the preaching and hearing in England, made them that were unfit and
carnal to become saints, and so fit members to the true church, which were not
so before.

Therefore the preaching in England and hearing the same does beget men to the
faith: That the preaching, and hearing in England has done this: Witness the
church of Leyden, and of Amstelredam.

Let them tell us where they received their faith: if they say they had it not
till they joined in these bodies, how could they then be true to their own
grounds, that none but visible Christians are fit matter for the church
whereas none can be so esteemed except in the judgment of charity, we judge
them to have true faith.

But some of these that have made this division have not denied, but faith is
wrought by the preaching and hearing in England: and yet which is wonderful
contradiction: they say it is not the word of God as it is there preached: so
that it seems there is something besides the word of God which is an ordinary
means to beget men to the faith, and there is another word besides Gods word
that will do it; the like absurdity has sildome been heard from any that
profess them selves to be Christians, and that they may, not seem to say this
without some reason, mark the reason that they bring to prove it, say they we
do deny that to be the word of God, as it is there preached: by a false
Ministry, though the word it self be of God yet as it is by them preached, it
is none of Gods word so Gods word here stands at fast, and loose, it is Gods
word, and it is not Gods word, as if they should say, it is Gods word if Mr.
Can shall preach it: but if another, that is a Minister in England preach the
same it is none of Gods word: so that men's outward callings true, or false,
makes the word to be the word of God, or not to be the word of God, an
assertion rather to be pitied then refuted, being little better then blasphemy,
that which they bring to make this assertion good, to wit, that any man having
an outward calling which is unlawful makes the word of God, which he
preaches, not to be the word of God, and this, say they to prove it, it was
true incense which Nadab and Abihu took, Lev. 10. 1.
to offer up to the Lord, but because they took strange fire, and not the fire,
which was from the Altar as the Lord had appointed, therefore the Lord sent a
fire to destroy them: so say they, it is the true word of God, which is
preached in England, but because they preach the same by an unlawful office,
therefore the Lord abhorres it: A stranger collection I think can hardly by
heard, for here strange fire is opposed to an unlawful outward calling, which
nothing can be more absurd, for Nadab and Abihu had a true outvvard calling to
offer, they were the sons of Aaron (says the text) therefore if any thing
hence might be concluded, in just proportion, it must be to the doctrine
taught, and not in the least to the calling: so that we may from thence gather
thus much, that if a Minister in regard of his outvvard calling true: shall
teach any thing, that is not from the Lord, they are to expect Gods judgment
for the same, and more cannot hence be collected, further, let it be showed,
that ever any prophet in the old or new Testament was ever termed a false
prophet in respect of his outward calling, but allwaies in respect of his
doctrine; we can find that such as had true outvvard calling in the true
church, yet were false prophets in regard of their doctrine in many
perticulers as Christ teaches concerning the Scribes and Pharisees for their
false expounding of the Law, let them show the like for outvvard callings: Thus
have we thought good, having been ear vvitnesses of these things here
propounded to set down our censure of them, desyring the Lord to make this
whole work (for the general good now set forth) take effect in those that
love the Truth.

Fare you well.
OF The lawfulnes of hearing the Ministers, of the Church of England, by John
Robinson.
AS they that affect alienation from others make their differences as great,
and the adverse opinion or practice as odious, as they can; thereby to further
their desired victory over them, and to harden themselves, and their side
against them: So on the contrary, they, who desire peace and accord, both
interpret things in the best part that reasonnablie they can and seek how,
and where they may find any lavvfull door of entry into accord, and agreement
what others. Of which latter number I profess my self (by the grace of God)
both a companion and guide: specially in regard of my christian countrymen, to
whom God has tied me in so many inviolable bonds: accounting it a cross,
that I am in any particular compelled to descent from them; But a benefit, and
matter of reioiceng, when I can, in any thing with good conscience, unite
with them, in matter: if not in manner; or where it may be, in both. And this
affection, the Lord, and my conscience are my vvitnesses, I have alvvaies
norished in my breast, even when I seemed furthest drawn from them. And so
all that have taken knowledge of my course can testify with me, and how I
have still opposed in others, and repressed in mine own (to my power) all
sour zeal against, and peremptory rejection of such, as whose holy graces
challenged better use and respect from all christians.

And in testimony of mine affection this way, and for the freeing of mine
own conscience, and information of other men's: I have penned this discourse,
tending to prove the hearing of the word of God preached by the Ministers of
the church of England: (able to open and apply the doctrines of faith by that
church professed) both lawful, and in cases, necessary for all, of all sects,
or sorts of christians, having opportunity and occasion of so doing: though
sequestring themselves from all communion with the Hierachicall order there
established.

Three sorts of opposites I make account to meet vvithall. The first of them,
who truly desire, and carefully endeavor to have their whole course both in
religion, and otherwise, framed by the holy, and right zeal of Gods Word,
either for their confirmation in the truth; or reformation, wherein, through
humane frailty they) step aside. And unto them especially I direct this my
discourse: begging at his hands who is the Father of lights, Iem. 1. 17
and from whom comes down every good and perfect gift, for them, as for my
self, that as he has given us to set our faces toward heaven, and to seek
him with the whole heart, Psalm. 119. 6.
so he would not suffer us to wander from his commandments, to the right
hand, or to the left.

A second sort is of them, whose tender and scrupulous conscience, makes them
fearful, and jealous of every thing, which has in it the least appeara^ce
or show of evil: least coming too near it, they be defiled by it, one way
or other. This their godly zeal, and tender nes of heart is to be loved of all
men, and cherished by all good means. Only such are to be entreated, for
their own good, to take knowledge of a distinction most useful for their
direction, in things lawful in their kind, and good in their right use. Of
which some are only naturally good in their kind, but not simply commanded
of God, as, to get, and keep the riches, and credit of the world; to enjoy
outvvard peace, or other bodly comfort. Others are morallie good in their
kind, and commanded of God, as to hear the word of God, obey the
Magistrate, and the like, Now in things of the former sort, it is very
requisite (considering both their nature and ours) that we keep a jealous eye,
and strait hand over our selves, and our ways. For them, they are not in their
kind enjoined as the other: neither do the scriptures any where require of
men, to be rich, or the like: as they do to hear Gods Word, obey authority,
etc. And for our selves we are prove, and in danger to ouerstraint for the
getting, and enjoying of them, as being naturally pleasing good things. So as
if out of a godly jealousy over our hearts toward them, we keep not our
selves from going too near the side, for the getting, or keeping of them: we
shall by one storm of temptation or other, be blovvne in to the ditch of sin
and destruction. But now, for the practice and performance of duties simply
moral, and commanded in their kind, as is the hearing of Gods Word,
specially by Gods people, we ought to strain to the utmost, and to go as near
the vvinde, as may be: seeing nothing but apparent sin in the way can excuse
the vvithdravving from it, when occasion of enjoying it is offered. Oh that
there were not to be found who being very scrupulous of coming near to any
thing amiss in outvvard ordinances: or to any person failing in them: yet make
no scruple of complying, and conforming with the world so far in the eagre
pursuit of wordlie profits: immoderate use of worldly delights and fulfilling
the lusts of the world and flesh dwelling in them, as that there appears
scarce an hayr-breath, or difference betvveene them and mere worldlings,
which know not God. Which latter evils are both worse in themselves, as being
expreslie condemned by the law of God, and light of nature: and more odious in
the persons: as being more personal, free and voluntary, then those in the
other, to which they are carried by the violent courrent of the times.

A third sort of opposites I make account to meet with, more intractable then
the former: and more vehemently bent against the thing propounded by me, out
of prejudice and passion, then the other by scruple of conscience, or show of
reason. To them I can hardly say any thing: (it not being their manner to
read, or willingly to hear that which crosses their prejudices) yet
something I must saic touching them, out of the woeful experience of many
years taken of them, though not much I thank the Lord, amongst them, unto
whom I have ministered.

Some of these I have found carried with so excessive admiration of some
former guides in their course, as they think it half heresy to call into
question any of their determinations, or practices. We must not think, that
only the Pharisees of old, and papists of later times are superstitiously
addicted to the traditions of the elders, and authority of the church. In all
Sects there are diverse (specially of the weaker sort, who being the less
real in their conceptions, are the more personal) that rather choose to
follow the trodde of blind tradition, if beaten by some such foregoers, as
they admire, then the right way of Gods Word by others to be showed them
afterward.

Some again are as much addicted to themselves as the former to others:
conceauing in effect, though they will not profess it, the same of their own
heads, which the papists do of their head the Pope, viz: that they cannot
err, or be deceived: and this specially in such matters, as for which they
have suffered trouble, and affliction formerlie: and so haueing bought them
dear, they value them highly. But it is to marchantlike, to strive to over
fell a thing, which we have formerlie over bought: we must buy the truth,
and not fell it, at any rate: but must account nothing either true or good,
according to the valuation which we have set upon it, but God.

There is also a third sort highly aduanceing a kind of privative goodness and
religion: and who bend their force rather to the vveaking of other men in
their courses then to the building up of themselves in their own: and in
truth rather to separation from men not only in evil, but even in that
which is good, for some other evil conceived in them, then to union with
God, and his people in his holy ordinances: and half imagining that they draw
near enough to God if they can withdraw far enough from other men. Great zeal
they have against the false church, ministry, and worship so being, or by
them conceived so to be; and against any appearing evil in the true, but little
for that which is true and good, as their practice manifests: but evil is as
contrary to evil, as good is to evil; and so is that zeal plainly carnal,
which carries a man further against evil, then for good: seeing no evil is
fo evil as good is good.

Fourthly, there are some to be found so sowred with moodines, and
discontentement as they become unsociable, and almost Lukanthropoi, Werewolfs,
as they speak, if they se nothing lamentable, they are ready to lament. If
they take contentment in any: it is in them alone, whom they find
discontented. If they read any books, they are only invectiues, specially
against public states, and their governors. All things tending to accord and
union any manner of way are unwelcome unto them. They have their portion in
Ismaels blessing. Genes. 16. 12.


Lastly there want not, who (as Iehu in his fierce marching, covered his
ambition, cruelty, and zeal for his own house under the pretext of zeal for
Gods) think to cover, and palliate their own both grosser and more proper, and
personal corruptions, under a furious march not only against the failings,
but the persons also failing of infirmity, in matters of church order, and
ordinances. Who if they were well acquainted, and duly affected with their
own both more voluntary, and greater sins, would slack their Iehus peace,
yea turn their course, though not to walk with others in evil (which God
forbid) yet to apply, and accommodate themselves unto them, in that which is
good, so far as possibly they could observe any way by the Lord opened unto
them. I could instance in, and name diverse particular persons monstrouslie
grown out of kind, this way. But that course I leave unto them, who rather
desire the disgraceing, then the bettering of them against whom they deal: or
perhaps conceive in their leauened hearts that there is no other way of
bettering, specially persons of meant condition, then by shameing, and
disgrac^ing them. Genes. 49. 5. 6.
But let not my soul come in their secret, in whose habitations are such
instruments of cruellic.

These things thus promised, the objections follovv, which I have either heard
from others, or can conceive of my self most coullerable against the practice
by me propounded. And they are of two sorts. Some of them are framed upon
supposition, that the ministres in that church are in themselves lawful, and
of God: but not yet to be heard by reason of the abuses, and evils to be found
in their ministrations. Others withdraw hearin (and those the more) upon the
contrary supposition: to wit, that the very order and constitution of that
church and ministry is papal, and unlawful. Now the examination of the
grounds of the one or other I will not in this place, meddle with: but (though
both cannot be true) will for the satisfieng of the vvithdrawers on both
parts, grant for the present, to either part their ground, and so examine
distinctlie what exceptions they can or do build hereupon.

But first, for the former. Supposing a church, and the ministry, thereof
essentiallie lavvfull, it cannot but be lavvfull for the members of other
churches in general union, and assosiation, with it to communicate
therevvith, in things lavvfull, and lavvfullie done: seeing the end of union is
communion. God has in vain united persons, and states together, if they may in
nothing communicate together. But he, who would have us receive the vveak in
faith, whom God has received, would not have us refuse the fellowship of
churches in that which is good, for any weakness, in them, of one sort or
other. And this we have so plainly, and plentfullie commended unto us both by
the Prophets, yea by Christ himself in the Jewish church; and Apostles, and
Apostolical men in the first christian churchs; in which many errors, and
evils of all kinds were more then manifest: and the same often times both so
far spread, and deeply rooted, as the reforming of them was rather to be
wished, then hoped for: as that no place is left for doubting in that case by
any, who desire to follow their holy steps in faith toward God, and
charity toward men, and effectual desire of their own edification.

The objections of the former sort follovv.

1. OBJECTION.
There is danger of being seduced, and misledd by the errors taught in the
astemblies.

ANSWER.
1. We must not loose the benefit of many main trueths taught, Matthew 5. chap
23.
for danger of some few errors. 2. Cor 11. 19. ^. Ioh. 4. 1. 3.
Specially in lesser matters. Let such read Parker of church policy, lib. 1.
c. 39
This were to fear the devil more then to trust God, 2. There were in the
Jewish church in Christ's time, and in diverse of the Apostolical churches
afterward, more and greater errors taught, then are in any, or ail the
churches of England: of which also there are not a fevv, which if their
ministers did as fully and faithfully teach and practice all trueths, as they
keep themselves carefully from errors, might compare in this business, with
any reformed church in Europe. 3. This exception has its vvayt against the
hearing of Priests and Jesuits, specially by the weaker sort, and lesseable
to discern of things that differ: But not against many ministers of the church
of England.

2. OBJECTION.
He that in any thing pertakes with that church in which sins known are
suffered unreformed, pertakes in all the sins of that church, as he that
swears by the Alter* swears by the offerings upon it which it sanctifies,
Matthew. 23. 19. 20.

ANSWER.
I partake not in the sins of any: how great or manifest soever the sins
be: or how near unto me soever the persons be except the same sins either
be committed, or remain unreformed by my fault. Otherwise, Christ our Lord had
been invvrapped in the guilt of a world of sins in the Jewish church, with
which church he communicated in Gods ordinances, living and dyeng a member
thereof. If my brother sin a scandelous sin, and I by just order, make
complaint thereof to the church, I have done my duty It appertains to the
church to excommunicate him, if he repent not; but not to me except (Popelike)
I would make my self the church. I am guitty of the evil in the common
wealth, and family, for the redressing vvherof I do not my duty in my place:
which if I do in the church as I can, I am free from the sins done and
suffered there, which sins and evils I can no more be said to suffer
(vvanting power to reform them) then to suffer it to blovv, or rain, because
I hinder it not.

But the proof of the assertion from Matthew. 13. is of admirable devise. How
does the church sanctify the sin of the sinner, as the Alter does the
offering of the offerer? The Alter makes that to become actually an offering or
holy gift, which before was not an offering actually, but only gold, silver,
or other material: So does not the church make any man's sin to become his
sin, which it was not before, but only suffers the sin that was. But to
strain the strings of this imagined proportion, to make them meet: and to
suppose the church in a sense to be as the Alter; yet this only follows
thereupon: that, as he who partakes with the Alter in the upholding of the
offering, partakes with the offering: so he that partakes with the church in
the upholding of any evil, has his part in the evil also.

And this I grant willingly: but deny, as a most vain imagination, that
every one, that partakes with a church in things lavvfull, joins with it in
upholding the things unlawful to be found in it. Christ our Lord joined with
the Jewish church in things lavvfull; and yet vpheld nothing unlawful in it.

3. OBJECTION.
But this course of hearing will offend weak brethren, not persuaded of the
lawfullnes of it.

ANSWER.
1. It will offend more, and many of them vveakere, and that more grievously:
if it be not performed. Secondly. It is an offense taken and not given: seeing
the thing is in it self good: in its kind commanded by God; and in that
particular, by men in authority; and directly tending to mine edification:
and not like unto eating of flesh, or drinking of wine, or the like things of
indifferent nature, and left to my free liberty to use, or not to use.

And these are the principal objections upon the former ground: they upon the
latter follovv.

There is in the hands of many a threatise published by a man of note,
containing certain reasons to prove it unlawful to hear, or have spiritual
communion with the present ministry of the church of England. This has been
ansvvered: but indeed sophisticallie, and in passion: Neither has the
ansvverer much regarded what he said, or unsaid, so he might gainsay his
adversary. With that answer was joined an other directed to my self, and
the same doubled pretending to prove Public communion upon private, but not
pressing at all, in the body of the discourse, that consequence; but proceeding
upon other grounds: and in truth, consisting of a continued equivocation in
the terms public, license, government, ministry, and the like; drawn to
another sense, then either I intended them, or then the matter in question
will permit. Whereas he that will refute another, should religiously take,
and hold to his adversaries meaning: and if in any particular it be not so
plainly set down; should spell it, as it were out of his words. But it is
no new thing even for learned and godly men to take more then lavvfull liberty
in dealing with them, against whom they have the advantage of the times
favoring them, like the vvind on their backs. But God for bid I should
follovv them heerin. I will on the contrary use all plains, and simplicity,
as in the sight of God, that so I may make the naked truth appear as it is,
to the christian readers eye, what in me lies.

And for the treatice mentioned, it must be observed, how both in the title,
and body of the book, the author confounds as one hearing of and haueing
spiritual communion with the ministry* etc. which as it is true of such as
stand in spiritual and political church-vnion with a church, and the
ministry thereof, who accordingly have church communion in the public
acts, and exercises of that church: so is it not true of others which are not
members of, not in ecclesiastical union and combination with the said church.

For the better clearing of things, let us in a fevv words, consider
distinctly of religious actions, according to the several ranks, in which
they may rightly, and orderly be set. Some such actions are religious only,
as they are performed by religious persons. And of this sort is hearing (and so
reading) of Gods word. The scriptures teach, and all confess, that hearing of
the word of God goes before faith* For faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17
as by an outvvard means. Hearing then being before faith, 1. Tim. 1. 5
and faith before all other acts of religion inward, Romans 10. 10
or outvvard: Gal. 2. 20
it must needs follow, that hearing is not simply or of it self a work of
religion: and so not of religious communion. Hearing is properly, and of it
self, a natural action, though it be the hearing of the very word of God.
And I call it a natural action in it self, in a double respect. First, for
that the light of nature teaches every man to hear, and listen to another,
that can and will teach and inform him in any thing for his good, divine or
humane. Secondly, for that a mere natural man, levv, Turk, Infidel, or
Idolator, lavvfully may, yea necessarily ought to hear Gods word: that so of
natural he may become spiritual.

In the seacond rank I place preaching, Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
and prayer; which are properly acts religious, Pro. 15. 8.
and spiritual: as being to be performed the one by a gift, Ioh. 9 31.
the other by a grace of Gods spirit.

Of a third sort is the participation in the Sacraments: which ordinarily at
least requires a member ship in some particular and ministerial church in
the participant, they being public church ordinances.

In a fourth order I set the power of suffrage, and voice gi^eing in electing
of officers, and censuring of offenders: for which there is requisite an
interest of the person so voteing, in that particular church, as a member
thereof.

Of the last sort is the ministration of Sacraments, which requires, with the
rest fore mentioned, a public state of ministry in the person administering
them.

Now for preaching by some, and hearing by others (which two alvvaies go
together) they may be, and often are performed without any religious o^
sp^^^tuall communion at all passing betvveen the persons preaching or hearing.

When Paul preached to the superstitious Athenians shall we conceive he had
spiritual communion with that heathenish assembly? Act. 17. 22.
How much less had they spiritual, and religious communion with him, who
performed not so much as a religious work in their hearing? As God gave any
of them to believe; they came into invisible, or inwardly spiritual personal
communion with him: as they came to make personal manifestation, and
declaration of their faith; they came into outvvard personal communion with
him, Lastly, as they came to join in, or unto some particular church; in to
church communion with him: else not. So when there comes into the church
assembly, unbelievers, 1. Cor, 14. 23.
heathens, Turks, Jews, Atheists, excommunicates, men of all religious, men
of none at all, and there hear: what spiritual communion have they with the
church, or state of the teacher, or one with another, either in regard of the
nature of the act done, or by Gods ordination and institution? Hearing simply
is not appointed of God to be a mark, and note either of union in the same
faith, or order, amongst all that hear: or of differencing of christians from
no christians: or of members from no members of the church: as the sacraments
are notes of both in the participants. The hearing of the word of God is not
so enclosed by any hedge, or ditch divine, or humane, made about it, but lies
in common for all, for the good if all.

The particular objections follow.

1. OBJECTION.
No man may submit his conscience to be wrought upon by an unlawful, and
Antichristian ministry: neither has God promised, or does afford any blessing
upon it: neither can any have the sanctified use thereof.

ANSWER.
It cannot be said properly that the office of ministry works upon the
conscience of the hearer. The office only gives power, and charge to the
teacher to teach in such or such a church state. And as it resides in the
person of the officer alone, so the communion (lavvfull or unlawful)* which
any has with it, is in regard of the lavvfull or unlawful ecclesiastical
relation and union foregoing betvveen the persons: and not in any vvorking of
the office upon the conscience of any. Secondly, though God bless not the
unlawful office of ministry, which is not of him self: yet he may, and
does bless the truths taught by the officer, Genes. 4^. 5. 6.
which are of himself, and from heaven. To deny this of many in the church of
England, is ( Balaamlike) to curse, where God would have us bless.

2. OBJECTION.
To hear such a minister is to honor, approve, and uphold his office of
ministry.

ANSWER.
1. If this be simply true, then when the heathenish Athenians heard Paul
preach: or when an unbeliever comes into the church assembly, and hears the
preacher, he approues, honors, and vpholds the office of ministry, which,
what it means, he is altogether ignorant.

If any reply: But we know the ministry of the church to be as it is. I
answer, that the knowing of it makes not our act the more, or less an act of
approbation. If I do an act wherein I indeed approve of a thing, if I know the
thing, I really approve of it upon knowledge: if I know it not, I really
approve if it, but ignorantly. 2. If I approve of the office, simply, because I
hear the officer preach, then I much more approve of all the doctrines which
he delivers, because I hear him deliver them. If the latter seem
vnreasonnable, so is the former much more, except I be in church communion
with the officer, and then indeed I really approve of his office: as I also
do of his doctrine, if it be according to the confession of faith made by me:
for then I am in former union with him in the one, or other, and so have
communion in the acts thereof. If this were a good ground, that every one
approues of the evil done in matter, or manner, where he is present, none could
live with good conscience in any society of men upon earth. Persons so minded
are best alone: for with others they will keep no peace: no nor with
themselves neither: if they be true to their own ground. But they plainly
balke themselves in their courses, either in weakness of judgment, or
partiality of affection, or through want of due consideration of their ways.

3. OBJECTION.
By this then it seems a man may be present at any act of Idolatry, and do as
others do that practice idolatry, yet not approve of it. And so the three
Nobles in Daniell needed not to have put themselves upon such pikes of danger
as they did, for not falling down, as others did, in the place.

ANSWER.
1. In the preaching of the truths of the Gospel no Idolatrous act is
performed; as there was. 2. It must be known, that approbation is properly in
the heart; and only the manifestation of approbation in outvvard gesture,
speech or writing. Both the one and other are evil if the thing be evil. But
hear it must be considered, that I may in cases, do the same outvvard act,
which others do, and wherein they manifest their approbation of idolatry or
other evil: and yet I be free, in truth and deed, from all such approbation,
and stain thereof. The jews after Christ's death, and the taking away, 2.
Col. 15.
and abolishing of the legal ordinances thereby, circumcised their infants,
and frequentled the temple for purification, and other mosaicall ceremonies as
parts of Gods vvorshippe, and still remaining of divine institution. Paul also
circumcised Timothy, entered the Temple for purification, and yet did not
approve, any manner of way of the error and evil in the Jewish worshippers.
To come nearer home. It is the custom in Popish countries, that all that pass
by a cross must in honor of it leave it on the right hand, as they may, by
reason of the placeing of it, coming, or going. Now if I ride with others
that way, I may do the thing, that they do, and keep company with them, and
yet not honor the cross as they do. It is besides the former, the manner,
that such, as so pass a cross, should in further honor put of their hatt to
the said cross. But if I do this also I plainly manifest an approbation of the
superstition. The reason of the difference is, because I have another just
cause to do the former-thing, namely to keep on with my company: but have no
just cause of the latter. But now suppose, that at the very place, where the
cross stands, I meet with some friend, or other, to whom I owe that eiuill
respect of uncovering my head; I may then do that lavvfully also upon the
former ground. So if I had just and reasonnable cause either of coming, or
standing by the Magistrate (to whom I owe this civil honor) whilst he is
performing some act of Idolatry in the streets, or else where; I might upon
the same ground, go or stand uncovered by him, without just blame. To apply
these things to the objectio^ moved, seeing no other cause could reasonnable be
conceived of the Kings commanding such a thing, or of their doing the thing,
at his commandment, save the worshipping of the Idol; they in so doing
could not have escaped the just blame of Idolatry: But now I have just causes
more then one of my hearing, and amongst the rest, mine edification; and
therefore cannot be challenged therein to approve of the ministers, flate, or
standing. Besides that, as I formerly answered, hear is no Idolatrous act
performed.

4. OBJECTION.
He that hears them preach, hears them as Ministers of the church of England,
and as sent by the bishops, and so in hearing them, hears and receive them that
send them according to that of our Savior, Luke 9. 16.
he that hears you, hears me, John 13. 10.
and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me; despises
him that sent me.

ANSWER.
I grant the former part of the objection: and account the denying of it a
point of familisme: seeing the officers of public states in the executing of
their offices are to be esteemed, according to the public laws, and orders
of those states, and not according to any under hand either course, or
intention, by them selves or others. They are heard, as they preach, and preach
as ministers of the Bishops sending, and of the parris hes receiving to which
they are sent by them. And so I profess I hear them as the ministers of the
Bb: sending, and of the Parishes sent to: but not as my ministers either
sending, or sent to, except I be of those parishes, or at least in
ecclesiastical union with them. Every one, whether of false a church, or no
church, or excommunicated from the church, that hears me, hears me as the
Pastor of the church, which I serve, but not as his Pastor, I suppose, nor in
way of any his spiritual communion with mine office of Pastourshippe.
Secondly, by hearing and receiving there Christ means properly the hearking,
too, believing, and obeying the doctrine taught by the Apostles: which many
despised, unto whom he apposeth the former that heard it. Now the ministers in
the parishes have not the doctrines of the Gospel from the Bishops, as they
have their office: but from God in his word, and so far forth as a man
hears, that is, hearkens too, and receaues them by receiving it, he so far
hearkes too and receaues Christ.

5. OBJECTION.
Yet such as hear them have communion which their office of ministry what in
them lies.

ANSWER.
That is, they have no communion at all with it, if it lie not in them to have
any: as it does not. If I hold up my hand as high as I can, I touch heaven
with my finger, what in me lies. Do I therefore at all touch it? If such
think to have, or that they have, any such communion, it is their error, and
ignorance, but makes not the thing to be the more, then if they thought not so.

6. OBJECTION.
Is there then no communion at all between the teacher, and taught? what
profit the comes thereby such hearing.

ANSWER.
The church officer feeds the flock and church over which he is set, Act. 20.
28
as the object of his ministry. Such as come in (being not in church-vnion
therevvith) hear him so doing: And as a stander-by hearing me talk to, or
dispute with another (though I speak not a word to him) may reap as much, and
more fruit by my speech, then he to whom I directed it; so may and does it
often come to pass with him, that hears the minister feed the flock whose
minister he is, though he be no part of it. He may reap fruit by hearing him
feed his flock, or seeing him minister baptism to any member thereof. Hear is
communion only in the effects of the truths taught. It were usurpation in any
to partake in a church privilege (which the office of ministry is) that
were not in a church state, first. And so, if hearing simply imported
churchcommunion, none but churchmembers might lavvfully hear.

7. OBJECTION.
In the true church indeed is order, that the church covenant go before church
communion: but not so in the false.

ANSWER.
In the true church there may be unlawful church-communio^ without a
preceding church-couenant, as well, as in the other: to wit, if an act of
communion (properly) pass betvveen the church, and him that is no
churchmember: as for example, participation in the sacraments. But hearing
being not properly an act of communion, cannot import communion necessarily
with the one, or other: nor otherwise then according to a foregoing
church-vnion: whereas to partake in the Lords supper imports communion in
both: lavvfull in him, that is, a lavvfull churchmember: and unlawful in
him, that is not, in such a church state.

8. OBJECTION.
But it is the order of the church of England: that all that hear, are, and so
are reputed members of that church.

ANSWER.
I deny that there is any such order. Let the law or cannon either, be shevved
that so orders things. Excommunicates are permitted to hear sermons, though
not divine service, as they call it. 2. What if there were such an order? It
no more either made or declared me to be a member there, then does my
dvv^lling in such or such a parish make me a member of that parish church:
which latter is indeed the law, and order there. If the church with me
should make a law, cannon, or order that all that come in and hear me preach,
should thereby become members of it; we were the more foolish in making such
an order: but they never a whit the nearer either for membershippe or
communion.

9. OBJECTION.
He that hears, appears to have communion with the church, and ministry, and
all appearance of evil is to be avoided, 1 Thessalonians, 5. 22.

ANSWER.
The scripture is not to be understood of all that appears evil to others, out
of an erronius, and deceived judgment: for then we must abstain from almost
all good: seeing there are some to whom almost all good seems evil: but it is
meant either of the doctrine in Prophecy, of which I have some probable
suspicion; of which the Apostle seems properly to speak: or of that which
appears evil to a rightly discerning eye. By this imagined exposition I might
not hyre a house in a parish, where I were not known: seeing thereby I
appear a parish-member.

10. OBJECTION.
None can hear without a preacher, nor preach except he be sent, Romans 10 14.
15. Therefore I cannot lawfully hear him that has not a lawful sending.

ANSWER.
1. That conclusion is neither in text, nor sound: I may lavvfully hear him
that has no lavvfull calling, as I have formerly shevved. 2. The Apostles
meaning there, is not to show what is unlawful, but what is impossible. It
is impossible to believe without hearing, and impossible to hear without
preaching, and impossible to preach without the sending there intended: that
is, without Gods gracious work of Providence in raising up of men, by
enabling, and disposeing them to preach for the effectual calling of the elect
of God; of which he there speaks. If any make question whether faith come by
the hearing of the preachers there: it is more questionable, whether they
themselves, want not faith, which are so barren of charity, in which true
faith is fruitful. If faith come by the preaching in England to any, it
follows thereupon, that such preachers are sent, in the Apostles sense.

11. OBJECTION.
The sheep of Christ hear his voice, but strangers they will not hear, Ioh.
10. 3. 8. 27.

ANSWER.
Christ does not there speak of the outvvard hearing, but of the hearking unto,
that is, as he expounds himself verse, 3. 4. 5. 14. 16. 16. 27. of the knowing,
and believing of his voice: and following it. So chap. 9. I told you before,
and ye did not hear, that is, not believe, verse. 27. And God hears not sinners,
verse. 31. that is, approues not of them, and their prayers. So chap. 11. I know
that thou bear me alvvaies. and a thousand times in the scriptures. The
drift of Christ in the place is (without question) to show the difference
betvveene such as were his sheep, and such as were not his sheep. His sheep
heard his voice: and they which were not his sheep heard not his voice. But
they which were not his sheep, nor heard his voice, as there he speaks, heard
him preach outwardly, as well, as the rest, which were his sheep. Besides,
they which were his sheep, and would not hear strangers, in the Lords
sense, heard outwardly those strangers preach, and by hearing them discovered
them to be strangers, that is, false prophets. The strangers of whom he speaks
were of the true church, and of Israel: but brought false doctrine tending to
kill the soul. Such strangers none should hear, that is, believe and follovv.

12. OBJECTION.
The scriptures both of the old and new testament vvarn Gods people of false
Prophets; which the ministers of that church are, haueing an unlawful calling.

ANSWER.
1. They vvarn, Deuteronomy. 13. 3
not to hearken unto them, 1. Ioh. 4. 1
nor to believe them, but to try them which without hearing them, cannot be
done. Not that all false Prophets are to be heard by all, that they might try
them; for that were to tempt God: but I now answer the scriptures cited;
which speak of Prophets in the true church: which were to be heard, till
they were orderly repressed, or at least, plainly discovered by their doctrine
heard, to be such. 2. No man's unlawful outvvard calling makes him a false
Prophet; nor his outvvard lavvfull calling a true: but his true or false
doctrine only makes him a true, or false Prophet. A man may have a lavvfull
office of ministry, and yet be a false prophet, if he teach false doctrine:
so may he be a true prophet, if he teach the truth, though in an unlawful
and Antichristian state of ministry. Numb. 2^ and 25.
Yea Balaam was both a false prophet in cursing (in purpose) where God would
have him bless, Ios. 13. 22*
and in teaching 2. Pet. 2. 15. 16.
Balack to put a stumbling block before the people of Israel: Rev. 2. 14.
and yet a true prophet in blessing Israel by the spirit of prophecy, Number.
25. 5. 9 10. etc. and chap. 24. 2. 3. etc.
and word of the Lord put into his mouth. He is a prophet that speaks or
declares a thing past, present, or to come. And to prophecy in our sense, is
nothing else but to speak to edification, exhortation, 1. Cor. 14. 3.
and comfort. He that does this is a true Prophet: He that speaks the
countrary, a false. It were good, if they, in whose mouths the challenge of
false prophets is rifest, would better wey how themselves expound, and apply
the scriptures in their propheciengs, lest notvvithstanding any outward lawful
church state, they be deeper vvounded by the rebound of their accusations this
way, then their adversaries.

13. OBJECTION.
The Lords forbids Judah going to Gilgal, or to Bethel, Hos. 4. 15. 16.

ANSWER.
The meaning is plain, and the words express, that they were not to go
thither to offend, and play the harlot, in joining to Idols, verse. 15. 16. 17.
This I grant is to be done in no place: but deny any such thing to be done in
the hearing by me pleaded for. The scriptures every where forbid the going, or
coming to such places, or persons, as in, or by which some evil is done; to
wit, for the doing of any thing, evil, or unlawful in, or with them.

14. OBJECTION.
They that eat of the sacrifice partake of the Alter, 1. Cor. 10. 18. so they
that receive the word from an unlawful Officer, partake with his office.

ANSWER.
I deny the consequence. The office is not to the word, as the Alter is to the
sacrifice. The Alter makes the thing to be offered, actually to become a
sacrifice, which it was not before, save only in destination: as Christ
plainly teaches, saying, Math. 23. 19.
The Alter sanctifies the gift, but so does not the office make that to become
the word of God, which was not so actually before. This argument has its
special weight being applied to sacraments, or proper institutions. The
church, and ministry under God, make (in a good sense) the bread and wine
sacramental, in their use, which before they were not. And to the sacraments
(specially the supper of the Lord) The Apostle in the place cited has an eye:
shevving the proportion betvveene the eating of the sacrifices in Israel,
which in that use became their sacraments: and the eating of the sacrifices of
the Heathens, which were their sacraments; and the eating of the Lords supper,
as the sacrament of christians. With these things join in the last place, that
sacrificies considered as proper institutions, might not be offered or eaten,
Deuteronomy. 12. 5. 6. 7.
but in the place chosen, and sanctified by the Lord, for that purpose. No more
may sacraments now be eaten; but in the church: vvheras the word may be
preached to any as well out of the church as in it.

15. OBJECTION.
The places called Temples and churchs having been built for Idolatry should de
demolished, and therefore are not to be frequented, specially being accounted
and made holy places, Deuteronomy. 12. 3.

ANSWER. John 4. 21 23. 24.

1. The difference of places under the law, 1. Tim. 2. 6
when all other places (for the most solemn vvorshippe) as opposed to that
one place as holy, were unholy, is now taken away: so as no place now is
holy, or unholy as then. 2. Suppose it be the Magistrates duty to destroy them
(of which I now dispute not, nor howfarre he should proceed therein) yet I deny
the consequence, and that I may not use that lavvfully which he ought to
destroy.

The Magistrate ought to have destroyed such cities in Israel, Deuteronomy. 13. 12.
13. 14. 14.
as whose inhabitants had been corrupted with Idolatry. Yet might the cities
(if spared by the Magistrates) lavvfully be dwelled in afterward; and
Synagogues in them both be built and frequented for Gods moral worship
Jericho should have been Josh. 6. 17. 36.
an execration and heap for ever: 2. King. 2. 3. 5.
yet being built again and standing, was the seat of a school of the Prophets.
The murderer ought to be put to death: yet if he be spared, and surviue: his
wife, children and servants, lavvfully may, and in conscience ought to converse
with him according to the natural, and civil relations, betvveene them and
him. 3. I know no law in force, nor doctrine received in the church of
England, that ascribes any holiness to the places. And for errors, and abuses
personal they rest in the persons so erring. I suppose some such holiness be
ascribed unto them, as to holy churches, holy buildings, consecrated places,
etc. Yet I see no sufficient reason, why I may not use lavvfully a natural,
and civil place in them, for any lawful work, civil, or religious: private,
or public: for there is one reason of all these. If any think those places
like the Idolathites, he mistaketh therein: The things offered to Idols, and
eaten in the Idols temple, and feast, were in proportion, 1. Cor. 10.
as the bread and wine (being blessed) in the Lords supper: as both the
Apostle, and reason of the thing manifests. Whereas the place which I use
(though for a religious action to be performed in it) whether in the temple,
or in mine own house, has only the consideration of a natural and civil
circumstance. The temple as a temple (which yet I do not think is done in
England by any either received doctrine, or law) may be made an Idol, by
consecration: and yet every particular place in it not made unlawful for all
uses.

If any further object, that in preaching, and hearing Gods Word therein, we
have a religious use of it, they err, not considering, that though the work
done be religious, yet the place is no more religious therefore, then the time
in which I do it. Time and place are natural circumstances, and without
which no finite action can be performed: and some time, and place more
comodious and fit, then others for the doing of things of all kinds. I have
no more religious use of the place in which I hear publicly, the^ in which I
pray privately in my house or chamber.

16. OBJECTION.
Seeing whatsoever is not of faith is sin, what word of God, and so of
faith is therefore this practice?

ANSWER.
Every scripture that either commands Mat. 7. 24.
the hearing of Gods word, Luke 11. 28.
and promises a blessing to them that 1. Pet. 2. 5.
hear and keep it: Tit. 3. 1.
or that commands me to edify and built to my self: Heb. 12. 14.
or to obey the Magistrate; or to follow after peace; or to prevent offenses,
1. Cor. 10. 32.
warrants, and in cases, enjoins this practice: supposing no sin to be in
the way; of which in answering the former objections (to which I suppose
all other of vvait or couller may be referred) I hope I have cleared it.

And for any unsatisfied, or other wise minded, I vvishe I knew their reasons
either for their good by a sufficient answer to be given unto them; or for
mine own, by admitting of them, as there may appear vvait in them. In the
mean while, let me entreat of the differentlie minded, one way, or other,
that they would exercise mutually that true christian charity one tovvard
another, and compassion one of another infirmities, which becoms all, that
will be in truth, and deed, followers of Christ Jesus: and which is most
needful (specially in things of this kind, for the preserving of the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace. Which bond of peace whilst men are not
careful to keep inviolated, by brotherly for bearance, in matters of this
nature, they miserably dissipate, and scatter themselves, and one another;
even as the ears in a sheffe are scattered, when the bond breaks.

But as few or no good things of any kind are so well used by some, but
others as much abuse them: so is it to be feared, that there will not want,
who will change their lawful liberty this way into lavvlesse
licentiousnes, and so take up in steed of all other religious exercises: a
hearing course only.

And those specially of them, who disliking the present churchstate in England,
yet want due zeal, and love to that which themselves approve. Let me a little
turn my speech to such, for the preventing in some, and remedying in others of
that inordinate and broken course.

And first I demand of such, what is this course of hearing such ministers, as
whose stare of ministry they approve not? Is it any particular ordinance
left by Christ, and enjoined all christians in all ages and places? Verily no.
It were to be wished that no church-ministerie were to be found, which is
not approueable by the Word of God, notwithstanding any good act performed by
them that posses it. This hearing is only a work of natural liberty in it
self, as I have showed, and sanctified to believers by their faith. It is
lawful to use it upon occasion, as it is to borrow of other men: but to make
it our course, is to live by borrovving, which no honest man, that can do
otherwise possibly, would do. Yea what differs it from a kind of spiritual
vagabondry in him that can mend it, though with some difficulty, to live in no
certain church state, and under no church order, and government.

To print deep in our hearts the conscience of our duties this way; let us
briefly consider how many bonds of necessity the Lord has laid upon us, to
walk in the followshippe, and under the ordinances of the ministerial and
instituted-church.

First, we have lying upon us the necessite of obedience to Christ our Lord in
the commission Apostolical enjoining, that after we be made disciples, as the
word is, Mat. 28. 19. 20.
and baptized we be vvithall taught to observe whatsoever he has commanded,
It must not then suffice us, that we are disciples, and christians, but we
must join hearewith the entire observation of all the ordinances of Christ (as
we can find means) from the greatest to the least. And let us beware that
like the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5. 19. 20.
we call none of Gods commandments little, because we would make our
selves, and others believe, that little, and light account is to be made of
observing them: lest we our selves be called little, that is, be indeed none
in the kingdom of heaven. Our sins of ignorance and humane frayly, alas, are
to many, let us not add thereunto presumptuous sins either of commission, or
omission, to provoke God vvithall.

2. The church, and ministrations therein are not needless, but most needful
means sanctified of God, and given of Christ for our salvation and edification
thereunto: Act 2. 47.
which he that despises, that is, Ephesians. 4. 11
does not submit his soul and body unto (as he has means) and converse
therein with good conscience though in affliction and persecution, despises
not man, but God and Christ to the depriving of himself of the fruit of Gods
most gracious presence in his house and temple, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
where he has promised to dwell and of Christ's ascension into heaven for the
pouring out of all kingly gifts and largesses upon men for the work of the
ministry. 2. Cor. 6. 16.


3. Our great infirmities whereof both the scriptures every where, and our
own experience vvarn us, show in what great need we stand of all the Lords
holy ordinances, and institutions for the supplying of what is vvanting in us;
and correcting of what is a miss; and continuing, and increasing of what is
good, unto the coming of the Lord: where we must also take knowledge, and
remember, that it is on note of difference, and the same very clear, betvveene
the wisdom of the flesh, and the wisdom of the spirit, that the former
will be sure to provide for the body, and outvvard man, what may be: though
with danger, and prejudize of the spiritual: the other will take care and
order, for the spiritual state though the outvvard pinch for it. And if any
out of the view, and persuation of his own strength of grace come to
conceive, that he stands in no such need of Christ's ordinances, or of any
christian follovvshippe for the dispensing of them: let such a man consider,
that the less need he has of others by reason of his greater plenty of grace
received, the more need others have of him for their supply. But whatsoever
any imagine of himself, the Apostle, who was not partial, teaches, that
the very head (the chief and highest member) can not say to the feet (the
lowest and meanest members) I have no need of you. 1. Cor. 12. 21.


4. And lastly, it is necessary for our sound, and entire comfort with the
Lord our God, that our obedience be entire in respect of all his holy
commandments, which we do, or can discern to be such, and to concern us,
according to that of the man of God, Psa. 119 6
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy commandments.
That so we may have our part in the testimony given by the holy Ghost of
Zachary and Elizabeth: Luke 1. 5. 6.
which was, that they were righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments, and ordinances of the Lord, blameless. That is, both in the
moral precepts, and sacred ceremonies, and institutions of the Lord, Whose
examples we in our place, and times are to follow, not balking with the Lord
in any thing, great, or small: nor seeking starting holes whereby to escape
from him, in his word, which is wholy good and pure. Good, as coming from our
good God, Pro. 30. 5. Heb. 6. 5.
good in it self: and good for us, if we converse therein as we ought; in
good conscience toward God, zeal for his ordinances, modesty in our selves,
and charity toward other men: specially toward them, with whom God has
joined us in the most and best things: taking heed lest, by any uncharitable
either judgment of, or vvithdrawing from their persons, for such humane
fraylties, as unto which, into one kind, or other, all Adams sinful,
prosterity are subject; we sin not more by our course held against them,
then they by theirs in them, which God forbid.

To conclude. For my self, thus I believe with my heart before God, and
profess with my tongue, and have before the world, that I have one and the
same faith, hope, spirit, baptisin, and Lord which I had in the church of
England and none other: that I esteem so many in that church, of what state, or
order soever, as are truly partakers of that faith (as I account many thousand
to be) for my christian brethren: and my self a fellow-member with them of
that one mystical body of Christ scattered far and wide throughout the world:
that I have always in spirit, and affection al christian fellowshippe, and
communion with them, and am most ready in all outward actions* and exercises of
Religione lawful and lawfully done, to express the same: and withal, that I
am persuaded the hearing of the word of God there preached, in the manner, and
upon the grounds formerly mentioned, both lawful, and upon occasion, necessary
for me and all true christians, with drawing from that Hierarchical order of
church government, and ministry, and the appartenances thereof: and uniting
in the order, and ordinances instituted by Christ, the only King, and Lord of
his Church, and by all his disciples to be observed: and lastly, that I cannot
communicate with, or submit unto the said Churchorder, and ordinances there
established, either in state, or act, without being condemned of mine own
heart, and therein provoking God, who is greater then my heart, to condemn me
much more. And for my failings (which may easily be too many) one way, or
other, of ignorance hearin, and so for all my other sins, I most humbly crave
pardon first, and most at the hands of God. And so of all men, whom therein I
offend, or have offended any manner of way: even as they desire, and look that
God should pardon their offenses.

FINIS.
HERE FOLLOWS A true Copy of a Letter, sent to London written by the Author
of the former Treatise, and read in public, and by the whole consent of the
Church was sent to London, in answer to a letter sent by the Church of London
to the Church of Amstelredam and Leyden. Which we have thought good to Printe:
only to let the World see, what the Churchs opinion was of hearing in England,
the contents whereof follows.
TO OUR BELOVE IN THE Lord, the Church of Christ in London, Grace and Peace
from God the giver thereof: and in him our loving salutations.
IT may seem strange unto you brethren, and that not without cause that we
should have deferred thus long our answer unto your letter; and as
unseasonable that after so long delay, we should now frame an answer. Our
defense in the former case is, partly, the other churchs keeping the same so
long in their hands, before they sent it unto us; and partly their contentions
arising about it, of which we both desired to see some issue, and hoped
vvithall, that by occasion thereof, we might come to communicate our
counseills together; as we conceive, by your joint letter, your desire to have
been. But both in vain. For the letter then, (partly fearing, lest we should
seem to neglect you: and partly hoping that some use might be made thereof for
after times, and occasions,) we thought it better late them never to address
this our answer: yet so as you are in the first place to be entreated by the
Pastor of the church hear, to take knowledge, that he was not very vvilling
to read publicly that your letter for two reasons, The one, a loathnes that
either strangers or brethren, should take knowledge of that in ordinate, and
lawless course held by such there, as both in regard of their years, and
learning, and especially of their place in the church, should have being an
example, to the rest in wisdom, sobriety, and Christian forbearance,
specially in a case threating division, and dissipation: following therein
Christ our great high Priest, who being touched, with the feeling of our
infirmities, can have compassion of the ignorant. Heb. 4. and 5. The true
natural mother would not consent to have the living child derided, but the
counterfeit was easily moved thereunto, how earnest soever she seemed to have
it accounted hers.

Secondly, For that he conceaues it not orderly, that the bodies of churchs
should be sent to for counseil, but some choice persons. Power and vnauthoritie
is in the body, for elections and censures, but counseil for direction in all
affairs, in some few. In which regard every particular church is appointed
its Elderships for ordinary counseillers, to direct it and the members thereof
in all difficulties with whom others are also to advise upon occasion,
specially ordinary. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts,
Mal 2.

These things premised, our general answer to the questions propounded by
you, follows. You demaind, 1. Whether you have done well in re^eining her (to
wit, the maid, about whom the difference was) she leaving practice according
to her promise?

Answer. We judge that therein you did well yea though she had continued her
practice, upon occasion, and without neglect of the church, whereof she was a
member, how much more leaving it, as she did. Considering the action it self,
the hearing of the word of God, the great prouocations she had thereunto; the
state of the other church, about which your next question is moved, and with
all these, that excommunication is the heauiest censure which the church can
inflict for the most heinous offense most obstinatly stood in, we deem it
against that brotherly forbearance, which the stronger owes to the weaker,
so severely to censure, a failing (so supposed) of that kind.

To their assertion that she was an Idolator having broken the 2. Commandment
for that Mr. Iakobs people were judged Idolators in their going to the
assemblies; and therefore from. 1. Cor. 5. If any called a brother be an
Idolator, etc. We answer, that hear are diverse consequences and collections,
made, without rule of charity, or ground of truth.

To grant (as the truth is) that many things in the assemblies are against
the second Commandments: which forbids nothing, but Idolatry expressly; and
by consequence whatsoever tends thereunto: and vvithall that Mr. Iakobs people
did partake with diverse of these evils: yet we deny it to agree, either
with christianity, or ciuillitie, in common course of speech, to calenge
every such practice, as the committing of of Idolatry, or such person, as
Idolators. The Lord Jesus teaches, Math. 5. 21. 22. that all unadvised anger
is against the sixth commandment, Thou shall do no murder. Is therefore
every man that manifests upon occasion, any the least unadvised anger to be
challenged as a committer of murder, or murtherer^ so by proportion, every
less modest word, gesture, or fashion of apparel, is against the seventh
commandemsnt, Thou shall not commit adultery: Every vvronging of another by
negligence, vnprouidence, or partial affections (which every one less, or
more bears to him self) though but in a half penny, against the eight
commandment, Thou shall not steal, are all therefore so doing to be
pronouncied and prosecuted, as theefes and adulterersreversed? By these vain
collections, and bold chalenges, searse any so good and godly, but might be
branded, as Idolators, ^heefes, murderers, adulterers, and what not. For who
can understand his errors, and secret faultsreversed? words are unto things
as clothes unto the body. And as it were a vain course to put upon a child a
man's coat, though never so costly, to make him seem a man, so is not only
vain, but also injurious to put upon the things which we dislike, odious
phrases; though taken out of the very seriptures, to make them seem worse
then in truth then are.

Indeed he that is under the Law, and judgment thereof, doing the least evil
against the 1. or 2. commandment is an Idolator, and against the 6. 4
murderer, and so for the rest, in regard of God, and the rigor of justice:
whom yet for men so to call and prosecute, were rash and rude at the least:
But now if the person can in respect of other good things, by the word of God
and utmost extent of charity be deemed to have any the least interest in the
grace of the gospel, to censure such a one as an idolator, thief, murderer,
and the like, is against both charity and godliness: The Apostle, 2. Cor. 6.
teaches us to judge, and speak otherwise, where he calls such of the
Christian Corinthians, as by occasion of friends and corruptions of times were
drawn to partake in the Idol feasts, and tables of devils (of which they had
also before been by him most seriously admonished, 1. Cor. 8. and 10.)
Righteousness, light, Christ, believers, and the Temple of God; opposed to
unbelievers, unrighteousness, etc. As it is one thing to have sin, which if we
say we have not, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; and
another thing, to be sinners in the Scriptures phrase, 1. John 1. Psalm. 1. 5.
John 9. 3. 29. so all that practice through ignorance, or infirmity, some acts
(less discernable) of Idolatry, are not Idolators: but such in whom it
reigns in action or disposition.

Lastly, If all in the church of England, and of Mr. Iakobs, church be
idolators as the Apostle there speaks: then are they all excluded from the
kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. and are under the curse and condemnation of
the law, which censure the most rigid this way have disclaimed, as rash and
unjust.

Secondly, Whether Mr. Iakobs congregation, be a true church or no? We have so
judged, and the Elders of the church at Amstelredam, and the body of the church
with them, as we conceive: and so do we judge still, having sent you with our
letter a copy of certain papers in which that matter is handled.

Thirdly, Whether Mr. Staresmore and his wife are received, and retained in our
churches by that covenant, which they made with God in Mr. Iakobs church, or
whether they have renounced it as false, and made an otherreversed?

Answer. Their receiving, hear, was only by that covenant made with God, and
the church there continued, and none otherwise, the persons having testimony,
and dismission from the church there, and so were in the virtue of the same
couenaut, by us commended, and conveyed to that other church in Amstelredam.

Fourthly, To your fourth demand about your carriage toward your Teacher, and
other brethren renouncing communion with you, it is both unseasonable now to
answer, and difficult for us, who are ignorant of such circumstances* and
manners of carriage by them, as by which offenses are much agreeuated, or
extennated

Fifthly, Whether their pretense of having the truth be sufficient to make
them the church, and to warrant their above mentioned dealingreversed?

Answer, Neither the pretense of having, nor the having of the truth indeed,
makes the church in the sense in hand: no more then the having some other
particular commendable virtue, by some makes them the church excluding them
that want its. As Reuelat. 2. and 3. The visible, and ministerial church is
the whole body, and every member thereof. Not some parts, Act. 20. 1. Cor. 14.
23. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. of which some of these members have more comelines,
and some less. The church is a state spiritual and political: not personal
error therefore or other sin makes any cease to be a member thereof. And if
the greater number be members still, though inerrour: the smaller cannot be the
body. Besides, if some particular sin, or error make the greatest part, not
to be members, then much more two or three perticulers. Which thereupon the
church might not censure for any error or other sin, to wit, if they were
not members: Lastly, this confirms that popish and presumptuous ground, that
the church cannot err.

Sixthly, Whether women have voices with men in the judgments of the churchs?

Answer. The Apostle teaches plainly, the contrary, 1. Cor. 14. 34. 1. Tim.
2. 14. and though he speak perticularlie of prophe^ing and teaching, yet lays
he down a more general rule, forbidding all such speaking, as in which
authority is used, that is usurped over the man, which is done specially in
judgments. And if a woman may not so much as move a question in the church for
her instruction, hov much less may she give a voice, or utter a reproof for
censure?

And this answer we return at the length, brethren, to your letter and
demands, and therewith our loving salutations in the Lord. In whom vvishing
your peace and vvellfare, we rest.

Your loving brethren John Robinsz. and church with him.
Leyden 5. April, 1624.
FINIS.

