A Golden Mirror.

Containing certain Pithie and figurative Visions prognosticating good fortune
to England, and all true English Subjects* with an overthrow to the enemies.

VVHERETO BE ADJOINED certain pretty Poemes written on the names of sundry
both noble and worshipful.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Roger Ward for John Proctor, and are to be sold at his
shop upon Holborne Bridge. 1589.

TO THE HONORABLE, LORD GILBERT TALBOT, SON AND HEIR TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE EARL of Shrevvsbury, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter. etc.
Increase of honor, and all felicity
WHereas about two years past, I chanced to have offered me this present
Treatise, which though I then accepted and gave money for: yet, dreadyng
least I might be over rash in committyng it to the Print, especially before I
had fully seen into the end and purpose of the writer, whom I understood to
be a Gentleman of the North Country: yet now after long deliberation, I
finding this same both pleasant and profitable, have adventured the charge of
Printyng it. Pleasant I say it is in regard of the invention, and the more to
be esteemed of, considering that it foretold (as it were) the coming of the
Spaniards and their overthrow to our great unspeakable good. Profitable it is
in respect of example: for here among the due praises of many, those two most
noble and loyal men your good honorable Father I mean, and the like right
honorable the Earl of Darby, are set as spectacles or looking glasses, wherein
all men may see a lively pourtrayture of right Noble minds in deed, for the
right of their Countries weal being most vigilant and studious. Hereto be
adjoined of the foresaid Authors doing also, certain Verses penned upon the
name of my Lord Strange, and sundry others, upon the names of diverse
worshipful, which, for that they are tending unto virtue and pretty
inventions full of witty sentences, I have thought good to add unto the
former Treatise.

If any will contend, that such grave matters as in the former part be
entreated of, ought not be expressed under a color of Dreams, let him but
read Cicero his work De somnio Scipionis, and he shall find there most grave
and pithie matters, touching the well usage of a Common weal, concerning the
unstableness and inualiditie of riches in comparison to virtue, with the
blessed end of good men, and the woeful misery of the wicked, all
effectually discoursed under the name of a Dream. Now my humble suite is that
your honor will vouchsafe to take on you the patrosinie of this Treatise, to
whom I have thought best for to dedicate the same, and that you will herein
respect not so much the slenderness of the gift, or the unworthiness of the
giver, but will according to your noble courtesy, take in good part the simple
good will of me your poor suppliant, who, though I be able to deserve nothing
of your honor, yet will I ever pray for your good prosperity.

Your honors humbly deuote* JOHN PROCTOR.

THE AUTHOR TO THE Gentle Reader.
MY well-beloved in Christ, I have made ready for thy reading a number of rare
inventions pend upon the Ethimologie of the names, of diverse worthy
personnages inhabiting the gentle natured country and Cou^tie of Chester: A
place planted with an infinite number of Gentlemen being of great worship,
who in all their behauiours in every respect, may welbe to many countries a
spectacle, or Mirror for many worshipful virtues, as duty to her Majesty,
obeyng the laws, keeping good hospitallitie, loving and cherishing their
servant and poor tenants, using liberality to all men: being of nature
lowly, friendly, and familiar, without any lofty proud stately words or
countenance to their inferiors, daily and hourly feeding, and clothyng the
poor people that want and crave for Christ's sake. What shall I say there is
no country comparable to the same, concerning the virtues aforesaid. If
Radamanthus, and Pryapus, did not corrupt some of them with their ugly vices.
But as the best and most diligent husbandman can not vveede his Corn so clean
how precise soever he be, but some vvedes, as thystles, brackens or brambles
will spring up among the fairest and most ranckest corn of the whole field:
even so among many virtues it ever has been seen, and ever shall be that some
vices secretly shall lurk in some one corner or other according to the old
saying, who lives without a fault, or what commodity is without his
discommoditie? which argues that Cheshyre is not only for these vices to
blamed more then the rest of our Native Country: Wherefore they are not alone
to be condemned: But vvishing all to be reformed* I beseech thee gentle Reader
to bear in mind his sayings, that writ upon the earth with his finger: and
cast no more stones, at this gentle Country, then thou would have thrown at
thy self: vvishing the words which shall flee out of thy mouth, to be
fethered with such indifferency, as both thou, and they may be thankefully
received among all their worships and theirs, with the rest of the
inhabitaunce of the same foil. For if necessity should constrain thee to
make trial of the good Nature of this Country, thou would not only find
my reports to be of troth, but also thou thy self should have just
occasion to speak more in their deserved commendations and praise then I have
done: which I leave to thy gentle judgment, requesting thee to take in good
part these sundry inventions lately sleeped out of my pen, wherein I have
Poetically set down diverse fictions, which shall (I trust) be profitable to
every Reader, that will indiffrently judge upon the sense, if he have
knowledge to understand me, according to my good and faithful meaning to my
Country: But in these days not any thing is more disdained then the travel
of the true meaning subject, to write against a vvorldlyng an Usurer, a
Papist, a Boasting Thrazo, an Extortioner, a Tel-tale, a Pick-thanke, a
Clavvbacke, a Perjured person, a Tirant to his Country, or a Traitor, to her
Majesty's Royal person, is so secretly disdayned, and so enuiously noted of
some wicked vvretches, that by one means or other he shall not escape an
evil displeasure, not a little to his great detriment and losses, but commonly
to his utter confusion, all the which dangers (gentle Reader) do not daunt
my mind at all, neither cause my pen to stay one drop of incke from
paintyng the praise of the virtuous, or tellyng the troth to the Tyrant, by
familiar examples of the other evil disposed persons as a caveat to vvarne the
wicked, and to encourage the godly to persiste in virtue, which I beseech
the almighty that we may all seek the path of perfect righteousness,
desiring to pray for peace, and to ensue the same. To honor and dread God,
obey our sovereign and gracious Lady the Queens Majesty and her laws, and
finally one to love another. Thus vvishing thee and all thine, no vvorsse then
my self I cease.

Golden Mirrours, very significatiue and pithie: with Verses upon the
Etimologie of the names of sundry Noblemen and Gentlemen.
WHen as the Stately Stagge does haunt the mountain top,
And secretlye does doubt, the Hunters subtle slight:
To Maxfield forest, with weary steps I got,
And Shutlings lo, did scale of monstrous height:
Where fominge brynish floods in th'occident I see,
And six sundry Shyres appeared unto me.
Thus gasing in the clouds, these countries far to view,
Meet underneath, the mountain where I was:
The keepers came, the Stagg for to pursue,
With bended bows, and grayhounds, more and less.
And Gentlemen, with Gentlewomen brave:
That thither came, a huntyng sport to have,
But or the Course was set, time ware a way apace,
And Boreas breath was black, and glummish chill:
Which caused me, to seek a warmer place,
Underneath a rock, on the other side the hill:
Where hours three, I am sure that I set,
And watched for sport, until I fell a sleep.
And in this slunthring sleep, the richest Dream I had,
A sight of blasing bliss, and glorious Golden show:
I saw a virgin, in rich attire clad,
Whose virtues causde all men her name to know:
For fame did sound her just deserved praise,
Whose gifts of grace, her Royal race bewrayes,
A Rose as Ruby red, sprang in this Ladies hand,
Whose fragrant taste, perfumed the lofty air:
Three Crowns upon the same, by right did stand,
Three Princely Lions, this (Lady) honored there:
The flower deluces did bow unto the earth,
Which did declare a Prince of famous birth.
And in a galland garden, stood this famous Dame,
Inuironde round, with bryni^h waltring waves:
With mighty mountains, vaunting in the same,
And rivers fresh, through valleys passadge craves:
Where springs do spoute, whose silver streams do gush,
Through ribs of rocks, them selves do daily push.
Many Cities buylt of fame, and honor great,
Of worship, worthy Towns, of rich and manly shoe:
Wherein me thought, was Julius Caesar's seat,
With stately buyldings, many thousands more:
Of comely creatures, so populous to view,
The like was never seen, if every one were true.
Of wealth there was no want, but grace there wanted some,
Will played such wicked parts, and private gain:
That in this garden, the poor men seldom won,
And yet there durst not one of them complain:
The little fish still flies from the whale,
Yet what is devoured, God Neptune knows not all.
Then came Morpheus with Linces eyes, in his fist
Which sparkled like the fire, among the cloudy skies:
Hold these (said he) and see what ere thou list,
Nothing can be unknown unto the wise:
Which when I had, but present in my hand,
I heard and saw, but scarce could understand.
But by the blasing beams, of Lynces eyes,
I saw much more, then Argos many away:
And heard report, what words from him there flies,
And who they were, that did this dame obey:
So did I view a vile and wicked brood,
That lately drank, of ugly stigian flood.
From out whose mouths, they belched bulls of lead,
Which rored and beld, in the ears of some by sleight:
A fox their sier, a wolf their supreme head,
Their friends are traitors, I know not what they hight:
Thus still I stood, these novelties rare to view,
And warely watched to see what would insewe.
And as I standing there, to see the same,
Dropped into doubtful dumps, of that and this:
Upon the sodden presently there came,
A valiant hounde, as white as silver is:
And did behold this Lady in the face,
As one right ready, to obey her grace.
Straight came an Eagle, soring in the skies,
With Golden feathers, delighting all men's sight:
Who stooping straight, fell down upon his knees,
To do his duty, thus he left his flight:
(And said) Madame, the Lord preserve thee still,
Thus do I pray and have, and ever will.
This Hound and Eagle, with foot and wing so pressed,
In sure service unto this excellent Dame:
Those that had drunk of Stigian could not rest,
But by the one or other straight was taken:
No Bull durst bell, near where there byding was,
This noble Hound, no crafty Fox let pass.
A voice I heard, that all the world did hear,
That thundered from, the golden trumpe of fame:
And true report him self, was present there,
And made a challenge, to perform the same:
The words were these, the Lion well may trust,
That Hound and Eagle, that never were unjust.
They both be ready, always for to obey,
The Prince and Laws, they truly love in heart:
No blotte of blame, from first unto this day,
Their banners blanckles, of any evil part:
Their service shows, they sprang of spotles race,
As at these days, appears by their grace.
And with these words, the voice was ceast and gone,
And at the gase I ghastly quaking stood:
Birds, beast and fowls, in flocks was many a one,
Whereas a number, seemed of Vipers blood:
(I judge yt so) because they sought the spoil,
Of none so much, as of their native soil.
Then looking up and down, both here and there,
To hear report: and vewe with Lynces eyes:
Me thought that Jupiter, descended from the air,
(...) midd a shower, of silver drops he flies:
And Saturn followed, with his chollericke look,
And furious Mars, his blade, about him shook.
Then Mischief calde, for (treason vndertrust)
Help now (quoth he) or else I am ore' thrown:
Then said Jupiter, thou wretched Thief unjust,
I am the God, that makes such villains known:
For treason thou, shall reap thy just reward,
And I this Virgin, in prosperous reign will guard.
Then Echo, she was called, that lives in woods,
And rocky ragged tours, and Dales with Dymbles deep:
Where rivers run with waltring waves in floudes,
For that (that she) could never counsel keep:
Said Jupiter, come Echo, unto me,
Reueile all those these days that traitors be.
But at this word me thought a number fled,
Some others wishte them fishes in the Sea:
An other sort began to hyde their head,
And many other did ambodexter play:
For Echo did all traitors trades bewray,
As Jupiter commanded, so she did obey.
Thus Echo charged to tell all things that is hard,
Jupiter commanded woods, waters hills, and dales:
Mountains, meadows and valleys to regard,
With cabbins and caves in England and in Wales:
What people they receive, since vipers be abrod,
That neither honor Prince, ne yet almighty God.
Except you know them, stay them all (quoth he)
He charged the stones to tell that lie in street:
So did the Eagle to all the fowls that flee,
Commanded them to watch, with whom they meet,
That by your voice the Serpents may be known:
That seek to have our (only joy) ore thrown.
And pressed accomplere, said the noble Hound,
With stern and stately countenance all about:
(All enemies) what soever to confound,
My present service shall put you out of doubt:
In place my person, shall the trial make,
If any enemy dare, approach the state.
Then Neptune rousde him self upon a rock,
Amid the brynish fomyng floudes he sat:
The gates of all his palace did unlock,
And send for Triton, his pleasure to relate:
Whose trompet sounds over in the seas,
For to declare such news, as Neptune please.
When Triton came, and had his duty done,
God Neptune bad him sound his trumpet up:
And in the seas commands all creatures come,
That of the fomyng floudes did drink or sup:
And tell Caribd and Silla I am here,
And do command them, presently appear.
Triton trudged and sounded Trumpet straight,
At voice whereof, appeared great and small:
The Seas did mount of mighty monstrous height,
All living creatures attended on the VVhale.
A mighty muster I never saw the like,
It passes all my skill the half for to indite.
When all assembled wear^ before this God,
Triton sounded silence in pain of present death,
And then came Mercury to charm them with his rod:
That none durst speak that time that bears breath:
Thus silence made, quoth Neptune now prepare
My pleasure to fulfill, that here my Subjects are.
Said Neptune, since to you it is not unknown,
But that on Tellus all my floods do stay:
On whom I reap the fruits, on earth that is sown,
And do maintain my state both night and day.
He sends me word that Vipers are abord,
That would destroy th'annointed of the Lord.
Which Ladies virtue moves all the Gods.
As Jupiter himself for to defend the skies:
And to prepare for all her foes such rods,
As Justice can by any law devise,
So that her Foes on earth cannot escape,
Mark now said Neptune what I will debate,
Then for Eolus, Triton sound his Trump,
Who presently did personally appear:
who was upon the sudden in a dump,
Till Neptune told him softly in his ear.
Which when he knew, what was the cause in deed,
He willingly with Neptune did proceed.
And then said Neptune, I charge my furious Floods,
To swell and rage, up toward the cloudie skies:
With greedy Jaws devour up their bloods,
That harm against her noble state devise.
To thee Caribdis and Sylla, thus I will,
That night and day their ships and them you spill.
Then said Eolus with a blustering blast,
I for my part shall make their course but short:
I will break Anchor, Cable and also Mast,
So that destruction shall acquit their sport.
But whom (said Eolus) that it pleases you,
I Will blow his sails, the Traitors to pursue.
And as this word, Eolus mouth had past,
God Neptune musing whom to choose therefore:
The mighty Jupiter sends with a blast
A faithful Foul, for seas none like of yore.
A Drake adrest to pass through every storm,
To swim the floods, this Virgins foes to charm.
Then stepped out Nature that secretly lay hid,
And did avouch the choice was by her made:
And Mars himself to take the charge did bid,
And there withal did give this Drake his blade:
And Neptune bad him welcome to the Seas,
Eolus promised him to blow his sails always.
And when this valiant Drake received charge,
And to the purpose as before I sed:
And his commission reachyng wide and large,
Me thought some foes far of hoist sails and fled:
An other sort to Crikes began to fly,
Because they knew they had deserved to dye.
But Drake not dreading, laid to his breast to swym,
The fomyng floods to search for foreign foes:
The Gods in all exploits were still with him,
And Eolus in his sails, a luckie blast still blows:
No foe he fears though he can Spanish speak,
He venters if they bide, their force to break.
And as I kend him far, as eyes could scry,
And all his faithful followers at that time:
A warlike Winter, appeared in the sky,
Yet Phoebus friendly did upon them shine:
Eolus Furbisher, was ready for to scower,
The Spanish cloud, that mischief meant to power.
And seeing a sight my eyes began to tire,
With floods so furious, and eke so many sail*
Streightwayes I heard, and saw such gunnes on fire,
The tremblyng earth, my feet began to fayl:
The skies were dimd, the Seas of fire flamd,
As though this word Rise Deadmen had been named.
Foes fled that could, some sanke into the Seas,
The rest prisoners that craved of Drake their life:
An other sort sought boggs and woods for ease,
Thus Neptunes Drake, by force does stinte their strife:
The Gods of this Drake, do make such a treasure,
That Sancta Dominga. he had at his pleasure.
Thus fire and smoke, dashed Drake out of my sight,
But that I heard for joy the Sireus sing:
And that I had a glimring of some light,
Else of this Drake, no other news I bring:
But surely the Gods, the helm do hold,
Where Drake does swym: what needs more be told.
Then turnde I back, this garden for to view,
For Morpheus twitcht me sharply by the ear:
And said it is best, thy charge to look unto,
And with thy pen, let diligence appear:
Now shall thou see (quoth he) a happy sight,
And comfort that, among the poor does light.
Whereat I ready for to view the same,
A number infinite, did presently behold:
That did rejoice, to hear of vipers taken,
That sought such mischief, as before I told:
With singing, ringing* and clapping hands they said,
God save our Noble Queen, our mother and a maid.
The younglinges leap, like lambs upon the leyes,
The lame reioyst, and laughed, to hear the news:
The poor ploughmen, vnyokt, and present plays,
The traveler, his journey does refuse:
And all with cheerful voice did sing and pray,
God save our Noble Queen Elizabeth always.
The prayers of the poor, did pearce the skies,
The joy of the people, spread over all the earth:
The virtues of the virgin, throughout all kingdoms flies,
For all her faithful subjects, unfeignedly made mirth:
Poor clout-shooes gate their clubs, and willingly attend,
To wreke there mistres cause, both life and good will spend.
The noise whereof, so sounded in the air,
And with the roaring cannons on the sea:
That heaven and earth, in every part might hear,
How nigh soever, or else how far away:
The thumping of the same so frighted me,
That on the mount I wakened where I ley.
My limbs be numde, as cold as any stone,
And Phoebus bathing in the Occident flood:
I could not stand when as I would have gone,
My joints were frosen, congeled was my blood:
Dismounting thus the hill, I did retire,
To master Leigh of Ridge, a Gentle Squyre.
To whom I told my Dream, both more and less,
From first unto the last in each degree:
Who wi^hed me, my pen, for to adresse,
To set it down, that all the world might see:
God save the Queen, (said he) the Eagle, and Noble hound,
And all that traitors be, almighty God confound.
Amen (quoth I) and he that would not so,
I wish he were the first, to feel deserved woe.
FINIS.
The Godesse chaste, that Dian has to name,
Is much abused by vermin that devour:
In forest, park, and chase, her galland Game
Is vexed sore, and daungered every hour:
Which causes her, to send for sure Hounds,
To hunt the wolves, out of her Stately Grounds.
WHen as Aurora with rudie cheeks prepared,
Her Oriental palace Phoebus to receive:
The Crystal skies, unto the earth declard,
That Flora would restore, what Hyemps did bereue*
Which caused birds to brush, them on the bows,
And many for to walk, their chambers did refuse.
And I my self then weary of my book,
To be partaker of the pleasant air:
Into a forest fast by the way I took,
Wherein my sight, did hautie hills appear:
And rocky towers, did scale the lofty skies,
Whom underneath, deep dales and dymbles lies.
Thus for to feed my gredy eyes at gaze,
By wandering long I weary was at last:
Till suddenly, my wits were in a maze,
My eyes did dazile, and all my sense was past:
I set me down, a while to rub my brows,
The poor Knights palace of pleasure to peruse.
But in a dream or trance, that time I was,
As did appear, by sightes I see full rare:
I heard such hunting of hounds both more and less,
That scarce I can, the twenteth part declare:
And every hound, was called by his name,
The Hunters hallowing did declare the same.
The ragged hills and rocky towers report,
By Echoes, voice, the quest of Noble hounds:
The which to hear, it was a worthy sport,
The merry voice from earth to skies rebounds:
The Goddess, Nymphs, with speedy foot do follow,
With sound of merry horn, most plesantly they hallow,
Thus as I heard this heavenly hunting there,
I parted from the place, where then I sat:
To have a sight, of that which I did hear,
Up higher the hill, with expedition gat:
Where under a bush, not far where I did stand,
I saw a Nymphe with bended bow in hand.
Whose presence then I durst not well approach,
Her strange attire, and sparkling looks were such:
But closly kept me underneath a roch,
Because harm haunteth some for meddling much:
Thus as I stood to hear this merry quest,
I heard the names of hounds that hunted best.
The followers cheered the hounds with merry voice,
With pleasant notes of worthy warbling horn:
And called upon the hounds that were of choice,
Who lead no chawle, the game they found so warm:
And many hounds of sundry names there where,
Of mighty mouths, so did their sound apeare.
I heard the hunts-man, call on duty still,
Obedience raung'd, from duty quite away:
Pleasure he ran riot, with his fellow will,
Rufler rudely rou'd, and would no whit obey:
Love well found the perfect, whereat the hunts-man blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ever true.
Bowman bruisht the brakes, through thick and thin,
Diligence followed duty, with merry open mouth:
Yet scarce could duty bring obedience in,
He was so rudely raung'd ore far into the south:
The hunts-man never ceast, but hallowed still and blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ever true.
Findeall, and hold fast, both hunted together,
Through thick and thin, both night and day:
Revel and ringwood spared no weather,
Over hills and dales, they take the way:
Whereat the hunts-man, both hallowed and blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art still true.
Talbot, treasure and trusty, followed duty fast,
And louewel labored lustily night, day, and hour:
The hunts-man did rechat, with horn a merry blast,
Dianas Nymphs did follow with all their might and power:
Thus one, or other, never seast but blew,
And cride, here Talbot, take it, for thou was ever true,
These hounds hunte together, with a gallant quest,
But that Mendall was behind above a mile or more:
And favor hunted counter, with diverse of the rest,
Which marde some sport, beshrow their hearts therefore:
But to the trusty hounds the hunts man hallowed still and blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ever true.
The wolf, and fox, both fled before the hounds,
The beastly belling bull, lay coucht in cabin closse:
And wicked weesels, fled from Britanian grounds,
The tygar trudgeth, daily to his loss:
The hounds quest merrily, the hunts-man ever blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ever true.
The concord of their cry and merry quest,
Caused all the hills, and mountains to rejoice:
The rocky woods, records both East and West,
To every ear, the noble pleasant voice*
The Nymphs let arrows flee, and still the hunts-man blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ever true.
Thus over hills and dales, these hounds did mount,
Diana in her chariot, followed very fast*
Till to the quirry, a number out of count,
Were brought to reap their just reward at last.
Where presently, the Mort the Hunts-man blew,
And said, here Talbot, take it, for thou art ever true.
The heads and quarters of these Carrens vile
I did behold, where kites and Crows did eat,
A mark for many that do themselves exile
From Duties doctrine, and deal by deep deceit.
For by this same it does appear full well,
That sacred Gods of every thing can tell.
The heavens did declare a joyful time,
By crystal skies, and Phoebus golden gleimes:
The Lark aloft into the clouds does clime,
And every Hunter, his wished pray obtaines.
Till at the length, away the Hunts-man blew,
And said, that noble Talbot evermore was true.
This heavenly hearing so delighted me,
I wished this hunting last for evermore:
Most pleasant dream it was that ere I see,
But lo, what luck did light (alas) therefore,
A friend of mine by chance that way did pass,
And wakened me, asleep where then I was.
FINIS.
Verses pend upon the Etimologie of the name of the right honorable,
Fardinando, Lord Strange.
FAme in her flight, by chance found me
Asleep upon a bank,
And in a fury, said that she
Would yield me little thank,
To sleep when thou should wake, and write,
Since I (said she) will now indite.
Arise (quoth she) write after me,
My sentence do not change,
Here shall thou view a creature true,
Who may be called Strange.
And if thou learned be quoth she,
Behold the noble Wight:
Whose modest mind apeares to be
A wise and virtuous Knight:
Descent of noble Parentage,
And rarest creature of his age:
A man so fixed and firm of faith,
That never yet did change,
And stands to truth for life or death,
This man is very Strange:
Recorded is his life by me,
Within my house of fame:
From age to age his memory
Shall still advance his name.
(Quoth she) because his noble gifts
Do put his equals to their shifts
Let poor men judge, that want refuge,
That find their Landlords change,
He takes the old rent, and is content:
Which may be called Strange.
Doubtless (quoth Fame) thou may be bold
To write what I shall say:
Strange is his virtues to behold,
Among the rest this day:
He serves God in humble wise,
His Princes foes he does despise.
His lowly mind men ever find,
Still fixed not to change.
Which winnes men's hearts in every parts,
And that must needs be strange.
Esteemde he is, of Noble Prince,
And of all gentle blood:
His like before his time, nor since,
For virtuous gifts and good:
I never knew, nor never shall,
Though I to mind with pen should call:
All histories of ancient age,
Yet I should find some change:
His part he plays upon the stage,
Exceeds very Strange.
No pride perceived in his breast,
No hautie heart he bears:
And where is need, to help us pressed,
And thus he spends his years:
No harm to any has he wished,
Nor for a poor man's profit fisht:
Doubtless his life, to man and wife,
Does show in him no change:
But sure, each hour unto his power,
Among the rest, is Strange.
Of worldly wealth, he makes no coumpt,
He ways his honor more:
Love to his servants does surmount,
And to his tenaunts poor:
Of country still, he takes care,
And for the common wealth prepare:
Remembering well, that fame will tell,
What people love to change:
Therefore I say, this present day,
He may be called Strange.
Death doubts he not, in Princes causes,
So true of faith is he:
To serve and prosecute her laws,
He cares not who they be:
Refusing neither night nor day,
All tides, and times, he takes the way:
No favor fear, no friend, nor foe,
Can cause his mind to change,
No gain nor pain, can tempt him so,
And that is very Strange.
If I should make report (quoth Fame)
Of half his golden gifts:
Except that Tullie were thy name,
Thy pen were put to shifts:
Go to therefore, and write (said she)
And I therewith abroad will flee:
And every ear, of him shall hear,
That never yet did change:
But sure as rock, and all his stock,
And that is only Strange.
He loves men, much more then sheep,
That some do most delight:
He pities people poor that weep,
When wrong has wrought them spite:
He gently hears their grieved causes,
And does with justice use the laws:
By force he ways no wight with power,
Nor mind, with wind does change:
As many do this present hour,
But now that is not strange.
Not marks and pounds, but hawks and hounds,
Is ever his desire:
He lays not gether poores men's grounds,
He is no country stroyer:
He lives in love, of rich and poor,
Sufficient he does call his store:
Full well knows he, that men must dye,
And therefore will not change:
But lives content, with ancient rent,
Which argues to be Strange.
Thus did I write, and Fame indite,
Me thought that present time:
For in the sense, I had delight,
To study every line:
Lo this in sleep, me thought I heard,
Of Fame, which bad me take regard:
With painful pen, to tell all men,
That it might never change:
Then out of sight, she took her flight,
And bad me think of Strange.
Then wakened I, with weeping eyes,
To call my Dream to mind:
Because I see, such men as these,
In England hard to find:
Alas therefore, what should I say,
It is the cause poor men decay:
Vice takes place, for want of grace,
So many love to change:
Thus have I penned, and also end,
My Dream of Noble Strange.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimologie of the Name and Title of the right
worshipful Lady, the Lady Julian Holcraft of the Vale Royal.
THe head which still with study is oppressed,
Of force must find, some way to ease the same:
All travelers must have a time to rest,
Or else their limbs, with wandering will be lame:
So I a weary sitting at my book,
Into the fields to walk the way I took.
High on a hill to mount I did delight,
To view a Royal Vale, that was below:
Where rivers run, with streams as crystal white,
And pleasant woods, about the same did show:
Wherein did bounse the Buck, with Heart, and Hynd,
The Faulconer there for hawks, may pastime find.
Each spray was sprouted out with buds,
Upon the which Merula sings sweet:
The To Bucke roreth in the shrubs,
The fertile meadows, taste of flowers sweet:
Which vapurs did perfume the starry skies,
That from this vale so Royally does rise.
Lo thus bewrapt in viewing this prospect,
The sight I see, my sense so over threw:
The crystal streams, my eyes had so reflect,
The joy thereof my judgment overthrew:
That down I sat to study at the same,
Till Morpheus had my drowsy head ore' taken.
And thus a sleep to me approached near,
A gallant Dame, presenting great renown:
Which said arise thou slugg, why sleep'st thou here.
Come go with me, where thou shall have a room:
I looked up and did Melponia see,
I rose and craved, her pardon on my knee.
Doubtless (quoth he) at Helicon thou art,
(Recorded thee) where thou shall still remain:
But yet more counsel take before we part,
In have prepare, thy pen for to proclayme
The virtuous life, a Lady leads here,
As daily shall by just report appear.
In lasting letters, pen this Saras gift,
Whose mildnes may full well Rebecca teach:
And Rachels virtues, all would put to shift,
The steps she treades no living wight can rech:
From blooming youth, unto these present days,
Of Alcest, she: does justly bear the kayes.
In heart so meek with spotles thought is she,
That words in wast, be banished from her breast:
No idle look once glanceth from her eyes,
The poor man's plaints, to hear her ears are pressed:
Her liberal hand, does hungry belly fill,
Who wants her help, she is their comfort still.
Unto her friend, as sure, as marble rock,
To foe not yelding, but as reason will*
Of s^eaches she, both bears the key and lock,
In (time) to use all things, she has the skill:
In judgment she can play Apollos part,
A Goddess she might be, for learned art.
Live she does, in love of rich and poor,
Her race so rarely run, has not been known:
Her lamp of light, thus burns evermore,
With news thereof, lo Fame her trump has blown,
At Hespias, in chair of state this Dame
Has cheifest place, for to advance her name.
In worldly storms she bears her sails so well,
No sudden blast can work her any wrack,
From out her presence vice she does expel,
And Virtue yet would never see him lack:
Her just deserved praise she does not seek,
She is so humble, and lowly in her sprite.
And to the stranger still she has regard,
To show such courtesy as worship craves:
Her neighbors cause with her is ever heard,
Lo thus this Lady still her self behaues.
She bears no mind that soreth in the sky,
Nor yet too low she lifts not to fly.
Not cankered Envy can these words deny,
If Spite should speak, he must declare the same:
For Virtue vaunts her name into the sky,
With golden Trumpet, sounded up by Fame,
Would God therefore her days should ever last*
Then might a number think their sorrows past.
Her blossoms breed the fruits of noble state,
Whose taste does comfort rich and poor these days
By Natures works, of God these gifts they gat^
That every wight should justly speak her praise:
At Helicon the Muses do delight:
With golden pen this Ladies life to write.
Of many virtues more: I could declare,
To occupy thy pen, if Tully were thy name:
That wanting Time I am compeld to spare,
Behold Sir Phoebus does confess the same:
For now he batheth in the Occean Sea,
Which is the cause I must depart away.
Look now therefore, thy pen do witness bear,
Melpomen said, for so thy duty is:
And make report what thou of me do hear,
And tell the world that I command thee this.
For Justice evermore has this regard,
That every creature reap their due reward,
Doubt neither friend nor foe to speak a truth*
Consider thou art bound by duty much.
Remember Time will bring all things to prooffe,
And since it does thus much thy credit touch,
For to discharge thy self from bearing blame,
Thy pen I wish to write upon this Dame.
And with these words she vanished away,
And I did wake forth of this pleasant dream,
The night was come, and banished was the day,
The clouds obscured Dianas face with rain.
Then to my study straight I did prepare,
This Ladies words Melpomen to declare.
These are the news, and all the news I have,
God send good news this year, and evermore.
Our noble Queen the everlasting save,
And God increase your Ladyship with store,
God bless my Lady Countess, and her birth,
Her honor, and your worship long life with joy and mirth.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimologie of the name of the right Woshipfull, Sir
Edmond Traffard, of Traffard, in the County of Lancaster, Knight.
SVch was my hap of late to walk, the lofty hills to view,
For to revive my weary wits, which study overthrew:
And forth I past from high to higher, and so to th'height of all,
Where viewing of the country round, at length to mind did call
The wonders great, and works of God: when all a Caos was,
And lapped up upon a lump, as hard as beaten brass,
In musing at those days and these, my flesh began to quake,
To call to mind the wretched ways, that worldly men do take:
And as I drowned was in dumps, came Morpheus with his mace,
So that my senses did obey, and yielded to his grace.
No sooner thus asleep, but straight in drowsy dream I see
A Lady swifter then the wind, called Time approaching nie.
Rise and awake (quoth she) to me, why sleep'st thou on this hill?
The words I speak I charge thee straight, record with painful quill.
Then did she shake a razor sharp, and with a frowning face,
And thretning speech, she said the world should suddenly give place
For I am Time which executes the secret will of God,
In every age of wickedness, by Time they feel the rod.
Else had not floods ore'flowed the world, for ugly sinful vice,
If Time had not bin present there, which caused the^ play their prize
I Time shipped Noah into the Arc, and all the charge he had,
And I was she first found him and by doves, which made him glad
Lo thus at first and ever since unto this present hour,
By Time were builded Cities great with many a lofty tower.
Down have I cast the^ all again, old walls do mention make,
And Cities now, and buildings brave, I (Time) shall cause to quake.
Although the bragging Worldling raise his house into the air.
I Time will vanish al away, as no such thing were there*
My blade is whet, I wait but when to use the mortal edge:
On whom I light, my order is to have the life in pledge:
My sister Atrapos, the Poets do feign the fatal Dame,
Who can do nothing wanting Time, she does usurp my name:
Ne Lachices, nor Clotho can the distaffe dress at all,
But when that I do point the Time, they come when I do call:
So that I Time do bear record from first unto the last,
Of present days, of days to come, and days that now are past:
Of young and old, of rich and poor, the virtue Time does prove,
On whom to wait, both king and Prince, and all estates behooue:
No state can start by night or day, that Time can not epsy,
Nor secret shift so closely lapt, but Time the truth shall try:
I Time therefore am come to thee, of wonders great to tell,
Therefore it stands thee much upon, to use thy pen as well.
Doubt not to write, what I declare, nor fear not who shall see
What drops fall from thy painful pen, but bear thy self by me:
For lo (said Time) the fire burns that Mars has set on fire,
See now his cruel mortal blade, that blood does still desire:
The fearful skrikes of innocents, from far do thou not hear*
Remediless (alas) they cry, and die in deep despair.
And now behold how hunger haunts with cheeks both pale and lean,
This bloody butcher, furious Mars, and all his wicked train:
And greedy spoil, spares not to spill, to pray on others good,
Ravening Rape with maid and wife runs headlong to the wood.
For Favor flies, and force takes place, and vice does virtue kill,
Fained Friendship now lays on lurtch, his faithful friend to spil.
And Shift in shackles now inuents to kick against the spur,
And yet Dissembling every day, lies coutching like a cur:
Revenge is feeing of his friends, in hope to have a day,
But see where Justice is at hand, his guerdon for to pay.
Death does provide dame Pestilence, to work the later woe,
Likewise destruction, with his friends, do wish it to be so.
Know this (said she) more plagues then these are ^^^ming near at hand,
No creature living but shall feel, the same on sea and land:
In top of all their worldly trust, shall come the woeful news,
Great terror in the hearts of me^, when God these whips shall use:
Time shall try all, this is most true: the Scripture says the same,
Therefore I charge thee send abroad, these sayings in my name.
Now rise (quoth she) and turn thy face toward the Occean sea,
A triple foorded river shall, direct thy ready way:
Where thou shall find Antiquity, the maker of the place,
Whose name has been Time out of mind, before the conquest was:
Thus suddenly she took her flight, and vanished away,
And I in trembling fear did wake, not knowing what to say.
Since dreams be vain, of Poets pens, and Fables of delight,
So do I pray, that all prove false, that hear I did indite:
Beseeching God with Nestors age, your worship may increase,
With health, and wealth, and New years joy, and so my pen does sease.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimologie of the name of the right worshipful
Master Peter Leigh, heir apparent to the valiant Gentleman* Sir* Peter
Leigh, of the linne, Knight.
PErusing ancient books of late,
I found a story strange:
Which told me that, the earthly state,
Should have a soden change:
And all that is, should nothing be,
Whereat I mused maruellouslye.
Erste never was my barren brain,
So suddenly be rapt:
For to perceive that all was vain,
I thought it great mishap:
Since once I thought the world should last,
To hear destruction, made me basht.
Thus as I mused at the same,
My weary wits, with study toild:
By Morpheus, means a sleep did frame,
Least Naturs gifts, should have been spoild:
But as I slept, a dream full rare,
I had, which greeues me to declare.
Enuironde round about was I,
From lofty skies, with golden gleymes:
Wherein I saw, a Gods fly:
Thrice swifter then Sir Neptuns streams,
A razour in her hand she bare:
And fiercely did these words declare.
Remember well (quoth she) to me,
Make ready pen, and inck, to write:
The words that now I speak to thee,
Since that I know, thou can indite:
Time is my name, young once I was,
Though now, I wear and wast alas.
Lo I am she that present was,
When Heaven, Earth, and Seas were made:
From age, to age, what came to pass,
Unto this hour I know the trade:
Although that worldlings Time forget,
Yet to accounts I call their det.
Else those that fleet, and flow in wealth,
Would quite devour the poorer sort:
Since might always forgets himself,
And makes of wrong a common sport:
I Time therefore this bloody knife,
Do bear unawares, to shut their life.
In Time that is past, what Cities great,
Whose walls, and towers scald the skies:
Were mounted up, to be the seat,
For earthly Gods, this Scripture tryes:
Which lies now laid lo with soil,
And who but Time, that made the spoil.
Great castles to defend the foe,
With walls of force, long since were built:
Their towers torn, does plainly shoe,
That Time compeld them for to yield:
Whose ruin does these days declare,
That Time bids every man prepare.
Have I not been, the cause (quoth Time)
That every man these days does build:
Whose pride therein, so far does shine,
That all the poor thereby are spild:
But as their goods, is now their God,
I Time therefore, shall bring a rod.
Erste such a whippe as I shall bring,
From mighty love, was never feel'd:
I all their buildings down will fling,
To flee themselves, shall be compeld:
The sword shall vengeance take for sins,
And those shall lose, these days that winnes.
So that if Ovid were alive,
The Metaphor would pass his pen:
The father, and the son, shall strive,
And sharp revenge consume all men.
The Tenant shall his Landlord hate,
And neighbors be at great debate.
So Love, and Charity, shall wast*
Pride, and Envy, shall increase:
And pure chastity, displast,
But whoredom, he shall never seace:
And Usury, shall fill his baggs,
While poor Tromtroth does walk in rags.
Quit void of grace (quoth Time) I see,
The greatest number, at this day:
For Simon Magus, subtly,
By cloaked craft, can catch his pray:
The world runs headlong after gain,
Whose pleasure Time shall turn to pain:
Undoubtedly this rasour sharp,
(quoth Time) shall presently dispatch:
Yet none shall know, when to depart,
No where, nor when, I make the match:
But suddenly the thread I cut,
Thus wordly joys, by me are shut.
You see (quoth Time) the alteration,
You see, how lucar leads the way:
You see, these days, abomination,
By error, faith you see decay
By bribes, true justice blinded is,
By following will, some wade amiss.
Edels^a now, deceives us,
By outward signs and also shoe,
Fair words be framed marvelous,
To work the hearers grief and woe.
But now said Time, the day's at hand,
All things shall wast on sea and land:
Revenge from skies with fiery flames,
Shall now at hand devour and wast
All mortal men unto their shames,
Except where grace and virtue's plast.
Those that believe, and God do fear,
As Angels then shall straight apeare.
And with these words she took her flight,
And bad me boldly write the same:
When Time was gone I was afright,
For all the world me thought did flame:
With Thunder then the earth did quake,
Which woeful thing did cause me wake.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimoligie of the name of the right worshipful, M.
Thomas Leigh of Adlington, in the County of Chester, Esquire: purporting the
nature of Time.
THe thorny thumps that Thought did thacke within my woeful breast
Had pincht me so, that Naturue craved for help to purchase rest.
Of studious works I weary was, into the fields I fled:
My purpose was by wholesome air, for to refresh my head.
And as I wandered up and down, under a bush I sat,
Some secret thing me thought that time, came in my painful pate.
Lo thus at last with musing much, a sleep came in my eye,
Erst never such a dream I had, nor thing so strange did see
I saw a Lady called Time, which flew as swift as wind,
Give ear (quoth she) for presently I will express my mind.
Have care unto my speech (said she) and mark my sayings well:
Else out of wisdoms worthy ways I must thy wits expel.
See here the wings wherewith I fly, behold the knife I bear.
See here the present speed I make: yet Time no man does fear.
Quite void of care I see the world, they mount with Icarus now,
Undoubtedly so that they gain, to get they care not how.
Yet I Daine Time will call to count the stoutest of them all,
And give unto the loftiest mind, a troublesome tombling fall.
Remember Time began all things, at first when all was made,
Time at the last shall cause again al things to wast and fade.
Have I not cast Jerusalem unto the slymy soil?
Of worldly wealth I make but dust, though worldlings daily toil
My nature is as I began, so for to make an end,
And cause in time both quick and dead both for to bow and bend.
Such is my nature, that I must make trial of all truth,
Look from the first unto the last, let ancient books be prooffe.
Erected I have Cities great, so have I Castles strong,
In every part of all the world, these buildings lie along.
Great is my force, let Scripture judge, which says al things shall wast,
How can the greatest kingdom then escape my force at last.
Else worldlings would still brag and best upon their good and land.
So I dame Time should have the tant which have the^ in my hand
Such buildings now be mounted up by such as fear no fall,
Quite void of care the builders be, to leave the same at all,
Until I Time with razor sharp, do cut their vital thread.
I see there is not any now, the latter day does dread.
Esteem they do their goods and lands, and Time to come forget
Remembering not that Time at last shall cause them pay their det.
Mark but how hours wastes days, and days the weeks devour
And weeks consume meneths you see by proved proofs each hour.
And months do swallow up the year, and years do consume men.
All this does chance by me dame Time, yet who knows where or when?
And with this speech she took her flight, and bad me take my pen.
For to record the words she spoke, and publish to al men:
But when I saw that Time was past, alas she grieved me sore:
That I in Time did not take Time, I daily weep therefore,
Thus have you heard my drowsy dream, though Time be gone, and fled,
And I her sayings still record within my heart and head.
FINIS.
A Psalm pend upon the Etimologie of the name of the right Worshipful, Thomas
Leigh of Adlington, in the County of Chester, Esquire: To the note or tune of,
Domine ne in furore. Psalm. VI.
THy mercy Lord, my faith persuades,
although my sins be red:
How I shall be made free to thee:
by Christ's blood that is shed.
Of all my wandering wilful days
and rechlesse rudefull toys:
My faithful hope is for to mount,
to thee in lasting joys.
And as I wickedly did sin,
I faithfully repent:
Such is thy mercy that I know,
my tears shall thee content.
Lo hear my tears the witness is,
my sin does grieve me fore:
Esteem O Lord my woeful plaintes,
I trust to offend no more.
In thee my only hope remains,
on thee is all my stay:
Give ear unto my woeful cries,
when I shall pass away.
Have mind upon thy mercy Lord,
forget thy wrath and ire,
Erect my Spirit into thy bliss,
I humbly thee desire.
Else all my tears and grievous plaintes
return without reward:
So shall I wear, and wast in woe,
my cries shall not be heard:
Seem not therefore to turn thy face,
accept my woeful suite:
Quit me from Satan's nets and snares,
his traps good Lord confute.
Unto thy Majesty O Lord,
I dedicate my self:
Yield I do my soul to thee,
and leave the world my wealth.
Accept thereof, thou glorious God,
thus still on thee I cry:
Revenge not Lord, but mercy have,
and never let me die.
All glory be unto thy name:
and to thy only son:
And to the holy Ghost, with whom
to us thy kingdom come.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimologie of the name of the right worshipful Lady,
the Lady Marie Edgarton of Ridley, in the County of Chester.
THe toyled mind and weary wit that study does oppress,
Nature moves many ways, the same for to redress:
Which caused me to leave my book, my senses to revive,
And wandering, walked hear and there, the time away to drive.
High up a hill with weary steps, the haughty rocks I scaled,
Among the which I heard a voice, that sore my heart appald:
Among the shrubs I shrouded was, where in a trance I sat,
Or else some drousie dream it was, that then and there I gate.
Erst was I never in the like, for there me thought I see,
An armed man with bloody blade with speed approached ny:
His face as fierce as flames of fire, his hands imbrewd in blood:
And like a Lion in his rage, before me stamping stood.
Lo here (quoth he) my name is Mars, that am the bloody God,
The gleids that glow within my breast, breeds mischief al abroad
Kings and kingdoms by the ears I daily use to set,
Murder is the thing I crave, and peace I still forget.
And now (said he) pull forth thy pen, and write my sayings all,
For presently a wonder great, appear before thee shall:
Se here (quoth he) Megera comes with crawling snaky hair,
Lo in the bosoms of the best, she throws them here and there.
Do thou not see what wrath she works, that lurketh close in breast
And do not view what kingdoms I to mortal war have dressed
The Messenger I am (quoth he) that Jupiter does send,
to execute his wrath on such, that do his Grace offend.
In uttering of these words to me, far of I did heholde,
How Spoil was coming and his mates with all the speed they could
Whereat the skrikes of innocents, with wives and virgins cries.
And grievous groves of murdered men did pierce the starry skies
My flesh did tremble at the sight, to see the Flames of fire,
The rubbery both of rich and poor, Destruction did desire,
And ugly monstrous Rauishment defilde both maid and wife,
The worldly Muckscraps for their goods did daily loose their life.
And then came desperation post, to put the rest in fear,
And grudging Grief and future foes, cause many to despair,
Yea Hunger haunted armor bright, with cheeks both pale and lean
And pierces through the sturdy steel, and wrought a mortal pain
Revenge as greedy as a gripe, made havoc where he came,
Destruction with his naked blade distroyed many a man:
Dearth was lodged in every house, and kept both land and seas,
And almost all both old and young bewaild the woeful days.
In all this hurlyburly there, Love shrank his Neighbors all,
And charity was chased away. Pride slipped and had a fall:
Mirth in every nooke did mourn, and pleasure pained sore,
Tom Troth was sworn for to depart the place for evermore.
Enuiron'd round about was peace with bloody men of of war:
Of Charity obscured was the blazing lamp and star,
And Pestilence as fire red, the stoutest caused to stoop,
That Lamentation wrang his hands the country round about,
Death was the last that laid on lurtch, the final end to make:
and for a brag, his bloody dart about his head did shake:
(quoth he) behold, these mischieue mates that on S. Mors attend,
Against whom no creature can preuale, til I dispatth their end.
Great were the brags that Mars did make, and fierce his fury was
and swear an oath with present speed all this should come to pass:
Then did he turn himself about, and Albion Isle he thrate,
Which was of Mars no sooner said, but foreign foes heard that:
Else had I slept a longer sleep upon that haughty hill.
But that the roaring Cannons voice me thought was thu^ping still
And noise of armed men was such, that (alfright) I wakte,
Thus rashly rushing up for fear, from thence my way did take,
Refusing neither hedge nor ditch, nor sparing thick nor thyn,
No step so foul my speedy feet made spare to step within:
Thus runninng rashly in this race, with panting brethles breath,
I rested by a pleasant poole, fast by a little heath.
Thus reuoluing with my self what were the best to do,
Whether to tell this dream or no, since dreams be called untrue:
Which mazed my mind with triple trance what way were best to take,
This dream for to reueile, or else to dround in Lethea lake
Of the one and the other being basht: the likliest way to choose,
At length thought good to pen my dream, in steed of better news
Beseeching God to bless this Isle from Mars and all his mates,
And grant us peace. God save our Queen and all the noble states
No other news for this new year I can your worship tell,
But that I trust in spite of Mars that all things shall be well.
Beseeching God that sits to judge, to guide your days in peace,
With health, long life, and joyful years, and worship to increase.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimologie of the name of the right Worshipful. M.
Peter Warberton of Arley, in the County of Chester, Esquire.
PRepare a place above the skies,
Where Angels rest in joy:
Out of all mundane thoughts arise,
Which works the souls annoy,
Of Time watch well the stealing steps,
Take heed of youth that age forgets,
All things have time, by power divine,
And Time consumes all,
She has cut off the mightiest kings,
And so the rest she shall.
Emperor, King and Kaisar she
Does mount upon the stage,
And all that shall advanced be,
Time raises in each age.
So Time dismountes them all again.
Some from great joy, to shame and pain,
Thus rich and poor she evermore
Cuts off both great and small:
The Captain stout and all his rout
She spoils, and ever shall.
Therefore watch well, this hasty Dame,
That makes this mortal speed:
As all our Parents felt the same,
With us she will proceed:
Time flies apace she taries not,
She grantes no grace if men forgot,
At first she is as sugar sweet,
But ends like bitter gall,
Let Worldlinges watch that be asleep,
For Time no doubt they shall.
Remember Time, built Cities great,
Which now is wilderness:
With many a costly and stately feat,
That now consumed is:
And Time, these days builds many hours,
Which shall in Time, be none of ours:
For as the seas, does ebb and floe,
So Time does with us all:
Now choose who thinks of Time or not,
All things consume she shall.
Who marketh Time, in these our days,
Her works be wondrous strange:
For those that erste did bear the keys,
By Time does office change:
And from the hall, to kitchen comes,
And at the length, bide fortuns domes:
As captive stand, to hold up hand,
To live or dye at all:
Who can prevail: when Time does deal,
Which will consume and shall.
And does not Time make infants strong,
Of young and tender age:
When six and thirty year has sprung,
These lusty bloods on stage:
Mark Time when all this race is run,
Unlooked for croukt age does come:
And by no means but only Time,
Therefore lets watch her all:
Since down she casts, such as clyme,
And evermore she shall.
Right thus of age, Time makes dust,
And so she does of youth:
And Time still tryes, all things that is just,
And brings us all to prooffe:
And Time shall at the later day,
The filthy factes of men bewray:
Not sparing one, nor leaving now,
But to accounts bring all:
And thus has she persuaded me,
She does and ever shall.
Else could not now, the world be old,
Which at the first was young:
For Time, her self now waxes cold,
Her limbs be not so strong:
As in her first beginning she*
Nor half of Nature francke and free:
Her lofty looks, I read in books,
Begins for to fall:
Her galland cheer, begins to wear,
Yet she shall end us all.
Remember then all things begun,
Must have an end at last:
For when the vital, thread is spun,
The mortal knife makes have:
For Attropos does tend on Time,
As waiting maid by power divine:
Unlooked for, or men be ware,
She breaks both heart and gall:
And when she smiles she works wiles,
For to consume us all,
Thus trudgeth Time and tarrieth not,
To tend upon her pray:
And lays her snares, in the every plot,
To twitch all states away:
Therefore judge if the world be vain,
That greedy gapeth, still for gain.
One brother sells now an other,
And worldly wealth rules all:
But Time does watch, for to dispatch,
For so at length she shall.
Of this beware, and mark it well,
For Time, is now at hand:
That Time all pleasures shall expel,
As Well by sea as land:
Not one but all, shall taste of woe,
Of very force, it must be so:
Else sin, would sincke, and vice would drink,
The works of virtue all:
So Time consumes* those that presumes,
Lo thus she does and shall.
Such is the force of Time ye see,
Such is the end of all:
Here may we see that vanity,
Does work our mortal thrall:
Quite now your selves, from worldly mucke,
Least Time unlooked your lives to pluck:
Undoubtedly in Time fore see,
To win the way to rest:
And help the poor, which is the store,
For which God thinks you blessed.
If Time cut of, all living things,
And still bringes all to naught:
And shall to judgment bring the kings,
As Well for deed, as thought:
Then let the meaner stats take heed,
To watch and pray with present speed:
Else in the snares, of Time unawares,
We must to judgment all:
Remember this, great need it is,
For Time consume us shall.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Etimologie of the name of the right worshipful George
Brereton of Ashly in the County of Chester Esquyre.
GRace grows and springs, where virtue vaunts her self,
Else wicked men, would swallow all by wealth:
On every man, God does his gifts bestow,
Regarding most where virtue seems to grow:
Great is his mercy to us every hour,
Else how could David, conquer Saules great power.
Beware therefore, of Mydas wicked mind,
Refuse the world, whose pleasures men does blind:
Erect thy steps, in grace and virtues pathe,
Remember that in wisdoms well thou bath:
Esteem no wretch, whose tongue shall paint or gloze,
There pick-thanke pranks, shall but thy worship lose:
Of friends to come, it is vain to hope too much,
Nor present friends, their friendship greatly tutch.
Enter not where doubts are of return,
So needs not care, though after claps do spurn:
Such wisdom warely, shall provide thy way,
Quite from the snares, that should thy state decay:
Unto the poor stretch out thy stretched hand,
In Princes cause, look faithfully thou stand:
And pity still where power has oppressed,
Remember this, and men shall think thee blessed.
FINIS.
Verses upon Ieffrey Shackarley of Holme and Shackarley, Esquyer.
IN present bliss, watch warely future harms,
Else Sirces shall bewitch thee, with her charms:
Fly from the steps, of such as fear not God,
For else offenders justly feel his rod:
Regard that man, that plainly tells truth,
And banish those, that fabling flattery sooth,
Yield courtesy to them that gentle are.
So Truth thy worship, shall abroad declare,
Have no regard to lend thy ears to such:
As shall with lies true faithful meaning touch,
Condemn no man, till thou his answer hear:
Know this by Scripture, justice has no pear,
Consider patience proves, virtues mind:
And worship works ever after kind,
Remember them, that crave for Christ's sake:
Least God his gifts, away from thee shall take,
Endure firm in says, observing law,
Yield to thy Prince, a just obedient awe.
Do thus and so, the golden trumpe of Fame,
By true report, shall justly say the same.
FINIS.
Verses upon Master Hugh Sharkerly, the son and heir of the said Ieffray,
Esquyer.
Have patience present, when wrath would wreke his will,
Else wisdom wants, that guides men from ill:
When youthful royes, would rashly rule the rain,
Give ear to age, who tells that all is vain:
Have care to watch the world and fear no foe.
So wisdom shall, thy wit declare and show:
Haunt not the steps, where Cupid leads the way,
And let no tongue, thy counsel once bewray:
Conceile nothing, that duty bids reueile,
Know subjects must, nothing from Prince conceal:
Constrain no man, not more then power is,
And hear no picke-thanks, telling that and this*
Reach to the poor, that crave for Christ's sake,
Let reason rule, when will would havoc make:
Endure sure as all thy stock has done,
In doing so thou shinest like the sun.
FINIS.
Upon Master Ieffray Shackcarley Esquyre.
IN Fortunes friendship watch her changing face,
Else suddenly, she may dismount the best:
For those that most, do stand within her grace,
From age to age, have cause to trust her least:
A prooffe too plain, look whom she luls in lap,
You see at length, she spoils with some mishap.
She sets some, on throne of stately seat,
Higher then the rest, on golden mounts to vaunt*
And yet at last, proves but a poisoned bayt,
Compounde with guile, the worldlings to inchaunt:
Know this of Fortune, where she seems to smile,
Custom there does teach her work a wyle:
And those that in her floods, boyse sails the heart,
Revenging still themselves upon their foes:
Lo suddenly there (...) fall is next,
Entrapt with snares, that works most woeful woes,
You ^^e that Fortune, fails none but such.
As in these days, do trust her over much.
FINIS.
Lenuoy.
When raging floods, of surging seas be heart,
And Boreas blastes, against the rocks does rush:
The present fall, by Nature is the next,
And quiet calmes remains in every bush,
So likewise such, as Fortune favors most:
By her displeasure, suddenly is lost.
FINIS.
Verses penned upon the Ethimologie of the name of the right worshipful Lady:
The Lady Julian Holcraft, of the Vale Royal.
THe golden trump, that Fame does sound,
Proclaims to every ear:
Where virtue is, for to be found,
By works it does appear:
As gold commends, the precious stone,
So worship shows, her self alone:
As Phoebus does exceed a star,
So gentleness does show:
How can Dame Fortune mount more harre,
Then place her darlings so.
Envy nor spite can not prevail,
Where virtue vaunts with grace:
Old ancient wrath of force shall fail*
And vices shall give place:
Where worship worthily shall show,
There just report, the Fame shall blow:
And every ear, such news shall hear,
As due desert does crave:
Lo Ladies all, behold you shall,
Who ought most honor have.
A Dame well decked with modesty,
As worship does behoue:
And garments lynde with lenity,
When patience list to prove:
With stomachers, of pure pity,
And head gear, that is wise and witty:
And liberal minds, all people binds,
To honor such (...) heart:
Do thus and then, the hearts of men,
You win in every part.
In storms when wisdom is the cloak,
No blast can blemish such:
This is the way for to provoke,
Your Fame the skies to touch:
Unto the poor, s^^etch out your hands,
God shall your store, increase, and lands:
Love them that plainly tells you true,
And banish golden speech:
Pick thanks mischief daily brew,
And all men's hearts they sigh.
Yield not, unto a cruel foe,
Where truth is on your side:
And warely watch a friend to know,
That steadfastly will bide:
And where you may revenge in deed,
Let mercy presently proceed:
Nothing does please, the Lord always,
So much as mercy still:
For mercy binds, all noble minds,
To save and not to spil.
Have mind that all that is begun,
Must have an end at last:
The end, no King, nor Prince, can shun,
Since Time all things will wast,
Of Time her trade you see it still,
Time builds all, and gives the fall,
To all things quick and dead:
The lucky life is to be wished,
The end is to be dread.
Lo here the fruits of virtues rare,
That in one lady is*
Conceive the same, and straight prepare,
For worship teaches this,
Remember where is courtesy,
That rises of gentilitie:
Of mercy, grace and charity,
Comes blessings of the Lord.
For if these want assuredly,
They still remain abhorred.
Behold how virtue bears the keys,
That unto bliss does lead,
A Lady living at these days,
Whose worship Fame does spread,
Her name I will not now express,
Since just report does all confess.
But as I proved, so I praise,
And will do till I die,
Her liberal hand her heart bewraies,
Above the starrie sky.
God bless her still from time to time,
From dangers, woe, and pain,
That she in worship still may shine,
And long in health remain:
And God protect her noble birth
Long for to live in joy and mirth.
And that their honors may increase,
As sand upon the Sea,
And this to pray I will not cease.
But call on God God always.
FINIS.
The last Dream that Morpheus did show unto the Author, was of a Lamb, that
appeared unto him, and seemed as though he spoke for the Time, by the
providence of the Gods: as follovveth.
LAst at my book in study where I sat,
My wits worn weak, my sense was gross and lame,
A drosie dump began to pierce my pate,
That in mine eye, a sleep began to frame:
Which when I spied, yet reason bad me rise,
And sluggish sleep always for to despise.
To shun that sloothfull vice my hawk I took,
I calde my Spannels, and to the field I went:
A flight to find, both brake and bush I shook,
till too and fro, three hours full were spent:
Thus wandering long, my Spannels found of game,
And I made have with speed to fly the same.
The Partridge sprang, my hawk fled from my fist,
With open Jaws my Spanniels cried the game,
With speedy foot, no hedge nor ditch I mist,
Through thick and thin I ran, to see the same.
But out of sight both hawk and Partridge flew,
Till I by following, into a Desert drew.
And being thus in uncouth place not known,
Both Hawke and Spanneils lost and from me fled:
And I with toylling travel overthrown,
Dame Nature came, and thus unto me said:
Preserve thy self (quoth she) thy hawke is gone,
And take some rest, for other help is none.
To whom I did obey and down I sat,
Upon a bancke and leaned to a thorn:
And rested there till Morpheus hit my pat,
With his drowsy mace, and said to me in scorn:
Well met Faukoner, what have you killed to day,
Cho ho has croken bill, her master left astray?
Let Hawks and Spanels pack and follow me,
(Quoth he) for now thou shall in deed attend:
Although thou meant, against duty from me flee,
I pardon thee, although thou did offend:
So many times though I have troubled thee,
This is the last, I promise faithfully.
Thus like a lump or clod of clay I was,
For why? my vital sprite with Morpheus went,
For to behold what he would bring to pass,
With weary stips to wait I was content,
Til at the last a Lamb did us approach,
Who did this sentence bravely to us broch.
Que brantare lafe, es causa muy fea.
Which words made me no little for to muse,
To hear a Lamb in language strange to say,
Those that break says, do all the Gods abuse,
And are detected at the latter day.
Then said this Lamb, since Robinson is here,
Before he pass some wisdom shall he leare,
Well said my Lamb (quoth Morpheus) let us hear,
Some sayings grave out off Experience school:
Since thou his Scholar, learned many a year,
And has been Usher for to see good rule,
I pray thee now unto my Clearke declare.
The flatterers feats, and see that none thou spare.
And with these words he mounted ore a hill,
And Lamb and me left by a river side,
Stay, stay (quoth Lamb) rest here and if thou will,
Til of my speech thou have experience tried,
And saying thus, he stepped into his cave,
And brought a glass of Skill exeeeding brave.
Lo here (quoth Lamb) and then began to bleit,
And made me signs to look within the glass:
Here may thou see (said he) of deep deceit,
The total sum, I mean of more and less.
And by the same before thou pass shall prove,
Who is thy friend, and who dissembleth love.
I greedily the glass began to graspe,
Wherein I saw a number that I knew,
With honnied mouths, yet natured like the waspe.
That at the length their stings against me threw
But yet I did dissemble all the while,
Because I would perceive their fraud and guile.
Then looking still within this glass I see
The lofty looks of some that spoke me fair,
And in their friendship so embraced me,
That outwardly true meaning did appear,
When Morpheus Lamb perceived I did the^ trust
Take heed betime (quoth he) they are unjust.
These are Camallians that change to every color
They show like gold, but inward worse than brass,
Look what they promise makes no purse the fuller,
As by experience proof declares no less.
Of foreign frayes they tell a bloody tale,
But commonly they quarrel with good ale,
Therefore (said he) trust not an alehouse friend,
Believe them not that are accustomed to lie:
A boasting soldiers tale, has never end,
And flattering words, be false so shall thou try:
Rough trees, rough fruit, rough taste do bear,
See vice and virtue shows, in whom they do appear.
And therefore trust not the untrusty man,
To do and say, does differ much ye know:
Great difference is, twixt Orpheus skill and Pan,
You know the sense, what need I more to show:
And therefore he, that violateth faith,
Is worthy as I said to suffer death.
Stay yet said Lamb, behold more of this glass,
See where one bounseth in a players gown:
Furde like a fool, as nice as ere she was,
The brauest tippling tib; that is within the town:
While she at tick tacke, tryes to prove her chance,
Her husband is content, a hornpipe for to dance.
She is well custom'd, both with rich, and poor,
Fie of Gentillitie, for she can speak no French:
Which blemisheth, her banner, and craks her credit sore,
And yet notwithstanding, she is a bounsing wench,
She daily does usurp, a Gentlewomans name:
I lift to speak no more of her, for bearing blame.
And with these words this Lamb again did bleyte,
And as it seemed by countenance morned much:
And said oh foolish Poliphils drowned in conceit,
Why think you of your selves, as though there were none such:
You play Sabinas part, that proud lascivious Dame,
Whose ugly life the Poets, have penned to her shame.
Five hundredth Asses milk, she daily had the bathe,
For to increase her vice, and beauty to preserve:
As at these days, our country women crave,
Out of a little hyde, a thong to large they crave:
For every poor man's daughter, now is prankt in silk,
Which does Sabinas bath, encounter made of milk.
These base-borne birth, Galeriaes heart exceeds,
That Neros golden palaces did disdain:
They think them flowers, which are in deed but weeds,
For truth, does try them, counterfetted plain:
As some men have, of velvet scabarts made,
That daily couers, a rustie canckered blade.
Of poison Poets write, that Cleopatra dyed,
No, no, (quoth Lamb) it is a lie in deed:
Her death came thus, in stories as I read,
By a bodkin that she bought, her heart did bleyd:
With which she used, to curle her golden hair,
Wherewith she killed her self, it does appear.
Lo hear you lewd lascivious wanton sort,
That do delight, to paint your selves in pride:
No doubt but you, shall smart for youthful sport,
When mettell shall be, by the fire tryde:
When flaming fire (I say) the gold shall try,
In Plutos pit, you shall for ever cry.
Thus prating promisers, hold still your fruitles brags,
Among your potts, your promises perform:
Else will the wise, perceive your wardrop rags,
And to your shame, will laugh you all to scorn:
You mistres tipler, that would so gentle be,
For all your furs, your tricks the world does see.
Learn to speak French, and if you will be gentle,
For French must make you mistres, that is most sure:
Because your birth is, very base and simple,
And you a tipler, whose life is nothing pure:
Learn to know thy self, thy neighbors know thee well,
Per foy merritriciam, else will I ring thy bell.
And then aloude this Lamb to laugh began,
To Limbo lake (quoth he) la iambe les piedz pack:
Les leures of such, inticeth many a man,
To utter confusion, and everlasting lack:
Lo mistres tipler, if you will gentle be,
It Is more then time you come, to learn this French of me,
And at these words, a while this Lamb did pause,
And spying me, a weary of the Time:
Upon the earth, began to scrape his claws,
Friend Robinson (quoth he) thy listening ears incline:
For now women, that good and virtuous were,
I purpose by my speech, thou presently shall hear.
Posthumia was of evil sore accused,
For merry countenance, of ill she was condemned:
Minutius, her husband, her company refused,
And home again his wife, did to her parents send:
If countenance then, so great a vice was thought,
What say you by the act, this day that is daily wrought.
In Calcedon, both mayds, and matrons used,
Unto a stranger, but one cheek to show:
Hierous wife, all peoples breath refused,
Except her husbands, no man's else did know:
No shows in Egypt, never women had,
The cause was this, they hated for to gad.
When in Boetia, the Damsels, married were,
A noble customs worthy note they had:
A virtue rare, no doubt it did appear.
In those I say, that loved not to gad:
Her coyche was burned, that day she married was,
Which signified, from home she would not pass.
The daughters of Lisander, refused the rich attire,
That from Sicilie, was as tokens sent:
Least that the pride thereof, their hearts should fire,
The glittering show, they did no deal commend:
For virtue was, the jewel that they sought,
All stately dealings, banished from their thought.
Lo hear said Lamb, the life that Ladies lived,
The simpler sort, according calling went:
One at an others state envied not, nor grieved,
Ne yet the Time in lewdnes never spent:
No wandering unto waks, those days did women use,
Nor gadding unto greens, their life for to abuse.
Then was the husbandman, and all his children known,
By such attire, as them became to wear:
Th'artificer, by pride was not orethrowne,
Then malice in men's mynds, did not appear:
Nor no man would, break promise at that Time,
Faith, love, and charity, in hearts of men did shine.
Now poor men's pride, has brought the world to naught,
Their children as I said, so pranck in pride:
Incountring Gentlemen, as near as may be thought,
The common wealth, in England has distroyde:
And filthy flattery, these days is so embraced,
The cogging crew away true meaning chased.
And with these words, this Lamb, looked on me fast,
Mark well my speech (quoth he) an other time:
For now thou see that Phoebus makes have,
Into the Occidentall floods for to decline:
In time to come trust thou no flattering friend,
Nor tippling tib, except, to much thou spend.
The Meritrix, the furred fool does use*
Spy thou and at her mates a little while:
For she, and they, shall reap, they may not choose,
The fruits they graft, upon their sinful soil:
As every wight, does know their vice untold,
Shall ere they dye, their woeful end behold.
Thus presently came Morpheus back again,
How now my lamb (quoth he) have done my will:
Have told my Clarke, thy mind and meaning plain,
That of the world, he may have better skill:
I have my Lord (quoth Lamb) done what I may,
Plainly unto Dunstable, to direct the way.
I thank thee said Sir Morpheus for the same,
I will that he, and thou, this present time depart:
For that he bears abroad, a writers name,
I will not stay him longer from his act:
Thus suddenly I wakened out of sleep,
In Dreaming long, this lamb became a sheep.
Thus blushing brood, awaken I from sleep,
And on the soden, dashed in drowsy dumps:
Began with speed, for to pluck up my feet,
Because the place, did put me to my iumps:
This desert was, alas unknown to me,
My Hawke, nor Spannels could I never see.
But what this lamb by Morpheus means did say,
With diligence, I penned that other day.
FINIS.
The Authors name in Verdict.
REmember Lord for Christ's sake,
by mercy to forgive,
In judgment on those people now,
that sinnefully do live.
Condemn them not that retchles are,
and do thy laws forget,
Have mercy on all them, that trust,
Christ's blood shall pay their det.
Against my woeful cries oh Lord,
shut not thy mercy gate,
Receive my sinful soul oh God.
to enter in thereat.
Do not condemn me for my guilt,
let mercy thee persuade.
Revenge not Lord, my woeful works,
when I in sin did wade,
Oh God most high and mighty Lord,
in whom is all my trust.
Be merciful to those which are,
before thy eyes unjust,
In time of trouble still I called,
upon thy holy name:
Now do I cry to heal my soul,
and trust thou hearst the same.
Such is thy mercy promised,
to them that do relent:
O, Lord that thou forgeuest such,
that faithfully repent:
Nothing oh God, does grieve me more,
then does my careless race.
Of wicked wilful wretched works,
I call to thee for grace:
For why my sins crave punishment,
and are as scarllet red.
And yet I trust for to be saved,
by Christ's blood that shed:
Look down with loving eyes oh Lord,
and hear my woeful cry:
Thy grace extend to guide my feet,
least I should wade awry:
O Lord my rude and careless life,
with wild and wilful blade:
Now greeueth me for conscience does,
my soul in thee persuade.
FINIS.
MY days I see, are vain on earth, my time does steal away:
My youth is past, and age draws near, my health does still decay.
My lennow limbs grow dry and stiff, my bones be full of pain:
My former pleasures works me woe, I change to dust again.
I not delight in mondane mucke, nor in these pleasures vain:
But in thy kingdom is my joy, where thou do aye remain:
Take hear my faithful sacrifices of just repenting heart.
In time of death deliver Lord my soul from Satan's darts:
All honor glory be to thee, and to thy only son:
Who with the holy ghost be praise, thy will on earth be done.
FINIS.
AT LONDON PRINTED BY ROGER WARD, for John Proctor, are to be sold at his shop
on Holborne bridge.

Anno, 1589.


