THE TRVMPET O Fame: Or Sir Fraunces Drakes and Sir John Hawkins F(...)well:
with an encouragement to all Sail(...) and Soldiers that are minded to go in
this worthy enterprise.

With the names of many Ships, and what they h(...) done against our foes.

Written by H. R.

VERITAS VIRESCIT VULNERA

TC

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, and a(...) (...) be sold by William
Barley, at his shop in Gra(...)ous street. 1595.

AA


The Trumpet of Fame, (...) Sir Fraunces Drakes and Sir John Hawkins Farew(...)
with an encouragement to all Sailers and Soldiers, that are minded to go in
this worthy enterprise: with the names of many famous ships.
YOu Gallants bold, of Albions fertile soil,
For Countries fame, on land and seas that toil,
Searching with pain, the Confines of the earth,
Whose painful toil, all Nations admireth:
By whom enriched is your Countries store,
And some made rich, which erst was held but poor:
To you brave minds, whose thoughts does reach the s(...)
And scorn at home, like sluggards for to lie:
To you that fetch more worth, then Iasons fleece,
To you I do my rusticke Pen address,
For Countries honor, that spares not your blood,
But ventures all, for Commons public good:
You that for wealth does cut the Ocean,
Honor to have, and riches store to gain,
You that in this attempt, like men does show,
(...)r care to Country, and love to Prince you owe:
(...) men of worth, that ventures voluntary,
(...) thereby shows what minds all ought to carry,
(...)resse your selves, to follow those brave Knights,
(...)m God has blessed, in many hardy fights.
(...)se fortunes great and love unto their men,
(...) (...)nnot rightly paint, with my rude Pen:
(...)y are the men were never foiled yet,
(...)y are the men that honor still does get:
(...)se peerlesse fame, all Europe can declare,
(...)erica and Asia, whose actions rare
(...)y still applaud, and wonder at their deeds,
(...)ing the land, from whence such good men proceeds.
(...)e, conquering Drake, whose fortunes are not such,
(...) valor more, and kindness thrice so much,
(...)end to friends, a scourge unto the foe,
(...)gue for those that wish sweet Englands woe.
(...) Pylot may compare with him for skill,
(...) man more foreward, his enemies blood to spill?
(...) Captain has deserved more then he?
(...) eyes has seen more happier man to be?
(...) by our God that Isreal's people led,
(...)de unknown, which he for them puruayd:
(...)ers Moses well we may him call,
(...) leads you forth, this Noble General.
(...) (...)ength of men, he puts not his trust,
(...) (...)o his God, and cause which still is just.
(...) (...)arned has, that God is our Chieftaine,
(...) brings him forth and safely back again.
(...) then with him, and love him as you ought,
Let not your minds to mutiny be wrought,
Least Justice sword do cut off vital days,
whose power is such, for to command at Seas.
Be free from follies, and serve your God aright,
And honor truly this renowned Knight.
Learn by his worth, in actions he has past,
It Is sweet to such, that honors high will taste.
The worlds whole circuit in his travel great,
He viewed throughout, and many Princes seat.
what honor there he gaind, I do refer,
To stories large, where registered they are:
Then follow him, that cries, come fellows all,
For he begins, and last retreat does call.
Be forward then, and joy in this brave Knight,
That never yet received foil in fight.
But still returned with fame and wealth away,
In spite of those that would the same gainsay.
And Hawkins in this action his compere,
Full well is known a famous Cauilere.
whose valor shown, and service often done,
with good success, immortal fame has won.
In India land, he Englands colors spread,
where Spanish Powers he bravely vanquished.
The French and other Nations far and near,
Has felt the force of this stout Cauilere.
To English Queen an officer long been,
which place of trust, he did full well beseem.
For which his service, as due deserts and right,
he honored is, with title of a Knight,
The best of worth, which charge has in this fleet,
(...)uld recount, to do them honor meet:
(...) for I cannot name them as I would,
(...)ereby their virtues rare should be extold,
(...) greater part of force I must omit,
(...)their return, their honor gaind to writ:
(...) Cross, of Captains not the least, nor last,
(...) service done, may not be ouerpast,
(...)osse, that ever crossed has our foes,
(...) crossed them still, with shot and cruel blows:
(...)h Crosses Lord, do little England send,
(...)n raging foes, our Country to defend.
(...) him in place, let Thomas Dracke be seen,
(...)t for his fortunes, a happy man has been:
(...)ose travails and his good success was tried,
(...) many dangers which he did abide.
(...) valiant Crafton claims his place as due,
(...)ch often did the Spaniard proud pursue:
(...) riches great which home he often brought,
(...) well declare that honor he has sought.
(...) Merick speak, not meanest of all the rest,
(...)o venture will, as forward as the best:
(...)e Carackt late was taken, his valor did appear,
(...)e as resolute, as most men that were there.
(...) Harper now, I change my roming quill*
(...) of worth, and worthy for his skill,
(...)e aduanst in place of good regard,
(...)e service has against foes so well deserved.
(...)ish, borne faithful to thy vowed friend,
(...) resolution, I cannot half commend.
(...) this I say, and many more with me,
The proudest foes did never cause thee flee.
And Parker, let me tell thy worthiness,
which never quailst, for any great distress.
But like a man of courage stout and bold,
Have foyld thy foes, and brought away their gold.
And Henry Austen, to many known well,
Thy brave attempts, in fights both sharp and fell,
Has often been seen, where like a man of worth
Thou gainedst wealth, and foe-men forced forth.
And Morish, though thou be not great in name,
Yet has thy deeds deserved worthy fame:
The Frenchmens Leagers, so of thee does say,
whom thou have met full boldly on the sea.
O famous men of Plymouths happy Town,
Yours is the gain of honor and renown:
From you these men of worth most part did spring,
whose fames throughout the world does daily ring.
Good fortune ever wayt upon them all,
And grant your foes may never see you fall:
But as to fore God did you still defend,
Such honor now, our hopes is, he will send.
Take courage then, let honor be your aim,
And drag not back, you that will honor gain.
At your return, then shall you honor have,
As your deserts by venturing far shall crave.
Then fear no colors, set the chance on Christ,
He is your Load-starre, God of power highest.
Your store of victuals ever he will bless,
And as it spends, he will the same increase.
A goodlier Fleet this many a day,
(...)ere has not been prepared to the sea,
(...)om London shall you have these ships of fame,
(...)e brave Defiance, glorious in her name:
(...)mirall of this gallant company,
(...)ose force ere this, the Spaniards proud did try.
(...)ere in the seas she drenched has their bones,
(...) whom their friends makes many grievous groans.
(...)e glorious Garland, well deserves praise,
(...)her exployts, the foe-men can report,
(...) (...)hom in her fight she plagued in such sort.
(...)e Bonauenture, they cannot forget,
(...)ich to their pain with them has often met.
(...)rteene Galleys she fought with that one time,
(...) made them wish they all had farther been.
(...) many bickerings more with them she had,
(...) of their gains small boast by them is made.
(...)t famous ship which called is the Hope,
(...) often gald those Champions of the Pope:
(...)ere ever she encountered any one,
(...) gave them pasports, which did make them groan.
(...) Foresight, which has never soil received,
(...) played her part, and foes have often grieved.
(...)e many a broyle with conquest in the fight,
(...) has returned, and put them all to flight.
(...) he that never yet her force has showed.
(...) brave Adventure, forward does proceed,
(...)ke her trial in this action,
(...)elier ship from hence has sildome gone:
(...)e her guide, and all the rest of them,
(...)end them safely to return again.
The Concord and the Amity, two ships of worth,
Whose good success all London knows:
In merchant trade where they did use to go,
Their friends they pleased, and did torment their foe:
What Prizes by the Amity was brought,
With Spaniards proud, which their confusion sought.
To all their goods the owners can declare,
But too the last, were Spanish men of war.
The Susan Parnell, not least of all this rout,
She showed herself a tall ship and a stout:
Her fortunes great, I cannot half declare,
Trading in peace, or furnished for the war.
The Saccare bears her name full well I wot,
Who makes no spare of powder nor of shot:
with raging peales of thundering ordinance,
In thickest of foes, saint George she does advance.
And Solomon, not last of all the rest,
To foes have proved a forward saucie guest:
In their despite taking what they possessed,
And beat them sore, that did her force resist.
The lovely Elizabeth and Constance called,
with glittering blades her foes to leeward hald:
And in despite, for honor of that name,
To Countries good, returns home with fame:
May all that ever fight for Elizabeth,
Prove always happy, when they attempt to fight.
The ( Help) not help of many does she crave,
when under sail her daring foes she brave:
Hale home her sheates, and foe-men do your worst,
who so is last, she will be with the first.
(...)he little Phaenix, now for her I speak,
(...)hat never feared her force would prove too weak:
(...)he for her burden, ever did her part,
(...)till gaining wealth, and wrought her enemies smart.
(...)esides these past, whose names I have set down,
(...) (...)e not omit, our Merchant of renown:
(...)or Londons honor, where he of worship is,
(...)n Alderman of credit great I wis,
(...)amous Wats, whose forward readiness,
(...) all attempts was never known to miss:
Who in this Feet to quail the enemies pride,
(...)our gallant ships for war he does provide:
(...)he Pexases, who swift as bird does fly,
(...)utting the waves, and foe-mans force to try:
What wealth and happy fortune she has gainde,
(...)nd how in fight, her enemies she painde,
(...)ere needless here at large for to set down,
(...)et it suffice, she ever gaind renown.
(...)he Jewel, gallant in her sea attire,
(...)th dard her foes, with powder, shot, and fire:
(...)nd home has brought, their pearl and eke their gold,
(...)f such great worth, as is not to be told.
(...)he Elizabeth next, one of this gallant fleet,
(...)or honor gaind, I may not here omit:
When foes did rage, and swore to work her ill,
(...)he escaped their force, and wrought on them her will.
The little John, though last I call to mind,
(...)or good success, has not been much behind:
(...)ser panche well filled with Spanish Kyalls of Plate,
(...)nd spices store for comfort of man's heart:
She often brought unto her Owners good,
And bravely in the face of foes has stood.
Thus valiant hearts which now to seas are bound
To cheer you on, that erst has been renownd.
I have explainde the names of your brave fleet,
That cares not with what foes they shall meet.
What other ships of foreign soil there go,
I do omit, because I do not know.
Nor what they be, you need not much to care,
God and your Generals, does for you prepare.
Then frolic hearts, and to your healths one Ca(...)
Let love united, be firm with every man.
And love and duty in each one so abound,
That faithful subjects you may still be found.
It Is Englands honor that you have in hand,
Then think thereof, if you do love our land.
The gain is yours, if millions home you bring,
Then courage take, to gain so sweet a thing.
The time calls on, which causes me to end,
Wherefore to God, I do you all commend,
For whom all subjects that do love our Queen,
Shall truly pray, to send you safe again.
And for my part, I wish you always health,
with quick return, and so much store of wealth
That Phillips Regions may not be more stord,
with Pearl, Jewels, and the purest gold.
FINIS.

