GREAT YARMOVTHS EXERCISE.

In a very complete and martial manner performed by their Artillery men, upon
the twenty second of May last, to the great commendations and applause of the
whole Town, according to the modern Discipline of this our Age. 1638.

Non solum nobis, sed patriae.

Written by John Roberts of Weston, near Bathe, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, and are to be sold by Ellis Morgan, at his
shop in Little Britain. 1638.

To the Right Worshipful Henry Davie, President of the Artillery Yard, and
John Robins Esquires, both Bailiffs; and to the worshipful Company of Aldermen
of the Town of Great Yarmouth.
Also to the worshipful Captain Meadows, Captain de Engain, Captain Call,
Captain Man^rop, Captain Warren, Captain Bennet, and Captain Carter: and to the
rest of the assistants and Company of the Artillery Men.
THe principal and chiefest things, Right Worshipful and worshipful, that
emboldens men to dedicate their labors unto any personage, is the affinity
between the matter of the work offered, and the minds of them to whom it is
presented. And as in ancient times the Comicall Poets pend such Enterludes as
they imagined, would be plausibly heard of the auditory: so our modern Writers
do fashion and shape the subject of which they entreat, according to the
affection of him or them whose patronage they require in countenancing their
work. These I make my presidents, for observing your diligence and furtherance
toward the expense and putting in execution these Military and laudable
exercises in so complete and martial form found by it, you were the fittest
to patronize this Treatise, which is both excellent for imitation in general,
and very necessary for diverse in particular. And al^hough it is not so highly
esteemed amongst the common sort of people by reason of their igno^ance in
Sciences, yet for the general good that accrue and come thereby to a
Commonwealth, is nothing inferior to the best, especially where their study
tends to good and virtuous exercises, or the practice and contemplation to
laudable Arts, of which the Art Military being a principal member, as having
participation with all the rest, or to say the truth the quintessence, nay, the
very proof and trial of them, for though we hear and read never so much, yet
without practice and experience is still imperfect, and how can perfection be
attained but by action, which was completely performed according to our modern
Discipline, which following in order, I make bold to present to your Worships?

Thus praying the Almighty to lengthen and protract your lives beyond your
fatal periods, and give you a will to live, and a desire still to further what
may be available to both King and Commonweal, with these all good success in
this World, and eternal happiness in his Kingdom; I conclude and will remayn

Your Worships humblest John Roberts.

To the Town.
AT Honors Altar and the Shrine of Fame,
I offer up this Trophee to thy Name,
For good desert should Titles great inherit,
And ever correspondent be in merit:
Such manlike actions, martiall-like were shown
By thee, the applause deservedly is blown,
Ore Court and Country, which does canonize
In golden lines Great Yarmouths Exercise.
Great Yarmouths Exercise.
The whole scope of the exercise from the first Randevouze troop and march with
the three several Alts, together with the first skirmish and setting down in
the Field, as also the intrenching, with the advantages, and disadvantages both
of those of the Field and Fort, with the raising, re enforcing, and recovery of
every several Work. Lastly, the Summons, Surrendering, and Conditions between
them, with many more remarkable matters, performed by those of the Artillery of
great Yarmouth.

BEfore I enter into the proceedings of this Exercise, I will relate the
willing and forward minds of the Artillery men, who with a general and
unanimous consent (upon the first proposition) liberally laid down their moneys
for the furtherance of the intended purpose, so that nothing was either
wanting, or any way scanting to forward the said Design. Insomuch that there
was made a plentiful and large provision of all Materials whatsoever, and the
Field and Fort made answerable to either store: They were made and fortified
with Ramparts, Ditch, Counterscarffe, Pallisadoes, Baracadoes, Sally, Ports,
Parrapets, Redoubts, and Raveling with Larum Bells, Center Bells, and Beacons,
upon which was spacious platformes for the Ordnance, which were mounted to do
execution upon the Assailants, and in which were erected two several Tents,
one for Captain Call then Governor, and the other for Captain Mantrop,
attended with good Fire-men and warlike Soldiers, fitly appointed for that
purpose, with Lieutenants, Ensigns, Sergeants, and Corporalls, in a
correspondent way accontred.

In all points answerable to them were those of the Field fitted with Materials
necessary for Assailants to be provided of, as Commanders, Officers,
Canon-carriages, Linstocks, Ladles, Spunges, Badge-barrels, Pioners,
Scaling-ladders, Horse-tents, Suttlers, Forage-masters, Scout-masters, and
whatsoever else was needful.

And let me not forget to speak something of that worthy Gentleman Captain
de Engaine, who was Sergeant Major for that day of the Field, and Captain of
the Artillery-yard, a man well practiced in Military Discipline, and the only
man laid the ground-plot for this Exercise, from whom sprung all the directions
for the managing thereof, to his great applause, credit, and commendations. In
so much, I verily believe, if such Exercises were oftener practiced in the
Counties, Cities and Towns of this Kingdom so exactly and martial like, it
would add a great applause to our Nation, and strike as great a terror in our
enemies to hear and see every man so expert in Arms, and the Commanders and
Officers so solid, sound, sufficient, and ready upon all occasions to do both
King and Country able service. Now I will fall upon the subject I am to treat
of, and trouble you no more with what is impertinent to my intended purpose.

And first of the General, Governor, Captains, and Officers of both field and
Fort.

There being choice Commanders elected, the one to be General of the Field,
the other Governor of the Fort, every way correspondent to noble, valiant,
judicious, and trusty Martialists, were thu Commander-like accoutred.

Who having for their proper Arms a Truncheon in their right h^nds colored,
and waved suitable to their several colors, fair Helmets on their heads,
garnished with great plumes of feathers, they were completely armed for their
bodies with rich Scarffs on there right arms, fair Swords and Belts embroydered
and gilded with Pistols correspondent to the rest at their girdles, Captain
Meadows was General of the Field, and Captain Call Governor of the Fort.

The Serjant Majors were chosen by the like advice, had Truncheons three foot
long, some thing differing from the former, but of the same colors not waved,
fair Head-peeces gorgeously plumed, and completely armed with all things
fitting, as before, Captain de Engain was Serjant Major of the Field, and
Captain Bennet of the Fort.

The Captains had their leading staves with their men attending to carry their
Pikes and Targets, which were accommodated like Commanders, and men known both
expert and judicious: their names were Captain Warren, Captain Mantrop, and
Captain Carter, the first for the field, the two last for the Fort.

The Lieutenants were armed with Head-pieces Plun^'de, fair and large gilt
Partisans, Buffe Coats, Gorgets, with rich embroydered Belts and Swords, with
Pistols taking their proper places, according to their Captains seniority,
whose names were these, Israel Ingram, Nicholas Cutting, John Roe, Henry Lunne,
the two first were in the Fort, the other two in the Field.

The Ensigns were gorgeously suited, being proper men of person, with their
Head-pieces plumed, their Colors advanced tucked and richly apparelled in
every thing complete for those places, observing when there was a March beaten,
their Colors were shouldred, their names as follows, Daniel Wilgrace, Edward
Denny, for the Fort, and John Darset, and John Lucas for the Field.

The assistants to both the Serjant Majors were Commander-like suited, and
armed, their names were John Mallam, Thomas Godfrey.

The Quarter Masters of the field in like nature provided, their names John
Wish, John Robins for the Field, and Robert Gower for the Fort.

The Captain of the Horse was wondrous well mounted, and not any thing
interior in Arms, for whatsoever else became a Commander to be prepared and
provided with: his name was Captain Thomson, his Lieutenant John Bucknam, the
Cornet Robert Austin, his Corporal Thomas Wood, all men of good quality and
well respected, and those which did perform their parts exceeding well, who
deserved commendations for their seemly order and warlike behavior.

The Cannoneers habited correspondent to their places, with Field-linstocks in
their hands.

The Serjants completely fitted, and thus was every man properly accommodated.

In the morning, the Drums of both parts went about the Town beating a Call, to
summon every Officer and Soldier* to their Colors. And when the Governors
Clarke and the Captains, had called them by their Lists over, and found
appearance in them all, then they drew them up in a body thus, having two
Ensigns caused them to advance to the heads of the Pikes, where they made a
stand, their Colors advanced turked, one Ensign took the right hand, the
other the left, according to their senioritie and due place: every Officer did
the like, the Governor took his about six foot from the Pikes in the Center,
his Sergeant Major upon his left hand, the Captains one on the right hand, and
the other on the left, between the File-leaders of the Pikes and Musketeers on
both Flanks, after which they marched by Squadrons into the Fort, in every way
answerable to them were those of the Field, as you shall understand in its due
place.

In the Artillery Yard was the first Randevouze, of those of the Field, where
after the said Call beaten abroad in the Town, and also every man upon that
Summons found ready; some small time spent thereafter the word of Command was
given, the Drum beat a troop, they all advanced and shouldred, and so troopt
into the Market place, where their Cannon, Horse, Ammunition and Wagons were
ready to attend them, there they drew them into a mayn body.

Having a sparious place for the ordering of their Companies and Troops in a
warlike manner, marched into the Field in this order, the Pioners being prepared
there before.

First, a Cornet of Horse troopt into the Field, next a Squadron of
Musketeers, with a Drum in the third rank of Captain Meadows Company, being
eldest Colonel, in the Rear of whom the Colonel in person very laudably and
commander-like attended, marched, the Colors and a Squadron of Pikes, and a
Drum following, then the eldest Serjant in the front of the second Squadron of
Pikes, after them the second Sergeant and second Squadron of Musketeers, with
a Drum, and finally, the Lieutenant in the Rear.

After whom marched the Company of Captain Warrens in every point correspondent
to the other, and in one and the self-same uniforme.

At the Rear of which two Companies marched the Cannon and Baggage, and another
Cornet of Horse to secure the Rear.

Thus in this martial manner they marched into the Field, in which march they
made three several Alts; and at the last Alt, they were all drawn into form
of battle, the Pikes in the Center flanckt with Musketeers with the Ordnance,
Horse and Baggage upon the Wings.

Being upon the last Alt, and thus marching a party of Pikes and Musketeers
issued from out of the North Sally Port, and fired upon the Army presently, a
Squadron of Pikes and Musketeers, advanced from the Army, and fired upon the
Defendants Squadron, after whom instantly a troop from the Army also seconded
the assaylants Squadron, to reinforce these of the Fort, but they were as soon
repeld by their Ambuscado, who routed the Assailants and retreated them to the
Army, at which time those of the Fort took two prisoners from them of the Field.

The while this was in agitation, the Assaylants sat down and raised their
Tents, made their Huts and settled their Ordnance, they of the Fort firing their
Ordnance, all the while on them, which was answered after a short time by the
Cannon of the field shot for shot.

But speedily the aforesaid two prisoners were mist, whereupon the Drum Major
beat a parley, which being answered by a Drum of the Fort, made their demand
which was embraced, and the Drum of the Field blinded, about ten paces from the
Fort, was led into the Governors Tent, and laying down a months pay for
captives was led out, and so ransomed them both again.

The Army martially settled in the field in their several quarters, were
presently disturbed by the Ordnance of the Fort, those of the Field answered
them by their Cannon, and set forth their Sentinels, with several Guards for
the Ordnance. At this instant happened a sudden fire in the quarters* which was
done by a traitor from the Fort, for the finding out of whom, it was ordered
that by the beating of a Drum and word of mouth, a Proclamation was made, that
upon pain of death, every Officer and private Soldier should repair presently
to his own private Hut, and proper quarter, which being done, and the traitor
found alone without a Hut, instantly was apprehended and committed to the
custody of the Provost Marshall. And when there was a cessation of Arms, he
was to undergo the penalty of the Law, which was to be bound to a stake, and
Muskateer'd.

Then the Pioners were drawn up to the Front of the Army, where they were
divided into three parts, two thirds, for the Trenches in the Quarters, and one
third for the battery, to draw the Cannon nearer to the Fort, and to raise
platformes upon several occasions to advantage the Assaylants.

The Cannon were drawn up by the out-wings of the Front of the Army, and their
metal placed in a Horizontall Line of level toward the work of the Fort,
where the breach should be made to do execution.

After which the horse-troops were drawn from both the Flancks, and
distributed into two Guards, a good distance one from the other, right behind
the Quarters of the Army.

The Sentinels of Horse were set forth single, round about the outline, to
keep and to discover the Enemies approach from indamaging the Quarters, or
otherwise to relieve the Fort.

The Army thus settled in their Quarters, the Pioners began according to the
direction of the Serjant Major of the Field, both in their Trenches, and for
their Platformes, to break ground.

The Commanders of the Fort seeing this fire their Ordnance upon the Pioners,
to hinder, and beat them from their works, and brake the new begun Trenches.

Nevertheless by the violence of the Field Cannon, the Pioners (maugre all
opposition) advanced their Works, at one and the selfsame time from the Heads,
of both the Quarters, leaving a good large Piasa between the Front of the
Quarters, and head of the Trenches.

Instantly were there Wings of Musketeers drawn from the Quarters, fell into
the Trenches, and so followed the Pioners still for their Guard, with Squadrons
to defend both the Pioners and Musketeers from the Sallyers Pikes and Muskets.

These Pikes and Muskets were many times relieved by parties sent fresh from
the Quarters, and the former retreated to refresh themselves.

A sudden sally was made from the Fort and Court of Guard, to frustrate the
Assaylants Pioners in the Trenches, and fired upon them to hinder their work,
and beat them out of their Trenches, the Musketeers of the Trenches fire also
upon them, that were the Sallyers of the Guard. After certain vollies thus
interchanged, the Sallyers presently hasten to their Guard again.

Hereupon certain Squadrons of Pikes and Musketeers were sent from the quarters
toward the Fort, and Court of Guard, to the end suddenly to suppress and take
it from them.

Those of the Guard did as courageously withstand them, and in conclusion
forced them into their quarters, but those of the Field seeing this sent out
more force against them to relieve their first Squadrons, against which last
reliefes those of the Fort and Works gives vollies, to stop their passage
because they could not so conveniently fire before by reason they should have
endangered, and done much damage to those of their own quarters being they
skirmisht betwixt them and the Assaylants.

The reliefs from the quarters did proceed so on in their purpose (in despite
of danger) that they joynd with the first Assaylants, and rowted the Guardians
by falling pell mell with the but end of their Muskets, and at push of Pike.

In so much that those of the Guard finding an impossibility of keeping and
holding it any jot longer resolved jointly with magnanimous spirits to cut
their way through the weakest part of the Assaylants, to abandon the Guard and
fly into the Ditch, and next work of the Fort, as also those of the Redoubts
did abandon theirs, and retreated into the Fort, both which were performed with
great dexterity in a complete martial manner.

Presently upon this they of the Field entered the Guards, and maintained it
managing it with the supplies that came last unto them for their relief, and
upon entrance instantly sent back the first Assaylants to their quarters
again, to refresh themselves, nevertheless are so charged that they are beaten
back again by them of the Fort.

In which time the Trenches and Works of the Army are still advanced forward
with all advantage toward the Fort, both Works and Platforms raised, the
Cannon drawn forward and mounted.

The Trenches this while were often relieved by new parties of shot and Pike,
and the old sent to their quarters.

The batteries and works of the Trenches were continually attended by resolute
stands of Pikes, placed behind them for the Guard of both the Pioners and
Cannon.

Those of the Fort conclude, and make a sudden violent sally out of their
Raveling, which enclosed the face and front of their hornwork, and suddenly did
beat down some of the Enemies Trenches, whereupon the shot from the Hornworke,
and these of the Rampart do give their vollies, upon the Enemy being then laid
open unto them, on the other side the Assailants and them in their Trenches,
did as suddenly repair that breach, with such Materials as were useful, as
sand-bags, and other things prepared for their security and defense.

The Army having sufficiently fortified their Trenches, and stopped the breach
formerly made by the Salliers out of the foresaid Raveling, desperately (with
undaunted spirits) issued out of their Trenches and quarters; and recharged the
Raveling, and both beat and forced them out mayntaining it a time, until those
of the Fort made a sudden sally out of the Ditch with clubs: threshing Flayles,
and such like instruments apt for hard strokes, falling yet well upon the
Assaylants in the Raveling, and by strong hand beat them out and repossest it
again, and forced those of the Field to retreat from whence they first issued.

Whereupon those of the Fort being thus encouraged, suddenly made another sally
upon the Trenches, but were quickly repulst by them of the Field.

When the Commanders of the Fort perceived how the Field Trenches and Works did
increase daily upon them, fired their Beacon.

The Assaylans seeing this took their advantage, and sent out Squadrons of
Pikes and Muskets from the quarters, who instantly charged that part strongly,
where the intended breach was to be made.

All this while the Pioners proceeded forward, and railed their works nearer
and nearer, also brought the Cannon nearer to force a breach the sooner.

There were six selected Soldiers sent from the quarters to view the
Hornworke, armed with Arms of proof, Pistolets, and Targets.

Those of the Fort made many firings upon them from the Raveling, hornwork, and
adjoining parts within the Fort.

Notwithstanding these noble Spirits finish their Enterprise, (maugre their
fiery onset) returned and gave an account of their action unto the Commanders.

But to encourage those of the Fort, certain troops of Horse appeared at the
back of the Armies out-laid for the relief of the Fort.

Whereupon those of the Fort embracing the advantage made a strong sally out of
both their Ports to beat those of the Field out of their Trenches next unto
them, and did put their purpose in execution with clubs, threshing flayles, and
the but end of their Muskets, having thus effected their Enterprise fell back
from whence they issued.

The Trenches and batteries of the Field were by this time wrought so near the
Raveling and Hornwork, that they are resolved upon the first opportunity to
enter there.

The shot from both Works and Fort did continually play upon the Assaylants,
they out of the Trenches and Guards did the like upon them of the Fort.

The Cannon and small shor of the Field did continue their vollies both against
the Fort and Rampart adjoining, as also upon the Hornwork, so as they were
constrained to abandon it, and fly into the Fort.

In which time the mayn batteries of the Field were so much advanced, and so
near the Bulwarks of the Fort that they dismounted their Cannon, and fired so
much upon that part where the breach was to be made, that the said breach was
thereupon made accessable. Those of the Fort in despite of danger mount the
inside of the breach, and repayreth it with Sand-bags, etc.

Nevertheless, the battery continued and made a sufficient breach in the
Rampart, though their Ordnance are dismounted, yet they continue their firings
out of the Fort fiercely upon the Assaylants.

The Cannon of the Field having made an accessible breach, there presently
choice Commanders sent from the quarters presently to view it, during which
time the Cannon silenc't themselves, and bartered not during the time the
viewers were upon that service.

Who return and signify that the breach is accessible, whereupon the Counsel
of War presently determined of the assault.

Lots were drawn for the avoiding of exceptions amongst the Commanders, by
which means it was instantly known who should mount the breach first, who
second, and who last, and the means how consulted likewise of.

The first Assaylants were courageously beaten back by those of the Fort, the
second advanced and joined with the first, and as manfully repeld with
threshing styles and clubs from behind their Sand-bags.

The third time the breach mounted by all three parties which did force back
the defendants, and lodge themselves near the top of the breach. During their
assault, the small shot in the Trenches did not fire at all upon that part for
fear of annoying the Assaylants.

Those of the Fort being shrewdly gauled by the Musketeers of the neighboring
Trenches of the Field, keeps close within for fear of further danger.

Upon this there was a general cessation of Arms, during which it was ordered
that the Assailants were drawn off from the breach, and stand at the foot
thereof, as it was a guard divided into two equal parts on either side the
breach, and a Fugitive taken and hargubasted, and the Traitor that fired one of
the quarters.

This was no sooner effected, but that the Drum Major by command, beat a
Summons to surrender the Fort.

The Fort returned no other answer but by a Musket shot made full at him from
the Rampart.

The Drum returns and certifieth the truth hereof to the Counsel and
Commanders of the Field, hereupon the battery is renewed, and a general
assault given by the whole Forces of the Field, who were drawn down from their
quarters of purpose, and invironeth the Fort round, assaulteth it on all parts
at once, and a fresh assault made to enter the breach. Which general allarum
and assault did cause them in the Fort to ring out their larum Bell thereupon,
the Burgers flockt about the Governors, and persuaded a yielding.

The Governor entering into the resolution of the Soldiers and Townsmen
consented to their desire, and with the chief of his Officers mounts the
Rampart, and sends a Drum to another part to beat a parley upon the top of the
Rampart.

Lastly, the parley was assured and agreed upon by the Assaylants conditions
propounded and consented unto by Field and Fort, and ordered thus.

INprimis, that they should march out of the Fort in a complete martial
manner.

Item, that they might depart the Fort with bag and baggage without impediment.

Item, that the Soldiers should march out with their Muskets laden and
shouldred, matches lighted at both ends, bullets in their mouths, their rest
in their right hands, headpiece upon their heads, and swords by their sides,
Pikes in complete Arms shouldred, Colors flying, and Drums beating like men of
Honor.

And thus those of the Fort are in a Souldier-like manner provided according to
the aforesaid Conditions, marched out of the Fort, all which was completely
performed in a very seemly and martial manner, who marched out at the North
Pallisado, and wheeld their march toward the Southeast, betwixt the Field
Forces and the Raveling, something aloof from the Counterscarff, until they
arrived at the South Port of the Town where they marched in and after a volley
given at their Commanders doors, lodged their Colors, and past to their
several chambers.

The Fort thus rendered unto the dispose of the Conqueror, a counsel is called
by whom it is appointed that the Sergeant Major and his assistance with twenty
of the primest Pikes, and twenty choice Musketeers were selected out of both
the bands, and being placed in a martial order, the Musketeers in Front, and
Pikes in the Rear, with a large space left for the Colors to march, and thus
they advanced and marched into the Fort. At the North Sally Port rounding the
Fort within under the covert of the walls, continuing so privately conceald to
view, search and find out whether there had been any treacherous practices
left behind by them that last issued out, but assured themselves that all was
secure and no danger to be feared. Then the eight Majors commanded his two
Assistants to draw their Companies into two distinct Files, Pikes in Front, and
Musketeers in the Rear, then w^^ held them off to the right and left, this
done, the right hand File mounted close by the North Pallisado to the top of
that part of the Rampart.

The left hand File mounted the Rampart by the South Pallisado, then both
marched upon the top of the Work, and meet upon the midst of the breach where
the Sergeant Major took his stand, and presently in a short space marched down
before them through the said breach, and so continued their march to their
proper places.

This being done in form as aforesaid, the Colonel, Sergeant Major, and the
principal Officers (the Lieutenants only excepted, who in the interim attended
the Army) guarded with Squadrons both of Pikes and Musketeers, entered the
French, and possessed themselves solely of the Fort, after leaving a sufficient
strength to fortify it, marched in a seemly and military manner into the Town.

Notwithstanding this Exercise thus in every particular performed, and a world
of Spectators in every place, and near both Cannon and small shot, God be
glorified, there was not either man, woman, or child had the least hurt done at
all, such was the providence of the Almighty, and such the care of the
Commanders and Officers: as also the expert Musketeers were so respective among
themselves that not one Bandeleer took fire to annoy the other, or to endanger
the unruly multitude in the least.

This Exercise was performed with a great deal of charge and care, to the
great honor and applause of the Artillery men and Town. And if I should forget
one Alderman that is worthy the memory, one Master Owner, I should do him
apparent injury, for he was the motive and principal benefactor who did
forward this exercise, not only with his own servants and cattle, but liberally
with his purse, and painfully with his own hands, in so much that he was
seldom from the work while it was in action, setting forward what might be the
furthering thereof, sparing no charge, nor horseflesh upon the prefixed day,
but rode well mounted here and there to keep the concourse of people from
danger: would there were more of his noble and worthy disposition, which
Gentleman has done many good deeds besides for the good of the said Town to
his credit and applause.

It was my fortune to be present when this plausible Exercise was put in
execution, and although I have seen good service in the Netherlands and other
places, yet never saw a thing better performed and more Souldier-like imitated.
And this I say more they are very expert in Arms, and do perform all their
Postures and Motions with judgment and dexterity. I could wish that others in
this Kingdom were so well disciplined, and were able to do such service as
these can or might, if occasion did importune them thereunto.

To conclude, when all was thus finished and brought punctually to a period,
that noble and free minded Gentlemen Captain Meadows invited his Officers and
Soldiers to Supper, where I was my self in person, and there found great store
of diversity of dishes, and I am sure plenty of Wine in a very liberal well
beseeming way bestowed on them.

In the same manner did Captain Warren provide, and gave free entertainment,
together with the rest of the Captains.

FINIS.

