A philosophical discourse, Entitled, The Anatomy of the mind.

Nevvlie made and set forth by T. R.

Imprinted at London by I. C. for Andrew Maunsell, dwelling in Paul's Church
yard, at the sign of the Parret. 1576.

To the right worshipful Master Christopher Hatton Esquier capitane of the
Queens Majesty's Guard, and one of the Gentlemen of her Priueie Chamber, Thomas
Rogers wishes the true felicity of this life, and in heaven fellowshippe
among the Saints of God.
TRuly and commonly is it said (right worshipful) such prince, such people,
such superiors such subjects. For so do men frame themselves, and conform
their manners, as they see others placed in chief seat of auctority, as it
were to the view and sight of all men, addict themselves: thinkinge that to
be well done, which is done by example. And therefore as a good prince by
the example of goodness brings unspeakable commodities: so an evil prince by
the example of wickedness, causes infinite calamities in his realm and
contrie. Xerxes most sauedgelie, set his whole delight in pleasure: by whose
example the Babylonians in naughtines exceeded all men, and in beastliness the
brutish kind. Nero contemned Philosophy, excelled in Music: which made
better learning among the Romans to decay, and most men became Musicians.
These vvallowed in vvantonnes, and their subjects follovved in wickedness.
Ptolomeie was studious, and preferred the virtues of the mind before the
vanities of the world. But what came thereof? His subiestes the Egyptians
proved the most profounde in the liberal sciences. If Englishmen at this day,
be not only famous for all good lerninge, but zealous in deed in good
religion, what marvel? Our noble prince is both well learned in hum^ne
literature, and well lived through divine scripture. She does embrace all
godlynes, and her people through her example increase in holiness. Of whose
most excellent virtues, notvvithstanding the boddy of her whole realm do
savor, and asvvell town as city: contrie as university are bettered by them:
yet does her Majesty's most noble Court more shine through them, then any part
of her kingdom. As may witness her so grave, so godly counsailers, her so
prudent, so vigilant officers, her so faithful, so trusty attenders upon her
person. Amongst whom as your worship is not least gracious in her princely
favor: so are you not least glorious in the sight of the multitude. For how
can it be, but he must needs delight a faithful people, which so does like a
famous prince? The Lodestone by nature draws Iron unto it. All good qualities
by nature win the hearts of the multitude. But that Lodestone has greatest
virtue, which has the silver color. But those qualities adorned with the
goods of nature and fortune, get most good will. The diamonde though placed
in Iron is of great value. Virtue though in the mind of baseste for condition,
is very commendable. But nothing does so set out the Diamonde, as does the
Gold. But virtue is then most vvondred at, when it is in him, which for
authority is of power, and for deserte, in favor with the best. Worthy
sir, what your happy estate has wrought in others no hard thing it is to
conjecture, what it does in me, by this my dedication it may be gathered, For
were it not I perceived an especial excellency in your worship (which
deserves an especial fame) more then in many, I could not, leau^^g all,
reserve the patronage of my^^st fruits of study (by an especial prerogative)
to you alone. The work I confess to be far unworthy, so worthy a patro^:
notvvithstanding (because, those things (be they of nature never so simple, for
value never so contemptible) are of contrimen well sought for, which are of
courtiers well accepted: and of inferiors well bought, which are of
superiors well esteemed) I thought it best humbly to offer the same unto him,
which is in court of such auctority, as in contry he can do much, and every
where of such countenance, as no where that will be misliked, which is any
thing liked of his wisdom. Receive then I beseech you in good part this
rude Anatomy at his hands, who wishes unto your worship as much access of
promocio^ in this life, and joys in heaven, as he which is most desirous of
your eternal felicity. which if you do, I doubt not, but that vvil be vvelcome
to others, which is well received of so worthy a man.

Your Worships most humble at commoundement, Tho. Rogers.

Joshua Hutten to the Book.
SMall book, unfold the sense of things obscure
resolve this doubt that in my breast is bred:
Apolloes bays are thine (deserved sure)
if thou arigt can hit the nail on th'hed.
Upon a Hat black Velvet passing pure,
with Plumes of white, and those advanced hie,
An Dutch I saw whose glory did allure,
and captive led the fancye of mine eye.
In feelde of green was borne a Diamonde,
of largenes rare, of valor infinite:
Proportioned just circulare and round,
no earthly thing so perfect clear to sight.
In midst whereof all Sable did ensue,
these letters TEN. deep graven there:
A thousand wings of Gold that ever flue,
grew on this stone, the same aloft to bear.
For Crest a Crown of stars I did discry,
with Labels azure down dependant deep:
This, this has made such conquest of mine eye,
that all my powers it do^th for Captives keep.
By day in trance my thoughts are set thereon,
by night my dreams the like effect do bring:
In company, or otherwise alone,
my busied head still runs upon this thing.
Wherefore (good Book) the sense heerof dis^^ay,
the meaning of this mystery make pla^^:
Unbind this knot, and take this Veil away,
that thou thy praise, and I my rest may gain.
This Diamond what does it signify?
^ooke.
The mind ye most renowned part of man
H.
Why is it rownd? B. Because it cannot die
whom force, nor fire, nor time diminish can.
H.
Why has it wi^gs? B. For yt in mome^ts space
it sounds the deapth, it travels Sea and land:
It mounts to heaven even to the hiest place,
and down again with turning of the hand.
H
Why is it so incomparable clear?
That serves to show the pureness of ye state:
^ooke.
Wherein it did once Angellike appear:
when as the Lord at first did it create.
H.
Those letters what? B. Consider how they sound
TEN is the word a certain number set
For number numberless of things there found,
which long ago there purchaste place did get.
For first the mind before old Adams fall,
from Preturbations all, was perfect free:
But after, Motions and affections all,
and passions ca^e, which now there dwelling be
H.
Why is it set in feelde of grassye Green?
Book.
^ll flesh is grass the Prophet does us tell:
The pomp thereof like flowers that fading been,
such is man's body where the mind does dwell.
I.H.
The Crest and Labels, tell me what they show?
B.
The just reward that never shall decay:
That faithful minds which justly live below,
shall gain abooue, by Christ at latter day.
J.H.
I have enough, at window opened wide
I see the Sun, that earth was under Cloud:
By Th'ouch I saw, I see was signifiede
the subject, that does in thy letter shroude.
The mind of man, who se puissant dignitye,
as in a Glass in thee is plainly taught:
Each vain searched out, each secret ransackt nigh,
no power, nor poare, no Arterye unsought.
Which as I hear, thou do by example show,
more then by proof, wherein thou do right well
For labor lost it were to prove (we know)
those things to be, which are, as all can tell.
But give me leave, me thinks a whistling wind
from Pithian Caves, of Delphos Temple blown
Upon me lights, which has inspirde my mind,
and abled me to make like matter known.
This Ouche I saw, I said that it was set,
upon a Hat black Velvet passing brave:
Whose plumes of white, with winds and blustringes great
in flaunting wise still to and fro did wave.
These things (deer book) as it were with fingers sign
do point at him, to whom you oughtst of right
Thy self to yield, and all things else of thine,
with bending knee prostrated to behight.
The Hat, it is the ornament of th'hed
the Head may note the sovereign royal ^race:
Make choice of him that stands the state ^^^sted,
whom Prince regards and Nobles al embrace.
By Sable hue, his person sage descry,
The plumes, yt winds so raised in rufling sort:
His virtues note, and rare integrity,
blown forth by blast of all men's just report.
And though in Court there be about her grace
full many such (wise, faithful, grave) as he:
And such, to whom him self to give the place,
of ^owely mind still ready seems to be:
Yet one, for all, this gorgiouse Ouch to were,
does best deserve, one Hat of hautie hight
TEN hits his name. Let worthy Hatten bear.
thy reaped Crop to barn of his delight.
Thus shall thy Ship ride safe at rode in bay,
thus shall you shrowde thy self from Momus spite
My life for thine, I Hutten, dare to say:
that worthy Hatten deignes thy deed a right,
Whom GOD preserve.
Iustiniani Baldwini, carmen ad Lectorem.
VTile qui dulci, qui dulcia miscet honestis
Exornans triplici commoditate librum
Omne tulit punctum, meruit laudabile nomen,
Et grates, semper quas habuere boni.
Haec tria Rogerius libro been iunxit in isto
Hunc igitur laud^m quis meruisse neget?
Nam si turbatos animi componere motus
Vtile sit, quo Men's cum ratione regat:
Si iucunda solent animum mulcere legentis:
Historijs si quae scripta referta placent:
Clarorum liber hic dictis, factisque repletus,
Omne docet vehemens extenuare (...).
Iam Men's cum nullo fuerit male co^cita motu,
Virtutum studijs inficienda manet.
Nam quanto nostru^ superat Men's aurea corpus:
Hoc Mentis cura, et mayor habendus honos.
Istius ergo libri pars vltima tractat Honestum:
Isthaec virtutis continet omne genus.
Vt vitium fugias* and quae sunt r^cta sequare*
Hic multa exempla, and dicta diserta docent.
Cum fugit, and subito fugit illecebrosa voluptas:
Atque nim^ periunt, quae placuere, cito:
Cum senio vires, et morbis gratia Formae:
Casibus et varijs diripiuntur opes:
Sola manet virtus, virtus faelicitat vna
Et Senij^et Mortis n^scia, sola manet.
Haec docet, ac ist^s multo maiora libellus.
Est pretiosa, licet paruula gemma, liber.
A te nunc Author, solum (doctissime Lector)
Digna petit, tanto verba labor. Vale.
Abraham Fowlers needeles Haedera.
TO hang an heap of Iuie boughs,
where boots or needs none such,
Is but a toye to serve the time,
and yet we use it much.
For good endeavors gain the goal,
and practice proves it true,
That honest pains do purchase praise,
and labors win their lewe.
Then Rogers reap thy just reward,
that dainedst to devise,
An happy work which must of force,
the learned sort suffice.
Who^ golden pen has put in proof,
no v^^ne conceiptes of love,
Ne p^^sions strange which in such sort,
the ^oting mind may move:
But how to rule the raines of wrath,
to conquer furies kind,
As all things else (in moral phrase)
that may molest the mind.
For every grief that gripes the soul,
a sovereign help in store:
The wound, the weal: the cause, the cure:
a salve for every sore.
Thrice happy toil for him which took,
the pains in penning thee,
And for that worthy gentle wight,
which must thy patron be.
Let envy glut his gorge with grief,
and rancor rage his fill,
Yet Momus must to cunning couche,
and scorners yield to skyll.
The wise that read these fruitful lines,
where luckie bliss does lurk,
Will wish with me, God guide his head,
that framde so fair a work.
Epigramma Guil. Camd. in Anatomiam a Tho. Rogerio, elaboratam.
Cui pater est nullus, quem Nox ten^brosa sinistro
Progenuit foetu, deridens omnia Momus,
Incessit superos varijs, vanisque querelis,
Quod clathris hominu^ pectus non prostet apertum
Cerneretit motus animi, mentisque recessus.
Nuper at hunc rel^gens intento lumine librum,
Substitit, ac imo referens suspiria, dixit.
Quod querar, heu, nihil est, mihi ia^ men's tota patescit.
Anfractus animi varios, me^tisque labores
Rog^rius docte reserat, vel iudice Momo.
Vesalio cordis rimati fama redundat
Rogerio mentis reseratae gloria cedet.
Sic ait ingeminans, tristis, maerensque recedit.
The Preface to the friendly Reader.
AMongst those (gentle Reader) whose endeavor is to profit in knowledge, (and
there is none either of nature so wild, or for behauior so wicked, but in
their kind, (as it is for a hounde natural to smell, and for a bird to fly)
are desirous to learn, and be conning in somewhat) they are of all most to be
praised, whose chiefest, though not only, care is to know themselves. For if
the Ethikes (because they prescribe good rules for the framing of manners,
expel vices, advance virtue) excel other parts of Philosophy, and be
chiefly commended: then must those men of necessity be deemed the best, who
addict themselves rather to the knowing of their own nature, then natural
things: and are more studious how to be glorious for good living, then
desirous to be famous for great learning. And that was it which Apollo said:
For being demanded who was the wysest man in his time, answered, that not
that as learned, as famous hypocritical Hippocrates, but Socrates: one which
labored no^ for popular praise, nor for unprofitable profoundnesse, but his
care was to know him self, and therefore pronounced the wisest of the God of
wisdom. The ancient Grecians made much of those of the sect of Socrates, but
banished out of their country Poets and Orators: for they knew very well
that these pricked unto wickedness oftentimes, the other did always adhort
the Grecians to the knowing of them selves. Furthermore, it was the counsel
of the same Apollo, that every man should know him self. Not for that other
knowledge is unnecessary, but because without this it is mere vanity. For what
a dangerous thing is it with that wise man Thales the Astronomer, earnestly to
behold the stars, and not to care for that under our feet? besides what a
ridiculous? What a foolish thing is it with Thraso the warrier to put men in
a^aie, and be afraid to fight? besides how vain glorious? How unseemly is
it with Aristippus the Philosopher, to profess wisdom, and to be a
flatterer? besides how pernicious? What a madness is it with Gorgias the
Orator, publicly abroad to praise amity, and privately at home to practice
enmity? ^^^ides how odious? And that is to speak^ ^^e thing, to think
another, to talk wisely, to walk wickedly, what great inconstancy? what
greater vanity? And therefore better were it to be ignorant of al things, then
of our selves. Know thy self, and thou shall not offend: forget thy self, and
what will thou not do? Neither reason from wickedness, nor religion from
ungraciousness can hold thee back. Art thou an Aristides for vprightnes?
forget thy self, and what art thou but an Acteon for covetousness? A Lucretia
for chastetie? forget thy self, and thou shall be a Messalina for
incontinencie. A Caesar for clemency? forget thy self, and thou art a Nero
for cruelty. An Aemylius for abstinencie? forget thy self, and thou art a
Verres for intemperancie. A Numa for religion? forget thy self, and thou shall
be a Pherecydes for athisme. At one word art thou a man? forget thy self, and
what art thou but a beast? And such a beast, as surpasses all beasts in
beastliness. What so unreasonable as Alexander, when he was ashamed of his
father Philip, and would be called the son of Jupiter? what so sauadge as
Xerxes, which appointed a great reward unto him, which invented a new pleasure
never heard of before? what so cruel as Laodice, which to live in adultery,
murthred her own sons? And certain it is that all ambitious Alexanders, and
voluptuous Xerxes, and adulterous Laodices, that is, all such which forgetting
them selves, thirst after that which is unlawful, are more to be abhorred for
their poisoned behauior, then any viper, and shunned for their deuillish
conversation, then any monster in the world. It was not for naught then that
Philip that most famous king of the Macedonians so carefully willed his page
every morning at his chamber door to cry, Philip remember thou art a man: and
repeted these words with a most loud voice three times, Remember Philip thou
art a man. Neither withour great consideration have most grave, and wise
Philosophers in fore time, so often repeted this of Apollo, (...), Know thy
self. Which notwithstanding, that Cicero in his Tusculan questions, deemeth
to be spoken not of the knowledge of our external members, but internal
motions, must of necessity be referred as well to the knowledge of our bodily
shape, as the state of our minds. And though we can not with Socrates,
discern a wise man from an idiot, but only by his talk, yet may ^e know a man
from a beast by other proper^^es. And yet shall not that be a man which has a
boddie senseless: or if it have sense, reasonlesse: nor if it have reason, and
is boddilesse, but a composition of these makes him. Hereof is man called (...)
a little world: because that with every thing created of God, he has some
affinity. By which it is evident that he which thoroughly would know him self,
must as well know his boddie, as his mind. The boddie to put him in mind, of
his slavery: the mind of his sovereignty. The boddie of his misery, the
mind of his felicity. The boddie of his mortality, the mind of his
eternity. For by the one we participate the nature of beasts, by the other
of Angels. By the one we are for a time, by the other we continue for ever.
By the one we die, by the other we live. Such as they are, such are their
goods. For the goods of the boddie lasts not, but leaves us: the goods of
the mind more increase in us, the more we esteem of them, and the elder we
grovve, the more they prosper. For beutie, strength, health, and other gifts
of the boddie, either by time do vanishe, or perish by sickness: but
wisdom and other goods of the mind increase continually, and with the
mind remain immortal. Again the goods of the mind, be the evils of the
boddie, and the evils of the mind, are the goods of the boddie. For what is
more hurtful to our minds then is riches, good cheer, and life? and what is
more grateful to the boddie, for by them it continues? what is more
profitable to the boddie, then to be well nourished? and what is more
pernicious to the mind, for thereby it is kept in servitude? Such as they are
by nature, such are their friends. For the lovers of their boddies, are the
haters of their minds: and they which love their souls, hate them which
are in the flesh. Then is it meet that we know our boddies what they are,
what their goods, and what are their friends, least through ignorance we
prefer frail things, before eternal: vain things, before profitable: and
vicious fellows, before virtuous men. Of which knowledge these may suffice,
and the rather because the manifold calamities which daily we do, and
continually may feel, are to bring into remembrance the boddies misery.

But the better to know the other part of us, which is our mind: I did once
for my profit ^n the University. draw into Latin tables, which since for
thy profit (christian Reader) at the request of a gentleman of good credit
and worship, I have Englished, and published in these two books. The former
of which is of Perturbations (and discourses of that part of the mind of
man which is void of reason) The latter of Moral virtues (so called because
it is of that part of the mind, which is endued with reason). In
consideration whereof, I have named the whole, the Anatomy of the mind,
because the mind in them is divided, and every part of either of them
sufficientlye manifested, and illustrated with many examples of Heathen men,
to the bettering I hope of dissembling Christians, which (if not by wholsome
sermons of godly men, yet) by notable examples of others (destitute of those
gifts and graces which we are adorned with all) may know them selves,
be ashamed of their ungratefulness, embrace virtue, and increase in
godliness. In the doing of which, if I have not discharged my duty,
according to thy expectation, pardon me, I beseech thee, and ^ccept this
howsoever it be at this time in good part: hereafter (if God so please, and
grant me life and leisure) it may be published both in sweeter phrase to
delight, and in better method to profit. Valeas.

Of the Perturbations in general.
Chap. 1.
MYnding to discourse of the affections, or perturbations in man, necessary it
is some what briefly to speak of them in general, according to the strange
opinions of two sects of Philosophers, namelye, the Stoikes, and
Peripatetions, and the rather because they have been the Fathers and
protectours of Philosophy. Which as they were of two sects in general
points of humane wisdom, so are they of two sorts, concerning the motions of
the mind. Stoikes.
For the Stoikes will not permit a man to be moved any whytt, for any thing: the
Peripatetions contrariwyse, Peripatetions.
think it meet that a man should be moved, and being passioned, he should
keep himself within the bounds of modesty. Either opinion in respect of
other, strange, and yet neither true. The Stoikes too severe, Lactantius de
vero cultu. Cap. 15
or better preci^e* the Peripatetions in this point too prodigal. For (as
terms them Lactantius) furious and mad are the Stoikes, which are so far
from tempering them, that they would cut of, and as it were gelde men of those
things which are grafted and planted in them by nature. Which what other thing
is it, then from Hearts fear: from Snakes poison: fearcenesse from wyld
Beasts, from tame quietness to take away? for look what particular and
special things are given to wild Beasts, those are to be found in one man
altogether. And if true it be which Physicians affirm, that cherefulnesse has
abiding in the Spleen, anger in the Gaul, lust in the Liver, and fear in the
heart, then easier is it to slay* then to pluck any thing out of the body,
that is to alter the naturel and disposition of man.

But these wise men perceive not that when they take vices out of man, they
take virtue also, which only they would, should have the rule and government of
him. For if it be the part or property of virtue, in the mydst of anger to
bridle and suppress that unruly affection (which they can not deny) then must
he needs be without virtue, which is without anger: and if is be virtue to
contain ye insatiable desire of the flesh within his bounds, then must he
needs lack virtue, which is without ye lust which he should assuage: and
again if it be a part of virtue to bridle the desire from coveting that which
is another man's, then can he have no virtue which has not that in the
suppressing of which the use and office of virtue consists. And therefore
except there be passions and perturbations in man, there is no place for
virtue. Eue^ as there is no victory, where as there is no adversary. And
therefore how precise in their opinion the Stoikes have been, it may easily
appear. Now the Perip. say that a man should be affectioned, but yet modice
meanly, and in his passions keep a measure: As though that then he should fall
into none offense. But, as he offends as well which goes softlye, as he which
runs, if they both wander and be out of the way: even so is he as well to
be reprehended, which is subject to perturbations, though it be but in
measure, as he which immoderatly does serve them, if both be unlawful. For as
directly to walk is good, and to go astraye dangerous: so to be moved with
affections to a good purpose is commendable, but to an ill end and purpose
altogether damnable. For a more illustration, the burning desire of the flesh,
though it be without measure, as long as it is in lawful Marriage, is without
blame: but if it once desire another man's wife, though it be not in such
burning, and vehement wise is a most horrible crime. And therefore to be angry,
to covet, to lust, is no offense, but to be an angry, a covetous, and a
lecherous man, deserves great reproach. For he which is an angrye man, is
moved, when he should not: and he which is covetous, desires which he ought
not: and the lecherous hunteth after that which is unlawful. So that neither
can we say with the Stoikes, that a man ought not, neither with the
Peripatetions, that one should somewhat sharply without any respect serve his
affections: when as necessary it is that perturbations should reign for the
illustratio^ of virtue, and to have them but a little, if it be not in respect
of virtue, and to a good intent is much to be reprehended. And therefore as
that water which is always standing, and never runs, must needs be
noisome and infectious: so that man, which is never moved in mind, can never be
either good to himself, or profitable to others. But have them we must, and
use them we may (and that aboundauntly) in honest wise. And therefore the end
of our affections, make them either good, and so to be commended: or bad, and
therefore to be dispraised. And thus briefly of the perturbations in general,
and of the use of them.

What are Perturbations. Chap. 2.
WE may define perturbations according to Zenons opinion, Perturbation.
to be contritions of the mind, contrary to reason. Or as the ancient
Academikes say: They are affections of the mind, not obeying unto the rule of
reason. Or unreasonable, or contrary to nature, motions of the mind. Or they
are desires too much abounding in man. They are in number four, and may be
divided into two sorts, either in respect or opinion of Good, or Evil. To the
opinion of Good, are ascribed Pleasure, and Lust: under the opinion of Evil,
are comprehended Fear, and Sorrow.

Of Pleasure, and her parts. Chap. 3.
Pleasure.
PLeasure, as in his books of Tusculane questions, Cicero says, is a gesting
ioyfulnesse, a ioyfulnesse showed forth, and expressed by the gesture of the
body. Which translation or Metaphor is taken from brute Beasts, whose
property is not by words, but by signs, and skypping to signify their
meaning. By which it may be gathered, that this perturbation belongs not unto
a reasonable creature, or unto one of a confirmed judgment, but rather unto
Beasts, Children or light persons, which when they have obtained any good
thing, can no otherwise signify their delyght and ioyfulnesse, except either
immoderatly they laughe, or unreasonably leap for joy. This pleasure the
Stoikes affirm to be an unreasonable puffing up of the mind, supposing it
self to enjoy some great good thing.

Cicero in his second book De finibus says, Cicero de finibus, lib. 2 Au.
Gelius.
Pleasure is a certain pleasant moving in the sense. Aulus Gelius says, it is
a certain exultation, or an exc^eding rejoicing, sprung of the events of things
desired. This Pleasure Aristotle makes of two sorts: one to come of honest and
good things, the other of dishonest: and according to these two sorts, it has
two appellations given to it by the Latins. For in respect of honest things,
it is called Voluntas, Voluntas. Voluptas. Volupe. Volupia.
but in respect of dishonest Voluptas. And it is named Voluptas of one Volupe,
or Volupia, which was Chamber maid to that virtuous Gentlewoman, or patroness
of pleasure Venus* So that the Latins seem to take this pleasure, Venus.
in the worser part, but the Greeks indifferently: for they say it is (...),
whose deriuation is from sweetness or pleasauntesse. But to leave the name,
(...),
and come to the nature. Cicero will not have a wise man to be puffed with this
pleasure: and Plato says it is the food of filthiness, for it dulleth the
wit, weakneth the judgment* and takes away understanding. This pleasure is
well-beloved, and has many companions, especially, Ilwyl, Delectation,
Oblectation, Insultation, Boasting, Prodigallitie, and Ambicion.

Of Ilwyll. Chap. 4.
Ilvvyll.
ILwyll is that which never speaks well, neither can take any pleasure at the
prosperity of any man, but her own. And those which are affected with this
quality, as they hate all men, so are they loved of none: and as they can take
no delyght at anies welfare: so for their crooked and overthwart dealing, none
takes pleasure in them. One may easily know them, for they are in looks
grimme, in talk snappishe, in behavior uncivil, and in opinion perverse.
Such were doggish Diogenes, Diogenes. Heraclitus. Timon Atheniensis.
Heraclitus, and Timon of Athens uncivil persons: and for their strange
manners, termed haters of men.

It is reported of Phocion the Athenian, Phocion.
that he would in nothing fulfill the request of the people, and therefore was
he hated worser then a Toade. And Cicero sharply reprehendeth Cato, for that he
was in opinion so obstinate, that he would in no case agree to any thing which
was decreed by the people. To be brief, all Tyrauntes which rather seek to be
feared, then loved, are such kind of men. And therefore is it a token of an
abject and servile man, at another man's prosperity to be grieved: or to
rejoice at the hurt of any man, espetiallye because the common state of mankind
is such, as none has assurance of perpetual felicity. For he which is this
day in aucthority, to morrow may be displaced: and it is said that Fortune is
like glass, which then may easily be broake, when it shyneth most.

Of Delectation. Chap. 5.
Now follows Delectation, Delectation
which by the sense of hearing creepes into the mind, and fylleth the same
with much delyght. The Stoikes say, that Delectatio^ is a pleasure which
infecteth the mind by a certain sweetness conceived by the ear. The fame is
given to man to good purpose, and profitably (were it not he abused it) as by
which we may recreate the mind, and bear the incommodities of this life, and
the better go about our business. For by this we expel cares, and after a
sort feel no pains in the things we take in hand. For certainly, the state
of us is such, as except some recreation, we had cares would overcome us. But
to leave men, which with singing, rithmes, and other instruments of Music are
marvelously delighted: are not ye very Birds by a concent and sweet variety
of voices, are as it were nourished, and man by their melody greatly
delighted? Has not our most bountiful God in divine sort, and myraculously
endued them with a perfect, and super excellent harmoni^? who is he which
hears the sweet melody of the Nightingal, Nightingal.
and is not stricken with admiration? especially* when he shall consider how
pleasant a voice is in so small a body? what an artificial sound in a
natural, and brute creature? and the same vttred not s^rekingly, but in number
and good harmony. So that the most learned in old time, have thought that
this bird has not only the art of Music by nature perfectly, but also by
discipline and practice to attain to the perfect habit thereof diligently: and
hereof it comes, ye some say, the old teach the young, and that their singing
most effectually tells and prognosticateth things to come. It is reported
that in Stesechorus mouth, Stesechorus
being then a child, and in his swaddling clowts, a Nightingall sang sweetly,
which those who professed the knowledge of interpreting the singing of Byrds,
said: did sygnifie that, that child Stesechorus should prove a rare and
excellent Poet, and so he did. But to leave the illustration of this matter by
examples, especially the thing being so plain, this part of pleasure,
delectation, is a good thing, and may be used to the profit, and commodity
of man, if it be referred to those ends above mentioned, that is, to our
recreation, when cares trouble us, to cause us to bear discommodities of this
life patiently, and cheerfully to go about our business.

Of Oblectation. Cap. 6.
A Familiar companion of Delectation, Oblectation.
is Oblectation: and therefore because they have great affinity, they shall
immediately one follow the other. It may seem by sound, to be almost one
with Delectation: but as in sound they have a difference, so in sense they are
diverse, and one more general then the other. For (as it is above said)
Delectation in the pleasure of the ear consists, but Oblectation stretches
farther, and many ways pleasureth a man. The Stoikes say, that Oblectation is
a certain bending, or inclination of the mind, to a pleasure gently and
sweetly mollif^yng the mind. This Oblectation, except it be carefully
restrained by the raynes of reason, it so overcomes a man, that it makes him
effeminate, and so spoyleth him of discretion, that his only care and study is
how to fill him self with pleasure, which is his chief felicity. Scythians.
Sardanapalus.
With this vice the Scythians were so overcome, that in beastlynesse, they
exceeded ye brutish kind. With this vice was Sardanapalus so brought into
slavery, that he could not be one minute without pleasure, whose poesy was
Ede, bibe, lude post mortem nulla voluptas, which may be thus interpreted,
Eat drink, and pass the time with play,
For mirth is none, when life is fled away.


But most shamefullye, did certain Kings and Princes of Asia, Asian King^
submit them selves to this, more then brutishe Oblectation. For their
custom was before any Maid of their Dominions could be married: first to have
a sight of them, and, if it were their pleasures, to take from them the flower
of their Virginity. And the better to be delyghted* they had so warely enacted,
that none durst marry where he fancied, except first he had craved a special
warrant from the Kings person. It is therefore the duty of every well
disposed person, by all means possible, to fly al prouocations to this
Oblectation: and especially at the beginning to see to himself, for if they
once come to a custom, they will easilye come to a habit and having got an
habit in pleasure, impossible it is almost to put it away and to be endued
with virtue.

Insultation. Chap. 7.
NExt unto Oblectatio^, follows Insultation, Insultation.
a foul affection and unmeet for a reasonable man. This Insultation is an
exceeding delyght and pleasure taken at the hurts of another, especially as
when we overcome our enemies, to laugh them to scorn, and unreasonably to
rejoice at the same. In field to be a conqueror is a glorious thing, but
miserable captives to have in derision, who will commend? for vanquishing
Hector, Achilles.
who will not praise Achilles? But in shameless drawing Hector about the
walls of Troy, who can but blame Achilles? By overthrow of his enemies Scylla
got renown, and for his valiantness who dicsommendes him? ^ylla.
But when he can not be content with victory, but will take his enemies bones
then buried, and flyng them into the Sea, who cries not out of Scylla? So ye
more shame for their Insultation, then Fame for their victories have they
purchased. But contrariwise, so far from insulting have wise and prudent
captains ben, that some have lamented the death even of their very enemies,
and some have loved them for their great valiantness. And therefore Julius
Caesar, though much reprehended in respect of the civil discord between him
and Pompey, Julius Caesar.
yet is he greatly adorned with co^mendations, for severe punishing the most
cruel murderers of his capital Pompey. And so Hanniball because of Marcellus,
and Alexander in respect of Darius, Hanniball.
have got double honor: honor by reason of valiantness, and honor because
of gentleness: one by sending the dead corpse of Darius rychly adorned with the
roabes of Alexander to the Queen of Darius: the other by causing ye relics
of Marcellus to be put in a vessel of Silver, Alexander.
with a Crown of gold on the same, and for a token of good will to be sent to
the son of Marcellus. So that as much honor for their clemency, as glory
for their victory they have achieved. And therefore as one is not only to be
desired, but also carefully to be sought for: so the other is so far from being
cared for, that all men ought to hate Insulters. And thus much for Insultation.
Now let us orderly proceed, and speak somewhat of braggers and boasting.

Of Boasting. Chap. 8.
MVch like unto Insultation is vain Boasting, and it is according to the mind
of Cicero, Boasting.
a jesting ioyfulnesse, exalting it self insolently. Which affection is much
to be reprehended in all, but then is it most odious, when as wise men are
defiled with the same. For it makes them not only with pride to be puffed,
but also ridiculous, and to be derided of all men. And such may be compared
unto that vain Souldior in Terence, ^iles gloriosus.
who by immoderate praising him self, is a good vice to make wise men sport.
Even as the shadow does follow the body, so should Fame follow good deeds,
Fame.
it ought not to be hunted after. He which has worthily brought any thing to
pass, should look for commendatio^s by others, but himself ought not to
seek it. And to say the truth, every good man is content, and takes
delight in his own conscience, his praise by others if he do hear, it
inflameth him not, if he hears not, he cares not. But what shall I say? I
see the notablest men defiled with this foul affection. And of all sorts some
are boasters. Of Poets and Orators Cicero reports that he knew many,
Orators* Poets.
both Poets and Orators, and yet he never knew any which thought another
better then himself.

Zeuxis that notable Painter, when he had finished the Picture of Atalanta,
Zeuxis. Atlantaes picture.
being stricken with admiration of his own work, brake into these words, and
writ the same under the Table: I warrant any Painter will sooner envy then
imitate my doing. O foolish Zeuxis, who hears these thy words and does not
condemn thee of foolyshnesse? Pompeius the son of Pompey the great, having
on the Seas put to flight his enemies would needs for that exployte of his, be
called not, Pompeius.
the son of Pompey, but the son of Neptume. And this works boasting, it
makes us not only to forget our selves, and the cause of our well doing, which
is God indeed, but also to be ashamed even of our own Parents, then which what
can be more impiety?

Of Prodigality. Chap. 9.
PRodigality is next, another notable part of Pleasure. The Stoikes call the
same a dissolution or a too much loasing of virtue. Prodigality.
A Prodigal man's property is to covet other men's goods, and not to care
for his own: to spend lustely, and to fare deliciously: so he has, he cares
not how he gets it, and so he spendes he cares not, how, when, or who
consumes it. Nothing can make him thrifty, no not admonition of friends: nothing
can make him keep a measure, no, neither fear of poverty, nor fear of
punishment. This Prodigality the Athenians said was a token of him which
desired to reign like a Tyrant. And therefore Aristophanes the Poet, in the
presence of the people, Aristophanes.
exclamed and said, that it was not meet a Lion should be nourished in a
common weal, for if he should, men must serve to satisfy his appetite. The
Poets call dissolute and prodigal men loase and vngirdled, which is taken from
Venus gyrdle, Venus,
which being once loased, she alureth unto wicked concupiscence whom she
lists. Homer writes that by the loasenesse of this gyrdle, Jupiter was
inflamed with desire of his own sister Juno. Jupiter.
And hereof it comes, that all such as do unlawfully desire copulation with
any ioygned to them by alliance, are called Incests, as it were, loase and
without girdle. For Cestos in Greek is a girdle, Cestos. Incests.
and Jncestus without a girdle. There are which call this Prodigality,
Luxuriousness, and me^ affected with ye same Luxuriousnes: Luxuriousness.
eue^ as we call boanes and members put out of their place, loasened, so are
they called Luxurious, in which there is no place either for reason or virtue.
And therefore nothing is more unmeet for a man then Prodigality, which makes
him careless in all his enterprises: whereof he is termed loase and dissolute.
With this vice especially have been noted Elpinor a fellow and companion of
Ulysses, Elpinor.
whom the Poets faigne, because of his beastly behavior, to have lived among
Swyne and Hogs: and whose end was lamentable by falling from a ladder, as the
end of all prodigal persons, for the most part is strange and wicked:

And one Fabius, which because of his great expenses, Fabius ^urges. Apicious.
was named Fabius Gurges: And so was Apicius, who after he had by banqueting
and good cheer, spent his whole patrimony, at length because he would not
lead a poor and miserable life, took a halter and hong him self.

Of Ambition. Chap. 10.
Ambition.
THat which occupies the last place among the parts of pleasure, is Ambition:
which the Greeks call (...) a love and care of promotion. And they say, it is
an unmeasurable desire of glory: or an opinion most vehement, and infixed in
the mind, as though it were greatly to be wyshed for. This Ambition the Poet
Euripides cries out of, as the most dangerous thing in a common weal. To
which Cornelius Tacitus agrees, and shows the cause and ends of Ambition
after this manner. The desire of principality has been of long time in the
minds of men: it then brake out and increased, when Princes began to enlarge
their dominions. For when authority was but small, equality was accoumpted
of: but when they began to conquer kingdoms, to subject the whole world, when
they envied the felicite of commonweals, and desired the euersion and
overthrow of all: then even among them selves (meaning the Romans) began
this Ambition also, sometime the people against the Senators contended, some
time troublesome Tribunes, would bear the sway, by and by the Consuls, after
them sprang C. Marius, and tyrannical Sylla, C. Marius. Sylla.
which would alter the whole state of Rome, and reign at their pleasure: after
them came Pompey and Caesar, Caesar, Pompey.
who could not abide to be in subjection to any: for it is written, that one
(Pompey) could abide no equal, and the other (Caesar) would suffer no superior:
Both (as Tullie writing to his friend Atticus, says) did seek not the
profiting and commodity of their country, but their private commodity. And
therefore true is the saying of Themistocles (touching himself and Aristides,
Themistocles. Aristides.
who envied each other to the death, and would rule without controlement)
except he (speaking to the Athenians) except ye cast me and Aristides out of
your City, into the bottom of the Sea, ye shall never have a quiet Athens.
And so truly it may be said, except ambitions persons be cut from every
commmon weal, impossible it is to be without civil and continual discord.
This ambition Theophrastus amongst men does detest, Theophrastus.
as a shameful thing, but in young men, and those which apply them selves to the
study of good learning, he greatly commends, and supposes to be a notable
occasion that they may the more couragiouslye give them selves to study, and
the better profit in the same: and in them it is called Emulation. Emulation.


Of Lust. Chap. 11.
WE have spoken already of Pleasure, Lust what.
and her companions, now will we likewise declare what Lust is, and who are in
subjection under her. It is defined to be either a desire raised against
reason: or a wild and unbridled appetite, which, in whomsoever it reigns so
kylleth all good motions, that virtue can have no place in the mind of him. It
is a wild and unruly colt, and needs a skillful ryder: else will it break
other men's hedges, and spoil good and virtuous plants: it will make a man to
have neither care of his own good name, nor consideration of the shame which
his posterity shall have by his wicked living. Diogenes said, that this Lust
was the tower of mischief. The tower of mischefe*
And very well may it so be called, for it has in it many shameless
defendours, as Needinesse, Anger, Wrath, Palenes, Hatred, Discord, Love, and
Longing, all jolly fellows, and of great experience, whose skylfulnes and power
shall be declared in order.

Of Needynes. Chap. 12.
NEedynesse is called of the Stoikes, Needinesse, what.
an insatiable coveting, or a desire without all measure immoderate. And then
it appears, when as we, having enjoyed our desire, seem to be nothing the
better for it. And it is termed of Plato Covetousness. The Stoiks write, that
this Needinesse comes not of great penury, but of great abundaunce. For he
which possesses much, needs much. And therefore, where little is, little is
the care, and little ought for to be coueted.

The elder Cato was wont to say, that he stood in need of many things, Cato
senior
and yet he coueted nothing. And said he, if there is, which I may use, I use
it, if not, I am he which can use and enjoy my self lawfully. M^n object unto
me, that I need many things, and I tell them that they know not how to
lack. And notable is that sentence: Covetousness is the desire, Covetousness.
and studdie to get money, which no wise man ever has wished, for that (as it
were infected with a contagious poison) does effeminate both body and soul of
man: it is never minished, neither with lack, nor with abundance: and it
lacks as well those things which it enjoys, as which it wants. M. Cato, in
his Oration which he made for the reformation of manners: M. Cato.
said, that Prodigallitie and Covetousness were the two plagues which
overthrew great and famous kingdoms. This Perturbation of the mind, does not
only bring Princes into contempt with the people, but also causes a speedy
revenge.

Platoes counsel is very good which says, A rich man truly ^ermed.
that he which would be counted rich, ought not to heap much money together,
but rather to quiet and keep under his desire. For impossible it is but he
should be always poor, which has no end of coveting. And therefore is
Covetousness well compared to the dropsy: and covetous men, Covetousness
like the (...) and like that (...) Dypsus.
to those which are infected therewith. For as those which have the dropsy,
do thyrste the more, the more they drink: even so covetous men, the more they
prossesse, The effects of Poverty and Plenty.
the more they would. And as those which are bitten by a certain Viper named
Dypsas, do unreasonably thirst, and by how much they drink, by so much are
from easing their pain: even so those which are bytten with this Viper
covetousness, are always thirsty, and the more they possess, the more their
dissease increases. Plato in his third book De Repub. would have both plenty
and poverty to be banished out of his common weal, the one because it causes
Pleasure, Idleness, and Ambition: the other because it makes abiectes,
seditious, and men given to all filthy lucre. Therefore will we here conclude
and say with Solon, that riches ought to be gotten, but yet after honest
means, not couetously, that is by wicked arts. Male parta, male dilabuntur,
Ill gotten goods, are ill spent, says Tullie.

Of Anger, Wrath, Palenes, Hatred, and Discord. Cap. 13.
ANger is defined after two sorts, either according to her nature, Anger what
or according to her effect. Those which expound the nature of it say, it is a
heat of blood, and inflaming of the same, even to the innermost part of man.
According to the effect it is thus defined: Anger is a lust or desire to
punish, or to be revenged on him, which seems to have hurt us. Wrath, what.
Wrath is a desire to be revenged, seekinge a time or opportunity for the same.
The one of these consists in habit and disposition, the other in deed and
effect. Lactantius says, Lact. lib. de vero cultu.
that the anger of Superiors toward their inferiors, that is, of
Magistrates toward wicked violatours of the law, is good and profitable for
a common weal, but when inferior persons are moved with the same one
against another, then is it both dangerous and damnable: dangerous because
that if they should be resisted, it must needs follow that some be hurt or
slain, from whence ryseth part taking, dissension, and war: and damnable,
because it is against the commandment of God, who wylleth us to be in love
and charity with all men. Great care have wise men had for the subduing of
this affection. Clinias. Theodosius
Clinias by playing on the Harp, and Theodosius by reciting the Alphabete, did
forget their anger. Ciceroes counsel deserves to be remembered, which is:
Ciceros ad Q. Fratrem.
I do not here contend, that as at all time, so especially in this our age it
is a hard thing to alter the mind, and suddenly to pluck away that which by
custom is come to an habit: but this I admonish you, that if you can not
avoid it, that before your mind be occupied with anger, then reason could
foresee it should be occupied, you ought so to frame your self, and daily
have this in mind, Anger should be resisted. And when anger most does move
you, then should you most carefully keep the tongue: which thing to do,
seems to me as great a virtue, as not to be angry at all. For at no time
to be angry is not only a great point of gravity, but of gentleness, but
for to temper both talk and thought, when you are angry, or else to hold
your peace, and to suppress the motion and grief of mind, although it be not
of perfect wisdom, yet is it a token of a rare wit: Hitherto Cicero.

The next and third in order is Palenes, Palenes, what.
which is called an anger newly begone, or but newly beginning, and after a
little while is quickly gone. A man so affected is soon hot, and soon cold,
because reason overcomes the outragiousnesse of the passion. For if it
should persist and continue long, it would easily come to hatred. Which
according to the mind of Cicero, is an old grudge: Hatred, what.
or as Zeno defines. It is a certain desire by which we wish ill to some
body, that so we may come either to wealth, promocion or profit.

Here it is not impertinent to distinguish Hatred from Anger: for they may
seem to be all one, and to have the same nature: Arist. lib. 2^ cap. 8.
Rhetorx ad Theodecten. The difference between hatred and anger.
but Aristocle does as notably as learnedly, show the difference between them.
For (says he) Anger springs from an injury done unto us: but hatred
oftentimes is conceived of none occasion. For by and by, as soon as we conceive
an ill opinion of any man, at the same time we begin to hate. Again, we are
angry with some particular persons, with this man, or that man? but hatred
most commonly is against a whole company: as every man that has the fear of
God before his eyes, hates all droonkardes, thieves, whoremongers, and
generally, all wicked men lewdly bent. Again, time can aswage anger, but
hatred once rooted, can not be (or very hardly) plucked from the heart.
Moreover, he which is angry desires to bring vexation and grief, to him
whom he is offended withal: but he which hates seeks to destroy. An angry
man will be known: but an hater cares not much for that. The thing which an
angry man will do, may be sensibly perceived: but the hurts which a hater
does, can not by sense be known, as injustice, sclander, and such like.
Besides, grief does accompany Anger, but Hatred is without grief, and paste
al shame. Furthermore Anger is driven away by revenge, but hatred no calamity
can put away. To conclude, he which is angry desires to have him vexed, with
whom he is angry, but he which hates, desires his death, whom he does hate.

Discord, what.
The last is Discord, which Cicero defines to be an anger conceived even at
the very heart by an extreme, and inward hatred. He which labors of this
disease, as an unprofitable member should be cut from the body of a common
weal. For he can agree with none, he can yield to none, but dissenting from
all, seeks by conspiracies, insurrections, poisoning of Princes, the plain
euersion and overthrow of all. Cice. pro lege Agratia contra Rullu^ ad populum.
Cicero says, that Non potestatum dissimilitudo sed animorum disiunctio
dissensionem facit: Not the inequality of power* but the disjunction of
minds, makes dissension. And Salluste very notably says: That by discord
the greatest things come to naught: which agrees to that fiction of the
Poets, who say, that by discord, which is called Alecto, Alecto*
one of the furies of hell, the world, and all things else shall perish. All
these affections in this Chapter contained, so depend one of the other, as if
they were lynked together with a chain. And therefore they ought very warely
to be suppressed, least they bring us into a mad estate. And that the more
wyllingly it may be done, I will declare the effects of one, which in respect
of other is not so hurtful, that by the same, the other which can hurt more,
may be the better avoided, which is Anger. It is written, and experience proves
the same, An angry man, a mad man.
that an angry man, when he is in his heat, differs not from a madd man.
Behold his looks, his color, his gesture, voice, words and behavior, and no
difference shall you find. Examples we see many, and wonder at them. Alexander
Magnus. Clito.
Alexander in his anger, caused his trusty and most faithful Clito most
cruelly to be slain: Dionysius. Iracundiae comes poeni^^ntia.
Dionysius the Syracusane, in his rage, killed his best beloved Page, but when
the fury was paste, and they came to them selves, they did so repent them, that
for very sorrow desperately they would have slain them selves. Periander
likewise in his rage, murdered his own wife: Periander.
but when with judgment he had considered the fact, he caused the strumpets
and concubines which incensed him thereunto, with fire and faggot to be consumed.
But what ne^de I to recite these examples? Or why do we so much wonder at
tyrants, when as grave men and of great judgment, have been subdued by this
furious affection? Between Aeschylus and Sophocles about versefiyng, Aeschylus
and sophocles.
there was sometime no small contencion, in which by the sentence and judgment
of those which were present Sophocles was preferred. Aeschylus took the same so
grievously, that for very anguishe of mind, he could neither abide the
presence of his friends, nor any body else, but fled presently into Sicilia,
where obscurely he lived, and at length by thought dyed miserably. The like
Calchas.
is written to have happened to Calchas a soothsayer, at his return from Troy.
For coming into trial with Mopsus, Mopsus.
one of his profession, and being ouercom did so, for very anger, torment him
self, that within short time he dyed of that angry conceyte. And had not Plato
by learned persuasions altered the mind of Niceratus a young man of good
disposition, and excellent in Poetry, Niceratus.
he had in such sort dispatched himself. For sometime great emulation there
was between this Niceratus and one Antimachus in Poetry, Antimachus
and as the custom was openly they celebrated the praise and commendation of
Lysander in verses. Now Lysander having hard them both, did much esteem the
verses of Antimachus better then the other, although in deed by the sentence
of those which had judgment in Poetry, Niceratus had deserved more
commendation and preferment. Which sinister sentence of wise Lysander, so
grieved him at the very heart, that he was determined to forsake and leave the
studdie of good literature. But Plato by grave counsel turned his mind, and
made him of a dissolute, a diligent student in Poetry.

Of Love. Chap. 14.
THe greatest, and most burning affection is Love. Love,
Which may easily be proved both by the aucthority of Plato, and other men of
great countenance. Plato amongst the four kinds of divine furors accompteth
Love: Furors.
the first he calls Prophetical, Prophetical, ^y^tical. Proetical,
Amatoriall,
whose president is Apollo: the second is Mystical, whom Bacchus: the third
is Poetical, whom the Muses: the last is Amatoriall (if so I may say) whom
Venus governs, by which he would show no other thing, but that Loves force
is divine and supernatural. Certain of the later Academiks affirm that Love
is a divine mystery, given unto man for his conservation and comfort. And they
prove the same by the examples of Ariadnes, and Medea. Theseus, and Ariadnes.
Jason, and Medea.
For had not Theseus of Ariadnes, and Jason of Medea been much esteemed, their
names at this day had not been remembered, neither had they by victories gotten
such renown. Chrysippus is of their opinion, and he says, that Love is the
bond of friendship, neither does he think it should be dispraised, since
bewty and fayrenesse, are, as it were, the flower of virtue. Stoikes.
The Stoikes will permit (although other affections they can not abide to see
in a wise man) the Stoikes I say, will permit even a wise man to love, and
espetially those young men, which with the beauty of the face, have a
dexterity of wit: and yet should not so esteem the fayrenesse of the face,
as the show of virtue, signified thereby. Which when Cicero considered, he
said, Cicero.
he did not a little marvel, why at no time men have loved either an old
man, that was bewtifull, or a young man deformed: but at length, as enforced to
descend into their opinion, he said, well, let it be so (as you Stoikes say)
that a wise man may love, I do not gainesaye, as long as he may love without
care, and sighing. The Peripatetions, when they define friendship, to be an
equite of reciprocal, or mutual good will, make three kinds of the same
friendship, one they call neyghborhoode, the other hospitalite, and the last
Love.

The Mistress of this Love is delight, The cause of Love.
which by the aspect and sight of beauty is taken. For whosoever in vewing and
beholding takes no pleasure, can at no time love in deed.

How Love comes to frendeship.
When this love is confirmed either by gifts or by study of virtue, then goes
it from a passion, to a perfect habit, and so leaves the name of Love, and is
called Friendship, which neither time nor distance can violate, of which
hereafter. Zeno, although he were the Prince and chief of the Stoikes, which
so much praise this affection, and said it was meet and necessary, that
young men should be Lovers: yet he says, that love is an insatiable desire,
intruding it self into man by some wonderful beauty. And he says that this
affection never poysoneth wise men, because it is an extreme enemy to virtue,
neither will it suffer the affected otherwise to be occupied, then in
contemplating of a thing most vain. Whose opinion seems to be true: and if
we consider of the same rightly, we shall no otherwise but with Zeno confess,
that it is a passion unmeet for a wise man, an enemy to good wits. The
effects of Love.
The effectss of Love are strange, and the very remembraunes and reading of
them ought to make love to be odious, and more to be shunned then any other
Perturbation, which men are subject unto. For it suffers the passioned never
to be in quiet, but continually tormented. Hark I pray you how a young man,
which Plautus brings forth in one of his commedies, lamenteth his miserable
estate, in bitter sort: I actor, crucior, agitor, stimulor, versor, in amoris
rota miser exanimor, feror, distrahor, diripior, vbi non sum, ibi sum, ibi est
animus: What more could be said? I am tossed, I am vexed, I am plucked, I am
pricke^, I am turned, on Loves wheel, ah wretch, I am killed, I am torn, I am
stolen, where I am not, there I am* there is my heart. Who does not lament his
case? Harken what another says: Ah ego ne possum tales sentire labores?
Quam mallem in gelidis mo^tibus esse lapis?


As though he should say: Ah silly soul can I sustain,
And still these labors bear?
Naie I for stone on top of hill,
Would God were placed there.


Another says likewise.

Durius in terris nihil est, quod viuat* ama^te
Nec modo si sapias, quod minus esse velis,
Which thus may be interpreted.

If thou art wise, then nothing less,
Then love thou wylt desire:
A harder thing is not then is,
Of Love the burning fire.
This Love as it vexes the mind, so it casts the body into sickness, we see
the same daily confirmed, with infinite examples. But I will recite but one or
two. On a time Demetrius, son to Antigonus, Demetrius. Antigonus.
being sore sick of this diseas, his Father came to visit him, and as he was
entering into his chamber, met an harlot of rare beauty, with whose love
Demetrius was tormented: then Antigonus being entered, and wylled him to be of
good cheer, he took him by the arm to feel his pulses. But Demetrius told
him that he was somewhat better, for even now the Fever left him. Then the
King smyling, said, you say true my son, for I met her even now at the
chamber door.

Selencus likewise, King of Syria, Selencus.
had a Son, which was cast into a dangerous disease, by a strange Love. For
it is reported, that the beauty of his mother in law so inflamed him, as had
not his Father pitied him, he had finished his days. For his Father
understanding the weakness of his son, the cause of his sickness, and way
to restore him to his former health, because he tendered his welfare, ioygned
his wife to his son in marriage, and was content that his Queen, and wife
should be a daughter in law unto him. A strange Love, and a rare pity. This
Love is the cause of deadly hatred, and can abide no partner in the same.

It is reported that the cause of the civil dissension between Themistocles,
Stesilia, Themistocles, Aristides.
and Aristides, was the love of Stesilia that harlot: whose beawtie being
vanished, (their hatred was such) as never could they be reconciled, and made
friends, but exercised capital malice, betw^ene them selves, even to the
death. And it is thought that the privy hatred of Cato against Caesar,
Seruilia, Caesar and Cato.
began about the harlot Seruilia, whom both loved entierely, and continued
between them as long as they lived.

Now what shame Love brings, let us Semiramis, which by her nobleness and
virtue, Semiramis.
surpassed not only Queens, but all Kings which had been before her time, by
this blind affection was so overcome, as her Fame is turned into a perpetual
reproach. For being in Love with her own son, and alluring him to commit
incest with her, was deservedly spoiled of this life: and for hope of a little
vain, and foolish pleasure, lost that which is sweeter then all pleasure. L.
Vitellius, likewise being (except for this one fault) a right honest man, L.
Vitellius.
and of great estimation, by reason of a fond Love which he bare to a maid, so
defamed him self, as he was a laughing stock unto his neighbors and
acquaintance For he could not be content with enjoying her at his pleasure,
but must also openly every day play with her and anoint her brows, and
veins most vainly. So that more shame by his fondness, then honor by his
innocence he got unto himself.

The Kings of Assyria, Kings of Assiria.
are they not worthily for the love of women condemned of wantonness? for,
delighting in the company of women, them selves never answer any Ambassador
sent unto them, but by messengers they answer all, they sitting, playing, and
dallying with Concubines at their pleasure. So that this blind Cupid not only
does bring unquietness to the mind, and sickness to the body: but also
creates hatred among men, and brings shame to those which are vnmeasurably
troubled with the same. And is this all? Noe forsooth. Ex ducibus tauros saepe
Cupido facit: It makes valiant Captains, most vile captives: and those which
are subduers of the stoutest, to be in subjection to the most effeminate
abiectes. It was no small reproach to Hannibal in Salapia, Hannibal.
to yield him self into the hands of an harlot, which he loved as his life:
that deed of his has obscured much of his glory, and is a good common place
for some to dispraise him. Alexander.
Alexander also to his great shame, for the love of the faamous harlot Thais,
Thais. Persepolis*
caused that most populous and rich City Persepolis to be burned, and was
not only a commander, but also a committer of that shameful fact* for he was
seen to run about with burning fagottes, ready to consume that which was not
yet set on fire. A strange thing, that a man of a woman: an honest man of an
harlot: a most noble Prince, of so notable a strumpet, whose only care was not
to profit, but to plague: not good, but ungraciousness and mischief, should
be so overcome, as at her request, without any offense to consume, and set on
fire so glorious a City, which at all times might have been a great succor
unto him, and profit to all the world Yet Love conquered him, and caused him
in his heat, to do that which afterward he did not a little repent. Strange be
the effects of Love, which I have already recited, but more strange are which
they follow. Strange it is, that it should cause such a desire of any, but more
strange of harlots: wicked it is, that men in such sort should wish the
company of any, but more wicked of their kindred: Horrible it is to commit
incest, but more horrible in such sort to fancy Beasts, and senseless things:
Diuillish it is to destroy a city, but more then diuillishe, to euert
cities, to betraye countreies, to cause servant to kill their masters,
parents their children, children their parents, wives their husbands, and to
turn all things topsy turuy, and yet it does so, as shall be declared. Wicked it
is, unlawfully to wish or covet the company of any, but more wicked to commit
incest. Therefore, who, can too much dispraise that Semiramis, of whom I made
mention even now, who by Love enforced, Semiramis.
requested, the copulation of her own son? or that same Clodius, Clodius.
which took the Virginity from his own systers? or that Pesiphae, Pasiphae.
who lay with her own son?

Now with what words shall I inueygh Anacreon with Batyllus, whom he compared
with Jupiter him self: Anacreon.
And Pindarus with another, in whom he was so delighted, Pindarus.
as dallying him in his arms, he gave up the ghost: And Xenophon with Clinias
who being departed out of this life, Xenophon, Clinias.
Xenophon craved at the hands of Jupiter, that if it were his pleasure, that
he but once should have the sight of Clinias, and afterward be blind, or not
see him, and ever have the use of seeing, he would rather have the sight of
Clinias, and ever be blind, then not behold him, and never be blind.
Horrible is this kind Semiramis. Pesiphae. Cyparissus. Aristomachus. Pub.
Pilatus.
unreasonable Beasts. As did Semiramis an Horse: and beastly Pesiphae a Bull:
and Cyparissus an Heart: and Aristomachus Bees.

But most horrible was the Love of Publius Pilatus, which miserably did delight
in the Love of the image of Helene, Image of Helene. Image of Atalanta. Image,
Bonae Fortunae.
and Atalanta: and of two young men of Athens, which were in Love with the
picture of good Fortune notably set forth.

By this affection was Troy, and many Scylla betray both her Father and her
country. Troy. Scylla.


This Love caused the Tarentines to Romans: This Love caused L. Pedanius
Secundus Tarentines. ^. Pedanius ^^cundus.
to be killed of his own servant, because he took pleasure in that party
which was his delight.

This Love caused Semiramis (which I have so often named) to murder her
Semiramis.
because they should not blaze abroad their copulation with her.

It caused Catiline, for the love of Orestilla, to kill his own son,
begotten of Catilme. Orestilla.
because she would not join marriage with him, as long as his son lived. It
caused Laodice, wife unto Ariartes King of Cappadocia, her husband being dead,
Laodice. Ariartes.
for the Love of a knave, which in her husbands time she kept, to murder five
of her own sons, least if they should live, the adulterer whom she loved,
should be put from his kingdom. But contrary to her thinking, one was living
which took reuengement.

It caused the same Laodice, not only in such sort, to murder her natural
children, suppressing of it, least it grow to a monster, and bring forth
deuillishe fruit, as is declared. Remedies of Love.
Many remedies are prescribed to ease the same* The Poets say, Leucadia, there
is a very high and steep rock called Leucates, Leucates mons.
which is a notable remedy to aswage Love. From this rock lepped first of all
Cephalus, Cephalus. Degonetes.
for the love of Degonetes, which he loved without measure. The same Sappho is
reported to have done, because she could not purchase the sight of her
beautiful Phaon. Sappho.
A strange passion which can not be eased, Phaon.
but by death, or the enjoying of that which is coueted. To this agrees that
sentence of Crates Thebes. for he says, that Love is remedied either by
fasting, Crates.
by time, or with an halter. For good cheer nourishes, and increases Love:
Time either does take away, or at the least assuage the same: But if neither
fasting, nor time will do good, then the next remedy and most ready, is to
take an halter and hang him self: his words in Greek go roundly, Cicero lib.
4 Tusc. quest.
(...),

But Ciceroes counsel to assuage Love is good, and to be followed. His words
be these: To a man tormented with Love, this salve should be ministered. First
he should be told how light a thing, how vain, and to be contemned Love
is. Then should his mind be brought to some other studies, cares,
cogitations, and business. Finally, by chaunginge of the place, even as sick
men are used, it should be cured. Likewise, men would that by some new Love,
the old infixed, as one nail by another, should be driven away. But the
chiefest way to alter the mind of a Lover, is to admonish him what a fury
it is: for of all Perturbations of the mind, there is none more vehement, and
outrageous, then is Love, by which, whordome, deflowring, adultery, and incest
are committed, either of them much to be reprehenhed. Hitherto Cicero.

Notable is the example of Spurina, a young man of rare and superexcellent
fayrenesse, Spurina.
which because he perceived many women to be much delyghted with him, and
many Parents did suspect their children, and many husbands had their wives in
ielosie, both to avoid all such suspicion, and because none should be in love
with him, by reason of his fayrenesse and rare beauty, he did in most
pitiful sort, mangle and cut his nose and nostrelles, so that he seemed not
only deformed, but also odious to all men.

His meaning was very good, and worthy to be noated of all: and he may
stryke a shame unto all such as by ill and wicked means, seek to allure and
entrappe well disposed persons, and those which without such enticementes,
would be the servant of God. But of this Perturbation sufficient.

Of Desire, and Longing. Chap. 15.
THe last part of Lust, is Longing. which is an immoderate desire of a thing
wished for. Longing what.
And hereof it is said, that even hastening is a lingering, to him which
longs. Cicero, defines it after this manner, and says it is a Lust to see
that which is not present, and before us. This affection amongst others is most
light, and inuadeth none of the grauer sort, but either women, weak, or
effeminate persons.

Then every thing is most esteemed, when either it begins to want, or we
altogether lack it. Wine seems then to be most delectable, when the cups are
empty: and the latter fruit is sweeter then the former. Women persuade them
selves, if their husbands being absent, they can not hear from them, that
without all peradventure, they are either dead, or in great misery. Hereof is
Penelope brought for an example, Penelope.
which with pitiful outcryes, and lamentations, bewayleth the absence of her
Ulysses, and because she would deceive time, she took web and distaffe in
hand, so to mitigate somewhat, her increasing sorrows. This Longing likewise
caused Sappho, when she could not quietly bear the absence of her beloved
Phaon, Sappho.
desperately to cast her self from a most high rock, and so eased her grief
by kylling her self, wherefore it appears that then we know what a thing
is, and of what estimation, when we have it not: whereof proceeds this
Longing. Homer, when he lived was of none accoumpt, Homer.
every man contemned him, and none would vouchsafe to accoumpt him their
countreyman* but Homer being dead, was both lacked and longed for. Insomuch
that seven famous and notable cities, Smyrna, Rhodes, Colophon, Salamis, Ius,
Argos, Athens.
namely, Smyrna, Rhodes, Colophon, Salamis, Ius, Argos, and Athens, made war
for his bones, and then every one could challenge him for theirs, and be
desirous, that his fame should bring renown to them. The unfinished picture of
Tyndarides to Nichomachus, Nichomachus. Timomachus. Apelles.
and of Medea to Timomachus: and of Venus to Apelles, did strike a greater
desire, then if they had been perfectly consummate. But of this affection we
will speak no more, but only this, that it is unmeet for a wise man (whose
part is to bear patiently, which must needs be borne) to be subject to this
Perturbation.

Of Fear and Sorrow, two Perturbations, which trouble our minds, through an
opinion of evil toward us. Chap. 16.
IN our beginning, we divided Perturbations into two sorts, either in respect
or judgment of Good, or of Evil. In respect of Good, were Lust and Pleasure,
in opinion of Evil, Fear, and Sorrow. Of the former we have already spoken
sufficiently: now let us in like sort illustrate, and make plain those which
follow. And first we will speak of Fear, and of his parts. Fear what.
Which Cicero, according to the opinion of the Stoikes, defines to be an
opinion of some Evil coming toward us, which seems to be intolerable.
Varro thinks this fear to have his deriuation from the moving of the mind,
and Metus he says, is quasi motus animi, Metus quasi motus animi.
A moving of the mind. For it seems that the mind is fled, and the body
much terrefied, when some Evil happens* or is toward us.

Fear has many parts, but especially Slothfulness, Bashfulnesse, Terror,
Dread, Trembling, Astonishme^t, Co^turbation, and Fearfulness: As unmeet
for every man. The Stoikes with whom the ancient Academikes agree, do say,
that there be three good affections, agreeing to virtue, to wit Gladness,
Will, and Heed. Gladness. Will. Heed.
Gladness they say is a certain reasonable quiet and sweet pleasure,
contrary to Sorrow: Will is a desire, agreeing to reason, contrary to Lust:
Heed is a wise declining from Evil, contrary to Fear. By which they seem to
infer, that a wise and valiant man, should always be heedefull, but never
fearful. For as Tullie says, there is more evil in fearing, then in that
which is feared. To this agrees that of Socrates, for he supposed Fortitude to
be a science, Fortitude what. Hannibal.
and skyl, teaching to take heed. Which made Hannibal more then other
Captains to be diligent in preventing a mischief, and therefore by a sudden
fear stroke^, he never lost opportunity. Contrary to that, Nicias.
Nicias the Athenian, which through Fear and cowardnesse, lost many
opportunities. Therefore that which is done fearfully, or cowardly, brings no
small reproach to the dooers. Which made Tiberius Caesar, Tib. Caesar.
much to be spoken against, for that for the least wind and tempest, he would
hyde him self, and durst not show his face. It is the greatest token of
victory, when a Captain is courageous, and it brings a stomach to
soldiers, when they behold their guides not to be dastardes, but manfully to
stand unto it.

Alexander was wont to overcome the fortune of his foes by audacitie, Alexander.
and their power by policy: which made him oftentimes to say, that any
thing might be done by couragiousnesse, but nothing by fear and dastardness.
And he was so far from fear, that virtuously he would do all things: as
may appear. For being on a time in great danger, neither could he overcome
without great slaughter of his men, was counsayled by Parmenio, by craft in the
night to encounter, Parmenio.
and so subtiltye should serve, when strength could not. But Alexander like a
noble Captain made answer, and said, that which thou counsaylest me
Parmenio, is rather the part and property of thieves, Dolus non decet fortem.
whose endeavor is by snares to entrap. And therefore so far am I from
imitating such kind of men, that in open field I will encounter: It is not
my purpose, that by subtlety and wylynesse my fame should be obscured. And
therefore I had rather to repent me of my ill fortune, then to be ashamed of
the victory. Now of the parts of Fear, amongste the which Slothfulness, is
first.

Of Slothfulness. Chap. 17.
^lothfulnes what. Demosthenes.
Slothfulness according to Cicero, is a fear of labor, to ensue. And therefore
ye same Cicero writes, that if Demosthenes had seen any citizen up before
him, and at work, it would much have grieved him, for he was no sluggarde,
neither did he favor any so bent: which made him prove so rare an example of a
perfect Orator. This diligence as it helps and prospers al enterprises, so
contrariwise, slothfulness marreth every thing. And therefore, although every
man ought for to shun the same, Slothfulness unsitting for a Prince.
yet espetially Princes. Which is the counsel of Pallas, Pallas.
whom Homer brings forth, saying: It is not for a man of authority to
sleep a whole night. He must be watchful. Demetrius.
Demetrius King of the Macedones, was stained with the blot of slothfulness,
for that the lamentations of his oppressed subjects, was not esteemed of him.
Espetially it appeared by the example of a poor old woman, which being
injured by some, craved justice at his hands. But he answered, that he had no
time to answer, when indede he was idle, and had no business. But she nothing
abashed, said: Then is it not meet you should rule, if you disdain to hear
the complaints of your subjects. Which boldness of the woman, so moved him,
that afterward his ears were open to the complaints of all. The caus^ of
slothfulness, prosperity. The (...)
Slothfulness ryseth oftentimes of too much abundaunce of any thing. As for
example, we see the Sabies, because they have in great abundaunce al kind of
riches, and marchantes bring them gold and silver for their wares, by which
means they prove very rich, without all care and labor, slothfully they
spend their time.

Nabatheis.
But contrariwise the Nabatheis, their neighbors having nothing, but y^ which by
their virtue and labor they attain, are very good husbands, and can abide no
slothfulness, but idleness they punish grievously, and diligence they
worthily reward. Homer, when he would mock and deride idleness, brings
forth the Pheacons, which accoumpt the greatest felicity in doing nothing.
Pheacons.
And those abound in all kind of worldly wealth, which increases without any
pains taking. If any business they have, they refer the same unto women,
because them selves will not be troubled with the matter.

Herodotus makes mention of a certain idle people, Lotophagie
which he calls Lotophagie. They live by doing nothing, and they feed them
selves, and make their apparel of the bark of certain trees, named Lotus. Of
which, if any eat, Lotus.
they are so delighted therewith, that all other they do contemn. It is
reported, that as many as have fellowship with these Lotophagies, become of
their qualities, and are careless in all their doings, as happened unto
certain companions of Ulysses, so Homer says. Effects of idleness.
Which is feigned of the Poets, to no other purpose, but to signify that
idleness makes of men, women: of women, beasts: of beasts, monsters. Wherefore
it ought to be detested, because it is an enemy to virtue, and makes us
fearful in doing any thing, be it of never so light importance. Contrary to
this, is diligence, and industry, by which that Demosthenes (of whom even
now in this Chapter I made mention) being of nature very dull and blockishe,
The diligence of Demosthenes.
passed all those which of nature, were of sharp and ripe capacity. For it
comes to pass, and that oftentimes, that industrious, and diligent men, by
their pains excel even those to whom nature has been most beneficial.

And certain it is, that most commonly where abundaunce is, there is most
negligence: and where nature has been friendely, there is a certain vain
opinion, which causes slothfulness.

Of Bashfulnesse. Chap. 18.
THe next companion of Slothfulness is Bashfulnesse. Bashfulnes what.
The which is defined of the Stoikes to be a fear, of ignominy: or as A.
Gellius says, it is a fear of just reprehension: or as another learned man
defines, it is a vehement motion of the mind, ^lying shame, desiring
commendation. Cicero calls it the best ruler of the Lusts, when it is raised
by the care and study of honesty. I^ becomes young men very well and is a
token of a good wit, and disposition. Cato the elder was greatly delighted with
such, Cato senior.
as at the least fault would blushe. And so was Diogenes the Cynike. Diogenes.
For when he talking with a young man, he perceived his face to be red with
blushing, said unto him: be of good cheer my son, for this color, is the
color of of virtue it self. But that I may come unto grave Cato again, his
delight was in those young men, which in well doing would blushe, but he cared
not for those which waxed pale. For the one was a sign of a good nature, but
the other of impudency, a very evil quality. Some which write more
properly, call this affection Shamefastness, Shamefastness.
and that the ambiguitie of the word may be shunned, they say that
Bashfulnesse is raised sometime by ill deeds* but shamfastnes is always
through consideration of goodness. So this verb impersonal Pudet, Pudet.
is referred both to a reverence of honesty, and likewise to a shame of
dishonest things, and differs from Piget. Pige
For the other Pudet to praise, and this Piget to dispraise* and grief does
belong.

Of Terror. Chap. 19.
THe third part of Fear, is called Terror. Terror what.
Which the Stoikes write to be a certain fear, springing from the imagination
of an unaccustomed thing. Cicero says, it is a Fear much troubling, by which
it comes to pass, that from Bashfulnesse, redness of color, but from this
Terror palenesse, and cracking of the teeth, does arise. We may fetch the
beginning of this word from the Greeks, if we alter but a few letters. For
(...) signifies to fear, with shaking of the body, and with palenesse of the
face. This affection becomes not a constant, and valiant man, who should
always be reddie to suffer all things patiently, without sign of a troubled
mind. Who valiant in deed.
Aristotle affirmed him properlye to be called a valliaunt man, to whom the
fear of an honest death, struck no terror* and which was reddie to suffer all
things, which could bring his death, patiently. They which in such wise have
passed this life, have been always numbered among the best, and most renowned.
Which made Solon to enacte that those children, Solon.
whose parents in battle had manfully been slain, should for the prowes of
their parents, be kept at the charges, of the common treasure. Wherefore it is
the part of a virtuous, and valiant man, to hate this life, and contemn
death. And reason teaches us the same. Notable is that example of Q. Mutius
Sceuola, Q Mutius ^ceuola.
which neither for the armed crewe of lusty soldiers, nor for the austere
looks of cruel Sylla, which by his countenance, seemed to threaten extreme
punishment to all the Romans, could once be terrefied, but boldly, and
sloutlye, even to the face of Sylla (which requested of the Senate, that Marius
should be proclaimed an enemy to the state) answered, I will not permit
Sylla, through desire of prolonging my days, that Marius, which has saved
not only this city, Marius.
but all Italy shall be judged an enemy to his country. Of that mind was
Marius (which reason and virtue had brought him into) that ^e thought nothing
better, then to be without the stain of an vncorrupt life, which if he once
were, nothing should terrify him from hazarding both land and life, for the
keeping of the same. And therefore he which is innocente, and without blame,
ought not for to be stricken with the terror of any thing, sith it is the
thing much dispraised of all wise men, and practiced of none which are stowte
of stomache.

Of Dread. Chap. 20.
THe Stoikes say, that Dread is a fear of some evil imminent, Dread what.
and at hand. And because it goes before an effect, they call it a
Foregriefe: because that, that same Fear troubles the mind before any evil
do happen. To have this Dread is a token of an abject mind, and servile
disposition. For it causes a man not to use those benefits which God has
abundantly bestowed upon him: and it makes us not to enjoy our riches for
fear we should lack, nor other commodities of this life, through a fear of
death. This infirmity of weakness of the mind causes us, that when we have
long wished for, and labored earnestly to the attayning of some thing, when we
have gotten the same, not for to enjoy it, for fear of loasing, and lacking
of it. This Perturbation can not, neither ought for to be in a wise man, whose
property is with a quiet mind to suffer al things, and whom prosperity cannot
inflame with disdain, nor adversity overthrow, but according to the rule of
reason, those things which he possesses, he enjoys, and those which he has
not, he does not greatly covet. Yet belongs it unto every man, to have a
forecaste. Forecast.
For although from this Dread and Fear of loasing, we should be free: yet
ought every man to prepare him self, as he may patiently suffer what shall
happen: and with Theseus (whom Euripides makes mention of, Theseus.
and Cicero does commend) say, I have considered with my self what miseries
may fall, whether it be flight by banishment, or cruel death, or any thing
else, because if any strange calamity should chance, I would not be
unprovided to bear the same quietly. Panetius de officijs.
And Panetius gives the same counsel, for he would have a prudent man to
prepare him self quietly to take all kind of fortune, be it pleasant and
prosperous, or bitter, and contumelious: And that we should do so, God has
so disposed things, that he will not suffer man to have the knowledge of
things to come. For if he had a prescience, and foreknowledge of his
prosperity, he would be careless: The knowledge of (...) to (...), ^hy (...)
to God, not given to man.

^ope what.


and understanding of his adversity, he would be senseless, and by a certain
fear in anguishe of mind, consume him self. Again, if that divine property
of knowing things to come, were ingrafted in the mind of man, who is he that
would have Hope (which is an opinion of goodness to come) a rare and most
excellent virtue, and praised not only of divines exceedingly, but worthily
commended even of Heathen Philosophers? Simonides.
Simonides the Poet, said, that Hope was the governor of men: and other
Philosophers have written, that Hope of all passions was the sweetest, and most
pleasant. And hereof it is said, that Spes alit miseros, Hope comfort
captives. Wherefore we will conclude this Perturbation, with an answer of
Alexander the great, Alexander Magnus.
who liberally bestowing many things upon his friends, upon a time Perdiccas
spoke unto him, on this manner: Perdiccas.
If you thus largely still bestow your goods, O bountiful Prince, I marvel
at the length, what you will keep for your self? Then answered Alexander,
for my self I reserve Hope. Supposing that a good and virtuous man should
only hope well, and dread nothing.

Of Trembling. Chap. 21.
Now follows Trembling, Trembling what.
whose companion is Astonishment, which is a very soddaine motion of the mind,
ioygned with an amazedness of ye same, a stammering of the tongue, and a
ceasing from labor and pains. It is called in Latin Pauor, which is derived
from the Greek word (...) which signifies Cessare fac^o: (...) is to ease,
and suddenly to stand still, which appears in the nature of Trembling. It
may also be fetched from an old Latin word Pauire, which signifies to hide,
and hereof comes our English word Pauement. As we see in boys, women, and
weker persons, when they are stricken with any Fear, or Trembling, to hide
their faces, either with a handkercher, or some thing else. But this is done at
no time without great grief of mind. Timanthes that notable painter,
Timanthes* Iphigenia*
when he had finished the picture of Iphigenia, in colors set forth Calchas to
be sorrowful for the same, Calchas.
Ulysses.
but Ulysses appeared to be more sad a great deal, but for to make her father
Menelaus to appear most sad and sorrowful, Menelaus.
he painted him with covered face. Thereby to show his great skyll: which was
more wonderful then the rest. Q. Curtius was wont to say, Q Curtius.
that they do best bear injuries, which most diligently do cover and hyde
them. Caecilius.
Caecilius prince of the writer of Latin commedies, said, that he was a
wretch, which could not keep his grefes in secreete. M. Crassus having behaved
himself in wicked sort toward the Parthians, M. Crassus.
when he saw both his sons heads fastened to a spear, to be carried about,
and his army cruelly on every side to be slain, withdrew him self secreetely
into an obscure place, and there lamenting his covetousness, rashness, and
ambition, hyd himself a great while, and so repented him of his folly and
wickedness. Brutus also being past all hope of ouercomming his capital and
deadly Antonie. Brutus.
went him self alone into a cave, and there unfolded and unburdened his
grief: and afterward going into a more cloase and secreete place, and having
given himself a deadly wound, brake into these words: Wicked men seek the
destruction of those which mean best: and so desperately dyed. But of this
affection sufficient, because which I have already spoken, and shall speak
concerning fear, has a great affinity, and does illustrate the same. Now
concerning Conturbation somewhat.

Of Conturbation. Chap. 22.
COnturbation is defined of Cicero to be a fear much troubling us,
Conturbation what*
for it makes our cogitations, we being in a great perplexity, doubtful, and
draws the mind into diverse cogitations. The Stoikes say that Conturbation is
a fear making the mind effeminate, and causing all our actions to be done
with great difficulty and hardness. All wise men espetially, should be free
from this Conturbation. For it is an affection, contrary unto Fortitude,
without which nothing can be accomplished worthily, and with commendation.

I will bring forth the example of one, by which all other, which have any
charge, and are in authority, may judge what inconveniences do happen, by
having troubled minds. It is thought that the whole glory of a battle
consists in the policy of a captain. For if true it be which Ephicrates
wryt, An army is as it were a living creature, Ephicrates. A^ (...) like a
living body.
whose head is the captain, whose breast are the well placed soldiers, his
hands are footmen, and his legs horsemen, then must it needs follow, that
as in a body, the head being troubled, the members can not fulfill their
duties: so a captain being in mind troubled, it must needs follow, that the
whole army be in great danger. The office of a Cap^^^ne.
Therefore it is most necessary that a captain be void of a troubled mind,
neither must he omit any thing which belongs unto his office, as to comfort
the fearful, to cheerishe the faithful, to talk familiarly with his
inferiors, to his foes to seem terrible, but amiable to his friends, to
(...) conuenticles, and to do all things openly without suspicion of double
dealing, to give attention unto messengers, and to entertain ambassadors
courteously, be their news never so unpleasant. Tygranes, Rex (...) Tygranes.
though ambitiously he would be called king of kings, yet was he of so
troubled a mind, as any strange news would straight cool his hautynesse. ^s
it appeared. For on a time when as the Romans by ambassadors, had sent him
their minds plainly, it so troubled him that he could not abide the sight of
the messengers, but caused them against all right, and law of arms, cruelly
to be put to death: which made him not only to be more assaulted of his
enemies, but also to be despised of his own subjects, and caused him to come
into servitude and subjection. As Tygranes for his unquietness and cruelty, is
brought for an example to be shunned: so Darius constancy, is worthy to be
followed. Dari^^
It is reported of him, that whatsoever happened, he took it quietly, and was
never in mind troubled for the same. And in deed it is no small consolation
to a man when any evil is coming quickly, and with speed to have intelligence
thereof, espetially to a wise man, which can with a patient mind, bear all
mysfortunes.

Of Fearfulness. Chap. 23.
Fearefulnes
THe last part of Fear, is Fearfulness, which according to the interpretation
of M. Varro, is when the mind being moved, does as it were forsake the body,
and is sent abroad. Some say it has his appellation from that heat which
comes into our faces by the sense, and perceiving of fearful things. Cicero
writes that this fearfulness is a continual fear. And hereof it comes
that he is called fearful, which stands in fear of every small thing, and
as we say in our tongue, which fears his own shaddowe, which never sleeps
securely, never rests quietly, which is inconstant, and seems now to be
cruel, and a threater, now gentle, and quiet, now bold, and courageous, by
and by, weak and effeminate. The most fearful of all men (as Herodotus
writes) are the Garamantines for they are afraid of every thing, Garamantines.
and can abide the sight of none: though they have weapons, yet do they not
use them, for they are afraid for to hurt, and when they are hurt, they will
not for very cowardnesse resist.

Two sorts of men are above all others, Of fearful men, two sorts.
both which are malefactors and wicked persons, as those whom their
consciences will not suffer to be at quiet, but continually object unto their
senses most horrible sights of strange things which will at no time suffer them
to be at reast, but continually assault them, and seem to take vengance for
their transgressing: And the other be sick and impotent persons, which by the
weakness of their Orestes, Orestes.
which because of his matricide, was cruelly tormented with his mothers furies.
Nero.
And Nero likewise for the like offense, could never be quiet, but the ghost of
his mother, whom most wickedly be had murdered, seemed every foot for to
terrefie him, and with scourge and whip, severely to punish him for his so
heinous offense. Magna vis conscientiae. Caesar Caligula.
Likewise Caesar Caligula, another tyrant, ^o was terrefied, with strange
sights and ougly shows, and at no time he slept one night quietly and in rest.
But as before I said, This kind of Fear, neither troubles, or very seldom
one virtuously bent, and of good conversation. By which opinion Theodorus
Byzantius being led, Thedorus Byzantius.
affirmed that no wise men were molested with such apparitions in the night,
but only boys, women, weak, or wicked folks, whose minds being sore
occupied by some strange, and strong imagination suppose to see, that which
indede they do not, but are merely deluded by their own conceipte. Examples
of the latter may be Vitellius Caesar. Vitellius.
Who by excess in banqueting, falling into sickness, and being a sleep,
there appeared before him, a tall and goodly young man, to be lyfted in his
presence into heaven, by which he coniectured, that after his death he should
live in penury. But true was that vision of the picture of Fortune of
Tusculane, Visions, Galba.
which appeared unto Galba, lamenting that he had offered and consecrated the
money (which she had given him a little before) unto Venus, and therefore with
bitter words she threatened to take it from him again: for within short space
afterward by the sould^ors of Otho he was murdered. Likewise unto Tiberius
Caesar, there appeared in a vision in the night, Tib. Caesar.
the image of Apollo, which said unto him, that notwithstanding he had
purposed to set up, and erect his image in a Temple, which he had new builded
at Syracusas, yet he would not have it so, and therefore he came to admonish
him, for the aduoyding of a greater inconvenience, not to place the same
according unto his former determination. It often falls out that dreams,
Dreams* when true.
and apparitions in the night prove true, when they appear unto men of
confirmed wits, and whose delyght is in contemplation, and study of celestial
matters. And thereof comes diuinations, and forewarnings of things good or
evil. Likewise Kings and Princes, those which are in highest authority,
seem to have a certain familiarity with God, which by dreams and visions in
the night, signifies unto them ways how to profit themselves, and their
subjects, and to avoid dangers imminent, and at hand. As we see Agamemnon,
Agamemnon.
whom Homer makes mention of, to declare at large the whole order of their
war, which was told him in his sleep. Nestor.
To which Nestor gave credit, and said, That touching things pertaining to the
profit of a common weal* a Kings words were to be followed, if in his
sleep he were told them. Ptolomie the brother of Alexander the great, Ptolomie.
having by a poisoned shaft received his deadly wound, and being dead, it is
written that Alexander his brother sat upon his carcass, and so fell in a
sound sleep: Then being at rest, there seemed to come before his presence a
Dragon, which his mother Olympias had nourished, and brought in his mouth a
certain root, which was of such virtue, as it would restore Ptolomie from
death to life again, and he told likewise the place where it grew. Now when
Alexander did awake, he told ye same unto his friends, and companions, which
counsayled him forthwith to send some to seek the same root: which being
found did not only bring life unto Ptolomie, but also healed many, which were
sore wounded. This happed when Alexander gave credit unto ye vision, but when
Alexander believed not those things which were declared unto him by dreams,
great hurt came toward him, as by this example which follows shall appear.
Being sometime in a sound sleep, there came before him an image, which willed
him not to receive ye cup of poison, which ye young man whose face he beheld
should bring unto him. Shortly after Cassander came unto him (which was that
young man which ye image gave warning to avoid) and being before him, Alexander
demanded whose son he was, who answered that he was the son of Antipater:
Alexander hearing that, forgot his dream, as he which had not power so much as
to suspecte, Cassander.
that Cassander the son of his friend and familiar Antipater, would under
the collor of friendeship seek his destruction. But the friendship of
Alexanders was a furtherance to Cassanders treason, for at the length puffed up
with pride and ambition, by poison he deprived of life that noble Alexander in
his flor^shing age. Cic lib. 2. de Diuinatione ad finem. Hannibal.
Cicero tells that Hannibal by dream, was foretold of al his wars. For on a
time being in a sleep, it seemed unto him yt he was called into counsel with
the Gods: and being come, he was wylled by Jupiter, to gather an army, and
invade Italy, and he should have a prudent and pollitike captain, whose
counsel in all his affairs he might follow. The captain being ioygned with
Hannibal, commanded him in any case not to look back. But Hannibal with
ambition inflamed, would not obey his counsel, but still looked back. Then
appeared a great and sauadge beast, accompanied with many serpents,
whethersoeuer it w^nt, overthrowing and destroying all things utterly. Hannibal
wondering at the same, asked of God what that monster signified, it was
answered, that it foreshewed the destruction of Italy, and he was warned
again not for to look back, but according to his commission, to go
forewarde in his enterprise. Which examples recited, if they be true, then may
some credit he given to dreams. But to my purpose. The cause of fearfulness.
The cause of Fearfulness, we have said, to be either an imbecilitie or
weakness of nature, in respect of years, in childehoode, or doting old
age, or by sickness, or it ryseth from a conscience conuicte and guilty of some
offense. Other shows an apparitions in sleep, are so far from terrefiyng
and causing Fearfulness, that they comfort and delyght the minds of them to
whom they appear, by signifiyng dangers imminent, or the profits which
shall be reaped. And thus much concerning Fear, and his parts.

Of Sorrow, the last of all Perturbations. Chap. 24.
WE are now come to the last of the four springes or fountains of
Perturbations, which is Sorrow: Properties of the affection.
whose property is to cause in the mind of man, a biting grief, and vexation:
even as Fear causes a ^light and departing of the mind: and as Pleasure
rayseth an over prodigal merinesse: and Lust an unbridled appetite. And as we
have the others both defined, and divided into their parts and properties: so
will we likewise declare what Sorrow is, Sorrow what.
and how many branches spring out of her. It is defined of Cicero to be a
fresh conceit, of a present Evil. In Latin it is called Aegritudo, which
has another nature then Aegrotat^o. For as writes Cicero, Aegritudo.
the one Aegritudo, is a vexation of mind, and the other Aegrotatio, is a
sickness of the body. Aegrotatio.
This Sorrow, the Stoikes call grief, and dolor, and they say it is an
unmeasurable contraction of the mind, a Perturbation altogether contrary to
Pleasure, Lust, or Fear. Out of her springes, Parts of Sorrow.
Pity, Envy, Emulation, Backbiting, Freating, Sadness, Sorrowfulness,
Bewayling, Troublesomnesse, Lamentation, Carfulness, Molestation,
Afflictation, and Despair. Of every one of these likewise, as of the rest we
will speak some what, and explicate their natures.

Of Pity, or Compassion. Chap. 25.
Pity what.
Pity according to the opinion of Cicero and the Stoikes, is a Sorrow
conceived by the miseries of another man. The Greeks name ye same (...), and
they suppose the same to be a manifest token of great good will. Reason wills
us in the prosperity of our friends to rejoice, The duty of a friend.
and to be grieved at their adversity, which is the part and duty of a true
and faithful friend. This Pity the Athenians accounted not only as a most
excellent virtue, Pity worshipped for a Goddess of the Athenians.
but also worshipped for some divine thing, and therefore they consecrated and
builded aulters, and temples unto her. There is another kind of Pity, which
the Greeks call (...), but it is more wretched and miserable, and has his
deriuation from the softness of oil, and therefore less appertains to a
wise man. The Latins call the first Misericordiam, from whence Misereri (which
ought to be in all men) and the later they say is Miseratio, Misericordia,
misereri. Miseratio, miserari.
and thereof comes Miserari, and none have that but weak and effeminate
persons. There is a third kind of Pity, which springs from the
recordation of a grefe and trouble pass. For the secure consideration, either
of our myseries, which we have been afflicted withal our selves, delights us
as very well Maro, Forsan et hoc olim meminisse iuuabit, Perhaps to remember
this hereafter will do good: and Euripides to the like sense, Dulce est
meminisse malorum, The memory of miseries is a pleasant thing: Cicero ad
Lucilium.
either of the calamites of others passed do comfort us, as Cicero says
notably, which of us does not the remembrance of Epaminundas much delyght,
which being about to give up the ghost, Epaminundas.
wylled the poisoned shafte to be plucked from his deadly wound, when it was
given him to understand that his shield was sou^de f^lse, and his enemies put
to flight, and then cheerfully was content to depart out of this world?
Whether pity mate rest in a wise man or no.
Much contencio^ is amongst the philosophers, whether this affection ought to
be in a wise man or no, of either part great patrons. The Stoikes deny that a
man of judgment should have this affection, for they suppose that he has
enough to do, to keep him self from sin and offending: and therefore they
think it is not meet that a wise man should be grieved at another damage,
or pity another myserie, when as at his own he should not be troubled,
but content him self and bear al patiently whatsoever, as long as he is
without sin, and endewed with all kind of virtues. And moreover they add
and say, that every thing is Good or Evil, or neither Good nor Evil. Good
things.
Those things which are Good, they say are the virtues, Wisdom, Justice,
Fortitude, and Temperance: Evil things.
Evil things they call Foolishness, Injustice, Cowardnesse, and Intemperance,
which are always hurtful and unprofitable. Things indifferent, Things
indifferent.
or neither Good nor Evil, they say are things which being used according
unto the rules of Virtue, are good and commendable, but being had to serve as
ministers, and encreasers of impiety and wickedness, are most hurtful and
damnable, as wealth, riches, bewty, strength, nobleness, and such like. The
opinion of the Stoikes.
By which they will infer that a wise man having virtue, though no other
thing else he enjoy, yet can he not be miserable, and having no virtue, though
he have all things, yet is he most wretched. And therefore their conclusion is,
that a wise man having virtue, lacking other commodities of this world, ought
not to be pitied, neither ought he to pity others lacking those, having
virtue. The opinion of the peripatecions.
The Peripatetions are in another mind, and come nigher unto the truth. For
they judge the end of man to be virtue, and that to the getting thereof he
should refer all his actions and doings. But their opinion is, that a full
and perfect felicity consists of the threefolde Good, to wit, of the goods
of the mind, of the boddie, and of Fortune, Who happy.
and without those, that is, except he have the external, and corporal
Goods, together with the gifts of the mind, he can not be in happy and
perfect estate, that is, a wretch he is, if either sickness torments him,
or poverty punishes him, or other euylles overcome him. So that virtue is not
sufficient to perfect felicity, and yet naughtiness alone causes misery.
Their conclusion is, that a man, yea a wise man, ought not only to have pity,
but also many other Perturbations, referring them to the increase of virtue. To
whose opinion the old Academikes draw nighe, The Academikes.
and they follow Plato the prince and protector of philosophy, whose
judgments is that not only a wise man, but every man ought to take remorse
at the miseries of others, The part of every man to be pitiful.
and that that they should take upon them the defense of those which are
iniustly troubled, they should see to the poor and fatherless, succor the
needy, and impotent, visit the imprisoned, relieve the necessity and want of
all, finally, do unto every man as they would be done unto, considering that
as the poor, and miserable are, so have they been, or may be. Whose opinion
as it is wholesome, so is it to be embraced of al men. For this pity and
compassion many have been commended oftentimes. Arcagatus a notable Surgeon
was highly esteemed among the Romans as long as he had pity upon the
patientes, Arcagatus.
whose cure he had promised: but when he began to be unmerciful, and to have
no remorse of them, he was not only despised of grave men, but every boy in
derision to his reproach, called him Vulnerarius. Vulnerarius.


Cicero greatly commendes Caesar for his great pity and mercifulness, in
these words: Cicero in Oratione pro rege Deiota^o.
I ought not C. Caesar (as in the like troubles men are wont) to endeavor my
self by words, to move you unto pity, it were a vain labor, for of your
own accord, without any persuasion thereunto, you are wont to succor the
afflicted and miserable. Xenocrates was so pitiful as he would aid and
defend even brute beasts, Xenocrates.
much more a man distressed. For on a time he sitting in the sun, there
flewe a sparrowe into his bosom, and there as it were besought his aid
against the persecution of an Hawk, which he did not deny, but there kept
her, until she was ryd of all fear, and then opened his bosom, and let her
fly, saying: That he would not betray unto their enemies, any which flew unto
him for succor. A notable example of mercifulness, and pit is that it
should slyp out of remembrance by oblivion. For the only remembrance thereof
is able to provoke any in whom the sparks of virtue do any whit burn, to
have pity and compassion of the afflicted, and to succor and defend the
innocent. Philip the king of Macedonia, Philippus ^acedonia.
oftentimes was wont to say, that a King ought to remember always, that he
was a mortal man, and subject to many thousand calamities, but by mercy and
pity, was made like the immortal God. A worthy saying, and deserves to be
written in letters of gold, in the chambers of every man, espetially of those
which any way are better then other men: whereby they may think that only
Pity, and mercifulness brings them credit, both with God and man. From this
good King Phillip, did not his son Alexander degenerate for having by
conquest ouercom Darius, Alexander magnus
he had in his subjection all which did belong unto Darius, and so might use
them at his pleasure. But his pity was such as he abstained from all such as
his very enemy made most account of, as his wife, and other her handmaids:
and did not only not offer any violence unto her, or any of them, but also on
pain of death commanded, that none in any case after any sort should injury
them. Which thing when his enemy Darius understood, so moved him, The fruit
of pity.
as he was enforced through consideration of Alexanders rare pity, to break
into these words: O Gods first grant me a kingdom well defensed, afterward
if it be your plesures, that I shall by death leave this world, I beseech you
that none may be king of Asia, but this my so friendly foe, and so merciful
conqueror. How can this Pity be too much commended, or who can sufficiently
be delighted in the same, since it makes of deadly foes, faithful friends: and
of mortal men, immortal Gods. Wonderful was the care that Titus, Titus,
Vespasianus.
son of the Emperor Vespasian, had to be accomted merciful. And it appeared
in nothing more, then not only in pardoning two traitors, which was a token
of an excellent good nature, but also in sending word to one of their mothers,
that her sons offense was forgeuen, which was a sign of a great care to be
accounted merciful. Deliciae human^ generis, Titus imperator.
Neither was his endeavor in vain. For by his great pity toward his
subjects, he so won their hearts, that he was called, The delight of
mankind.

Likewise, Antonius an Emperor, (which for his justice, got the name of a good
man, and was called above all others, Antonius Pius, Antonius Pius.
for his pity and mercifulness) was reported espetally (as never any of the
Emperors before him did) to have reigned and ruled without effusion of blood.
And surely the nature of mercy and compassion is such, Mercy most requisite in
a Prince.
as it brings an espetiall prerogative with it. And though many virtues have
caused Princes to be commended of their subjects, yet none has at any time,
either brought such admiration unto the practisers, or brought Princes more
into love with their subjects, then has Mercy. Wherefore every man for his
part, and every Prince for his praise, ought above all to endeavor to seem,
and to be merciful, without which we appear odious to our friends, to our
foes monstrous: brutishe before men, and before God deuilishe.

And thus much concerning the first part of Sorrow, called Pity, in as
few words concerning the necessity thereof, as might be. The next is called
Envy, whose nature and property shall now be declared.

Of Envy. Chap. 26.
THe second part of Sorrow is Envy, which is defined of Zeno to be a Sorrow
taken at the welfare, Envy what.
or prosperity of another man, which nothing at all hurtes him which enuieth.
This Envy is compared unto the Canker. Cankered Envy.
For as the Canker eats and destroieth iron, so does envy eat and consume
the hearts of the envious. The Poets feign Envy to be one of the furies of
Hell, and to be fed with nothing but adders and snakes: to show that envious
persons, do swallowe down poison, and likewise vomit up the same again. For
another prosperity is their poison, and another adversity their comfort.

Therefore did Politian write very pleasantly unto an envious man, Policianus
lib 1. Epistola (...).
after this manner: Thou enuiest all things to all men, except envy. And the
same likewise thou do envy in another man, which is more envious then thy
self. So does not he envy yt in thee, which notwithstanding thou can not
abide in him. And this ye nature of the envious. What you are I will not utter,
least I make you more miserable, then you are now. For if I should make you
known, your very name also you would not abide. It is the part of this envy,
like as fire, to covet the highest places, Inuidia comes virtutis.
and to bark at those which are wortheliest preferred. And therefore it is
called the companion of Virtue. It does not only seek the destruction of
noble and virtuous men, but also of notable and famous cities. For by this
Themistocles, which by sea had vanquished and overthrown the whole navy of
Xerxes, Themistocles.
which in number was almost infinite, and set his country free from thraldom
and servitude, this (I say) Themistocles which had brought so much honor and
fame unto his country, by envy was compelled to forsake the same, and to live
like a miserable captive in banishment, for the space of ten years. Though
envy were the cause of his punishment, yet the Athenians to cloak their
ingratitude, said, they did the same to suppress and keep under his stomache,
least the remembrance of his glory, and victories should make him so to excel
the rest, as he should have no companion like unto him: and the better to bring
him into hatred, they caused Timocreo^ a Rhodian Poet, Timocreon
by verses to report him to be a covetous person, wicked, a violater of his
faith, and no keeper of hospitality.

Aristides Iustus.
So likewise Aristides, which for his virtues, was called Just, was not without
enemies, and envious persons. For in recompense of al pains and troubles
sustained both by land and sea, to the increasing of his countries fame, yet
through some envious folks he was (I say) notwithstanding all his virtues and
benefits bestowed, as a most unprofitable member cut from the body of his
country. And not only those two lights and examples of virtue, Themistocles,
and Aristides were brought into misery, but also the whole state of Athens into
perpetual slavery, Athens.
when as none could abide one to be in greater estimation then him self, or to
excel in virtue: the same brought destruction unto the Romans, Thebanes,
Rome. Thebes.
and many other countries of great renown. This Envy is compared in some
respect (of old and ancient divines) unto the Sun. For as the nature of the
Sun is to obscure and darken things which are clear and manifest: and
likewise lighten, and illustrate that which is obscure: so envy endeuoreth to
obscure the glory of those which are famous, and in authority. So that none
are subject unto the talk of the envious, but such as either by wealth,
riches, renown, auctority, or virtue are better then the rest, and none are in
their books, but those which are cowards, dastards, wicked and obscure
persons. Cic. oratione prima in Catilinam,
Tullie has a notable sentence, worthy to be had in continual remembrance of
all such as are well disposed, his words be these: I have always bine of this
mind, that I have thought envy gotten by virtue, to be no obscuring of my
name, but an illustrating of the same. Amongst all envious persons (which have
been for number infinite) none has been so much reprehended for the same, as
was, Timon of Athens.
Timon of Athens. For he could away with none, but only with Alcebiades:
Alcebiades*
and being asked of Apemantus, why enuiyng all others, he so favored him,
answered, that therefore he did love and account of him, because he perceived
the disposition of Alcebiades to be such as he should in time be a scourge to
the Athenians, and a cause of many troubles which they should come into. And,
as he was, so are all they which are envious, they can like of none but such as
are causers, and helpers to bring those which are at rest, and as it were in
felicity, into miseries. But I will not spend more words about this
Perturbatio^ Envy, for which I have spoken may sufficiently set forth her
nature. I will therefore come to a very familiar companion of hers, which is
Emulation.

Of Emulation. Chap. 27.
Emmulation what.
EMulation, Cicero defines to be a grief of the mind, because one does
enjoy that, which we are desirous to have. This Emulation has a great
affinity with Envy (whose nature we have expressed) and hereof it comes, that
he which does Emulate, labors with tooth and nail, to get all praise and
glory which another has already unto him self. No better example of this
Emulation, Alexander Magnus.
than Alexander the great, for look what any of his familiars did excel in,
that did he by all means seek to attain. And therefore it is said, that he did
Emulate in Lysimachus skilfulnesse of war, in Seleucus an invincible courage,
Lysimachus seleucus. Antiagonus Attalus. Ptolomie* Sylla and Marius.
a rare ambition in Antigonus, in Attalus a divine majesty, in Ptolomie a
happy success in all enterprises. Syllaes emulation of Marius felicity, was
the cause of civil dissension among the Romans. For when Bocchus king of
Mauritania* had betrayed Ingurtha unto Marcius, Bocchus. Ingurtha.
that so he might purchase unto him the favor and good will of the Roman
people: Sylla being sent ambassador into Mauritania, brought Ingurtha being
sent unto Marius to Rome, and there, not as desired, delivered him unto Marius,
but as his prisoner by policy overcome, kept him, and both openly every
where, and among his friends privately, bragged of his good fortune. Which
Emulation of his did so strike Marius at the heart, as never they could be
reconciled again into friendship. And therefore Emulalation, except it be
ruled and governed by the raines of reason, is the cause of much dissension,
and troubles in a common weal. It brings likewise infamy unto those which
are infected with the same, when they will contend and challenge their
betters. As it did unto Marsyas, which would (him self being rude and
unskillful in Music) contend with Apollo, Marsyas.
but being overcome, in recompense of his fond emulation, was well scourged:
and as did Thamyras, for being kindled with an ambitious Emulation, Thamyras
Batula.
would needs try maisteries with the Muses themselves, in playing on the
Harp, but being vanquished, and convict of vnskylfulnes, was for his bold
attempt, bereft of both his eyes, and so was made a blind fiddler, and was in
derision named Barula. So that this Emulation which I have already spoken of,
is a thing of all men to be detested, for it causes not only inconveniences
and troubles in commonweals: but brings al such as are poisoned with the
same, into contempt with all men.

But there is an other Emulation, which is good and commendable. And it is a
study, and endeavoring by imitation, to be like another man, and yet not moved
thereunto by envy and simultation, but through the desire of virtue. Even as
Theseus did Emulate the deeds of Hercules, Theseus.
not thereby to darken the glory of Hercules, but the more to illustrate his,
and to raise an opinion of virtue unto him self. And this made Cicero, Cic. in
orat. pro. M. Marcello.
speaking in praise of Marcellus before Caesar to say, that he was an
imitatour, and did emulate the manners of Caesar.

Themistocles in his youth was gegeuen to all kind of wickedness,
Themistocles.
even with greediness, and was more vicious then any, in so much as his
mother being paste all hope of his amendment, for very grief conceived
thereof, honge her self, and yet by emulating the virtues, and victories of
Milciades, Milciades.
became a perfect image of a virtuous man: and being demanded of his
fellows, what upon such a soddaine altered his behavior, answered, that the
glory and triumphs of Milciades, had raised him out of sloth, and that for
very shame he could be no longer vicious, but would earnestly emulate the rare
virtues of glorious Milciades. This kind of emulation can not be too much
commended, neither can we too vehemently incite thereunto. For it is the very
next way to have any good quality practiced of men. And therefore it is
necessary not only to the attayning of all wholesome and good learning, and
liberal sciences, but also most meet for all others, espetially for Kings and
captains. For even as Aristotle did emulate his master Plato, Aristotle, Plato.
and the Academikes in Philosophy: and Cicero Demosthenes in Rhetorike: and
Virgil Homer in Poetry: Cicero, Demosthenes. Virgil, Homer. Euagoras.
Agesilaus.
so should Kings in peace emulate and put before their eyes Euagoras, and
Agasilaus, as notable examples of good government: and captains in war
imitate the grave wisdom of Q. Fabius Maximus: the wonderful expedition of
Scipio Africanus: Q. Fabius Maximus. ^cipio, Africanus. Paulus, Aemylius.
the notable policy of Paulus Aemylius, and the invincible courage of C.
Marius, and so by emulation to have that altogether in themselves, which were
particularly in every one of them. So that emulation is naught, and
necessary: naught when it springes of an ambitions envy: and necessary when
it ryseth of a virtuous studdie, and therefore to be esteemed of all good
wits, which might excel even those, which have been most excellent.

Of Obtrectation. Chap. 28.
AFter Envy, and Emulation, is next placed Obtrectation, a strange affection,
Obtrectation what.
and is defined of Zeno to be a sorrowfulness conceived, because another would
enjoy yt which we likewise, our selves have. Cicero says, it is a Ielosie: and
in defining thereof, he dissenteth not from the Stoikes, Ielosie.
but says it is a grefe of mind, because others would have that, which our
selves enjoy. This is a wonderful Perturbation, it can abide that none
should have any good thing but her self. Though Cicero call this affection
Ielosie, yet the Poets make a difference between it and Ielosie. For they take
Ielosie only in matters of Love, but Obtrectation more generally, and it has
place in all wicked emulation, envying, and detraction. Neither truly can it
be called Ielosie, which in Greek is called (...) which is a love of beauty,
for (...) signifies to love, and (...) beauty, so that Ielosie can not
properly be called Obtrectation, yet do the Latins to fly the Greeks word
(...) use Obtrectatio. But now to the purpose. No wise man, or such as make
any accoumpt of their good name, and honesty, neither may, nor can be subject
to this Perturbation. For as every one ought to endeavor to the attayning of
any good thing, so ought we not to be grieved, if many have those gifts which
we are adorned withal: for man is called Ani^^al sociale, and should labor to
illustrate his country by all means possible, which he can never do, which can
not abide that to be in another, which is in him self: neither to speak the
truth, is he a reasonable creature, which will not wish, yt every good thing
should be most used? for true is that saying of the Peripatetions, Bonum quo
communius eo melius: A good thing the more common, the more commendable. And
yet we see in this our age, not a few which having rare and excellent gifts,
can not abide to communicate them with others, perhaps for fear lest others in
their gifts, should excel them: and so put a candle under a bushel, from
which none can receive light. And not only in our time, but before long time
ago, has this Obtrectation been embraced. Hortensius. Cicero.
As between Hortensius and Cicero about eloquence: neither of them could abide
other while they lived, because both being princes of eloquence, both grudged
at the same, and grieved them at the hearts, for eythers glory. And yet
Hortensius being dead, Cicero did with many praises, mightily commend him: and
when he did bewail his death, he said: Horte^sius death now greueth me,
because, yt not as many have supposed, I have lost an adversary, and an
obscurer of my praises, but rather a companion and partner of my glorious
labor. Saluste.
Between Cicero likewise and Saluste was an open, and manifest obtrectation:
for each of them would have cut ye others heart vain, if disdainful words of
contempt, would have done the same. Also between Aeschines and Demosthenes,
was this learned ielosie, Aschines. Demosthenes.
as appears by their orations made against each other, whereby bitterly they
make invasions, and if they could (so vehement are their words) neither
should have had any commendations ascribed unto them. Again as Cicero had
besides Hortensius Salluste: so had Demosthenes besides Aeschines, Demades,
which envied his rare gifts, Demades.
and wonderful eloquence, and that was not a cloase or secret obtrectation,
but open and well known to all men, by their continual biting each other
with words of contempt, where ever they met.

Of Freating. Chap. 29.
Freating.
THe fifth part of Sorrow, is called Freating, which according to the mind of
Cicero, and Zeno, is a Sorrow of the mind, mightily bringing down a man, and
altering his constitucion. Which agrees very well to the deriuation of the
word. For in Latin it is called Angor, which is borrowed from the Greeks,
Angor.
for (...) in Greek it is to hang or strangle, and (...), a substantive
thereof, is named a choking or strangling. Hereof it is apparent, that this
Freating does not only unquiet the mind, but also bring the body much out
of temper. Nay, we read that by this Perturbation, many have lost their
lives, and soddainly given up the ghost. As P. Rutilius, P. Rutilius.
which when he heard that his brother presuming to obtain the dignity of a
consul in Rome, had taken the repulse for very anguishe of mind, with
freating left this world, and died. Another which was a sophiste, and
professed the art of Logike, being one of great fame, Theophra^tus. Stilpo.
and in that faculty had no peer in those days, entering disputation with
Stilpo, one of great fame for his profound knowledge, and being driven by the
same Stilpo to a Dum blanke, or Non plus, in an easy question, took the same
so grievously at the heart, as presently that great and unreasonable freeting,
dispoyled him not only of wit and reason, but of all sense and fealing. But
these few words may so sufficiently declare this affection Freatinge, to be
altogether unmeet for a reasonable creature.

Of Sadness. Chap. 30.
ANother part of Sorrow, is called Sadness: Sadness.
whose nature according to the opinions of those which have been most
dilligent in the searching the very properties of every Perturbation shall be
declared. Cicero, whom in this matter espetially I do follow, defines Sadness
to be a Sorrow continuing, and deeply rooted in the mind. And it has place
most chiefly in those whose minds are occupied about earthly affairs. Hereof
according to some men's verdite, Tristitia is explicated to be a standing of the
earth, Tristitia quasi, Terra^stitia, vt Solstitium.
and thereof is thought to be Terraestitia, eue^ as Solstitium has his
beginning a Solis s^atione, from the standing or quiet resting of the Sun.
Melancholic persons are most subject to this Perturbation: and therefore
Aristotle says, that they are continually vexed, both in mind and boddie, they
are very seldom well at ease, but stand in need of the Physician, because
they digest their meat very ill: and he says moreover, that they are strong
in imaginations, and for sharpness of wit they excel. The Poets feign
Prometheus, Prometheus. Caucasus.
to be tied on the top of the mountain Caucasus, and an Egle to be gnawing of
his heart. Whereby they signify no other thing, but the great sadness of
Prometheus, gotten by the contemplating the Stars and Planets. For Prometheus
was a learned man, and very skillful in Astronomy, and therefore because of
his great diligence bestowed in searching the causes of the motions of the
heavens, and the nature of things, he is thought with cares, study, and
sadness, to be consumed. Cicero.
Which when Cicero did understand, in smiling sort he said: He could very
well be content to be of a dull and blockishe capacity, so he might be free
from that kind of nature. Pythagori^i
And the Pythagorians were of his opinion, for their poesy was, that The heart
should not be eaten: Their meaning was, that cares, and sadness, should not
consume the heart by vnquieting the mind: We see those which be given to
sadness, to be proane to al wickedness, as envy, deceit, covetousness,
lechery, and such like vices: and moreover, they are delyghted in no good
exercise, for the most part, but desire to be idle, and do nothing. Which the
Astronomers considering, write, that they are under the government of Saturn,
an hurtful, slothful planet, Saturnus.
and most enemy to mankind of al other planets. C. Caesar, declared him self
to hate and detest those which by nature were pale, C. Caesar.
and sad. And therefore on a time, as he was merely jesting, with many of his
famyliars, but espetially with one of a pleasant countenance, and of
constitution of boddie very gross, another perceiving his great familiarity,
came unto him, and wylled him to talk not so friendly, but to take heed of
him, for without doubt he said, if he used his company and familiarity, no good
would come thereof. Then Caesar smyling, said, that he, feared not those of
merry countenance, but those lowering and sad persons, meaning Brutus, and
Cassius, which in deed afterward, Brutus. Cassius,
were not only the procurers, but the committers of his cruel murdering.
Myson also, whom some accoumpt among the seven wise men of Greece, Myson.
was given to such unreasonable sadness, that he was reported to persecute all
mankind with hatred, and men gathered the same, because he was in no company
merry, neither took he delyght in any. And but once in all his life, he was
seen to laugh, and that was at such a time, when as (a great sort being in
company) all others were sad: and being demanded, why at that time he brake
into laughter, none else being merry? answered, because I have no companion.
By which answer of Myson, it is gathered, that sad persons care for no
company, but take most delyght when they are alone. But now to come to the
cause hereof: Causes of sadness.
no maruayle though deep and profounde meditation bring the same, and cause
men to be desirous to be alone. For nature has given to every man two places,
or receptacles of all his cogitations, one is the brain, the other the heart,
both being furnished with cogitations, needs must a man be unquiet, and proane
to sadness, for to the brain have recourse all the senses of man's boddie, which
as they were messengers, bring news of al such exterior things, which are
object unto them: and therefore running continually thereunto, suffers the
brain never quietly to rest, but always with imaginations trouble it. But the
heart by reason that it is more cloase and secreete, is less assaulted with the
senses: And therefore the mind of man, when it has some great, and grave
cogitation, flies unto the heart, as to a more quiet place, where he may the
better judge truth from falsehoode, and according to reason give sentence of
every thing. And so we (by the example of the mind) when we are in any
cogitation of weight, seek the most secreete place free from all noise, that
so we may neither see those things which will trouble our minds, nor hear that
which may drive us from the same into some other matter. And in this respect,
sadness may be well commended, and taken for a great gravity, Sadness
commendable.
which ancient writers do much praise: and hereof it comes that Lucilius and
Varro, have called Philosophers grave, sad, and severe, epithetons given in
good part to their comendations. And Terence says: There is a sad severity
in his countenance, and faithfulness in words, whereby it appears that
sadness sometime is taken for a good quality. And as there is an ungracious,
so is there a virtuous, which is a token of no light person, but of one whose
behavior is such, as his desire is to be accounted grave, as were
Philosophers, and are all wise and prudent men. Therefore ought every man so
prepare him self, that not so much as a show of that hard, bitter, and sour
sadness, which has always been commended of none, but contemned of all wise
men, should appear in him: but this grave and severe sadness, ought not
only to be wished for, but labored for, that so, he may be nombred among the
grave, and wyser sort of men.

Of Pensiveness. Chap. 31.
NOt unlike to Sadness, is Pensiveness, Pensiveness. Moeror.
and therefore is it next adjoined unto the same, and is defined of Cicero to
be a doleful, or weeping sorrowfulness, It is named in Latin Moeror: and that
is, derived from the Latin verb Maresco, which signifies to dry, or wyther.
Because that this Pensiveness withers the body of man. But if any be not
content with that deriuation, they may think the same to be fetched either
from the Greek verb (...), Adversity.
which is by interpretation, to receive a lot, and hereof it comes that
adversity is ascribed to fortune: or else from (...), which is is by chance to
get a thing. But which of these opinions are true, greatly it skylleth not,
and yet there be which think this word to be derived of either of them. Now
to my purpose. This woeful Sorrow is a Perturbation which ought not to be in a
discreet and wise man. For it is a manifest sign and token of an effeminate
and woma^like person. And not without good cause it is so judged: for it
weakeneth the string or veins of virtue, and makes them in all their doing
negligent, and of no strength or power to accomplish any good enterprise:
Lacedaemonians.
which consideration made the Lacedaemonians by a certain superstition at their
alters, to whip and scorge their children, that so they might in time be
without Pensiunesse, and be hardened to sustain al miseries, with a bold
courage. And their custom was so narrowly observed, that almost none were
found, no not among the weak sort, which either would groan, or give any
sign of grief, when they were in pain: and if any did in his calamities
shed but one tear, he was not only derided of his fellows, but also
brought again to the altar, there to be grievously tormented for his not
observing their custom. Hereof it proceeded that the Lacedaemonians of all
people, in peace and war, proved the most valiant. The Spartanes also were
maruelously commended, Spartanes.
because they were free from this pensive sorrowfulness. And though they did
always declare their patience, yet at no time, or place more, the^ in their
miserable servitude under king Antigonus: for when he had ransacked their
city, bereft them of their treasure, and left nothing which good was, yet
amongst them all, there was none found, no not so much as a woman, which was
pensive at the matter, but every one reioysed, the old men that their lusty
inuentus: the fathers that their children: the women that their husbands, and
every one triumphed that, so many had gotten so gl^rious deaths, for the
defense of they^ country. Therefore who does not commend these men for their
noble stomaches which can without grief bear patiently so great losses? So
that the lacking of this affection beings commendation, but the subjection to
it, brings defamation. Cicero.
As it did unto Cicero (a man of great renown, and one which by eloquence,
brought much honor unto his country) for being called by Clodius into
judgment (because of his own authority, without permission of the Senate,
Lentulus. Cethegus.
he had commanded Lentulus, and Cethegus to be punished) he was of such an
abated courage, as having changed his garment, weeping, and miserably pensive,
as he was going, fell at the feet of every one which he met* A strange thing
that he which by eloquence, could turn the hardest heart into pity, should
by his pensiveness, be a laughing stock unto all men. But as Cicero was, such
was Demosthenes in eloquence, Demosthenes.
and persuading inferior to none (if by study, not Ex tempore, he should
have spoken) for when he should have defended him self before the Athenians,
he with pensiveness so forsook him self, as rather he had to go into
perpetual banishment, then by talk openly to beseech favor, or forgiveness
at the hands of the Athenians. So that this childishe affection, Pensiveness,
has as much darkened their fame, as their eloquence purchased their
commendation. Wherefore by their examples, we with great heed should beware
least we be spotted with the same fault, and so bring our selves into
contempt and derision, when as other qualities, cause us to be wondered at.

Of Mourning. Chap. 32.
MOurning Cicero calls a Sorrow, conceived of the death of him, Mourning
what.
which was dear unto us, By the^ Laws of Twelve tables at Rome, all crying,
and funeral weeping, were sharply forbidden.

And that not without good consideration, for reason has given us this
knowledge, that their deaths whose life, has been good, and without any
notorious crime, should always be a comfort unto us, by a continual
remembrance, so far should we be from mourning for them. Again, patiently
should that be borne, which no strength can overcome, Why mourning mislyked of
the wise.
nor counsel avoid. And therefore what avails mourning, when nothing can
alter? Rather should this persuasion comfort us, to think no strange thing is
happened, but that which all mankind sometime shall have. But permit mourning
to be a tolerable thing, and to be suffered: yet shall we get nothing but this
thereby, that we afterward shall seem in behavior light, and in habit
unseemly. And who is he but does deride such an unpleasant person? who is he,
but does contemn a man, which in adversity will mourn, and shed tears? we
therefore (naming him a wise man, which can mortefie immoderate affections)
will have a man (because he shall not appear, altogether forgetful of his
friends) to show some token of Sorrow, but that shall be after a grave sort,
such as shall become a man, not brutishly to howl, or cry out, but after a
modest sort shall make the same to appear. And that the better it may be
done, I will bring forth some, who are worthy to be imitated herein: who does
not greatly commend Anaxagoras, for his so patient bearing the departure of his
son? Anaxagoras
for when news was brought him, that his son was dead, he was so far from
shedding tears, that like a wise man he answered, Is that such a strange
thing thou tellest me? I knew I had begotten a mortal man. Or what man is
he which hearing of ye Leena, Leena.
is not ashamed of himself (if he be a mourner) or what woman should not
follow her steps (if she be a mother) which hearing yt her son in battle
died valiantly, never cried, or bewailed ye same with outcryes, (as the use is
now a days, almost among al women) but lifting up her hands to the heavens,
thanked God heartily, yt she had brought such a son into the world, which in
respect of virtue, for the defense of his country gave his life. And so should
every good woman for her child, and every welwyller for his friend, give God
most hearty thanks, if he dye virtuously. As did also Xenophon, which when
according to the custom of the Athenians, Xenophon.
with a crown of his head, goinge to make sacrifice, he hard that his son
Gryllus in a battle at Mantinoa had been slain, Gryllus.
at the soddaine tydinges, was somewhat astonished, but having farther
intelligence that he dyed valliantly, and with commendation of all, went on
with his business, and first thanked God, that it pleased him to take his
son out of this world, in so notable a sort.

I recite these examples to the shame (almost) of all Christians, which when
they see or hear of the virtuous death of their children, will
notwithstanding, not thank God therefore, but as if they had been the veryest
thee^es that might be, pittiously lament and morn for their leaving this
world.

Well, being in so good a matter, I will bring one example more, that so we
may either be ashamed of our selves, or the better styrred to bear patiently
the death of those which we esteem, and make accoumpte of.

To Horatius Puluillus, a man of great authority, and for his virtue,
Horatius Puluillus.
chiefest Priest in Rome, dedicatinge a Temple unto Jupiter, word was brought
that his Son had left this world. But he being for his wisdom as
reverend, as for his dignity honorable, because he would not seem to prefer
a private thing, before a public: or a profane matter, before his divine
exercise, gave no sign of any grief, but persisted in his godly attempt. This
example of Horatius, may strike a perpetual shame into the faces of them,
which, though they be in counsel, concerning weighty matters, or in doing
never so godly exercise, if news be brought them that their son, or their
friend be dead, they will both forsake their waightye business, and cut of
their godly prayers, and by tears make all to understand, that their son,
or their friend is departed: whereby they seem to make more accoumpt of one,
then of many: of a private person, then of ye publyke state, of a son, before
their salvation* For this matter, these shall suffice, and therefore this
Perturbation, Mourning, with the sentence of Pliny, Plinius secundus.
shall be concluded, which very wisely tells, which death should be mourned
for, in these words: In mine opinion (says he) their death comes not
untimely, which endeavor to get them by virtue immortality. For those which
are given to the belly: and to all kind of pleasures, as though they should
enjoy this world but even a day, they cut of the causes of life: but those
which think upon their posterity, and are studious to leave some notable
thing in the world, thereby to have their memory continue, those he says,
can not die untimely, or out of season, because their fame brings them into
continual remembrance. And we should think that those dye not untimely,
which dye virtuously, and mourn for them, but such as dye wickedly, and lament
their death.

Of Troublesomnesse. Chap. 33.
THis part of Sorrow, Troublesomnesse.
Troublesomnesse (if so I may enterprete the Latin word Aerumnam, for want, of
a more proper to express the same) is called of Cicero, a laboursome Sorrow.
Cice. lib 1. de finibus bonorum et malorum.
Cicero says, Our elders have named our labors not to be avoided, by a most
sad word Aerumna. And therefore they have named those labors and pains,
which necessarily must be taken, by the the name of Troublesomnesse, thereby to
give to understand, that nothing ought be left undone, be it never so
troublesome, of any man, if it appertain to the profit, and commodity of
many. For no dolor nor danger ought we to shun and avoid, if thereby we may
do good. And therefore Scipio reading the books of Xenophon, Scipio. Xenophon
de iustitutione Cyri.
did greatly commend that place of Xenophon, where he said, that no pains or
labors should seem grievous at any time to a captain or soldior, for the glory
which their prowes should purchase, might take away all remembrance of labor
passed. Therefore it is the part of every man according to his calling, to
refuse no labor, neither to commit that by slothfulness he be accoumpted too
nice, and him that will take no pains to the benefiting of others. And yet is
it meet, that in our business we do the same discretelye, least otherwise we
appear either foolish or fanaticall. Therefore this Perturbation is good, and
to be embraced, as that which puts us in mind, not to be careless in our
callinges, but careful to discharge our selves, and painful in profiting
others, considering that in so doing we do not only oftentimes enriche our
selves in this world, but also get a name everlasting.

Of Lamentation. Chap. 34.
AMong Perturbations, as there be some good, Lamentation.
and to be desired: so are there others to be shunned and despised: among which
is nombred this Lamentatio^, which we are now about to declare. For it is an
affection altogether unmeet for a wise man: whose definicion does show no
less: for Cicero describes it to be a sorrowfulness, showed by a certain
howling and crying out, for it is so far from a wise man, that it is not to
be lyked, no, not in little children. And although the Poets in their works do
oftentimes bring notable and valiant men miserably crying and lamenting, by
which they seem but smally to differ from fools and mad men (as Homer brings
out Bellerophon bayling like a sheep without company, Bellerophon.
wandering in the Alian fields) yet ought not their examples to be followed,
as those which wise men laugh at, and have in contempt.

Of Carfulness. Chap. 35.
Carfulness according to Ciceroes opinion, Carefulnes.
is a Sorrowfulness of the mind, proceeding from some great and deep
cogitation fixed at the heart. With this affection are troubled, as all those
which are of noble capacity: so espetially which have addicted them selves to
the study of good letters, if so be they loase and slack the bridle of reason
overmuch. The Aegiptians say, Aegiptians.
that their country can very well agree to the natures of men, for unto those
which use the same well, it is very healthful, but unto others, Athenians.
as hurtful. The Athenians also reported, that they as long as they gave them
selves to good things, were the most excellent of al, but following vice and
wickedness, they proved in the end to be the very patrones of all ungraciousness.
So that hereof we may infer, that this great study and carfulness in a
naughty disposed person, causes great hurt, as well to him self by sickness,
as to others by wickedness: but in a good and virtuous person, it co^uerteth al
his endeavors to good exercises, and so it both altreth as well the name as the
nature, and is called diligence, which ought to be in all men. For it is called
the mistress of doctrine, Diligence the mistres of learning
without which nothing can either be spoken or done in this life with
commendation, and praise of men, and without which it is altogether impossible
to prove learned, much less excellent in any science.

Of Molestation and Afflictation. Chap. 36.
Molestation
MOlestation is a grief of mind, not ceassing, but continuing. For when
carfulness by continual cogitations has troubled the mind, then comes it
at length, and is turned into this molestation, which if it persevere and
continue, it afflicts the boddy very much, and so afterward is converted
into another Perturbation, which is named Afflictation, and is defined of
Cicero to be a grief of mind, Afflictation.
with the vexation of the boddie. Of the same have many dyed, as we read of
Lepidus, which by a long grief conceived of the misbehauiour of of his wife,
shortened his days. Lepidus.


Of Desperation. Chap. 37.
THe last of all Perturbations, is Despair, Despair.
which of all other is most pernicious: whose definicion declares no less.
For it is a Sorrowfulnes without all hope of better fortune. And therefore it
enters so far into the heart of man, that oftentimes it compels him to
violate his nobility, and to cast violent hands upon him self: then which
nothing can be more hurtful and dangerous for the soul. The very Heathen
Philosophers and Poets, do greeatly enueigh against this despair, and
therefore to make it the more to be shu^ned, they feign Philostrates being
destitute of all his friends, Philostrates
by reason of the contagiousnesse of a wou^d, to lead a poor, and most
miserable life, and like a beggar, to wander from place to place: thereby to
signify, that though he were in such misery, as no man could be in more, yet
had he rather so to consume his days, then desperately to kill, and cast him
self away. A notable example. Yet notwithstanding, that wise men have
enueighed against it, and reason does condemn desperate persons, yet have the
Romans, and many other nations allowed, Romans.
and thought well of the same, else would not so many, so desperately have
bereft them selves of life: as did Brutus and Cassius after the death of
Caesar: Brutus and Cassius. Antonius. Cleopatra.
as did Antonie, when he heard that Cleopatra had killed her self: for hearing
the same, he brake into these words: Die Antonie, what look thou for?
Fortune has taken her from thee, by whom thou desyredst to prolong thy days,
and therefore it shall never be said, that such a captain as I have been
accounted, will be stained of a woman in stoutnesse of minds and therewithal
goared him self upon a sword, and so most desperately forsook this world.
Pachetes.
Likewise Pachetes an Athenian Orator, because he could not move his auditors
minds: and so did Empedocles, Empedocles.
because he could not learn the cause of the burning of Aetna: and profound
Aristotle, Aristotle.
because he could not give a reason of the flowing of Nilus: Cato.
and wise Cato having read the books of Plato, touching the immortality of the
soul* Ambrociotes.
and godly Ambrociotes in the like manner, for the same cause did cast him
self headlong from an high hill: and so exceeding in brutishness, the very
beasts, have desperately, and deuilishly deprived them selves of that, which
they should keep as a most precious jewel, until it pleased God to call
for the same.

And therefore as Lactantius has written, if he be a wicked homicide,
Lactantius de falsa sapientia. Cap. 18.
which is the slaier of a man, then is he the same which kylleth him self,
because he kylleth a man. Nay, a most horrible and damnable offense is it to be
judged, whose reuengement belongs only unto God: for as we came into this
world, not of our own accord, but by the leave and permission of God, so
ought we to leave this world, not at our pleasure, but when it shall please God
to call us away. And therefore (as Plato said very well) as in this world, he
which without license of one in authority will break a prison, though he be
not guilty, yet for his boldness procures his own death, and that
presently: so in the world to come, shall be perpetually be punished, which
contrary to the will and time prescribed of God, will part the soul from the
boddy, and set it at liberty. Thus briefly have I declared both how many, and
what are the Perturbations.

FINIS.
Of Moral virtues. Lib. 2.
Of the chiefest felicity. Chap. 1.
WE have already declared how a man may easily subdue his coltishe affections,
and make them to abide under the yoke of reason, so that he knows what to
avoid as capital and deadly enemies to his good endeavors. It will not
therefore be a miss now to prescribe what he should with tooth and nail,
with all care and diligence seek to attain, and in them as in a sure haven
rest himself, where he may be saulfe from the troublesome tempests, which
this wretched world shall raise to his destruction. Diverse opinions touching
the true felicity.
Many men according to their diverse minds (for every man has his opinion)
have diversely thought hereof. Some men have supposed this haven to be the
delight of the mind, as did the Epicures: Epicures. Aristippus.
others the beastly pleasure of the boddie, as did Aristippus: others a good
constitution of the boddie, and perpetual health, without sickness, as did
Metrodorus: Metrodorus
some have thought honesty linked with pleasure, as Calliphon and Dinomachus:
Calliphon. Dinomachus. Diodorus. Hieronimus* Herillus. Stoikes. Zeno.
some to be free from sorrow and grief of mind, as Diodorus and Hieronimus:
some learning, and profounde knowledge, as Herillus: some to live honestly, and
to follow virtue, as the Stoikes: some not to decline from the law of nature,
as Zeno: some in the goods of nature, fortune, and the mind, Aristotle.
Peripatecions.
as did Aristotle, and the Peripatecions. So that how many sects, so many
sentences, and how many men, so many opinions. But in this diversity, we will
chiefly allow the judgment of the Peripatecions, and so neither think with
Aristippus and Metrodorus, that the boddie, and delight thereof is the chiefest
thing, and most to be desired: neither with the Stoikes and Epicures, that good
qualites of the mind only, but jointly in the external, corporal, and
mental goods: and then is a man most happy in this life, when perfectly he
enjoys all those.

This felicity is defined of Aristotle to be either a virtuous prosperity:
Aristoteles. lib. 1. Rhetor. ad Theodecten. Cap. 14
or a flourishing estate, joined with an honest conversation: or else a way
sufficiently of it self, teaching how to live well: or a life endued with all
kind of pleasure, quiet, and glorious: Finally he is thought and defined, in
this world to be happy and blessed, which for his substance is rich, for
the constitucion of his boddie is healthful, and wants not those things
which both may keep the same when he has it, or recover the same, when he
wants it.

Out of those definicions, Parts of felicity.
may easily be gathered, the parts of which felicity consists, and they
are either in respect of the boddie (as we said before) corporal, or
natural: or of Fortune external: or because they are in a man, mental, and
of the mind. So that they are threeforde.

He that is desirous to have a full understanding of every one of these,
ought to make recourse to the great volumes of learned Philosophers, which have
at large explicated them. Yet will we not altogether let them pass, but of
every one speak somewhat orderly.

Of the goods of Fortune. Chap. 2.
THe Philosophers, and other unfaithful heathens, considering the mutability
of all things, and the small assurance that man has of any thing, have
supposed this world to be governed by some blind or beastly God. Fortune
discribed.
And hereof came the fiction of Fortune, which is of aunciente, both Poets and
painters fained to be blind, brutishe and frantike, and so to stand upon a
round stone, distributing worldly things. She is thought to be blind,
because she bestows her gifts without consideration of Persons: Brutishe,
because she rewards most commonly, the most ungodly: without judgment, Mad,
because she is waywarde, cruel and unconstant: standing not upon a square
stone, for that abides, but upon a round one, for that slideth continually.
And therefore she is compted as brittle as glass, and nothing or more
unstable. And yet notwithstanding, at her pleasure she bestows all things:
which Virgill confirms, for he ascribes unto her this little Omnipotent: and
Saluste says, that in all things Fortune bears swaye. But let them as
Heathens, and without the knowledge of the true God, imagine what they list,
yet let us think, and believe none to be Omnipoten, and to dispose the
world, and that which is in the same, but only our God, not Fortune: and that
he does all things, not rashly without reason, but prouidently to our
preservation: and that he is not mad in his doings, but mighty and marvelous,
and does all things to the comfort of his elect. For if the virtuous be
pinched with poverty, or plaged with any kind of adversity, they ought with
Christ to say, Their kingdom is not of this world: if the vicious be puffed
with plenty, or placed in all kind of prosperity, the good should persuade
them selves, that though they florishe, yet a time will come, when a straighte
accoumpt shall be asked, and those wicked stewards shall be thrown headlong
into that lake which burns continually with fire and brimstone, where is
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Yet will we somewhat follow the Philosophers (and
yet so as our opinion shall be that there is a God, and that nothing happens by
chance, or fortune unto man, but by the espetiall providence of almighty God)
and with the ruder sort we will consider what are the goods of Fortune: which
are in number infinite. For they are all such earthly things, Goods of Fortune.
as are given of God to the use of man, or those things which are not in man,
but are gotten by man, as Riches, Good will of men, Nobility, Fame,
Aucthority, Honor, many, and virtuous children, and such like. Those which I
have recited are much spoken of, and therefore I will speak somewhat of them.
Under the name of riches are comprehended plate, Riches.
money, jewels, household stuf, lands, possessions, store of sheep, oxen,
horses, and other beasts. I am not ignorant what has been the judgment of
wise and learned men, concerning riches, as that of Isocrates, Isocrates ad
Demonicu^.
where he says, That riches do rather stir to vices, then prick to virtue*
Plato.
or that of Plato, where he says, that he is a mad man, which can judge a rich
man, to be an happy man: or that of another, which accoumpteth that estate
miserable, whereas rich men are honorable. I know likewise that Philosophers
have contemned, Crates Thebanus
and cast them away, as did Crates of Thebes, which thought he could not,
possess riches, and reason at once: as did Moninus, which scattred money in
the streets, Monimus.
and nothing at al cared for this life: Aristippus. Democritus.
as did Aristippus Democritus and others. And yet I am not ignorant that
Isocates counsel is, we should gather wealth, both to relieve our own want,
and also to succor the necessity of others: That Terence says, riches are
according to their use, good, Terentius in Heart. Actus. primi scena secunda.
Lactantius de salsa Sapientia. Cap. 23.
if they be well used: bad, if they be abused: I know also that Lactantius,
called Democritus a foolish man, for leaving his patrimony, and substance at
six and seven: and that he judged Crates (and such like) a mad man, for
flinginge his substance and treasure into the sea, with which he might have
relieved manies want.

Of this point, because my desire is to be short, I will speak no more, but
will leave the sentence to the judgment of the wise, Callimachus.
only with Callimachus I say, that Riches without wisdom, to use them, can
not honest a man, much less exalt him: and virtue or good qualities without
Riches, are as it were a candle under a bushel, and obscure: and with learned
Sappho, I say, Riches without virtue do little profit, Sappho.
but joined with good qualities, do beutifie and set out a a man's virtue very
much. Aristotle defines him to be a true friend, Aristot^les. lib. 1. Rhetor ad
Theod. Cap. 16.

A true friend.


whose care is to pleasure his friend in all honest things, moved thereunto, by
a mere good will, which he bears unto him. Now he which has many such
friends, is coumpted to be likewise in Fortunes books. But of true
friendship, we shall have occasion to speak more, when we shall describe the
nature of Justice. Thirdly, he is said to have good Fortune which is borne of a
noble house, Nobility.
or by his own virtues rayseth to his posterity, great fame and glory.
Aristotle does distinguishe nobleness of birth, and says if is either
universal or particular. Universal, as to be borne in a noble and famous
country: particular to come of noble progenitors. Both truly illustrateth a
man very much, as long as his virtues do answer to the fame, either of his
country, or parents: otherwise more shame he gets the^ glory. For notable
is the answer of Themistocles to Tymodemus, Themistocles. Tymodemus.
which objected to him that were it not, that he were an Athenian, his name
would be obscure. Thou say true, answered he, for if I were thy
countreyman, my virtues should never be rewarded, and if thou were my
countreyma^, thou should never be so much as talken of, for thou have no
good qualities. Whereby he seems to infer that an obscure country brings
no credit to a man, be he never so virtuous: and a noble country illustrateth
no man, which is not of good behauior. On the other part to come of noble
parentage, and not to be endued with noble qualities, is rather a defamation,
then a glory. And therefore true is that sentence of Cicero, Cicero, pro Sexto
Roscio.
Noble men, except they be vigilant, honest, valiant, and merciful
(notwithstanding their birth) must needs give place unto them, which are
adorned with these goodly virtues. And to the like purpose, enueighing against
Catiline, he says, Cicero in Catilinam
Thy naughty life Catiline, has so obscured the glory of thy predicessors,
that although they have been famous, yet by thee they will come into oblivion,
and never be spoken of, wherefore never cast me in the teeth, of my baseness
of birth, for better is it by virtue and good deeds to get renown both to me
and my posterite, than as thou do, to depend upon the opinion of a noble
house, and so by idleness, and wicked living, to shame both your self, and to
extinguish their fame. So Cicero. By which it appears how foolish, and
fanaticall they show them selves, which will boast of their gentiltie, and
think others in respect of them selves, no better then slaves, or abiectes of
none accoumpte, when as in deed none are more abiects then them selves,
because depending upon their petty gree, they neglect those things which are
the tokens of a true gentleman. Nobility therefore of birth to a virtuous man,
brings great glory: to a vicious, rayseth perpetual reproach: other
Nobility in this life by virtue attained, is to be supposed no small token of
an happy life. Fame.
Another part of good Fortune is to be well reported of, and to have a good
name. The reddiest way to purchase a good name, is by our good deeds to show
our selves such, as our desire is to be accoumpted.

It is written of Dionysius, Dionysius.
a most cruel tyrant, that as long as he perceived him self to be well
reported of, he was a good man, but when the privy talk to his defamation
came to his ears, he then began to leave his good nature, and to exercise all
kind of cruelty toward his subjects, and became the most cruel Prince that
ever was. Erasmus in Vidua sua.
The consideration of which made Erasmus to say, that it was no small treasure
to have a good name: and yet is it more frail then any glass. For nothing is
sooner lost, and nothing harder to be recovered. And most commonly, he which by
good behauior deserves to be best thought of, it falls out, that he is most
defamed.

But true is that of Tullie: Cicero pro, Q. Roscio.
Even as fire cast into the water, is quickly quenched, and put out: so a false
and hot accusation against an honest life and conversation, does not long
continue, but is extinguished. And a rumor raised of nothing (says Erasmus)
sone of his own accord vanishes: Erasmus in vidua.
and the end of it is nothing else, but to make the innocence of him which
is slandered to be more wondered at, and commended. Cicero likewise writes very
notably hereof, Cicero pro. P. Quinct. 10.
and says: That if a man's good name be not polluted, though he have nothing
else, yet that stands him in more steed, then the possession of great riches
Wherefore we may very well say, that he has good fortune, which is free from
the slanderous tongue, and whose good name is not called into reprehension, by
the wicked endeavors of malicious persons. A man is likewise said to be happy,
when he is honored of men. This honor is called the reward of virtue. M.
Marcellus building a temple, which he called the temple of Honor, M. Marcellus.
Honor.
did so place and situate the same, as none could have entrance thereunto,
except first he came through Virtues temple. Signifying thereby, that the way
to honor, is by virtue only, not by favor, money, nor other means. And hereof
it is that in deed we honor only such as either have, or may do us some
great benefit. And therefore the Athenians honored Aristigeton, and Harmodius,
Aristogeton. Harmodius
for kylling a tyrant: and the Romans did erect images to all such as had
gotten renown to their country: and generally all such are honored of every
man, which have or may do him good. Cicero says, Cicero lib. 1. Epi. ad Q.
Fratrem.
that those have excellent wits, which are pricked with the desire of glory.
And we find it most true, that none have proved excellent in any thing, except
first he were styrred thereunto by a burning desire of Honor. Honor alit arts.
For (that I may ommit all lyberall arts which would be of no price, except
their were a preferment) who is he which in other things can prosper without
an hope of attayning honor* and praise of men? Great and exceeding be the
praises of Themistocles, and Fabius Maximus, Themistocles. Fabius Maximus.
but such commendation was given them, when the study of Honor had entered into
their minds, not before. For they were before of most wicked conversation, but
when the shame of the world had troubled them, and they were pricked with
desire of glory, they proved two such fellows, as in Athens was none like unto
Themistocles, and Fabius by his virtues got unto him another name, Fabius
Gurges.
and was called not Gurges (as before) but Maximus, both very honorable, and
very well esteemed in their contrie. This Honor, as the reward of well doing,
ought not only to be desired, but sought for, but yet not by all means, or ill
means, but we must come to the same (as I said before) by virtue, she must
be our guide, and bring us to the place of honor. It has been sought for of
many, and yet none purchase the same, and are truly honored of the wise, but
only the virtuous. For when as they hunt after the same immoderatly, Ambition.
not according to the rules of wisdom, they are counted ambitious, and
pricked thereunto because they would be in the eyes of men gracious, not for
any good they mean to the common weal. Such are known by their fruits, and
are honored of flatterers, or other men, because they would reap some
profit. To have the true Honor, and to be reverenced among men, for the sake
of virtue, is an espetiall gift, and one of the chiefest goods of Fortune.
Another of the goods of Fortune, Children.
is to be blessed with children, and those in number many, of nature honest.
There was a law among the Spartanes, Spartanes.
that he which had begotten three men children, should neither watch nor
ward: and if any had five sons, should be set free from paying any common
fine, and never be troubled with bearing any publyke office, but live at his
hearts ease, quietly. And the Romans had a company of men called Proletaries,
Proletaries.
upon whom was never any task or fine set, but they did benefit, and
pleasure their country with begettinge children. And certainly, the getting
of children is one of the chiefest benefits that can be in a common weal,
without which mankind would soon perish and come to naught. And who is he
that will not judge that man to be greatly in Fortunes favor, which is adorned
with many goodly children? Or who will reprehende that noble Cornelia, Cornelia.
which counted her children to be her treasure and riches? God has promised
that he which serves him shall have a wife, as fruitful as the vine, and that
his children shall stand like Olive branches round about his table. Finally
what a blessing it is to have children, let them judge which want. I have heard
that the chiefest cause of debate, among many folks is most commonly
barrennes: and some are so desirous of them, that many thousands they would
give, to have but one. By which it appears what a great blessing it is to
have many children, espetially if they be virtuous: else were it better to have
none. For, as we commonly say, Better unborn, then untaught. To have them
well mannered, consists in the power of parents, for if they will, they may
be endued with all virtues. Which made Solon to enacte that those parents in
their old age, Solon.
should not be relieved of their children, which cared not how they practiced
good manners, or profited in other humane literature. And therefore Cicero
does sharply rebuke Timarchides, Cicero action. 4. in Verrem. Timarchides.
for that being of wicked life, and conversation him self, yet he was not
ashamed, to have his son of tender years to be a viewer, and a witness of
his wicked living. And as vehemently he does inueigh against Verres for the
same fault, Cicero act. 6 in Verre.
because he cared not how his son spent his time, whether among harlottes,
or honest persons. Notable is the example of Iulia, daughter unto Augustus the
Emperor, Iulia.
and may be a good example to all well disposed parents, how they bring up
their children. For she being on a time counsayled by a dear friend, to leave
her light behauior, and to imitate the virtues of her noble father, answered
contemptuously, My father has forgot that he is an Emperor, and I do not
remember that he is my father. And surely the readiest way to make children
forget them selves and their friends, is not by instructing them in good
manners when they are young. I will recite no foreign examples, for England
can minister matter enough, and every iayle can bear me witness, how little
care parents have of their childrens good behauior. The cause of Iulias
wickedness, was her fathers too much pampering her, and the cause of al
wickedness not only in this land, but else where, is the carelessness of
parents. For if they, while they are young, either did punish them, or suffer
them to be punished, they would not without great fear and trembling offend,
yea in smallest matters. Now (I may very well reason from a contrary) If the
having of no children be such a grief and misery, not only to married folks,
but also to the common weal, then the having of them is a great comfort to
parents, and commodity to a common weal: and again, if carelessness of
bringing them up in the study of virtue, be not only to them selves a shame
and vexation, but unto their neighbors and countrymen hurtful, and
pernicious, then must it needs be confessed, that to have children well
nurtered, brings no small praise to their parents, and profit to mankind.
And thus much concerning the goods of Fortune, which do illustrate every man
very much, and cause them to be accounted of all men blessed: But the virtuous
they do place almost in the highest degree of Felicity.

Of the goods of Nature. Chap. 3.
BEfore I recite which are the goods of Nature, I will first show, what is
signified by this word Nature: else will my words rest in great ambiguitie,
and my meaning will hardly be perceived. The Philosophers take the same
diversely. Nature of what sorts
And sometime under that they comprehend the essence of every thing, whether
it be substance, or quality, sensible, or not to be perceived: and in this
taking of it, it is nothing Essentia in Latin, the essence of any thing:
sometime it is accident: of the mind, or pertaining to the body, as we say
in common speech, it is the Nature of the Adamant to draw iron unto it: it is
the Nature of the fire to beat: of a Lion to be merciful: of a Tiger to be
cruel: of a Man to be desirous of novelty: of a Woman to be fall of words.
But these acceptions make nothing to our purpose. Natura fini^a, et sufinita.
Sometime they distinguishe the same, and say there is a Nature which is
endless, infinite: and there is a finite, a nature which has an end. The
endless nature is that which of it self, Natura a t^rans.
makes and creates all thing, and very darkly they call it Naturam naturantem,
a Nature naturating, that is, creating all things: which in deed is nothing
else but God. Here do the Philosophers show great folly, and defile them
selves with unspeakable blasphemy, Lactantius de salsa Sapientia. Cap. 28
when they will ascribe the name of Nature unto him, which is above Nature. For
if Nature be derived of nascendo (as the learned do say) from springing or
being borne, how can he be called Nature, which is without beginning, and was
never borne? for in so doing, by name they confess him to have a beginning, and
so consequently shall have an end, which in deed has been from everlasting,
and shall continue for ever, then which, what can be more wicked? The finite
Nature is that which has an end, and may be comprehended. Natura fin^ta.
Again, they say Nature is of two sorts Universal, and Particular. Natura
vniuersalis.
The universal they divide, and say it may be taken Logically, or
Physically: Logically from an universal comprehension in the mind of
particular things, as by this general word, Creature, I understand all men
endued with reason, and boasts: and by this spetiall word, Man, I understand
all particular men, this man, or that man, by what name so ever he be called.
Physically understood, the universal nature is again distinguished, and
taken either for a celestial influence, equally coming into every thing,
according to his nature, and is of such power, as it preserves all things
from destruction: of this celestial nature, springes all second causes, and
singular effects: Causae secundae.
or else it is taken not for the influence which comes from the heavens, but
a secret working in all kinds, ingrafted into them of God, for continuance.
Of this it comes that every kind is preserved by his kind, and mankind by
man: the nature of horses, by horses: of corn by seed, and that necessarily.
For if by chance any thing bringes forth, which is not of his kind, Monstrum.
it is judged a monster: as for a woman to bring forth no man but a beast, is
monstrous: and against Nature, horrible and out of course. This universal
nature altogether consists in imagination, and is nothing without conceit of
mind. And this concerning the diverse understandings of universal nature.

^.
The particular nature, is that virtue which is in any one thing, without
consideration of a multitude, or many things under one general: as the nature
of this hen is to have chickens: these apples to spring out of this tree: so
that every particular thing, a particular nature: and without this there can
be no universal or common nature, except only in the mind of immortal
creatures. This being briefly spoken concerning the diverse acceptions of this
word Nature, we may the better prosecute our purpose. For none of these
natures which we have recited according to the minds of the Philosophers, is
yt which makes to our matter: although the two latter come very nigh. For that
infinite, and endless nature may seem the bestower of all goods and
goodness, and so (in deed largely, and as we say all goodness to spring,
and proceed from God) it is. For all things are the goods of this endless:
everlasting, and incomprehensible nature: but commonly, and with the rude
multitude to speak, Nature in this place, is understood a particular nature,
Nature*
a natural thing, and yet not every thing, but endued with sense: and yet not
beasts, but reasonable creatures. The goods of this nature, which this natural
man is adorned with all, are many, as those which I have spoken of before,
external: and those which I shall have occasion to manifest hereafter, all
good qualites of the mind, but in this place the goods of Nature be
understood, all such things as are in the boddie of man, not penetrating into
the most internal part, and mind of him.

^
Aristotle deuides all goodness into two sorts, and calls them either
external, or internal: external he says are those which we have spoken of
alreaddy, the goods of Fortune: internal the goods of the mind and of the
body, or nature. These last goods are these, (...) The goods (...) Nature.
Health, Strength, Beutie, and Bigness. Without either of these, one can not
be accounted happy in this life. For first let a man be for his substance
welthie: for honor princely: nay, let him be for his rare and wonderful
virtues, glorious, and if you will peereles: yet if he be troubled with a
quotidian fever, or tormented with some grievous disease, I pray you is not his
case miserable? Health
What a blessedness it is to have health, I refer me to those, which either
are, or have been afflicted with disseases. The cause of a thing, bringes
knowledge. None can better tell what it is to possess riches, then h^ which is
pinched with poverty: and none can better report the benefit of liberty
then he, which is in thraldom. By sour things, we know what are sweet. And
in adversity we wish again to be in prosperity. It is said, that a poor
laboring man having health, is happier, then a King in sickness. The reasons
are, because the one keeps us as it were in prison, that we may not stir,
the other gives us liberty to go about our business: one troubles the
mind, and takes away understanding, the other confirms the wit, and makes us
readdie to all good exercises: briefly the one brings all things backwarde,
by the other all things prosper and come forewarde. Stoike.
Although it be said that sickness is necessary to bring a man to the
mindfulnesse of him self, when as health has brought forgetfulness: which
has bine confirmed by many examples, as of Hieron a king of Sicilia, Hieron.
which then began to favor good literature, when he was pinched with sickness:
of Ptolomie the second, which proved excellently well seen in all humane
learning, Ptolomie.
when he had been plaged with great sickness: of Straton, which never would
practice any commendable thing, Straton
before he had been grievously afflicted with contagious diseases: and Plato is
reported never to have favored Philosophy, Plato.
before sickness made him to know him self: which though they are noted of a
number, to have proved famous, by reason of sickness, yet for one of them a
thousand, may be recited, which in their health have accomplished that, which
sickness could never cause the^ to enterprise. For what does more consume the
lively blood in man? what does more extinguish the natural heat which is the
cause of life, and promptness to every good exercise, then does melancholic
passions, wherewith sick folks are assaulted? So that less able they are to
goodness then, then at any time. Although sometime it falls out (as in those
which I have recited) that they have come from ungraciousness to goodness:
and from wickedness to virtue, by reason of the affliction of the boddie: yet
better he may (if he be endued with reason and grace) bend him self to a good
conversation in health, then troubled with sickness. And with Lactantius I
say, that necessary it is for him that is insolent, Adversity profitable
so^^tim^s.
to be brought to the acknowledginge of him self by sickness, or other
misery: but for a wise man not so. Which, if it were not, to what end should
so many, even of the wysest, seek so many means, and so learned counsel,
either to prevent sickness, when they are proane thereunto, or be cured, when
they are diseased. Whereunto should such great heed* either of misdiet, or
distempering of the boddy serve? Why does not every man either ingurgitate him
self, that he break even his heart veins with swylling, and good cheer: or
pass all modesty in all his exercises, if sickness be so commodious? But the
learned counsel, and those which have been sick, do cry Principiis obsta,
Prevent a disease, and when sickness is a growing, in time cut it of. So that
if their counsel be to be regarded, who both know and feel the
discommodities of an afflicted body, we ought to judge the^ in no small
happiness, which are free from all disquietnesse of body and mind. Croton,
that city was so commended for the healthfulnesse of the place where she is
situated, that of her came this adage, more healthful then Croton. Crotone
^lub^iu^*
This healthfulnesse of place caused the Athenians to excel the other Grecians
in excellency of wit. Athenians.
The Egyptians were the most profounde in all knowledge that ever were,
Egyptians.
and no other reason is given, but because they dwelled in a most healthful
country of all others. The first precept which those give that write of
building is to choose a good and healthful place free from corrupt, and noisome
airs. Were it my mind to make any long and large discourse of this matter, I
would prescribe rules concerning the keeping of health, when we have it, but I
leave the same, those which are desirous of it, may bestow their labor very
well in perusing of Plutarch, Marsilius, Ficinus and others (if they
understand the Latin tongue) which have written at large, and learnedly
thereof. Another of the goods of Nature, is the strength of body. Strength.
A thing very good in time and place. Vincentius, a studious and very learned
man, Vincentius.
makes three kinds of stout and valiant men, stout in knowledge, stout in
body, and stout in mind. Those he calls stout in knowledge, which
(notwithstanding they have not that couragiousnesse of mind which valiant men
should be endued withal, Three kinds of valiant men.
yet) through a certain shame of neglecting their duty, they take heart of
grace, and compel their boddie to take that in hand, which appertains to
the profit and commodity thereof.

Stout in boddie, are such to whom nature has given bones and strength,
Stout in boddy of three sorts.
easily to overcome many labors, and they are of three sorts. For some of them
can do many things, but will not: some can and will: others will do more
then they can. The same Vincentius calls all such which are stout in body,
and yet are cowards in mind. no better then thieves, and dissemblers with God
and man: with God, because they may do good, and will not: with man, because
they seem to be, and are not stout. In mind some are stout, some stouter,
and some stoutest. Stout in mind of three sorts.
He confirms it with examples, and says, Thobie was stout, Job stouter,
stoutest Abraham. Thobie committed, Thobias. Job Abraham*
Job lost, Abraham left. This money, the other substance, the last house,
lands, and kindred. On^ in hope, an^^ther in patience: the other wyllingly. The
first by taking compassion of the poor: the second by suffering the
persecutor: the third, by obeying the commander. Fortitude
Fortitude is proved two ways, by desire and carnalitie. None of these gave
place to desire (which consists in three things, Desire in three things
consists.
in desire to get, in carfulness to keep: and vnwyllingnesse to forgo) but
expelled it all together, because every man should have his own. They gave
not place unto carnalitie, or natural affection. For Tobias did not love his
son more then he ought: Job did not vex himself for the death of his sons*
more then was needful: Abraham did not only banishe Ismaell, but also would
have offered Isaac wyllingly unto the Lord. Hitherto Vincentius* Three rare
examples of true Fortitude. Of the strength of the body might much be spoken:
but I will be brief. Only with that sentence of Lactantius I will conclude
and say, Lactantius de (...) lib* 1. (...). 9.
that he is not valianter which kylleth a Lion, then he which mortifieth his
wyld concupiscences: that he is not stouter which brings under foot ravening
fowls, then he which bridleth his raginge affections: nor he which
overcomes a mighty Amazone: then he which vanquisheth his outrageous lust
fighting against his good fame and honesty: nor that he is more courageous,
which subdueth wild coltes, then he which expels wild concupiscence, and
vices out of his heart, which are more hurtful, because they are domestical,
then those which may be shunned and eschued.

By which it appears, that be only is to be accoumpted valiant, which is
temperate, moderate, and of good conversation, be he notwithstanding of no
great strength. And this in comparison, (for in respect of this conqueror of
his internal, and infernal foes, the other against foreign enemies) is not so
much as to be accoumpted worthy of praise: For strength without a stomache,
is nothing, and he which has it, is judged but a babbler. Both going together,
brings a good opinion.

As to have health and strength of boddie, so to be of a good stature, is
nombred among the gifts of Nature.

Bigness.
This bigness or stature consists in breadth, and height: He is of good
stature, that is not to long, nor to short: to gross, nor to slender. A mean
in all things, so in this, is best. This comeliness of stature is no small
thing, and makes him well to be accounted of, espetially when to the
comlynesse of person, commendable qualities of the mind do answer. Another
of Natures goods, is form and beutie of boddie. Beutie.
The praises of beauty are many, and wonderful. We see those which have the
same to be fancied of all men, again, who can favor a deformed person? And it
is a great deal the more commendable, because of all creatures none is
beutifull, but only man. And as nothing is adorned therewith, but only man,
so nothing is delighted therewith but only man. And as it is commended for a
notable gift, and great blessing, so is it dispraysed for a wicked thing, and
cause of much wickedness. Hereof it is said that beuty, riches, pleasure, and
prosperity, causes forgetfulness of our selves. But to speak the same
simply without consideration, is a mad thing. Aristotle. Eloquence.
And as Aristotle said to them which inueighed against eloquence (because many
abused the same) that can not be nombered among wicked things, which may he
well used to the benefit of others: so do I say to them which account
beutie, riches, and prosperity among evil things, that those things ought
not to be demed naught, which may be well used. And who is he so deuoyde of
reason, that will not confess that all these may be well bestowed? But if we
should confess the truth, we should say the beutie of the face of all
apparent things is most excellent, and a most evident sign of a good nature.
It is caused of a good and pure blood, which appearing in the face, bringes a
delightful color. The beutifull complexion is the sanguine: and the sanguines
are of the best nature, Sanguine
and given (by their constitution) to al commendable exercises. The most
deformed is the Malancholike, Melancholy.
a swarte and ill favored: and who are more wickedly bente, who are the causes
of mischief every where, then (most commonly) are such? If I should recite
the judgment of those which write of complexitions, and commend the
bewtifull, I should not end this matter in much paper, it shall suffice
therefore that by the way, I have touched the same.

Sturmius describes a man very notably, Sturmius de Imitatione oratoria lib.
2. Ca. 12 A description of man.
and says, That he may rightly be named a man, in which are these five
things. Whereof the first is, a clear complexion, not pale, swarte, or of
duskie color* The second, a good stature, and to be well set* not little, for
that is co^temptible: The third, a boddie well proportioned in every respect:
The fowrth, Agility of joints, and nimblenesse to go about any thing: The
fifth, and last, virtuous qualities.

Of all these, except the last, we have spoken, and therefore because without
them, all other things are nothing: all other Goods are Euyls, we will
immed^atly make manifest the Goods and gifts of the mind.

Of the Goods of the mind. Chap. 4
Now are we come to the goods of the mind, which in deed are only good,
and sufficiently good of them selves. The other to wit, the Goods of Nature and
Fortune, are so far good, as when they serve to good purpose: and are
handemaides waiting upon virtue, not ministers to vices: and therefore they
are not simply and sufficiently of them selves good, but by reason of their
good usage.

Cicero tells how there appeared unto Hercules two maidens diversely apparelled,
of diverse nature: Cicero li. 1. Officio. Hercules. Virtue.
the one plain and simple: the other gorgeously decked and very fine. Each of
them promised according to their hability rewards unto him* if he chused
according to their minds: The plain and simple said: if he would entertain
her, he should in this world be wretched, and of small accoumpte, but
afterward his felicite should be great, and his same everlasting. The other
brave Dame said, Pleasure.
if he would think well of her, and make her his own, he should not lack,
as long as he lived, any thing, which could be to his delectation, his riches
should be infinite, his pleasures unspeakable, according to his desires every
thing should happen, so that in this world, as long as he lived, he should be
glorious: pains he should take none, but live at ease: but afterward she was
not to promise any thing. Hercules perceiving her to be vain pleasure,
forsook her, and embraced the other, simple and rude ver^tue. Whereby he
showed him self more to esteem virtue, bare, and void of all ornaments,
miserable: then delightful pleasure accompanied with all the goods of Nature
and Fortune. Democritus was of his mind, Democritus
and therefore, because the pleasure of this world should not carry him from
contemplation, he plucked out his own eyes. Spurina likewise, a rare example
of a virtuous young man, Spurina.
rather would mangle, and deforme his beutifull face, then be an occasion that
others should by his fayrenesse offend. And certainly there was never any
desirous of a good name, which did not prefer celestial before earthly
things, eternal before transitory, virtue before vanity. So that the true
felicity is attained by the good qualities of the mind. Cicero confirms the
same, and says, Cicero act. 2. in Ve^rem.
that Sweet^r and more comfortable are the pleasures of the mind, then the
delyghts of the flesh. To declare the excellency of this Virtue, the ancient
Romans called their Jupiter, Optimus, Maximus: Jupiter why called Optimus,
Maximus.
the best, and the greatest: and we call our God so, to signify that for
virtue and power he is peerless. And first he is called Optimus, afterward
Maximus, to show that his divinity is before his Omnipotency. Plutarch^ in
vita Aristidis.
And again Plutarche said, that for three things God is judged most
glorious, for his immortality, for his Omnipotency, and for his Virtue: and
yet says he, of all these his virtue is most to be wondered at. And so we may
say that man is adorned with three things, with the Goods of Nature,
Fortune, and the Mind, and yet of all these the Goods of the mind are most
excellent. And he which is Optimus, the best man, shall excel him which is
Maximus of greatest power, riches, and authority. So that he which comes
nighest unto God in virtue, is the most happiest of al others: and the fardest
from virtue, the fardest from felicity. Mankind two fold.
Here I have to distinguishe mankind into two sorts espetially, the one are
such which forsaking this world and the glory thereof, altogether addicte them
selves to the contemplation of celestial things (supposing all the cares and
cogitations of man, should only be referred to the study of him which has
created all things of nothing most myraculously: and that in token of
thankfulness, he should only serve him in true holiness) and for the
better discharging their duties, be altogether careless of worldly matters.
The other be such, which considering they are as well compounded of boddie as of
soul, think it good, that a care should be had as well of boddie, as of the
soul: and yet so, as the care of the soul should be greater, then of ye
boddie. These are called Civil, the other Contemplators, or as we say
divines. These Contemplators, although they serve not altogether to our
purpose, yet shall be mentioned, because that well we can not express the one
without speaking of the other.

Of Contemplation. Chap. 5
OF the two felicities which the Philosophers defend, Contemplation*
one does as it were imitate the divine and celestial nature, the other
consists in civil actions: One by so much the more perfect then the other,
by how much their obiecte is more excellent. The better felicity is called in
Greek (...), in Latin Contemplatiua, a contemplative: the other (...), Actiua,
a civil and active felicity. Contemplators, of three sor^s
The contemplative has three degrees. The first is of such men, which bending
them selves to the seeking of celestial, and supernatural things, do choose
unto them selves before earthly things, heavenly: and do labor with all
study to segregate, and purge their minds from the filthy desire of worldly
things, that so al worldly cares set a part, they may spend their time in
devout meditations. This degree do all such attain, which judge and suppose
wisdom only to consiste in the acknowledginge of that which is supernall:
and those only to be wise, which bend them selves to the searching out of all
celestial matters, and in their life and conversation, study to express that
which is only belonging unto the divine nature. In this felicity are all the
four principle virtues perceived to be. Prudence in choosing celestial,
refusing that which is earthly. Prudence
As did Anaxagoras, which being demanded (after he had bestowed all his goods
upon his friends) why he did no more esteem his country? Anaxagoras.
answered, that the greatest care which he had, was of his country, and
poynted his finger toward the heavens: thinking him self but a stranger in
this world. Temperaunce in seeking for things necessary, Temperance.
eschuing superfluity. As did Diogenes, which said, that he studied not for
dignity, and served vainglory (as did other barbarians) but that he obeyed
nature only, Diogenes.
contempning all other worldly pomp. Fortitude, Fortitude, Fortitude
in being of an invincible courage, which is declared by not submytting them
selves like slaves to fleshlye desires: as did many Philosophers which
mortified them selves, that so they might the better profit in the study of
wisdom. Justice in worshipping one God, aucthor of all Justice, protector of
all such as put their trust in him. Justice
As do all such as worship one God in heart, and word. The second, is not to
flee the world, and vanities thereof, as hindrances, and stays to good
endeavors, as though he knew them, but as it were in deed to perticipate the
divine nature here in this earth, and to think of nothing but God and
godliness. So that the first degree seems to be but an election, and choosing
good before evil: the latter is as it were an habit, and enjoying thereof in
deed. In those which have this felicity, is also perceived the virtues,
Temperance in not thinking, Temperance.
or forgetting al motions which spring out of the flesh: Fortitude in that
they are so far from ouercomming the desires, Fortitude.
that they are altogether ignorant, that they are subject to any assaults of
the Perturbations: Justice in that they are so mindful of their duty toward
God, as they seem by their conversation, not to be clad with an earthly
boddie, but to have the substance of God him self, pure and free from all
swelling motions, which rise from the flesh. But have we any such
contemplators? Or was that Ephesian Heraclitus such a one, which made this
proud answer unto King Darius, Heraclitus.
(which by letters desired him to leave his solitary and sauadge life, and to
spend his time in his court) that all mortal men were dissemblers, none
cared for truth and Justice, and therefore he would enter no familiarity
with any man? The last step or degree of contemplatio^, is called in Latin
Exemplaris: which consists altogether in the mind of man^, Exemplaris
contemplatio.
from which the express, and true example of all virtues do flow, as out of
a spring. For in the mind all good qualities be imprinted, which impression the
Platonistes call Ideas, which are nothing but certain inward conceptions of
things. ^
These kinds of contemplations, have all the virtues surely rooted in their
minds. So that every degree has his diverse, and sundry taking. The first
rooteth all Perturbations out of the mind of man: the second does altogether
forget them: the last knows them, but either to exercise or name wickedness,
it judges sacrilege. The commendations of this felicity are infinite.
Theophrastus extols the same to the skies, whose praises, if it were my purpose
at large to discourse hereof, I would recite. But having another end of my
talk, I come to the active felicity.

Of Civil or active felicity. Cha. 6.
PLato, seeing Archytas Tarentinus bent altogether to co^templation, Plato.
Archytas, Tarentinus.
and comparing that with civil virtues, did dehorte him from the same, His
reason which he used was, because no man was borne to him self, but a piece of
his birth, his country, a part his parents, and a part his friends, and
neyghbors callenged, so that if he considered his estate thoroughly, and
discharged his duty as he ought, very little time he should find, which he
might say was reserved to him self alone. Aristotle.
Aristotle likewise to the same purpose says, that a man should not live to
him self, but should have a care of his parents, of his children, wife,
neighbors, and countrymen. And therefore is a man called Animal sociale, a
fellow creature, because of all other things he is or should be delighted with
company. Which made Cicero to say, that nothing was more acceptable before
God, Cicero.
then are the companies of men, and assemblied linked by a law, which being so
gathered together, all are called a city. Those which fly the company of
men, are called by an odious name (...) haters of men. Those contemplators have
been, as I said before, not only odious, but also ridiculous unto many. As
was one of the seven wise men of Greece, Thales. Which being earnestly given to
the beholding of the stars, Thales Milesias..
not seeing that which was before his feet, fell into a great hole. Which when
an old woman saw, she brake into a great laughter, and said, you in deed
are a wise man Thales, which will give your self to contemplation, and neglect
things before your eyes: who will not exclame against Epimenides, Epimenid^^
which being in hard contemplation, was not so much as moved, when his
country, and city where he dwelt, and also his own house was consumed with
fire? Meton.
Or that Meton the Astronomer, which did not only faigne him self to be
frantike, but also burnte, house, books, and all his substance, because he
would not break his study, in defense of his country, to go a warfare? A
man in my judgment, unworthy to reap any commodity of his country, which was
so vnwylling to bestow his pains in keeping it from servitude. And therefore
write they very well, which say, that he is a right good man which serves
God devoutly, and deals vprightlye with all men. Such a man is called
rightly* a civil man, A civil man.
and he is adorned with all virtues. And this is he which obeys not the
affections of the mind, otherwise then honestly he may, but embraces virtue
with all his heart: and so it comes to pass, that because of his good
disposition and honest behauior, he is said by virtue to be brought into an
happy estate and haven, or heaven of joys. Here it is necessary that I
declare what this virtue is, and of how many parts it consists.

The definitions of Virtue, and her parts. Chap. 7.
PYthagoras defines virtue to be a natural harmonye to which all honest
things do answer. Virtue what.
Many of the Stoikes according to the opinion of Socrates do define virtue to
be a knowledge of those things which are agreeable to nature: which opinion
caused Herillus to suppose knowledge to be the chiefest good. Herillus.
Of his mind was Possidonius, which said, that to live honestly was nothing
but a perfect understanding of those things which accompany nature. Horace by
a contrary defines the same, and says that Virtue is nothing but an avoiding
of wickedness. Cicero defines it in two sorts: for sometime it is a
perfection of reason: sometime an habit of the mind agreeable to reason.
Cleanthes said, it was an election of the mind, obeying to nature, which of
it self was able to bring an happy estate. Aristotle said, It is a chosing
habit of the mind, consisting in a mean, between two extremes, of which one
exceeds, the other wants much: as Fortitude when it exceeds, falls into
rashness, when it faints, into chyldishe fearfulness: and Liberality,
when it lauisheth out of reason, is called prodigality, when it is not extended
any whit, purchases the name of covetousness. And thereof came this proverb:
That in good things nothing is either wanting or superfluous. The consideration
of which made the Pythagorians to say, Pythagorici.
that wickedness could not be comprehended, but godliness might. And
therefore much easier is it to become wicked then virtuous. For the ways to
wickedness are many, plain, and common: but to goodness are not many, but
one, and that same is hard to find, because it is but little trodden. Now
seeing we know what is virtue let us learn of how many kinds it is. Virtue of
how many sorts.
Aristotle deuides them into two sorts, and calls them either moral, or
intellectual: he calls all such intellectual which by nature are ingrafted
in us, Intellectual virtues. Moral virtues.
as Heed, Wariness, Wisdom: Moral, are such which by custom, and civil
conversation we attain: These flow from the manners of men, and use makes
them perfect: the other out of the mind: for many men may be found which are
(although not in like manner) wise, and have discretion to know good from
evil, although not perfectly and fully, for wisdom perfect, is gotten by
long exercise, and many years. Some call those, as did Panetius, either
contemplative, or active. Again, some into three kinds divide them, and call
them either natural, rational, or moral.

Parts of ver^ue four.
But Plato best of all says plainly, that virtue is divided into four parts,
the first is Prudence, the second Temperance, the third Fortitude, and the
last Justice, and he calls them the four principal virtues, because that
out of them do spring all the other virtues. Now seeing we know which are
they, let us also tell what they are.

Of Prudence, and her parts. Cha. 8.
PRudence or wisdom, according to the minds of diverse Philosophers, Prudence
what.
is diversely defined, and yet in sense they all agree. The Stoikes say it is a
knowledgd of good things, bad things, and things indifferent. Cicero is of
their mind, and gives the very same definicion: and sometime he calls it
the mystresse of this life, sometime the art teaching how to live well.
Aristotle says, it is an habit of the mind, whose office it is to show what
things are hurtful, or profitable unto man. Socrates was of that opinion,
Socrates.
that he thought all virtues should be called by the name of Prudence. But
Aristotle (as being out of the way) reprehended him, and said, that his opinon
had been good, if he had thought no virtue could have bine without Prudence,
but he could not say rightly, that every one was Prudence. Many and great
have been the praises of this virtue. Apollophanes a Stoike stood in such
admiration thereof, Apollophanes.
that he judged all other virtues in respect of wisdom nothing worth, that
she was to the rest as a prince to her handmaids. Another Philosopher whose
name was Bion, thought as well of her, and said, that she did as far excel
the rest of the virtues, Bion.
as the sight is better in dignity then other senses. Another Philosopher,
whose name was Epicurus, (which though concerning the chiefest happiness he
erred, Epicurus.
yet in this thing) fayde very well, that the very cause of all goodness was
only wisdom. For by that we know, what to eschew as hurtful to our selves,
and again what to choose as profitable. Hipparchus, and other Astronomers do
affirm, Hipparchus
that wisdom can prevent future mischiefs: and nothing is so hurtful, and
pernicious, but by wisdom it may be avoided. For (that I may laeue other
examples, until I declare the parts of wisdom in order) it is reported of
Socrates, Socrates.
that being (according to the judgment of the Physiognomers) given to all
wickedness, by wisdom he reformed him self, and became a good example of a
godly man.

The Poets, The birth of wisdom.
to declare the excellency of this virtue, feign wisdom to be a woman, and
to be borne not of any mortal wight, but even of Jupiter him self: and not of
the vilest part of him (as Venus was of Neptune) but of the best: Venus.
and to spring out of Jupiters brain, thereby to show, that wisdom is no
base, but a divine thing. And certainly (to leave all fictions of Poets) if we
consider the place, from whence our wisdom comes, we shall confess that it
is a most excellent thing. The place from whence it flows, is not the beastly
part concupiscence, but the best, the mind which is immortal. As the
Philosophers and Poets say their mind, to the extolling of wisdom, so do
the painters discribe what they think of her. They for wisdom painted
Minerua, and they did so set her forth, that wheresoever one stood, either
before her, or behind, she had a full sight of him. Thereby to show that the
Nature of wisdom is such as it beholds, The office of wisdom.
and notes every place, and person, neither does she commit, and do any
thing for which she may afterward say, Non putaram. Now all these praises
of all these men, may easily be perceived in the office of wisdom. For it is
the part of a wise man to measure all things by the rule of reason, to do
nothing but that which is honest and good: to bend all his thoughts to the
increase of godliness. Parts of wisdom.
All this may easily be perceived to be true, if we consider the parts of
which Prudence depends, which are in momber eleven: namely, Reason,
Judgment, Circumspection, Providence, Docilitie, Heed, (all which Plotinus a
Platoniste, affyrmeth to be the parts of Prudence:) but Aristootle does not
only confess those to he her parts, but also adioyneth, Warynesse,
Wylynesse, Craftiness, Subtlety, and righteousness. What each of these are,
according to our skyll, and hability, shall be manifested.

Of Reason. Chap. 9.
THe first and most principal part of wisdom is reason, Reason what.
which (according to the sentence of Cicero) is an order to do all things, by
the consideration of things to come. Cicero lib. 2 de Finibus.
And he prefers the same above all other gifts which man is endued with all,
and that worthily: Especially in his books de Finibus he has a notable place
in the praise of Reason, his words are these: Men, although by many other
things, yet chiefly by this one, do most differ from beasts, for that they
have Reason of nature, and a mind given them which is sharp, lively, and
noting many things at once most readely, which does behold, both the causes,
and event of things, it compares one thing with another, and joins that
which is separate, and tyeth that which is to come with things present, and
does consider the state of our life, which we have to live: the same reason
makes a man to love men, and to live with them charitably, not in word or
deed to disagree, that so from a domisticall friendship they may step to a
civil, to a general good will toward all men: and as Plato writ unto
Archytas, the same Reason makes a man to remember that he is not borne to
himself only, but also for his parents, friends, country, and for other men's
causes, so that little time he has to bestow for his private profit, but all
his labors, and study, should be conferred to the profiting of others. Much
more Tullie brings forth in praise of Reason, which for breuity sake I pass
over, and the rather because his words are not so fit and proper for this part,
for here we understand not reason so largely as it shall be that thing,
whereby a man differs from a beast, but rather more stricktly for a reasoning
of the mind, as it were pro and con, Ratiocinatio.
whether this be good or to be embraced or bad, and to be avoided. And so
does Aristotle take the same in that place of his Ethiks, where he talks of
Prudence. And so is it of Cicero so be a diligent and heedeful considering of
things to be done or no. Whose definition is good. For if wisdom be perceived
by choosing things good or evil (which all men do grant) then is it the
part of a prudent man, well to consult before he begin, and that must be had
in all which he goes about. Which consultation is the reasoning of the mind.
which reasoning does spring from reason. And when we have well pondered any
thing in our minds, reason must be judge, and give sentence whether it ought to
be done or no. Hereof is that of Salluste, Prinsquam incipias consulto, and vbi
consulueri^ mature facto opus est: Before a man begin any thing, consultation
should be had, but having deliberated, speedy execution.

Of Understanding. Chap. 10.
Understanding, which otherwise may be called Judgment, or discretion
consists in two things, in discerning truth from falsehood, and in taking
heed lest the mind he overmuch delighted, and so deceived by vain pleasures
of the body. Nothing weakneth this understanding, Enemies to understanding.
so much as idleness, slothfulness, evil affections, corrupt manners, for
they are as it were sworn enemies, not only to our wits, but also to our
good endeavors. Of Idleness it is said, that by doing nothing, Idleness.
men learn to live naughtily. And if we consider truly thereof, we shall
find, the causes of all mischiefs in every common weal, to spring of idle
persons, they are the fyrebrandes of sedition, the causers of all civil
dissension. And therefore notable was that custom among the old Indians,
Indians.
for there manner was every night before supper to examine every man, how he
had bestowed that day: now, if any could not prove that he had been about
some good exercises, their use was to expel him out of their company. Which
they did by the example of the Be, The nature of Bees.
which can abide no Droans among them, but as soon as any begins to be idle
they fall upon them, and kill them. But the Aegiptians came nigher unto their
nature, Egyptians.
for they had a law, by which they would compel any man to give an accoumpte
of the spending of his time: and if any were found to live idly, having no
trade or occupation, by the law he was condemned to dye.

Ovid says, Ovid. lib. 1 de Remedio amoris.
that the way to extinguishe the burning passion of love, is to beware of
idleness, as the very thing which ministers matter to the increasing of that
hot affection. And Cicero says, that idleness is the nource of all
wickedness. Well, as idleness, and slothfulness do make the brain unfit
for the meditation of that which is good, Evil affections*
so also when a man will subject himself to his carnal desires, and wicked
affections of the mind, he does as much debilitate* and cut the stringes of
his understanding. It is very well said of Iouianus Pontanus, that he which
rules others, Iouianus Pontanus.
ought to be free from all affections: for Anger suffers not a man to see that
which is expedient: Hatered hasteneth to injustice: Love weakeneth the
judgment: Lust offers wrong: Grief styrreth to reuengement: Properties of
the affections.
Envy overthrows a man. And as he thought a prince, and one in authority
should be clear from the contagiousnesse of the immoderate and beastlye
Perturbations, so do we think it the part of every man to quench them, when
they inflame him too much, and provoke him to that which is dishonest. What are
these wicked affections, and when to be bridled, we have declared sufficienlly
in our former book. Now of manners.

Evil manners come by evil company. Evil manners.
The nature of every man is perceived by those whose familiarity he
delights in: so that if he frequent the company of the good, he is compted
virtuous, if of the wicked, he may very well take his denomination from them.
Likewyll to like.

Isocrates counsayleth Demonicus, whose felicity he wished as his own,
Isocrates ad Demoni^^^*
that he should to all men show a good countenance, but he should enter
familiarity with none, but such as were of good conversation. For the company
of the wicked will contaminate a man, and make him bold in naughtiness. True
is that saying, He which touches pitche will be defiled therewith. Now how
much evil company weakes our understanding, it is no hard thing to perceive.
For how can the wit be sharpened by them, whose only time is spent in
banishing out of mind all shamefastness? How can they judge of virtue and
godliness, which choose to live in all ungraciousness, and refuse, and that
wilfully all counsel of the mind, and wyllingly confirm them selves in
naughtines. Therefore to have a good understanding, it is necessary that we
avoid, and that carefully all impedimentes to the same, idleness, evil
affections, and wicked company: and so shall we find that Minerua, which is
reported to spring out of Jupiters brain. Minerua.
The which Minerua is fained of Poets to appear sometime armed in all parts,
sometime without armor. Which fictio^ declares the events of our
understanding. Those weapons of Minerua hurts two ways, either in
cou^sayling wickedly or rashly. Of wicked counsel it is said, yt it is most
hurtful to the geuer. Rash counsel (although sometime it may have good
event: yet that is rather by chance then otherwise) has evil success, and is
the cause of infinite hurtes both private and public. And therefore it is
said, that sudden counsel, bringes speedy repentance. Wise men of deep
understanding, and judgment, because they counsayled well, and to the profit
of the common weal of the Romans, were called Consuls, of which there were a
certain number: Consuls.
to whom was committed the government of Rome. But it seems that Nature has
showed her self a stepdame unto us, rather then a mother. For every man has
a better judgment in other men's affairs then his own. We have a clear
sight in others business, but in our own matters, we are either stark
blind, or at the least poor blind, and can not so well foresee
inconveniences coming toward our selves, as we can counsel our friend to
prevent a mischief. And herein we are like Physicians which being sick, do
seek ease at another hand.

Of Circumspection. Cha. 11.
CIrcumspection follows, which is defined to be an espetiall care of the
mind, Circumspection.
to bring those things which we have in hand to a good pass. This
circumspection at al times, and for all persons is necessary: as that which in
war is the cause of escapinge many dangers, in peace does all things to the
increase of unity among men, that so they may spend their time joyfully,
secure from al fear of foreign assaults. And as a skylfull mariner,
beholds all the parts of heaven continually, that so at all times he may
accordingly guide his ship: so a wise Prince continually prepares him self
against all troublesome tempests, and in war and also in peace, he by
Circumspection preuenteth all inconveniences, which without this virtue would
bring him into misery. As did Q. Cepio, Q Cepio.
which neglecting the good counsel of his fellow in office Cn. Metellus, Cn.
Metellus.
cast away of the Romans in one battle.80. thousand. But for his labor he
was condemned to perpetual imprisonment. C. Flaminius, C. Flaminius.
also by the request of the people created Consul, was so puffed and swollen
with pride, that all his study was to seek occasions of war: and having
attained his desire, and was elected chief captain of the Roman soldiors,
became so careless and void of circumspection, that by the snares of
Hanniball he was entrapped, and all his men either taken* or put to slight. But
as rash captains void of circumspection, have brought shame to them selves,
and defamation to their country: so wise and circumspecte have brought as much
honor to them selves and country. As we read of Fabius Verruscosus (which
for his virtues was called Maximus) which by circumspection, Fabius Maximus.
did so abate the hauty courage of that victorious Hanniball, as among his
friends and companions he would say, that he never knew what war meant,
before he had occasion to encounter with Fabius. Afterward was by the Roman
Senate sent unto Fab. Maximus, Marcellus which likewise was a terror unto
Hanniball. Marcellus. Fabius Clypeus, Marcellus enfis, Romani imperij.
And therefore as he acknowledged Fabius to be his master, and to teach him
to guide an army, so did he confess him self to stand in fear of Marcellus.
Whose wisdom and circumspection was of the Romans so well noted as one of
them, Fabius was called the buckler, the other Marcellus the sword (to cut of
the enemies) of the people of Rome. So that as Cepio and Flaminius, for their
temerity, have been odious: so Fabius, and Marcellus for their circumspection
have been glorious in the eyes of all men. And as to them, so has it, or may
happen unto others.

The causes bringing circumspection are four: to wit Fear: Care, Causes of
Circumspection.
Necessity, and Affection. Fear afflicts, Care compels, Necessity
byndeth, Affection wounds, Fear afflicts, because the grief of coming
into troubles causes a great circumspection in a man. He which has a care of
his business, will by all means labor to have his desire: and therefore it is
said, that care compels a man to be circumspect in his doings. When there
is no way to avoid a mischief, then is he bound by the law of reason to
seek those ways which best may be to his profit. And when a man has a
desire to a thing, and that the same is continually in his mind, that
affection so wounds him at the heart, that he will be careful to get it, and
circumspect in the getting.

Of Providence. Chap. 12.
AN espetiall part of Prudence, is Providence, Providence.
which is defined to be a certain virtue and force of the mind, by which we
foresee a thing before it comes to pass. Chilo a Lacedemon said that the
foresight of things to come, Chilo.
was proper to a prudent man, by that same virtue of which he is denominated.
And therefore some think that this virtue of which Prudence is a part,
Prudentia quasi prouidentia.
should not be called Prudence, but Providence, because that her office
consists espetially in foreseeing things, or in preventing a mischief
before it come. And therein do we differ from brute, Providence in beasts.
and unreasonable creatures, which have no forecaste, but serve the time
present. And yet we read that there is a certain Providence in some beasts,
as in Myce, and Antes. Myce.
It is reported that by nature this providence is given to Myce, that before
any man, Antes.
they will foresee the destruction of an old house, and therefore before the
ruin and fall thereof, will leave the same, and seek a new habitation. And
certain it is that Antes have knowledge, or foresight of imminent miseries
which are not come, and therefore before any famine they labor, and that
diligently for provision: and in summer they store them selves, that in winter
they may not want. But let us leave the examples of beasts* and come to men
again, whom, this Providence makes to seem in respeect of others, Gods,
Minos. Rhadamanthus. Lycurgus. Numa Pompilius.
and to have a divine nature, as were Minos, Rhadamanthus, Lycurgus, Numa
Pompilius and others, which by a singular foresight, brought the rude multitude
unto a civil kind of living. For perceiving that of them selves they were but
men, and that man's authority among the ignorant was little worth, fained each
of them to have had familiarity with some God: and therefore Minos affirmed
that he had consulted with Jupiter: Jupiter, Minos, Rhadam. Apollo, Lycurgi.
Egeria Numae. Vesta, Amolpis. Mercurius, Minyae.
Rhadamanthus with the same Jupiter: Lycurgus with Apollo: Numa Pompilius, with
Egeria Nimphe: Amolpis with Vesta: Minyas with Mercury, and by their counsel
had given laws to their profit, if they obeyed them. Which providence of
theyrs prevailed, and made the people to come under laws, when otherwise they
would not. Great and many have been the praises of this Providence, and
certainly too much in commendation thereof can not be spoken Epicurus standing
in admiration of this virtue* thought the same worthy of honor and veneration,
as the mistress, and commander of the well ordering of this world. Providence
chief
The Poets do say that the chiefest of Jupiters daughters was Providence.
daughter of Jupiter.
And for the excellency hereof, Kings aforetyme, have as it were professed
the art of Providence: supposing that it was a princely thing to have the
knowledge of future things. Among the Romans was a college of wise men called
Augures, Augures.
by whose authority the state of Rome was governed oftentimes. In France there
were a kind of men called* Druidae, Druidae.
which foretold that should happen. Among the Persians those kind of men
were called Magicians: Magicians.
whose authority was such as none of the Kings of Persia, at any time was
created king, except he was known to be profounde in art Magike. But
providence and diuinations, gotten by such wicked means, is not only odious
to honest persons, but also pernicious to the practisers.

Epaminundas, Epaminundas.
a notable captain of Thebes was of ye mind, that he thought all diuinations
and Oracles to be nothing else but the occasins of cowardnes, that so often as
any man were loath to encounter, he might say, that there appeared a vision
unto him in his sleep, which willed him not to fight: or that by the oracle he
was appointed for some other purpose: or by some other sign either of b^ast or
bird, was terrefied from battle. Accius also gave his verdite of these
diuiners and sothsayers, Accius.
his words are these: I give no credit unto these wise men, which sell words
for money, and fill men's ears with vain talk, so to enriche them selves, and
no whit pleasure those which come unto them.

But certainly to have a providence, to tell things to come, by a secreete
gift of nature, is a goodly thing, and such men above others ought to be
admitted into the consultation of great matters: Marry these blind Sothsaiers,
Sothsayers.
as we commonly call them, wise men, are of all men most to be abhorred, as
those which either have entered league with the author of lies the devil, and
so perticipating his nature, can tell no truth: or else depend upon things
uncertain, and so for one truth, tell a hundred falsehoods.

Of Docilitie. Cha. 29.
DOcilitie or a good capacity is a certain virtue of the mind, Docilitie.
by which we quickly conceive, and easily understand those things which are
taught us of another. A good wit may diversely be known according to three
degr^es which it has. The first is of hope: Tokens of a good wit.
the second o^ practicing: the last of perfection. That of hope is in
children* and infants, which in their cradles give a sign of their wit^ that
of practicing appears in young men in learning, which is perceived three
ways, either when they have a desire to learn, and are studious: or when they
quickly conceive which are vttred: or when they faithfully commit them to
mind. These be apparent, and ^^^^ly tokens of a good wit* the other which ^e
in young ones are mute, and give a dumme show, so that certainly we cannot
say they have good wits, but only in hope, and by conjecture: That of
perfection is in the elder sort, when they (...) not only quickly conceive,
and faithfully remember, but also fruitfully put in practice those things
which diligently they have learned. In all persons, an excellent thing. The
praises of Alcibiades were many, Alcibiades.
and yet espetially he was commended for that wheresoever he were, and in what
country soever he soiorned, he could easily frame him self to their manners.
If he were in Lacedemonia, he could be a right Lacedemonian, and could seem as
grave, as painful, and as valiant as the best: In Thracia he would be a
Thracian: In Ionia, he would be as nice, delicate, and wanton* as who was
wantonnest.

M. Antonius.
Such another was M. Antonius. For at Rome, he would live like a Roman* and
would seem a right senator: In Aegipt, who was more licenciously bente? or
could play his part in wickedness more kindly then he? But this kind of
capacity can not be commended. For we coumpt not that a go^d wit which will
easily attain to the perfection of wickedness (for that should be very
hard to learn) but virtue and godliness. Vice, and ungraciousness is
quickly learned, and should not be learned: as that whereunto the dullest is
readdiest to engrafte: Virtue and godliness is hardly learned, and should be
learned: and that the sharpest of wit, is very dull to conceive. Wherefore as
Themistocles answered one which promised a thing to confirm his memory:
Themistocles.
Nay said he, my memory is good enough: and something I had rather learn to
forget, then always remember: so should we say, that to some thing we are by
nature too prone, and can sone conceive, so that we should rather seek to
forget, then study to remember them, as are al kind of ungraciousness and
impiety. Some have this Docilitie of nature: some get the same by diligence.
They which have it by nature, are not always of the best memory. On ye other
side, Docility gotten by industry, though it be hard in conceiving, yet is it
not hasty in forgetting. It is an easy matter to imprint a thing in wax, and
it is more easy to put it out. It is a hard thing, and requires time to
engraue any thing in marble, and it is more hard to take away the same.
Examples we* have of either part many: and the best learned have not conceived
a thing soonest. Demades.
Then Demades who had a better gift quickly to conceive? Nature was
beneficial. And yet in writing who was more foolish? he lacked diligence. Then
Demosthenes in conceauing, Demosthenes,
who was more hard* Nature neglected him. And yet in writing, who was more
excellent? His pains was wonderful. And so it falls out most commonly, to
whom nature has given sharpness of wit, they are most careless, and least
commended in their exercises: again, whom nature has done lest for, and
have the worste capacities, they prove by ^eason of their pains, most
profounde. Then Demosthenes, Demosthenes.
none was more famous among the Grecian orators, and yet extempore he was lest
ingenious. Then Cicero none was more notable among the Roman orators, and yet
to speak upon a soddaine* none was more unwilling, more unfit. It is reported
of him, that among all the orations which he made, but one of them was made ex
tempore without premeditation. Which he did either because he could not, or
would not. Certainly he would not, because he could not: and his
unwillingness arose of his unfitness. How unfit he was it appears by most
of his orations, where he tells with what fear he came to speak before a
multitude. But that is the part of an orator to use a modest excusinge of him
self, (some will say) and that we may not think such a patron of eloquence,
so bare of inuencion, and matter, as that he is not able at all times to make,
yea ex tempore, an oration. Certes he was such a one. And though by study he
was peerless in his art, yet otherwise he could persuade very little, and
abject orators passed him as far, as Demades passed Demosthenes. He should
once have spoken upon small warning, but by an occasion, it was differred
until another day: which news his servant Erotes brought unto him: Erotes.
and it so reioysed him at the heart, that for those news he made Erotes of a
bond man, free, and of a slave a ci^^i^en of Rome. Whereby it is evident, that
upon a soddaine to speak he was no man: and that those his words, in many of
his orations proceeded of an imbecility, which he knew was in him self. So
that it appears of two wits (whereof one is natural, the other gotten by
study) the better in a simple consideration of either of them) is that which
by diligence we attain. Marry when to that gift of Nature we join
diligence, and make that fully perfect, which otherwise is not, then certes
without comparison, it is by many degrees the better. Cicero pro P. Quinctio
Cicero has a notable place, in which he shows that noble persons have the
best capacities, his words be these: Noble men, whether they give them selves
to goodness, Noble me^ of best capacity.
or ungraciousness, in either of them do so excel, as none of our calling
(meaning the baser sort) come any thing nigh them. He spoke by experience. God
grant that all noble, and gentlemen may repel from their hearts all vain
cogitations, and embrace virtue, for certainly (by an espetiall gift of God)
their wits are more quick to conceive any thing then are the ruder, and baser
kind of men. For if they follow the counsel of the learned, and entertain
godly motions into their minds, they are notable examples of blessed men:
contrariwise, when they depart from reason, and neglect good letters: they do
not only excel inferior men in wickedness, but even the very beasts in all
beastliness, and prove devils incarnate. For they have not only a will, but
also a power to bring all yt to pass, which they are desirous: now both joined
together, does either profit much, or overmuch plage a common weal. Wherefore
God grant that they may tame and bridle all unruly affections, and earnestly
tread that pathe which brings to felicity. I may not stand long upon any
part, neither is it my mind fully and at large to discourse every thing,
wherefore having given a light to the vewing of this part of Prudence, and have
as it were by poynting, showed what is Docilitie, and who are most Docile,
learn, and conceive a thing sonest, I come to the next part of Prudence.

Of Heed^. Chap. 14.
Now are we come to another thing without which none may be either named or
judged a wise and prudent man. Heed.
Cic. lib. 4. Tusculan. quest.
It is named in Latin Cautio, in our tongue we call it Heed. Whose nature is
(according to Cicero) with judgment to decline from things hurtful.
Wherefore this is a most necessary thing, as for all men, so espetially for
him whose profession is by fortitude of mind to defend his country* I mean
a captain. Examples we have many, and that of most triumphant and victorious
fellows, which have embraced this as an espetial thing, most meet for him, in
whose prudence remains either the saving or destroying, not only of many a
thousand valiant soldiors, but also famous and noble towns, castles and
contreys.

And therefore we read that Caesar was always so heedefull, Caesar.
and fearful of afterclaps, that he always would have two legions of
soldiors well armed in all points, lying before his tents, which should upon a
soddaine set upon his enemies, if soddainly, or in the night they would seek
his overthrow. Such another was Sertorius, and therefore he took up his
fellow Pompey very much, Sertorius.
for that he was so rash, and heddy not heedefull in his doings, and therefore
he said that ere long was, he would know (for then he was but a young warrier)
that it was the office of a captain, to have as great a care of things which
might happen, as that which he knew had come to pass. C. also Marius in all
his doings was most heedefull, C. Marius.
and by no snares of the enemy, would be brought from a thing once determined.
Oftentimes he was provoked of his enemies in such sort to join battle, as
had he not been of a confirmed judgment, he would have satisfied their
minds. On a time he was sent by the Senate, to fight against one Biorex, a
King of the Cimbrians, Biorex.
and perceiving himself to weak, so prepared him self, as he was out of his
enemies danger. The King perceiving he could not encounter, sent unto Marius,
and wylled him to bring his army into the open field, that so they might
finish their contention. Marius answered, that it was not the manner of the
Romans to encounter at the pleasure and time appointed by the enemy, but
rather to stay until a fit opportunity were offered. But said he, signify
unto your King, that by this time to morrow, I will meet him. And so by great
heed overcame the huge army of the Cimbrians. Again at another time he went
against Popilius Siloe, (which for his great prowes was so termed of his
enemies) and having placed his army upon the top of an hill, Popilius Siloe.
and lyngring because of his weakness, Siloe cried unto him and said, If
thou beeste a man of thine hands Marius, and have any heart, come down, and
fight with me. But that callenge nothing prevailed with Marius, for he
answered: If thou art such a fellow as thou art accoumpted to be, compel
me perforce to come down, otherwise I promise thee, it is not my mind until
I see time and place* as I desire to fight and encounter. Which heed of his
made Siloe and all his crew, to come under the subjection of the Romans. Not
like those mad brains, which think their ^^edite is crakt, and that among
men they are deemed but cowards, if when they are challenged, they go not into
the field. And therefore contrary unto Heed is Temerity, Temerity.
a foolishness which runs all upon the head, and neither obeys reason,
nor the persuasion of friends, nor the wholesome counsel of any man. As the
other rayseth a good opinion of him which is heedefull, and causes all men to
reverence and regard him for his wisdom: so this makes a man to be coumpted
but a light brain, and no man esteems him for his temeritie and
foolishness. And therefore to those which I have already spoken of C. Caesar,
Sertorius, and Marius, are opposed Otho an Emperor, C. Curio and others no
less defamed for their temerity, Otho. C. Curio.
then they were mightily extolled for their Heed and wisdom. Otho by his
great rashness so foiled him self, and defaced the glory of the Romans,
that it was almost extinguished. And therefore being ashamed of himself,
desperately dispatched himself* and had rather die in such sort, then live in
shame. Curio by his hastiness, did not only himself to be slain, but his
whole army also to be utterly destroyed. For fighting against Vtica, which
was defended by Accius Varus, Vtica Accius Varus*
an ambassador of Pompey, word was brought him that king Iuba was coming
against him with an huge army, Iuba.
by reason of which news, he brake up his siedge, and removed his tents: by
and by came certain r^ages, and runawayes (by great policy sent from his
enemies) which told him that he needed not fear the coming of Iuba, for he
was returned back into his country, and meant nothing less then to come
against him. To which he straight gave credit. But in the end it proved
nothing so, for Iuba hastening soddainly, set upon him, killed him, and
overcame his army. If Curio had looked about him carefully, and not rashly
given credit unto the vain words of subtle fellows, happily he might have
gotten Vtica, and atcheiued great renown unto him self, beside the* salfegard
of so many valiant Romans. Wherefore great care ought to be had both how to
attempt any thing, and whom we believe. Fair tongues, oftentimes work
mischief. In all times and chances, too much heed can not be had, least by
the example of those recited men, we fall into reprehension. And not only
warned by others peryls and calamities, but by the example of brutishe
creatures, we should learn to be heedefull, which by nature have thi^ given
them, as an espetiall gift, that they do beware of mischeife, and defend
them selves, and their young ones from the invasions of enemies. Now to the
rest.

Of VVarynesse. Chap. 15.
THe Perip^tecions, and also the ancient Academikes to those above recited
parts of Prudence, ad five more, to wit, Warynesse, Craftynesse, Subtlety, and
Equity, so that it consists in eleven parts, which orderly shall be
manifested. And first of Warynesse, which in Latin is called Sagacitas.
Warynesse.
This is the scholemaster of upright vnderstanding^ And therefore the
Philosophers do say, yt as it is the part of a wise man, wisely to consult and
give counsel: so is it the duty of a wary m^n well to conceive, and
uprightly to judge. For Sagire (from whence ^omes Sagacitas) which is called
Sagenes, ^agire.
o^ warynesse) signifies to be of quick judgment of sense: whereof comes
this phrase Sagae anus: and Sagaces canes, because they can smell out a thing,
and that quickly. Also, he that tells of a thing before it happen is said to
presage. To presage.
And therefore by divine inspiration, to many is given this part of Prudence,
so that they are said to presage, and for the same are highly accoumpted of
among men. Cicero says, that the nature of this virtue is by the senses of the
body to smell out a thing, even as dogs do* whereof they are called Sagaces
canes, as I said before. So that a wise man is then coumpted sage, and wary,
when he rightly does judge of things which are to be done hereafter. For
Sagacitie pertayneth to those things which we are about to do, by smelling
them out. Those which have this gift of smelling out things imminent, are
much to be reverenced. Minutius.
And therefore notable is that saying of Minutius a Roman captain unto his
soldiors. Oftentyme, I have heard, soldiors, that he is the best and most
excellent man, which is endued with that discretion, that in all extremities,
he can give him self that counsel which is profitable* The next is he which
wyllingly receaueth good counsel* But he which can neither give, nor take
counsel, he is to be judged most unhappy. We therefore because we have not
that wisdom, that we are able to counsel wisely, will embrace the mean:
and though we have not dexterity of wit wis^^y to judge: yet did we not lack
will, gladly to obey good counsel. A saying worthy to be followed of all those
which have neither wit in showing dangers at hand, nor will to embrace that
is profitablie spoken of their friends.

Of VVylynesse, Craftynesse, and Subtlety. Chap. 16.
Having declared ye nature of Warynesse, we are now come to ye rest. Of which
because they have great affini^ie, and seem to have but one, and the same
signification, we will but m^ke one chapter. The difference betwee^^
Craftynesse, and Wylynesse, is, because the one is in dexterity of wit,
Wylynesse.
natur^ll^ the other is gotten by experience. Tho first is called Versutia,
Versutia* Craf^^n^sse Cal^i^itas.
and those Versuti, which can easily conceive, by reuoluing things in their
mind: the latter is called Calliditas, and those Callidi, whose mind by
practice is so hardened, even as the hand of a workman by great labor, and has
gotten as it were another skin by continual occupying. And so says Cicero*
But more properly to speak Wylynesse in dark speech: Cicero. lib. 3 de
Natura Deor*
and Craftynesse in counsayling, and in our affairs is perceived. Example of
the first we have many, as are all doubtful speech of men, and all the
oracles of Apollo, which diversely might be understood. As was that of Apollo,
Apollo. Craesus*
to Craesus which consulting whether he might pass the river Halys or no,
this answer was made him that he passinge Halys, should make shipwreck of
much wealth: (which being doubtful, and might be understood either of the
loss of his own or enemies wealth) persuaded himself that he might safely
adventure, and that his going should be the cause of the loss of his enemies
goods: but he was deceived, and through a vain confidence sustained the
damage of all his wealth, his enemies being saulfe. Of the latter, may Rhascus,
and Rhascopolis two brethren, Rhascus and Rhascopolis.
be examples. For when the Roman army (whereof part was conducted by Cassius,
the other by Antonius) would come through their dominions, Cassius. Antonius.
doubting the worst for faufegard of them selves, they consulted how they
might with the favor of the Romans, have the rule of their contries: their
consultation took this effect, that they should feign them selves deadly
foes, and sworn enemies each to other, yea, and gather each of them an
army: and one of them to take part with Cassius, the other with Antonius,
that so he that was vanquished should be saved by his brother.

There is another which has a great affinity with these former. Subtlety.
and last mentioned part of Prudence, which is called Subtlety, in Latin
Astutia. It is called Astutia, Astutia
from a city which was called Astu: whereof it comes that Astutia, Astu.
which we call in our tongue Subtlety, shall be a certain civil craftiness.
And therefore it is defined to be a certain crafty wisdom, gotten by daily
practice in civil matters. Hanniball*
Hanniball may be an example hereof. On a time being overcome by Julius a
consul of Rome* sent word secreetely to the senate of Carthage to know their
minds, whether it were best to set upon the Romans or no, word was returned,
that they thought it best, with all speed to gather his men together, and
again ^o wage battle. Hanniball by long pra^^ice and great experience, knew
(notwithstanding his coloring) what was ^est to be done, and therefore he
thought good to stay for a time and not suddenly give the onset. The Senators
pondring his words, did not so much, as in countenance contrary him, but
wyllingly went into his opinion. This civil wisdom d^e^h not only beautify a
man's honesty, and makes him in all things which he takes in hand heedefull and
circumspect, but also increases our eloquence, and makes us to speak with
great attentio^ of these which hear us: and then it leaves the name of
Subtlety, and is called Civility, because that by a civil accompanying of
our neyghbors, we attain by custom, a certain kind of pleasant talk. But
to come nigher to our purpose. It may seem strange, that we ascribe unto
Prudence, the most principal of the virtues, Wylynesse, Craftiness, and
Subtlety, which are coumpted vices, unsitting for a wise man* For who does
not execrate and abhor him, whose dealinges are not plain, and simple, but
crafty and subtle? Objection.
Or compare all the behauiors of every man, and tell how many virtuous and
godly do delighte in those names, or would seem wyly, crafty, and subtle?
Again what wicked man is there which cloaketh not his knavery under some shift
or other? So that it seems odious to a good man to have this name of
subtilty. etc. And therefore how can these parts be comprehended under
Prudence, when as none takes any pleasure in them, but only persons
ungracious? But certainly as they are to be abhorred when they are used to
wicked purposes: Solution.
so are they to be embraced as evident signs of an excellent wit, when they be
referred to honest ends. For who does not commend that subtle policy of
Apelles, Apelles. Antigonus.
which painting the image of Antigonus (which had but one eye) because the
deformity of his blindness should not be perceived, he made him to stand of the
one side, and and so by art seemed to be a worthy person, to want no gift of
nature? Or who does not like of those crafty devises which Physicians
oftentimes do use, Physicians
and under the show of honny, will give their patients gaul, and so under
such shifts for their health sake defend them: whereas if they went plainly to
work, the sick would never take that which were wholesome, if vn^othsome?
Or that of Zeno who to deliver his fellow citizens from thraldom, Zeno.
devised a notable policy? for being after his conspiracye taken, was by
tormentors most cruelly afflicted, that so by pains he might confess all such
as were of his counsel: whereby first he accused the tyrants most dear
friends, and caused them presently before his face to be executed like
traitors: afterward telling the tormentors that he had some weighty thing to
inform the king of, desired that he might speak a word or two in* the kings
ear, who coming unto him, and listening what he would say, by the biting of
Zeno lost his ear, which Zeno spit in his face. Which devise of his made a
gap to Zenos contreimen, to set them selves free from servitude and slavery.
And so they did, for seeing the tyrant to have done to death his dee^e friends
set upon him, and with stones in the market place killed him. Again who does
not abhor those persons which beat their brains to the increase of
wickedness, and by subtle slight bring many into misery? And therefore they
are much to be praised, which would never seek ye ruin of any town, army or
country, but only by mere fortitude, not by snares, shifts, and subtlety.
And as greatly is Alexanders praise, Alexander.
which being counseled by Parmenio his servant, by snares and subtlety to
seek the subversion of his enemies, Parmenio.
said name Parmenio, My estate will not suffer me so to do, but if I were
Parmenio, I might do so. Anotable answer.

Of Equity and Righteousness. Chap. 17.
THe last part of Prudence is called Equity. Equity.
Which is a right judgment of that which is good and honest: Or else it is a
more gentle sentence given to malefactors, then commonly the laws do give.
For this Equity judges with lenity: the laws with extremity. But some will
say hear is no place to talk of punishing or pardoning, of Justice, or
Equity, for that belongs to Justice, whereof no mention has been made.
Certes it may seem so. Naturalis Iustitia, Legalis.
But herein I follow the judgment of the best learned, which distinguish
Justice, and say there is a Justice natural, and there is a Justice legal.
The legal Justice is that written law according to which common judges give
sentence: the natural justice is that discretion, which every prudent and
wise man, is endued withal, whereby he driven thereunto through consideration of
circumstances, does oftentimes make things bitter, sweet, great and
dangerous, easy: heinous and horrible, either not so at all, or not so
horrible as they are supposed to be. This natural iustic^ (as I said) is in
the mind of every wise man: and therefore the Peripatecions number it among
those things, without which none may he called a Prudent man. To this
equity some ioygne Equanimitie, Equanimitie.
which is called of the Grecians (...), which is a certain tranquillity of the
mind, by which in adversity, we do not through grief and thought hurt our
selves: nor in prosperity exult and rejoice over much. For this virtue have
many heard well, espetially Socrates, Socrates. Antonius. Xantippe.
and Antonius an Emperor, that I may leave others. Xantippe, the wife of
Socrates, said that her husband always kept one countenance, she could never
see him by his countenance at any time over sad, or exceeding merry. The like
is reported of Antonius Caesar. Sceptici. 1. Consideratores cuius sectae erane
Pyrrho, et Aristo.
There was a sect of Philosophers named Sceptici, which in the quietness of
mind put the greatest felicity, and thought him to be most happy, which in a
constant soberness, excelled other men. But I leave to speak any more hereof,
because I have touched it in my discourse of Perturbations, where I spoke of
Pleasure, and shall talk more of this hereafter among the virtues, when I shall
explicate the nature of true Fortitude. And thus much brieflye of Prudence,
judged of the Philosophers the most excellent virtue, and therefore first
placed, the next is Temperance, whose nature shall now he described.

Of Temperance, and her parts. Chap. 18.
Now are we to describe, Temperance.
what is Temperance, as we have already shown what is Prudence. Therefore
generally first we will speak thereof, particularly afterward every part of
Temperance shall be declared. Cicero in partionibus Ora^orijs.

Virtues of what sorts


Cicero deuideth all virtues in two sorts, and calls them either virtues of
knowledge, or of conversation. Those of knowledge he calls Prudence, and
Wisdom: wisdom he says only consists in contemplation: Prudence in the
knowledge of common matters. And that he calls in diverse considerations
Domestical, and civil. Domestical when every private man does prudently
consider of his own affairs: and Civil when we bend our selves to the
profiting of the weal public. To our conversation he says, does belong
Temperance, only under which he comprehends Justice, and Fortitude, as
branches of the same Temperaunce, and under those he contains all those
virtues of which hereafter we shall speak. But me thinks he does not
properly talk of Temperance, as one of the four principal virtues, but
rather as they do consist in a mean, between two mischiefs. But Temperance
is otherwise to be understood. For the learned have divided virtue into four
parts principally, to wit, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice,
which they would never have done, had not Temperance some espetial
consideration as the other have. And this is gathered by the definitions, and
duties of Temperance. It is defined to be a virtuous habit of the mind,
Temperance what.
whereby we abstain from all vain and pestilent pleasures, both of mind and
boddie. And this does agree with that definition of Cicero, in his offices,
where he says, Temperance is the ruler of all troublesomnesse of mind, and a
strong subduer of al vain pleasures. Whereby it appears, that as it is the
part of Prudence justly to discern good from evil: The office of Temperance.
so is it of Temperance to abstain, and that always from hurtful things.
Aristotle says, It is the property of Temperance, to consist in those things
which belong to the keeping of life in man's body, and using the pleasures
thereof moderatly. And therefore he says it is a certain mean about things
belonging to the pleasures of the boddie, as tasting, feeling, hearing,
smelling, and seeing. And therefore said Plotinus very well, that it was the
office of Temperance, to covet nothing whereof it should afterward repent
her, and in no case to go beyond the bounds of wisdom prescribed. If I
should recite the praises which are ascribed unto this virtue, I should make a
volume thereof, but having another thing in hand, I will plainly without any
Rhetorical discourse talk thereof* leaving her commendations unto them which
have the leisure of a Philosopher, and the wit of an orator: but this I say, to
much to her praise cannot be spoken: as y^ which is enemy to all pestiferous
pleasures, and a friend to all virtuous exercises. Which is gathered from the
etymology of this word Temperance. For it is called Temperance, because it
keeps a mean in all those things which belong to the delighting of the
boddie. And he is called a Temperate man, Who Temperate.
which desires nothing but that he ought, when he ought, and as he ought: and
in all his doings sets honesty before his eyes, as a mark to level the
bow of his cogitations, and shote the darts of his desires unto. Therefore
Temperance is contrary to pleasure, if it be not honest: and Temperate men are
contrary to those, who set their whole delight in the vain pleasures of the
beastly boddie. This Temperance by the mouth of Prudent Solon cries, (...),
Solon.
Ne quid nimis, Nothing to much, nor to often. We have a pretty saying in our
English tongue, too much of one thing, is good for nothing. Observe a mean,
and then shall you be that Temperate man, of which we do here talk, a notable
member in a common weal, for by Temperance he embraces Modesty,
Shamefastness, Parts of Temperance.
Abstinencie, Continency, Pudicitia, Honesty, Moderation, Sparingnesse, and
Sobriety: without which Temperance can not be. And that he may the better
entertain them. I will declare the properties of them all.

Of Modesty. Chap. 19.
Modesty is a virtue, teaching a man how to rule his affections, and in all
his actions to keep a mean. Modesty.
And therefore is it called Modesty, because it keeps a mean, and does
neither want, nor exceed in any thing. It is perceived by the looks and
countenance of a man, for by the same we way gather oftentimes the disposition
of any. Again as in our countenance, so in all our conuersations, Modesty
should be seen. For this virtue have many in all ages been greatly
commended, and because their examples may continually remain in mind, I will
recite of infinite certain, and a few of a great number, as well princes as
private men, which by their virtue have got immortal and everlasting fame.
Such a one was Philip the father of Alexander the great: Philippus Macedoniae.
For by this virtue he took in good part those bitter words of dogged
Diogenes, Diogenes.
which said unto king Phillip, that he came therefore into his camp, because
he would mark the behauior of him, and note his insatiable covetousness. For
had he not been of great modesty, he would have torn in pieces Diogenes, for
his bold, and presumptuous talk: but comparing the sayings of Diogenes, with
his own cogitations, supposed he spoke of good will, and did bear with his
boldness.

Of no less modesty was the son of the same Philip, Alexander the great,
for having lovingly desired the same Diogenes, Alexander.
to leave his kind of life, and to come to his court at Macedonia: Diogenes.
Diogenes wrote back after this manner: Diogenes to Alexander, the King of the
Macedonians, wishes good luck: you did very well to write your self King of
the Macedonians, for you knew very well that Diogenes ought you none
obedience: you wryghte that I should come unto you. But wherefore? If because
you would see me, surely you can take no pleasure in beholding me, for I am
no such man of person: But if you do because you would profit in good
manners, you may very well bestow your pains in coming to me. For know
Alexander, that it is no farther from Macedonia to Athens, then from Athens to
Macedonia. Fare well.

What wise man would thus answer a noble Prince, desirous to profit in the
study of virtue? Or what man of power would patiently bear such contemptuous
words, of so vile an abiecte? And yet such was the rare modesty of good
Alexander, that he bare with his rudeness, and said nothing.

Greater then Alexanders, was that of Antigonus: for after that he was by Q.
Scipio, deprived of his kingdom, and placed over a very little Nation,
Antigonus.
was so far from troubling him self, with remembrance of his former
dignity, that he said that the Romans did then seek his profit, when they
committed a small people to his government. For said he, the greatest kings,
have the greatest cares: and the remembrance of their peoples complaints, will
not suffer them quietly to rest. Again, the less charge, the less care: and
therefore he could not sufficiently thank the Romans, for giving him the
government of so few people, and if they had altogether spoiled him of all
authority, he would have given them greater thanks. A notable example. And
was not that Modesty of Tiberius the Emperor worthy imitation? which being
counsayled of his friends, Tiberius Caesar.
to set great taskes, and to demand many subsidies of his subjects, Nay
said this good Emperor, It is the part of a good shephearde, to shere his
sheep, not to sley them, and so to sley them. He was of that modest nature
that he would not, no not at the suit of his friends violate the office of a
prince. Being in so good a matter I will proceed in reciting a few more
examples of those which by this virtue have purchased goodwyll of men by report
of good wrighters. Who does not wonder at (but who will imitate) that exceeding
modesty of C. Marius, C. Marius.
which by the people of Rome (in reward of his virtues) being appointed twice
to triumph would not so do alone, but divided the glory between him and
Catulus fellow officer with him? Catulus.
Contrary to all the ambitious, Hanniball.
Hanniball for his goodness of nature was much commended especially because he
used gentell speech and showed frendelye countenance unto all men: and also
because in his fare he did not excede. Dio likewise the Syracusane, Dio
Syracusanus.
by modesty has got immortalit^y. It is reported of him that he was of so
good a nature, that after he was placed in the throne of a king, and ruled the
Syracusans: he would never change, his accustomed fare and apparel which he
was wont to were being a student in the university. To keep him in the same
virtuous mind, his master Plato wrote unto him, That it was his part and office
to think him self so long to be glorious in the sight of all men, as long as
he was gracious unto Philosophers, which only addicted them selves to the
knowledge and contemplation of good things, Philosophers.
which would counsel him to nothing but that were profitable to him and his:
and commend him for nothing but for his virtues: they would not flatter him for
preferment, nor favor him in wickedness: sworn enemies to common courtiers.
Such was the modesty of Cato (which for the deadly hatred he bare to
wickedness was called Severe) that coming to a common play (where many
immodest examples to the corrupting of well disposed persons, Cato Seuerus.
are showed) a harlot, being before his comminng naked in the sight of all the
standers by, suddenly covered her bare and would not gesture it any more: and
being demanded why she was so ashamed, said, Cato is in presence. By which it
appears that the true modesty of an honest man, strikes more shame, then the
sight of many wicked and immodest persons can stir to filthynsse. To conclude
this part of Temperance (because I have more to speak of, and may not stand
much upon one thing) the Persians to imprint a deep consideration of modesty
in their childrens minds, Persians.
made a law that once every day the boys should show them selves before the
seniors, and rulers of their contrie, that by their grave looks, they might be
terrefied from light behavior, and should the better learn to be modest in
all their doings. And thus much of Modesty.

Of Shamefastness. Chap. 20.
THe next part of Te^perance is Shamfastnes, which is a ceraine natural
Blushing, Shamefastness.
by which we are afraid, and a^hamed to commit any thing which is not honest.
Between Blushing and Shamefastness there is a certain difference, Blushing.
although they may seem to have one and the same nature. For Blushing
commonly is judged to be a fear coming of a guiltye conscience: but
Shamefastness of honest things: and therefore by this we fly the company of
our betters, not because (as it is commonly said, Qui male agit odit lucem)
they are not of our disposition, but through a certain reverence: Again*
Socrates, which could abide no filthy talk, Socrates^
or any rybaldrye: but as often as he heard the same, he would stop his ears.
And therefore it may very well be called the maker of good manners. Again,
it is the thing which causes us to be vigilant in all our affairs. For by it
we had rather do any thing, then he surpassed in any virtuous exercise. And
oftentimes it comes to pass, that such as neither by the counsel of their
friends lovingly adhorting: nor by the persuasion of prudent men, diligently
provoking: nor by the admonitions of Magistrates, sharply rebuking: nor by the
threatninge of laws, most severely foreshewing cruel punishment for
looseness of behauior, it comes to pass I say, that with whom none of these
can prevail, and bring into good minds, by fear of perpetual disprayse of
the world, which we think to be Shamefacenesse, are called from vice to
virtue: and from a dissolute behauior, to discrete conversation.

We read of Theseus, Theseus.
that through this virtue, he bent all his cogitations to the imitation of
Hercules, and for fear of shame of the world, became first industrious,
afterward glorious. The like is reported of Themistocles, whom nothing could
put in mind of his loose Themistocles.
behauior, no not the counsel of well wyllers: nothing could bring from
pernicious company, no not the loving words of her which brought him into this
world, no not ye death of his mother procured by conceit of his wicked
behauior: and yet when none of these could prevail, shame of him self made
him forsake impiety, and embrace virtue, and so became the most excellent in
all good qualities, that was among the Athenians. What made among the Grecians,
Demosthenes. Demosthenes. Cicero.
Cicero among the Roman orators so excellent, but only this virtue? for
knowing well enough what they might attain unto, if they would be studious,
and again considering that to neglecte those gifts wherewith they were endued
withal, was altogether impious, having this in mind, I say, even with
conscience moved, and shame of them selves, did with tooth and nail, endeavor
to amend those faults which were in them, and likewise to adorn those
virtues wherewith they were endued withal: and so proved by pains, perfect
patrones of pure eloquence.

Tarquinius Priscus prince of the Romans, Tarquinius Priscus.
began such a piece of work, as the like for magnificall buyldinge, was not
extante in all the world, nor hardly could he conceived in the mind of man.
This work was so long before it could be finished, and so dangerous in
doing, as many werryed with turmoyles, desperately cast^ violent hands upon
them selves, and so had rather to end their lives, then with such a endless,
and infinite labor consume them selves.

When Tarquinius heard thereof, he caused the dead carcasses of those
desperate men to be set upon gibbets, to the vewe of all comers bye, in the
market place. Which policy of his, turned the minds of his workmen, and
through thinking least their bodies after their death should be made spectacles
to their brethren, and a pray for birds, altered thyr minds, and refused no
pains afterward to the hastening of his building foreward. But of this no
more, because of the same, in my former book of Perturbations were I spoke of
Blushing, I made mention.

Of Abstinencie, and Continency. Cha. 21.
OF the two next virtues (Abstinencie, and continency) we will make but one
Chapter, because they seem to have small difference in sense, though in sound
they have, and yet both in sound, and sense they differ somewhat. Abstinencie*
For Abstinencie is a kind of Temperance, whereby we subject under the power
of reason our appetite, when it is allured unto unlawful delectation, by the
inticement of those things which are in our possession.

Continency is a keeping of our selves from those things which are not to be
coueted. Continency.
The difference between them is. The one Abstinencie consists in the having
our appetite: the oother Continency, in tempering our lusts of the flesh.
Examples we have of either, many: espetially of Abstinencie, Paulus Aemylius,
and L. Mummius: P. Aemylius. L. Mummius. Amabaeas.
of Continency Amabaeas a Musicon, Bellerophon, Xenocrates, and Scipio. The
abstinencie of P. Aemylius, was perceived when he had subdued cities. For
notwithstanding, he had in his hands the possession of many famous cities,
and might do with the substance in them what he would, yet did he convert
none of those goods to his private commodity, but gave commandment unto his
men, to conueigh them to the common treasure house of Rome, and there should
remain readdie, to supply the want of his native country, if necessity
required.

L. Mummius for the same quality, L. Mummius.
is likewise commended. And that this was truly reported of him, it is
manifest, because that in Delos, being a banished man* he dyed most poorly:
which he would have seen unto, had he not been right abstinent, and contemned
all worldly mucke, in respect of his honesty. Again of the other side, as
these are notable patrones of Abstinencie, so those before recited are as
famous for their Continency, in containing from the sinful desires, of the
rebelious flesh. Wonderful and strange (I will not say to be imitated) was
that Continency of Amabaeas, Amabaeas.
which having a wife of rare and surpassing beauty, would never have
cop^lation with her. But more worthy to be followed (although less worthy to
be wondered at) was the Continency of Bellerophon, which being not a little by
strange means allured by Antea, ^elleropho^. Antea. Pretus.
the wife of King Pretus to lie with her, did altogether refuse the same, and
contained him self from violating the bed of his Lord, at whose hands he
had found much courtesy. The like is reported in the holy scripture of Joseph.
But fear of death caused that Continency. Joseph.
I think not, but rather care of a pure, and unpolluted conscience,
Conscieence.
which never will he purged without a strange and unfeigned repentance, from
the filthiness of the fact, which would continually have been object to their
eyes, so yt they should a thousand times have wished that it had never been
committed. For the pleasure passes, the pain pincheth continually. But if the
fear of punishmente were the cause, it cannot be misliked: but they are to be
commended therefore, and may strike a shame to those, which without all fear
(I do not say of God, for that is least in our minds, and should never be
forgotten) of punishment in this world, care not whom they pollute, be they
for authority never so high, for consanguinitie or friendship never so nighe
unto them.

But let us proceed, (for of this matter we spoke before when we talked of
Lust, in our former book) If so rare examples, not only of true and
faithful friendship, but of pure boddies, and unpolluted minds were Joseph
and Bellerophon, for not corrupting their Queens, and wives to their friends,
then how much are Xenocrates and Scipio to be extoled, Xenocrates.
which contained themselves from committing fornication with their inferiors,
when they might have used them at their pleasures? Xenocrates.
For Xenocrates being placed in bed by a fair woman (but of surpassing bewty)
and she with many toys (incident to harlots) intycing him to enter league
with her, was so far from satisfying her mind, that the more earnest she
was in desiring, the more vigilante he was in containing: and the more lust
she declared to Venerie, the more loathe he was to commit such Villainy, but
lay beside her as hot as a marble, in the coldeste time of winter. Yea, but
he was a Philosopher, and therefore less maruayle, though he were continent.
Truth it is, and therefore a shame to all wise, and learned men which are
incontinent. And I say, he was an infidel, and yet by philosophy and reason,
he persuaded him self that fornication was hurtful to the boddie, and
damnable to the soul, and therefore at the day of judgment shall rise to
their confusion, which are Christians, and yet neither by diuinitye, nor
religion, will be in that mind, to thin^e that either fornication, or
adultery, is either hateful to God, or shall be hurtful to them selves in the
time of vengeance.

Well, Scipio was no Philosopher, by profession, but a warri^r, Scipio.
(a strange thing, that one of that sort, should be so pure from unchaste
cogitations) and yet being of the age of three and twenty years, and having
brought under the subjection of the Romans, a city in Spain, a certain
Damsel without comparison among all the captives, most bewtifull, was
brought unto him, for delectation, after all his troubles. But Scipio, before
he would receive any recreation at her hands, demanded what she was: which,
when he understood her to be espowsed unto a young man called Luceius,
Luceius.
he thought it a shame for him to use her company, beyond honesty: and so with
many precious gifts and iewelles, sent her saufely conducted to her husband,
that should be.

This continency of Scipio, passes all the rest. For who would think that a
warrier, from a woman: a lusty young man, from a bewtifull maiden: a
conqueror, from a captive having time, place, and permission (so that without
controlement of any man, he might have used her) would contain him self, all
things falling so in the nicke? And yet this noble warrier, lusty youth, and
victorious conqueror, entered not familiaritye with this woman, this bewtifull
maiden, and captive, because she had given her troth to another. O
unspeakable virtue, and most wonderful continency of this noble Scipio,
which so preferred honesty before lechery: chastity before incontinencie:
and a faithful promise, before sinful pleasure. I may not in Rhetorical
manner enlarge this matter (and yet too much can not be spoken to his praise)
and therefore I leave it.

By this then it appears, that between Continency, and Abstinencie* there
is great similitude, Incontinencie.
and that they have so, it is evident by their contrary. For Incontinencie is
indifferently referred unto either of them. We call him incontinent which
either keeps no measure in the coveting of worldly things, or can not
contain him self from the effects of fleshly desires. Now because I have
illustrated the former part with examples, I will also make this part
confirmed by the like. And therefore opposite to th^se men above recited, are
these women (for most commonly women are worste bent, and we find of all the
best historiographers, least spoken to their praise) most incontinent which
follow, namely Messalina, wife unto the Emperor Claudius, and Popilia daughter
of Marcus. Messalina was so incontinent, that she could not content her self
(I will not say, with her husband, Messalina.
whom she cared least for) with her youthful gentlemen of her chamber,
about the court, but she would go to common houses, where most whordome
was committed, and there contend with most shameless harlottes, in their
abominable exercise.

If I should recite what I have red of this notorious and notable strumpet, I
should not observe the precepts of those two virtues Modesty and
Shamefastnes, immediately in the former chapters declared. But Temperance wyls
me to stay my hand, and tells me it is a sin to wright that which with out
shame she did commit. The incontinencie of Popilia also was such, Popilia.
as being told of her insatiable lechery, and that it might strike a
perpetual terror into her mind, for one of her calling, which should give
good example to inferior persons of honest conversation, yet without respect of
time, place, or persons would prostrate her self before those, of which, if
for no other cause, yet because of her birth, and their baseness she might be
ashamed: Being thus lovingly by a faithful friend admonished did answer,
that she did but according to her kind, and that nature had given that power
unto man (not so unto other creatures) that they might at al times come
together at their pleasure: and therefore considering it was natures will she
accoumpted her self, and would be judged a beast, if she did not as often as
she could satisfy her lust. But we will omit particular persons.

The Corinthians for this Incontinencie, have been evil spoken of. Corinthians.
For they cast all honesty so behind their backs, that they would take their
own daughters, and make them harlottes to marchantes and strangers in their
country, that so they might enriche them selves, and their country. Hereof
came this proverb, It was not for every man to go to Corinthe: for they paid
well for their pleasure.

The Babylonians also were greatly spotted with this vice of Incontinencie:
Babylonians
for once in a year they licenced their wives, daughters and maidens, to go
unto the temple of Venus, which stood by the sea coaste, and there should
refuse none which offered them selves, and would use them.

The Tyrrhenians are more incontinent then any. Tyrrhenians.
For they will not only have to do with their wives openly, and lie in the
common streates, but as though they were unmarried like brute and sauadge
beasts without all reason turned one to another. The like is reported of the
Messagetans. Messagetans.


But what stand I upon this point? Or what good nature can abide to hear
them recyted without blushing? and therefore I contain my self from speaking
any more of Incontinencie.

Of Chastetie. Chap. 22.
IN this chapter we mean to talk of Chastety, and that which is called in
Latin Pudicitia together, because in signification they are almost one, and
therefore not seldom they are confounded. Such affinity they have that how
to express this word Pudicitia in English otherwise I know not, then by the
name of Chastety. Hereby is perceived the barrennes of our tongue which
oftentimes geues to many things one appellation. Well, in sense there is a
difference. For by Chastety is understood a general chastisment of all the
troublesome perturbations. Chastetie*


And therefore does Varro take a chaste man, both for him that is religious,
and godly man: and also for him which is an abstinent man, and him which is of
good conversation.

Again, we take him or that to be chaste which is pure and incorrupt. And
therefore we say him to have chaste ears, which cannot abide to hear that
which is dishonest. And he is said to to talk chastely which talks properly
of any thing, whose words are pure without affectation, or usual in common
speech, or approved of the best. Now, Pudicitia is more stricte, Pudicitia.
and does not stretch, so far because it is referred only to the
vnpollutinge of the boddye, as the thing which in no case will suffer the
boddye to be defiled. So that it seems to be a kind of Chastety. For
Chastety is the rule or patron how a man may lead an honest and virtuous
conversation. But Pudicitia is only about Veneriall matters. Both of these
virtues have brought great renown to men, as women: but espetially they
adorn women, and in time paste to be endued with Chastity, (for that shall
comprehend the other) has been thought no small commendation.

Which appears by the great care, which in times past women have had of
keeping their good name, supposing them selves, having that to be well enough,
though they had nothing, and again without that, though they had all thing,
yet was it coumpted of them as nothing.

This made Lucretia not for to care for this world, Lucretia.
after that her boddie was once defiled. We read of certain Spartane Virgins,
in number fifty, Spartanae virgins.
being sent for their health sake, to the Messanians, among whom after they
had soiorned a while, they were marueylouslye provoked unto whoredom, but they
calling into mind the pretiousnesse of Maidenhoode, rather choase to be
slain, then once would, condescende to their desires: so that of those fifty,
not one was found which would yield her self to the lust of the
Messanians. We read also of a Theban maid, which being much allured unto
copulation by Nicanor, Nicanor.
in whose power she was, for he had brought Thebes and all the inhabitants
thereof into servitude, rather then she would grant unto his wicked request,
took a sword and slew her self.

Methridates a king of Pontus, being overcome of the Romans, Methridates.
kept him self cloase from the sight of all men, and because his daughter
named Diripentina, was troubled with sickness, Dirapentina.
and therefore could not depart with him, he committed her unto the custody
of one Menophilo an Eunuche, Menophilo.
which kept a castle named Gynorium. It happened that by the carfulness and
diligence of Menophilo, she recovered her self. Now the Romans persecuting
Methridates, came and besieged his castle, governed by the Eunuch: which
perceiving that his power was not long to keep the castle from his enemies,
and again calling to mind the unmercifulness of his adversaries, which
without all pittye would misuse all such as came in their claws, espetially
those of whom Methridates did make most acoumpte: and above all tendringe the
honesty of Diripentina, was in mind, that of them the Romans should never
have their will. And therefore took a sword, and killed her whose Chastetie
was his care, and afterward berefte him self of life.

Tentorian women.
The chastety of the wives of the Tentorians was wonderful, for after that C.
Marius had subdued and slain their husbands, and they by their suit could not
obtain to be ascribed among the Vestall virgins, shortly after, each of them
took anhaulter, and so (doubtinge least they should not keep them selves
free from the assaults of carnal men) honge them selves.

Pythagoras had a daughter excellent well learned, Pythagoras daughter.
which did not only profess chastetie in common schools, but also all her
life time most chastely behaved her self, and never knew man. Great was the
modesty of Armenia, wife unto Tygranes. Armenia. Tigranes.
For being once at a banquet with her husband, at the house of King Cyrus,
Cyrus.
where every boddie much commended Cyrus for his comlynesse of person, her
husband after they were returned home, asked her what she thought of Cyrus
majesty in countenance. Truly answered she, I am able to say nothing, for
I never cast mine eyes from you all the banquet while. But that example which
follows is more strange. Hiero a Syracusane king, reprehended of one of his
acquaintance, Hiero Syracusanus.
because of his stinking breath: answered that before that time, he never
knew so much: being returned home, be fell a chiding with his wife, because
she never would seek remedy therefore, or at the least give him to
understand of the same. His wife answered him in this manner. Have patience
my husband, for truly, I always did persuade my self, that all men had the
same disease, else be assured you should have had intelligence, and also be
cured thereof.

Effects of Chastity. Amylia.
The effects of chastity have been very strange. Aemylia a virgin was judged
of the Romans to be scarce honest, which when it came to her ears, she
prayed unto Vesta after this manner: Vesta, thou preserver of this noble city
Rome, if I for this thirty years, which time I have given mine attendance
about thy rites, and ceremonies, If I say, I have been faithful unto thee, as
becomes a virgin, give some token of the same, that all the Romans may
witness what I am. When she had thus prayed, she cast one of her garments,
bound up together upon the altar, which without any fire was enflamed and
burnte, so that afterward they never brought new fire, but they found some
continually upon the altar. Claudia likewise, another of the virgins of Vesta,
Claudia.
being supposed to be incontinent, and by any means could not bring the rude
multitude from judging sinisterly of her, by the like miracle purged her self,
and proved that she was for conversation honest. For on a time a ship laden
with hollye things, pertaining to the goddess Idea, so was grounded in Tyber,
that by no strength it could be set a floate. Claudia hearing of the same,
with speed came to the river, and there, with bended knees and humbleness of
heart, beseeched Vesta, that as she knew her clear from all fellowship of
man, so it might be known to all men, that she was a pure and unspotted
virgin. Her prayer took effect. And that ship which by the force of many
could not be removed followed her, and she drew the same with great facility
out of the river. So that her accusers were ashamed of them selves, and she
was obeyed as a princess, and reverenced as a goddess all her life time. Such
has been the force of this virtue. We will recite one example more, as much
talked of as the other. Tuscia, one of the same order of Vesta, Tuscia.
heard very much to her defamation: and therefore should be expelled the
college of virgins (for none might sacrifice unto Vesta, but such as were
known to be of good conversation) which did not a little trouble her. And
because her conscience bare her witness, that the rumor raised was false (as
the other above recited Aemylia and Claudia) she beseeched Vesta in pitiful
sort, that her innocence might by some way or other, be made known unto all
the world: espetially, that if to her profession, she had behaved her self,
she prayed that without spylling one drop, she might carry a five full of
water from Tyber unto Vestas chapel: which thing she obtained, and not
sheeding so much as one drop in a thing full of hoales she carried water. So
that these women, these chaste women may answer unto those continent men
brought forth in the former chapter. Yet will I ad unto those virgins the
example of one or two men, which have been no less wondered at then the
former. Scipio.
Scipio for his chastity was so praised, that even the most wicked, and
fardest from all consideration of honesty, namely pirates, came a long, and a
perilous viage to honor him, which all the world did so commend. Such as he
was, such was his friends. And therefore that made his dear friend and
familiar Laelius so to be praised. Laelius.
It is reported of him that in all his life he never knew but one woman, and
that was his wife. A strange thing in those days (I will not say in our
time.) The chastity of Ptolomeus Tryphon was such, Ptolomeus Tryphon.
that he would not so much as talk with a woman, least by her beauty he
should be allured unto Venerie. And therefore on a time perceauing a bewtifull
dame to come toward him, for communication sake: He said unto her, that his
sister warned him from speaking unto any fair woman, and therefore desired her
to hold him excused. He might be judged, by his words of some not to be
very wise: but whatsoever his words seem to be, his meaning was good, and
would as much as in him lay, shun all occasions of future grief. And thus
much for this part of Temperance.

Of Honesty. Cha. 23.
HOnesty, or that which is Honest is diversely defined of diverse men. Honesty.
For Aristotle supposes that for to be honest of which our good name
depends, by which we purchase credit among men. And that agrees to the
saying of those, which say, that that is honest which by popular, or common
speech is praise worthy. Plato and those of his opinion call that honest,
which of it self without any other external thing what soever, is
commendable. Cicero is of their minds, Cice. lib. 2. de Finibus.
and geues the same definicion. By which it is evident, that honesty is either
virtue it self or a thing done by virtue altogether. And therefore we define
Honesty in this wise, and say, that it is a free election of the mind to do
those things which are agreeing to the rule of virtue. Contrary to this
Honesty, is fylthinesse or dishonestie. Cicero says, Cice. lib. 4. de
Finibus.
that nothing can make men so miserable, as wickedness and impiety. And
therefore applying the same his words unto himself, in another place he
says, Cice. lib. 2. Epist. ad Atticum.
That he does nothing but war against dishonest and wicked persons. Whereby
he seems to prefer Temperance before Prudence, spiritual matters before
corporal, and the consolation of the soul, before the commodities of the
boddie. And therein he does not swerue from that which God in his holy
scripture commands, and Saint Paul earnestly does exhort unto. Quintilian
also in this point shows him self to be the faithful servant of God: for he
says, Quin. lib. 1 cap. 20. de institutione oratoria.
that the divine providence has given this gift unto man, that by honesty he
may best profit. Now if any be delighted with honesty, let him give ear as
to these now mentioned, so to heathen (I had almost said heavenly, and I may
say very well heavenly) Isocrates. (For I have exhortations out of Gods book:
For it were a labor infinite to recite them, and pertaining to a professed
divine, not to me in this matter, which depend only upon those things
wherewith man by nature is adorned, and therefore the exhortations, and
examples of wise Philosophers, endued only with natural reason I mean to
recite) who writes in this wise: Isocrates ad Demonicu^.
To honesty you shall be maruelouslye bent, if you do but remember the
pleasures coming from the same to be continual, not transitory: and again, if
you consider the pleasures springing from dishoneste things to be mingled with
grief and vexation. The pleasure passes, but the pain abides. This honesty
of the ancient Grecians was had in such price, that they did fly all occasion
of evil, and that by public authority. And therefore they banished out of
their cities all Poets and Players, because that in their Enterludes they did
both speak that which was not seemly, Poets. Plaiers.
and by gesture showed that which was dishonest. The like we read was done of
the Romans. Contrary to those are the deuillishe and detestable Corinthians
which so bend them selves to all impuritie of life, Corinthians.
that they worship, and give honor unto the president of all impiety, named
Cotys, Cotys.
her they worship, to her they do sacrifice, even as though all those sparks
of virtue which Aristotle says are naturally in all men, were altogether
quenched in them. But let us abhor them as odious to good men: and accursed
before God, and give ear unto those worthy sayings of Cicero, Quintilian, and
Isocrates, and with the ancient Grecians fly all occasions of dishonestie.
There was sometime a pretty dialogue between Socrates a Philosopher, and
Callistes an harlot. Callistes would prove that she excelled Socrates.
Callistes.
Her argument which she used, was because that she, when she was disposed
could draw from him all his auditors, but so could not Socrates from her. To
whom thus answered Socrates: Socrates.
And no marvel Callistes, for thou allurest unto wickedness, to which the
way is readdie: but I adhorte to virtue, whose way is hard to find.

Lactantius de diuino praemio. Cap. 5.
This point we will not prolong but with the saying of Lactantius conclude the
same. His words be these: He whose desire is to live well (in the world to
come) for ever, shall for a time live wretchedly, and be troubled with many
molestations, as long as he shall be in this earth a pilgrim, that so he
may receive a divine, and everlasting comfort. And he which choseth to live
well for a time shall for ever live unquietly: for he shall be damned by the
judgment of God. His words are plain, and shows that honesty is joined with
misery, wickedness with all kind of felicity: but misery which for honesty we
suffer, shall be turned to everlasting comfort, and that felicity gotten by
dishonesty, into perpetual

Of Moderation. Cap. 24.
A Companion of Honesty is Moderation, Moderation.
which does so measure all our actions, that it will not suffer us to pass
the bounds prescribed by Honesty, or come short of them, for as in running to
go beyond the mark is great rashness: so almost not to pass the standing, is
as much faintnes. Antomedon, Antomedon.
Achilles wagoner, is therefore much commended, because he drove the same not
over hastily, nor yet over slowly, but with a moderate swiftnes, all was eue^
from ye best to get the praise. But nigher to our purpose Pomponius Atticus
abooue al men is praised, Pomponius Atticus.
for his singular moderation in all his matters. Especially because in all the
civil dissension between Caesar and Pompey, he alone as ignorant, or at the
least was not troubled. He took no part and therefore was well liked of the
Conqueror. Whose rare moderation if others in his time had set before their
eyes, their perils had not been so great, nor the common well of Rome so
overthrown. This virtue brings with it another virtue which is called
Suffering, Suffering.
a notable virtue meet for a prudent man, for by moderatnig our selves, we
learn to forbear when we are injured: according to that of P. Syrus, P. Syrus.
a man should bear and not blame, which cannot be avoided: and yt of Epictetus,
(...) bear and forbear. Epictetus
For this Virtue were praised two noble wights Hanniball and M. Bibulus,
Hannibal M. Bibulus
one of Room, the other of Carthage. Hanniball by Moderating him self got such
an habit, that notwithstanding his army was compounded of men of many
Countries, yet did he so guide and govern them, that to see them chide among
them selves was a great wunder, and (as we say) might be cronicled: the like
for moderation and well guiding his army, we shall not read of any as we do of
him. Again M. Bibulus was of that moderation yt he would never be moved: his
nature was then most of all made manifest unto ye world when he without rash
revenging, took the death of his two Sons against all equity murdered. For
when Cleopatra had sent the murderers of his sons unto him, willing him to
use them as he would, refused it, and sent them back, saying, that his private
cause he ought not for to revenge, neither did it pertain unto him, and
therefore disired that they might be sent unto the Senate of Room, which might
according to law pronounce Judgment. One example I will bring forth more,
because of the worthynes thereof. It is reported of King Philip governor of the
Macedonians, Philip.
that he was of a most gentle nature, and that is evident by this fact of his:
beseeging a City of Melibea called Mathona, a Citizen of the same sent a Dart
at Philip, Mathona
and therewith deprived him of his eye, and yet the loss thereof made him
neither the more fierce in his affairs, nor more frantic toward his foes.
And though with his great pain it was plucked out, yet did it not incense him
any whit the more against his enemies, but unto reasonable requests of theirs
did condescend, which moderating of him self, and gentle handling of them made
them of deadly fooes his faithful friends.

Of Sparingnes or Hardness. Cap. 25.
NExt unto moderation is Sparingnes, Sparing or hardness
which more properly we call Hardness. By which we may understand not that
wicked vice Covetousness, although it may seem that we do, wherefore we ought
to have great care lest affections blind us, and so take one thing for an
other. It is ye common use of most men, under the show of one thing to
engraffe in our minds an other. And thereof Prodigality is called by the name
of Liberality: cruelty of Equity: foolish boldenes, Cicero in partitionibus
Orat.
of Fortitude: and to come to our purpose, covetousness, of sparingnes. And
therefore as Tullie says, we ought to be very careful lest those vices deceive
us, which seem to accompany the virtues, and so take one thing for another.
Wherefore we will show the great ods, which are between these two things
sparingnes and Covetousness, their difference in their names and signification
may be espied: Auere. Auarus. Auaritia. Covetousness.
for Auere (from whence Auarus and Auaritia, as Co^iungata, and each signifies
beyond all reason to covet a thing. And therefore a couetousman is he, which out
of reason coueteth. Now Parcere to spare (is derived from Parcitas spari^gnes)
is like a good husband thriftely to keep, Parcere. Parcitas. Sparingnes.
not vnfrutefully to spend, whereby it is plain that one (covetousness) is a vice
and well may be numbered among such things as a man should withal endeavor
fly, as hurtful to the common well and dangerous to his soul. And the other
(Sparingnes) is a virtue, teaching how to play the good husband, and so profit
his Country and pleasure his posterity. By this we flee Prodigality, and yet
we spare not when we may profit, and therefore it was an old saying that a
maid then had a good savor, ^hen she sauoured nothing at all: and a man was
then right wise, when he neither smelled of the stink of Covetousness, nor yet
was discried by the filth of Prodigality. The elder Cato was wunt to say that
by two things he increased his wealth, Cato seni or.
yt is to say by tilling his ground, and good husbandry. One of which brought
abundance of all fruit: the other taught how to use it. Which Cato, though he
had many virtues, which made him to be well thought of, among the Romans,
yet by none he got so much commendation, as by good husbandry, and sparing from
idle and vain expenses. Again, for this virtue was the lesser Scipio much
commended, Scipio minor. Pomponius Atticus.
and he that reads the life of Pomponius Atticus, shall find most of his
praises to spring of his sparingnes, which never would have been ascrybed unto
him and the rest, were it a vice and to be eschued, Laus praemiu^ virtutis.
for we never commend any for his vice, but virtues: and praises are annexed
unto well doing.

But as these for their sparing have been well reported of, so for immoderate
spending have others especially, Lucullus, Lucullus.
and Marius among the Romans been discommended. Lucullus did so lavish in
sumptuous expenses, and so desired in all his buildings to seem magnificall,
that he came into contempt among the common people, and was called a Romain
Xerxes, because he would appear more magnificall then became a private person.
Pompey hearing of his goodly buildings, was desirous to see if it were as the
common report was, and being come where Lucullus dwelt, and seeing the same
to exceed the common voice, said unto Lucullus in contempt: These your houses
for Summer be pleasant, they have so many stories, and so goodly windows, and
so open air, but in Winter they are not to be inhabited. Then answered
Lucullus what Pompey think you that Cranes shall excel me? can they according
to change of time alter their dwellings, and thinck you Lucullus will not have
his places of pleasure, and according to the alteration of time, remove from
one house to an other? It was a strange thing among the Romans to have one so
to flourish abooue other his fellow Citizens. Marius.
Marius was even such an other. Many things he had begun which were very
magnificall, and more sumptuous then would beseem his person, his buildings
were great and many (so that he was thought to have studied to bring all ye
glory of Room to his house) which in his old age he went about: and seeing
death would cut him short, so that he should not see ye finishing of that
which he had in hand, he began to rail upon Fortune, and to accuse her of
great partiality, because he might not see the effect of that which in mind
he purposed. But that over lauishing expenses of his made him (after his great
glory) when he had been seven times Consul, to be a laughing stock even to the
abject multitude, and contemned of his fellow Senators. Well, these fellows I
have recited to make lauishing prodigality the more odious, and to illustrate
this Sparing virtue, or virtuous Sparing which we have in hand: which is
opposite both to insaciable covetousness and unreasonable spending, The office
of Liberality.
and differs somewhat from liberality whose office consists in giving with
judgment: but this in saving like a prudent man, and much disagreeth from
nigardnes and unmerciful pinching.

The Office of this sparing fellow is to observe a measure in his doings, The
duty of sparingnes.
not wastefully to spend, but warely to spare: not wickedly to get, but
virtuously to inriche him self. It is reported that Aesculapius being the
Son of Apollo (which one would thinck would not suffer his son to be
handled in such sort) was for his insaciable desire of riches, Aesculapius.
by fire from Jupiter sent, consumed and killed with thunderboults, and after
wards cast hedlong into the bottomless Barathrum where ye Devils have their
habitation. For being a notable Physician, he was sought unto of all men, and
he did spare neither tung nor labor to pleasure afflicted persons, but rather
for love of money then for any good will to men, which being known to
Jupiter (from whom nothing is hid) he was in such strange manner tormented.
So that if Avarice be shunned of this temperate man, no dout he sparethe to his
profit, and the pleasuring of his posterity, which no dout will well keep that
so wisely gotten. On the other side, goods evil gotten by covetousness, are as
madly consumed, and (as we commonly say) the third heir never fare the better.

Of Sobriety. Cap. 26.
THE last, though not the least of all the parts of Temperaunce is called
Sobernes: Sobernes.
which is as necessary as any of the abooue mentioned, and more a great deal
then some of them. It appears by the contrary unto it called Drunckennesse,
which is in the sight of all men so odious and loath some, Drunkenness.
as we count them which are subject unto it, little better then brute and
beastly creatures. And therefore (according to the opinion of Nonius Marcellus)
we call him a sober man, whose mind is not overcome, but has the use of wit
and senses, and contrariwise we call him drunken whose head, hands nor feet
cannot discharge their duty. This virtue is called in Latin Sobrietas quasi
sine ebri^tate, Sobrietas.
a thing opposite unto drunkenness. By drunkenness I understand immoderate
swilling or drinki^g more then does a man good, by Sobriety a mesurable
taking of drinck. What a worthy and excellent gift is this Sobriety, it may
appear no way better then by the examples of them which have least esteemed
thereof. Alexan. Magnus.
Alexander Magnus thought he could not better celebrate the memory of Calanus
(who^e he looued entirely) then by appointing games for drinking. Calanus.
In which was iij. degrees, for he which drank most, had a Tale^t of silver
for his pains: the next had thirty pounds: the third ten pounds. In this
contention one Promachus bare away the Bell, Promachus.
but his unmeasurable drinking cost him his life: for within three days after
he dyed miserably. What honor Alexander got by his new device, I leave it unto
others to repor^e: what he might have got by putting that his money to the
relief of his poor Subjects it is evident. The like use we read of, at the
feasts of Bacchus, Bacchus.
where it was lawful for every man to toss the pots merrily, and he which
dru^k most had a Crown of pure Gold given him, which Xenocrates did once
obtain. Xenocrates. Micerinus


To these I will ad one Micerinus an Egiptian, which being certified by the
Oracle that his days were but few which he had to consume in this world,
thought to disapoint the determinate purpose of the almighty Gods, and
therefore being before a great drincker, afterward took more pleasure in ye
same, but the end of this wretch was miserable.

Cicero the Son of that famous Orator took such delight in drunkenness,
Cive. filius M.T. Ci.
as he was ashamed if any passed him therein, and because he was not of power to
revenge him self for the death of his father upon M. Antonius, he thought by
emulating Antonies drunkenness, M. Antonius.
and excelling him therein, he had brought him into contempt among the people,
as Pliny writes of him. Besides these have been celebrated of
historiographers for their drunkenness, Dionysius which by overmuch drink lost
his eyes, Dionysius
and therefore became a laughing stock unto all men.: and Nouellius, which
because of that qualytie, Nouellius Tricongius,
was called Tricongius, and by Teberius Caesar preferred to a Pretorship, for
no other thing but because of his excellency in drunkenness.

Now seeing we have showed some which for their excessive drinking have been
famous, let us also show some discommodyties thereof to make it the more
odious. It is writ^en that this vice drove all consideration of Justice out of
the mind of Phillip King of the Macedonians, Philip.
whereby he often times pronounced sentence against the innocent, and condemned
the unguilty. One woman having sustained injury by wrong sentence given of him
in his drunkenness, with opprobrius words railed upon him and said, she would
not stand to his judgment but appealed farther. Then some asked to whom she
would appeal (for in greater authority then Philip none was) she answered, I
appeal from Philip being drunck, to Philip being sober. Which when it came
to Philips ear, he called back his Judgment against her, and afterward in
drunckennes he commanded that he should not he brought to the seat of
Justice, but with great care pronounced sentence. Again by dru^kennes
Spargapises, Spargapises. Thomir. Babylon.
son unto Thomiris the Queen of Scithia, fell into the hands of his capital
foes and lost many goodly Soldiers. And Babylon which otherwise was
invincible, by this horrible vice fell into the hands of her enemies. Now
seeing the examples and knowing the discommodities which have happened by
drunkenness, let us harken unto the counsel of wise men and obey the laws
made against this vice by prudent Magistrates.

Anacharsis was wunt to say that nothing could make this vice more to be
abhorred, Anacharsis.
then to behold those which were overcome with drinck. Lacedemon
The Lacedemonia^s were of this mind, and therefore to make their children
altogether to detest the same they would carry them to banquets, where if any
of servile condition or others were overcome with drink, they should see them
derided of all me^, that so by their example they might be ware how they fell
into ye fault. Romain^
The Romans liked ye same order very well, and therefore to bring Musicia^s in
co^te^pt, Musicia^s,
they devised no better way the^ at common feasts to make the^ dru^k, and so
to carry the^ in carts into the Markette place, where all the town might laugh
at them, and terrify others from immoderate drinking, lest in their drunkenness
they were so used, the laws which have been made against this vice are many
and wu^derful strange. Pittacus one of the seven wise men of Greece, Pittacus
decreed that all offenses should be punished, but drunkenness with a double
punishment. Messalonians.
The Messalonians did so mislike this vi^e, that they would not suffer a woman
to drink Wine. If they would not permit a woman so much as to drinck wine, what
punishment thinck you would they have set upon her, if she had been overcome
therewith? Truly I suppose that which by the law of Romulus was decreede, Lex.
Romuli.
that if a Woman were found or seen drunk, she should leese her life therefore.
For he supposed drunckennes to be the beginning of dishonestie and whordome,
and therefore did appoint so cruel a punishment, that by the avoiding of that,
whordome might not be exercised among his people. Faunus a Romain was an
executor of this law, Faunus.
for seeing his wife to have broken the law, with his own hands killed her.
Romans
By another law of the Romans it was enacted, that none borne of a noble house
from his childhood until he came to manes age and was thirty years old,
should not so much as drink (much less be drunken with) Wine. And I think if
any which were forbidden to drink, had been drunck with Wine, Solon.
the Law of Solon would have been executed upon him, he should have been put
to death, or at least banished. But do I say that only yung noble men of Room
were forbidden to drink Wine? Nay it was not lawful neither for bound nor
free, for slave nor sovereign, to use ye same until they were thirty years of
age. Nay I will ad five mo for so affirms Aelianus. Aelianus li. 2. de varia
hist.
But of their mind we are not, but would have men to use ye same sometime, and
that moderately. For as Anacharsis was wunt to say, the Vine has three Grapes,
Anacharsis.
one of pleasure, the other of drunkenness, the third of sorrow: we would have
him taste the first, but the other two he should not so much as handle, lest
he fall into drunkenness, and so to repentance. For as Wine if it be taken to
often or to abunda^tly brings many dangerous diseases, besides the lothesome
vice of drunkenness: so taken seldom and moderately it reuiueth the Spirits and
expels cares, which otherwise would consume many of us. For this virtue
Sobriety many have been commended especially Caesar and Vespasian. Caesar.
Vespasia^.
Of Caesar, Cato said, that of all those which sought the overthrow of Room,
never any sober man went about the same but only Caesar. And Vespasian the
Emperor was of such sobriety, that he would drink nor eat but once in a day,
and that with great modesty. This sobernes of diet brings commodities,
Commodities of Sobernes.
for it does not only keep our bodies free from gross humors, which spring
of il dieting, but also prolongs our days very much, and makes us live a
helthful old age. To prove the same we have many examples, as of Socrates
which by his great sobriety, Socrates.
lived all his life time without any sickness. M. Valerius Coruinus.
M. Valerius Coruinus (so called. I suppose because he lived ye years of a
Crow, which is reported by those which write the nature of Birds, to live an
hundred years) also lived free from sickness an hundred years, the cause of
his great felicity is thought to be his good diet which he kept, and great
sobernes which he used whersoeuer he came. But he which passed all men (that
ever I read of) for his virtue was Masinissa King of the Numidians. Masinissa
His manner was never to sit at his meat, neither would he sauce his meat at
any time, he was content with common fare and householde Bread which he allowed
unto his Soldiers. His great sobernes and good dyeting of him self brought a
lusty old age and so helthful, as after 86. years of his age he had a Son
(the like I thinck has seldom been hard) of his own be getting, and being
of 92. years, he went against the Athenians, because they violated their faith
given to him, and over came them valia^tly. In which war it is reported that he
behaved him self as courageously as the best, and differed not from a common
and hired Soldier. Now to Fortitude.

Of Fortitude and her parts. Cap. 27.
NOw are we to speak of Fortitude whose praises are no fewer then those
ascrybed unto Prudence and Temperance. And that deservedly, Fortitude.
for (as Tully Prince of Eloquence does say) there is no virtue, but either
Sword, strength, or threats will weaken the same, but to banquish affections,
to resist anger, is only the part of a most valiant man, which things who
soever does: he may not only be compared with the most excellent and famous
men, but ought to be made of as a God. And therefore no meruail though ye
Romans flourishing by this only virtue, ascribed the name of virtue unto
fortitude, since with out the same are all other as it were la^e and imperfect,
without their limbs.

And therefore more commendations, glory, and triumphing has been ascrybed
unto those endued with this virtue, then any of the others. But why do I make
comparison? who for Tempera^ce? who for chaste modest abstinence, Tempera^ce
honest and sober life was ever out of the common treasure house of any common
well rewarded? Justice and innocent, virtuous, Justice.
godly, loouing and faithful hearted men where be they preferred or greatly made
of? Prudence.
Prudente and wise, circumspect, heedful, wily and craftye men are made of, who
can deny? But in such sort, as for Fortitude, Fortitude.
bold, patient, constant, stout hearted, and valiant defenders of their
contrie, who will affirm? Of one or two or a few, which for other virtues have
been well thought of and preferred, mention may be made: but none can tell me of
an universal rejoicing of an whole Contrie for any of the others at any time:
but for this valiant man every man reioyseth, his sight is grateful to every
man, and all men delight in him. Hereof it came that tokens of Nobility were
given to those kind of men in times past: as may witness their bracelets,
chains, Praemia fortitudinis.
Pictures, arms and triumphs, appointed them in token of honor, and now the
goodly orders and laws which general Captains have, to prefer to the order of
Knighthood any stout and noble hearted man. In old time, to every courageous
fellow, was given a piece of a vine in to^^ of his prowes, also noble wariers
for their valiancy had bows given the^ in token of honor. The ancient Grecia^s
to preserve the memory of those which had by valyantnes profited their
Country, did erect certain great Pillars, in which was graven the names of
such as had showed the^ selves noble hearted and faithful defenders of their
Contrie. As were those Pillars erected at Thermopylas in the honor of Leonidas,
Thermopylas. Leonidas.
which with a few Lacedaemonians, and a small crew of the Locresians, did
withstand a number almost infinite of the Persians; so long as he and all his
Soldiers were bereft of life, whose names together with Leomidas, were graven
in marble pillars to be seen of all posterities. It were a long and a very
great labor to recite the triumphs in number many, in sight strange, for
cost sumptuous, appointed to valiant and victorious Captains. Nay some have
stood in such admiration of them, that they have thought them worthy not only
such honor as we have recited, but also immortality. And therefore the
Athenians, Castor. Pollux. Hercules. Bacchus.
Castor and Pollux, Thebans, Hercules, Indians, Bacchus, only for their noble
hearts and stout courage are numbered among the Gods, and so called them: and
also did appoint alters, and sacryficed unto them even as if they had been
borne of immortal seed because they showed them selves vigila^t in seeing to
them selves, What* Fortit^de^s.
valiant in defense of their Contries, victorious in subduing their foes and
virtuous in all their doings. But we having somewhat offended in praising a
thing before we expressed by definition what it was: I will now define what is
Fortitude. Many are the definitions. Socrates said it was a knewledge
instructing a man how with commendation, to adventure dangerous, troublesome,
and fearful things, and in the taking of them in hand to be nothing terrified.
Chrisippus gave two definitions thereof, and said that Fortitude was either a
science teaching how to suffer things: or it was a virtue of the mind, obeying
unto reason without all fear, either in patie^t bering, or adue^turing any
thing. The Platonists define it in this manner, and say that Fortitude is a
keeping of a stable judgment in repelling those things which seem fearful
and terrible in men's eyes. Arist. li. 1. Retor. ad Theodecte^. ca. 22.
Aristotle in a certain place, calls it a mean between fear and holdenes,
and therefore he says it may seem to be a knowledge of dreadful things,
which may terrify a man without this knowledge. In a another place he calls
it a virtue by which many and marvelous things are done, not rashly without
discretion, but according to laws, and as far forth as they will permit.
Cice. lib. 1.2.3.4. and 5 Tuscula* quest.
Cicero defines Fortitude to be an affection of the mind in labors, troubles,
and torments, free from fear at all times.

All which definitions will nothing else, but that Fortitude shall be a virtue of
the mind, adue^turing nothing rashly with out consideration, neither fearing
any thing in a good cause whether it be death or any thing else, seem it never
so terrible. By which it appears that Fortitude consists between two
extremities, fear, and folishboldenes, which do either make a man to do that
which he should not, or not to do that which he should. For fear will not let
a man do what he should, Fear.
a good occasion being offered: and by boldenes he passes the bounds of the
law, Boldenes.
and in a head, for no occasion or very little, will slay God almighty. Well,
this Fortitude, this virtue boldenes free from foolish and childish fear, has
many parts (and without any of them none can truly be named a valiant man)
which are in number eight, and are these Magnanimity, The parts of fortitude
Trust, Security, Magnificence, Constancy, Suffering, Stabilitie and
Patience, whose properties shall be declared.

Of Magnanimity. Cap. 28.
Magnanimity is a certain excellency of the mind, Magnanimity.
placing before her eyes at all times virtue and honor, and to the attaining of
them bends all her cogitations and studyes: which exposition shows that none
can truly be Magnanimus, but he which is an honest and good man, and only by
virtue desires to come to honor and estemation. Which M. Marcellus (of who^e
before I made mention) declared by the erecting of the temple of honor, M. Marc.
unto which none could have entrance, except first he came through Virtues
Temple. Now the better to know this fellow, it is good to consider the parts
of which Magnanimity dependes, and what be the properties of this Magnanimus.
First his nature is in a good cause, and for the love of virtue only without
hope or desire of recompense, Properties of the noble fellow.
to do every thing. He is delighted in a good conscience, and therefore if he
be in adversity he mourns not, in prospe, ritie he insulteth not: and in
troubles he pyneth not away. Besides the excellency of the mind, he stands in
admiration of nothing, neither does he thinck any thing to hard to be brought
to pass, through that stomach which virtue has brought unto him, he is
constant but in a good cause, neither will he go about any thing, but that
which is honest and will bring him credit. He is no hipocrite nor flatterer, he
cannot abide to curry any man's favor, and he will tell the troth at all times
boldly without fear. And to be found with a false tale, it greeues him at the
heart. Such a one was Romain Atticus, Atticus.
for he would neither tell a lie, nor could abide to hear a lie at any ma^s
mouth. He cannot abide to dissemble with any man, but is open unto al, that
every man may testify what he is. And therefore if he hate a man he shall know
it, if he love one he cannot keep it secret. He will not speak one thing and
think another. Alcibiad^s ^^bulae.
He cannot be likened unto those pictures of Alcibiades, fair without, and
filthy within. He will not be compared to the mermaides* which sing sweetly, but
for a pray. Mermaids
He is righteous in his doings. If any offend wilfully and of set purpose, he
will not favor but punish severely, if any by compulsion, through fear
violate the laws, Caesar.
he sets the example of Caesar before his eyes, and is to nothing more ready then
to mercifulnes. All his care is to be good unto all men, and he thinks it a
shame for him, if any excel him in liberality. And therefore he neuerlets out
of his mind that sentence of King Anaxilaus, Anaxilaus.
which being on a time asked what was the best property in a King, answered.
to let none excel him in Liberality. He is always more willing to give then
to receive a benefit, for he is ashamed by a benefit to be bound unto any man,
as he whose care is to pass all men in well doing, for he thinks him to be a
conqueror which bestows a good turn, and him which receives he numbreth
among them which are vanquished. Benefits.
If he receive any thing, he is never well until he have requited the same with
greter measure.

He is easily entreated either to run or ride to pleasure his friend. If any
man sue unto hi^ he is not strange, or will not he with in, but speedyly
satisfy their demands. He thinks he should not be desired unto any thing,
neither does he love to request a thing at any bodies hand. He knows well
enough yt to beg a thing at a fre^des hand, is to bye it, neither does he
forget ye sentence of Euripides, that it is no small greef to a good nature to
try his fre^d.

And therefore he is more prepared to bestow, then his friend is to beg,
considering with the rest this of Seneca, yt how much the longer we are in
pleasuring, so much we loose of good will. In exacting a duty he is never
hasty, for it is a pleasure unto him to have men in his det. He looueth to
emulate the best, as for others he will not so much as put them before his eyes.
If he be surpassed in any good thing, he is ashamed. He is of ye best nature,
and therefore as nigh as he can, he will be the best man. He will for get an
injury offered no man sooner, persuading him self that more honesty he shall
get by forbearing, then by revenging. And therefore he does apply ye counsel
of Cicero unto Lentulus to him self, where he says, that iniuryes of men will
illustrate his innocence, and all good sayings of prudent men given to the
like purpose, he carefully commits to his remembrance. Again if he be fallen
out with any man, he is not well until he be reconciled again, and therefore if
he have molested any man willingly or otherwise, with speed he will submit him
self and crave pardon, if any man trouble or misuse him, he is ready to forgive.
He will hurt no man wilfully, either by word or deed, for he judges it the
part of a servile mind and beastly, not of a man, to offer an injury or
disquiet any man with out a cause. He will not backbite, Backbiti^g
ne he will not rail at any person, nay he is so far from railing at any man,
that he cannot abide such kind of men: but even as Memnon a general Captain
(instituted by King Darius to fight against Alexander) hearing an hired
souldior bitterly to backbite Alexander, Memno^.
could not abide his talk, but struck him therefore, and with sharp words
rebuked him saying. I do not nurish thee to backbite, but for to fight against
Alexander (he could not abide to hear his deadly soil spoken of) so he, as he
will speak well of all men him self, so cannot he suffer any to speak railingly,
no not of his deadly enemy. He is no boster of him self and of his doings.
Bosting.
But if he have done any thing worthy commendation, he had rather any should
report the same then he, for he thinks that by repeting what he has done, he
should but raise an opinion of foolishnes, among ye wise to him self. And to
avoid that fault the better, he calls in to mind continually (when he is
moved to speak of his own matters, the examples of others which he knows
have been (as that glorious Soldier whom Terence makes mention of) and are
odious for the same. He cannot abide to meddle with other men's matters, but all
his care is to live well in his own calling, and therefore the manners of other
men he does not greatly note except it be their good behavior, thereby to
increase good motions within him self. and therefore as Plato answered
Dionisius, Dionisius
so does he all men which demand of him the same. Dionisius having evil
entreated Plato (which came for mere good will unto him) and letting him
depart, Plato.
said O Plato how will thou among thy fellows, whersoeuer thou come report
of me to my defamation? how wilt you blase thy misusage at my hands* Nay
answered Plato, God forbid that I should have so much time from study yt I
should speak evil of any man: and so does this valiant man say. God forbid,
that he should have any leisure at all to speak il of any man. This virtue
although it should be sought for studiously of every man, yet especially is it
most seemly in a Prince, for without the same it is impossible that any should
reign gloriously, for many things come daily before them which being without
care let pass, may trouble ye body of his Realm: without this virtue which
brings unto him an invincible courage. Magnus Alexander dictus a
magnanimitate.


Of this virtue was Alexander called Magnus, and we call him Alexander the
great. And he is said to have virtue, and to reign in deed, which in his
countenance bears a majesty, and in all his doings does so behave him self,
as none without great reverence dare demand any thing at his hands, and will
admit none into his familiarity, but such as are of great wisdom and perfect
good behavior. The want of this virtue woorketh much mischief, when a Prince
has not this majesty and magnanimity, Counsel.
but will (through an imbecillitie of mind) admit, he cares not whom into his
cou^sail. Examples heerof we have many, as are all evil governed Cuntryes and
common weles. Ve^^es.
Verres could say, that he had never come into such misery, had he not been
ruled by dissolute fellows which be used familiarly, Galba Impecator.
ye cause of Galba the Emperors destruction was because he lacked this
Magnanimity and suffered him self to be governed according to the minds of
three wicked men in whose company he did much delight which brought shame to
him, and confusion to his people. Therefore is it the praise of every Prince
studiously to labor to get this excellent virtue Magnanimity, contrary to
this virtue is weakness of mi^de, which the Greeks call (...), whose nature is
clean opposite unto that which we have now spoken of, which again to report
were vain and superfluous, and therefore we leave it. Now to the next.

Of Trust or Hope. Cap. 29.
TRust or Confidence is a certain presaging or persuasion, Trust or Confidence
rather of a prosperity to come, then at hand. The cause thereof is Hope,
springing from a good consideration, and casting all douts which we have
po^dred out of our minds. Again the causes of this confidence may be two,
either former good luck (when we call into mind how happyly all things went
with us) there springes a comfortable courage, and in hope of the like good
luck we are animated to take any thing in hand seem it never so dangerous:
or the authority of some person. Both of these we mean to illustrate with
examples. Of the former we have many, as Nero an Emperor borne to all cruelty,
Nero.
which got such a confidence by a continual good success of every thing which
he took in hand, that when by Shipwreck he had lost many rich and precious
jewels, he said boldly that he did not dout, but that the very fishes would be
taken, and so his jewels, Giges.
(as was ye Ring of Gyges) should be brought unto him again. Also a certain
Centurian of C. Caesar being sent of him to Room to understand how all things
went with him, A Centurian of Caesar's.
went to the Senate house, and there by common voice hearing that his Captains
time of dictatorship was expired, and that his government was no longer
proroged, striking the pommel of his sword, with great confidence boldly
said. If so it be, then this sword shall prolong the same. The confidence of
C. Castrinus another Captain of Caesar's was wunderfull, C. Castrinus.
for when the Pharsalian fight was at hand, and the time appointed that Caesar
and his enemies should incou^ter, he came unto Castrinus, and demanded of him
what he thought of that battle, whether he hoped they should vanquish or no.
Then Castrinus giving forth his hand unto Caesar said. Take heart unto thee
Caesar for thou shall foil thy foes, and shall commend me for my valiantnes,
either alive or dead, which fell out as Castrinus did say. For both Caesar did
get the battle, and in a solemn oration did greatly commend Castrinus for his
valiant death. Notable was the stomach and the confidence of Androclidas,
Androclidas.
for being derided of one because that being lame he would be a Soldier,
answered merrily like a worthy fellow, I come not to fly but to fight, and hope
to have the end of my coming and see the confusion of my foes. As notable was
the answer of Leonidas to his bosting adversary, Leonidas
which cried to the Spartaines that their labor was lost, and that the next
morrow he and his fellows would strike them down every one, and that for the
multitude of darts, they should not behold the Sun. Well, said Leonidas, if it
will be as you say, we shall fight the better under the shade. This confidence
has been said of Pindarus and the Stoiks, to be the beginning of victory to
come, and to presage the same. Presagins
Here we will a little digress, and speak somewhat of presaging (of which we
spoke before in this book, declaring what was Prudence) The learned wrighting of
the same have thought wise men, and those which are most free from earthly
cogitatio^s, to have that gift that they can tell aforeha^d what will happen: and
that by certain familyars (for they have thought every man to have two) which
in latin they call Genios, one good which is called Bonus Genius, and the other
evil called Malus Genius: Genius bonus malus.
by which they say that a man may either live well and virtuously, or evil and
wickedly: virtuously by listening to the good angel (for so also have they been
called) wickedly by obeying ye suggestia^s of the naughty familiar. Familiars.
Of which mind has Plato been: for in his Symposio he says that every man
has his familiar given him of God to reveal the will of God unto him.
Socrates.
Socrates was said by this to have presaged the death of that most cruel of
all other Tyrants Critias. Critias.
For when Critias had sent unto him a Cup filled with Poison (which he was,
being condemned by the law, enforced to drink) he took the same, and drank
unto Critias which very shortly after the same sort, dyed miserably. Now to
return. Homer does oftentimes make mention of this familiar animating and
imboldning Soldiers to fight courageously, and foretelles them secretly what
shall happen, by which arises this Confidence which is in many valiant youths.

But noble youths ought to take great heed lest by to much Confidence they
fall into perils, and hurt them selves, which confidence is then called by the
name of Ouerboldenes, and is an extreme enemy to Fortitude, as well as fearfulnes
on the other side. Alexan. der.
If that Alexander the great had not had this over boldenes, his days had been
prolonged. For being counseled by the Chaldeans not for to take his journey to
Babylon, for if he did they said his days should be shortened, because of
contemning their words: And again being come nigh unto Babylon, and seeing
the Crows and Ravens in the air fighting before his face, of which some fell
at his feet prognosticating his end, and putting him in mind of that which
was told him by the Chaldeans, yet did not the fight and sight of them any
whit terfie him, but boldly in contempt of words and wunders entered the
city, where after few days he perished by poison, given unto him by those
whom he took for his deer and frusty friends. By whose example we have to
learn not to much to hope for continual prosperity always but to listen and
obey the good counsel of grave men. Caesar.
Caesar likewise being over bold and co^temning the words of those which
wished him well came to a most miserable end. For oftentimes he was warned and
foretold of the conspiracies of his foes to bring him to death He was
cou^sailed to see to him self, and to guard his body, lest at any time his
enemies upon the sudden should set upon him, many promising their service
willingly. But he contemned all their words and would none of their service,
saying that he was a miserable Prince that would have a Guard about him. But
his contempt hastened his end, for as it was told him before, his death was
sought and he murdered of his senate in their house of co^sultation, with
penkniues. If he had not so trusted to his good luck, and had such a
confidence that he could have withstoode all the assaults of his foes, and
harkened to the wholesome admonitio^s of his faithful friends, his days might
have been prolo^ged, and in time he might have turned the hearts of those
which then were his capital and deadly enemies. Of the latter also we have
many examples of which we mean to recite some. In Athens on a time one of ye
tragedies of Euripides was played, which much delighted ye multitude,
Euripides.
but one sentence did not please them well, and therefore they requested
Euripides that it might be taken out and that they might hear it no more. But
he stomaching their words came before them on the stage, told them that he
made plays to instruct the people, and not to be controlled of them: which
hold speech of his so astonished them, that never after they would so much as
murmur against him. Scipio.
Scipio likewise (for his virtuous and good nature called Scipio the good) in
ye time of a great dearth which was at Rome, hearing the people much to
complain of the want and penury which they were in, cried unto them and said:
Masters be content and hold your peace, for I know what is for the
commodity of the common weal better then you all (his experience brought him
such a confidence.) The people were straight quieted, and altogether, without
secret complaininges, depended upon his wisdom, doubting not but that he
both knew how to ease them, and also would speedyly get a remedy. And as the
people of Athens took the words of Euyripides, and the people of Rome the
sa^eing of Scipio quietly without concei^ of greef: so did Julius Caesar the
behau^or, Accius po^ta.
the strange behauior of the Poet Ae^ius toward him. For when Caesar came
into the College of poets, and every onrose out of their places in token of
obedy^ence to his person, only Accius sat still and would not rise: but Caesar
not a whit stomached him therefore. For he knew very well that he did it not in
contempt of his majesty, but only through a conceit of excellency. For he
thought himself cheifest among the Poets and in that place as good as Caesar.

That confidence gotten by an opinion of excellency, Apelles*
made Apelles to take up king Alexander as short. For Alexander coming
oftentimes into his woorkhouse, would find much fault with one thing or other,
which Apelles marked very well and was not a little moved so to be reprehended
of an ignorant man, one which could not judge of coulors, and therefore on a
time he said unto him. I marvel Alexander how you will continually be finding
fault, when you see my boys laugh you to scorn for your indiscreet words.
Which Alexander took patiently and considered that Apelles spoke not without a
cause. But this confidence except it be guided by modesty, and proceed from
judgment, it runs into a foul vice and is then called Arrogance.

Arrogance.
For this Arroga^cie have many come into the hatred of men. As Chrysippus which
to raise an opinion of knowledge unto him self, Chrysippus.
would set forth Books in his own name which were the doings of other men,
in so much as he was openly cried out upon. And therefore Apollodorus an
Athenian said, that if other men's words were taken out of ye works of
Chrysippus, there would nothing in his Books be seen but bare and white paper
This vice made Hyppocrates indiscreetly to answer the king of Persia (which
ernestly desired him to come and profess physic in Persia) after this manner*
Hyppocrates.
I am not so mad as among barbarous men, foes to the Grecians, to practice my
science and pleasure them any whit.

The like arrogance was in that notable Painter Zeuxes, Zeuxes*
which through an opinion of excellency, said most foolishly, that he had in
mind such a piece of woork, and so would set forth Helen in her lively
coulors as neither Homer by eloquence, nor any man by imagination should
conceive the like. But for to root^ this vice out of the minds of men, the
Poets fained a notable example of Thamyras, which they say, Thamyras.
because he would take upon him more then he could discharge, and would seem
to contend with them, with whom he was not in any respect to be compared, and
challenged the Muses them selves (he being a Contrie fidle^) into the
contention of Music, was deprived of his sight, and became a laughing stock to
all men.

Of Security. Cap. 30.
Security is an other part of Fortitude, Security.
by which (after we have cast in our minds all inconveniences and know the
wurst that can happen) we are quiet and without care. A notable virtue, and and
enemy unto all those things which may strike a terror into the mind of man.
No cowarde or faint heart can possess the same, and have the quietness of mind,
which it brings, because that with the least blast of any sharp wind of
adversity, he is so out of heart, as he has not power to go about any thing.
Straungely have the Philosophers written of this virtue. Cicero says that
those which are secure indeed, are in that same case which they were in before
their birth. They are so far from being troubled at any thing, that they are
not which they seem to be, that is, though in body they are on the earth, yet
their minds are in heaven. In this Security of the mind have many
Philosophers thought an happy life to consist. Democritus was the author of
this opinion: Democritus.
which indeed is nothing else but that contemplative felicity of which we
made mention in the beginning of this Book. Homer to express the excellency
of this virtue, faigneth those Elysian feeldes where the souls of the
righteous abide, Elysiicam pi. ^usulae fortunatae. Sertorius.
and he says they are in the Islands of Atlas, which we call the Fortunate or
happy Islands. Sertorius the Emperor hearing the fame of those Islands, was
altogether minded to leave his Empire, and consume his days in them: in which
mind if he had remained, Perpenna
he had not so traitorously been murdered of Perpenna being invited to a
banquet. Sylla.
Sylla did prefer security of mind before princely authority, and therefore
to lead a life free from trouble, of his own accord gave over his
Dictatorship and became a private person. If Pompey the great had not been
more bent to ye troubles of the world, the^ ye tranquillity of mind, Pompeius
Magnus.
neither so much Roman blood had been shed nor had he dyed so miserably.
Alexander one a time asked of an Athenian Orator what he could wish him to
take in hand, Alexander.
or what was most meet for his person to do: the Orator (which I think was
Phocian) answered that he could wish him to dimisse his men, break up his
army, and led his life in security not to break his brains about the taking
of Castles, and bringing nations into servitude. But Alexander would not hear
that* yet if he had obeyed that counsel, his days had been prolonged, and
his death had not so tratourously been sought of his familiar friend Antipater.

Therefore is it the part of every man to seek this virtue and part of
Fortitude, if we desire to have the good will of men, and be glorified after
this life.

Of Magnificence. Cap. 31.
ANother notable part of this Fortitude is Magnificence, Magnificence.
a virtue proper only unto Princes, private persons of this Magnificence cannot
be called magnificall: because their substance is not such, as perfectly they
cannot fulfill the function of liberality. The difference between these two
virtues is this. The one is about private things (and he is called a
liberal man which according to his reuennues gives freely, Liberality.
when, where, and to whom he should) the other is about great and public
matters (and he is magnificall which bestows his goods not regarding any
cost or charges at all, but how worthy a thing it is where upon he bestows
the same) so that ^ private man if he should so spend his goods he would
quickly be consumed* Isocrates adhorteth Nicocles unto the embracing of this
verrtue. Isocra. ad Nicocles.
In apparel he would have him to be most glorious, but he would have him to
show forth and declare his magnificence, in bestowing his goods and riches
upon those things which bring a perpetual commodity, but his munificence in
purchasing and procuring faithful friends. And these two things magnificence
and munificence are supposed to be the two special virtues of a Prince. And to
th'attaining of either of the^, and both of them have many labored. Julius
Caesar to be counted magnificall, Julius Caes
made many and sumptuous Libraries, Libraries.
and gave M. Varro in commission to go throughout the dominions of Room to
provide the woorks of the best learned to fornish them. But that famous and
right magnificall piece of work afterward was by fire consumed. Then
afterward the Emperor Domitian caused to be redyfied and new builded. Domitia^.
The Caves and conductes finished by M. Agrippa, began by Tarquinius Priscus*
Tarquin. Priscus.
were so for cost magnificall, for labor endless, as many being weried with
intolerable pains, ended their lives with halters (whereof also we made
mention in the second part of Temperance called Shamefastnes.) He also erected
a Temple unto Jupiter and many things else did he of great magnificence. But
those Caves which he made, Caves. Cloacae. Sylla.
passed all other things. Sylla to declare his princely mi^de made a Stage in
Rome of great sumptuousnes, and was one of the most magnificall things in
Room. Many roman Consuls also made many goodly things for the commodity of
all the inhabitants of Rome, and called them by their proper names. And heerof
came the market place of Liuius, Forum Liuij, Iulij, Pompilij, Cornelii,
Se^pronii,
of Julius, of Pompilius, of Cornelius, of Sempronius, and other works right
wunderful for cost and woorkmanship. But in all the world there was seven
things which for stately building passed all others, and therefore were called
the vij. wunders of the world. Wonders of ye world.
The first was Thebes a City in Egypt, for bigness and building so
magnifical, Thebes. 1
as not undeservedly it is counted the first and cheifest of the wunders: it is
reported to have an hundred gates, set out very stately. Walls of ye world. 2
The second was the walls of Babylon, made by the Queen Semiramis, they were
in compass three hundred, four score and five fullonges, and every fu^long
was 125. yards. Sepulchr. Mausoli Artemesia. 3
The third was the sepulcre or tumb of Mausolus, which his wife Artemesia did
erect for the great love she bare unto him. The excellency of this monument
did Satyrus and Pythius ancient and cunning builders, Satyrus Pythius.
most learnedly celibrate in many euolumes. The fourth were the Pyramides in
Egypt, Pyramides. 4.
which were Towers of such hight as to report it, it would seem almost
incredible. The fifth was Colossus (I think the picture or Image of Apollo as
some say, Colossus.
or as others of Jupiter.) The sixth was the Capitol of Rome whose statlynes
passes my skill to set forth. Capitoliu^ Romae. 6 Sepulchru^ Adriani. 7,
The last was the Sepulcher or tumb of Adrianus builded in Cyzicus, a woork so
magnificall, as, except those before mentioned it was a gasing stock to all
other buildings in the world. It were an infinite thing and a vain labor to
recite the sumptuous and magnificall buildings, which are celebrated by ye
eloquence of learned men. It shall suffice therefore that I have some what
declared what Princes and others in fore time have had to be counted
magnifical, and such ways to get a perpetual name among all posterities. But
no way to be spoken of among men is better, then to be in favor with learned
men, whose writings can raise a more credit then any raising of building or
magnificall piece of woork.

And therefore shall a Prince be more famous by getting trusty friends, then
building goodly houses, and by Munificence then by magnificence. Munifice^ce
For the one is for a time, the other continual: The one makes a few in a
Country, the other causes all the world, not a while but for ever to report
of him. And that has made so many Princes, so to esteem of learned men as
Alexander of Aristotle, Alexander. Aristotle. Dionysius. Plato.
Dionysius of Plato, and other gracious Princes of other good men. It is
reported that the greatest care which Alexander had was to get him the goodwil
of many, if he could of all. He had once fallen out with one Protheas a Iester,
but by entreaty of friends, was content to banish all malice out of mind, and
be reconciled. Protheas.
Now when Protheas understood the same, he came unto Alexander and merrily
demanded what token he should have, Alexander.
whereby he might know and surely persuade him self that he was not angry
with him. Then Alexander willed v. Tallents of silver to be given him, and
said, behold a sign of my good will, and hereafter use thy self well toward
me. Again the same Alexander, to make his very friends report well of him, gave
unto a yung man (son unto Mazeus which was in favor with Darius) after ye death
of his father (besides that which already he inioied) a Pretorship, which made
the yung gentleman to say, My Prince Darius was never but one man, but thou by
thy munificence and great liberality make many Alexanders. Meaning that so
many Alexa^ders there were, as he had freendes^ and friends he purchased by
gifts continually. Scipio Africanus (whose virtues we have somewhat spoken of
before) did not a little endeavor to have this virtue, Scipio.
nay he bent all his cares so to the attaining thereof, as he would be sure, as
often as he went abroad to the market place, to make some one or other his
friend of his foe, by gifts and liberality. And the Emperor Titus, Titus.
son to Vespasianus, was of such magnificence, as, if, being at supper or
otherwhere else, he had remembered him self to have given nothing that day, he
would say in pitiful sort, My friends, this day have I lost and done no good
at all. All which did very well remember ye only in Magnifice^ce they did excel
the multitude, and could at all times either profit or displeasure even whom
they would and as they would the^ selves. Anaxagoras instructing Pericles,
Anaxagoras.
said, that the only way to be gracious with the rude multitude was by this
virtue Magnificence: by which he should not only with benefits bind men unto
him, but also liberally reward every one which any way had pleasured him. And
the^ is he a grateful person: contrariwise in neglecting those to whom he was
(in some respect either for their diligence or benefits) bound, he runs into
ingratitude, then which vice nothing is more hurtful to a good estate and
common well. Ungratefulness.
And therefore the Persians punished ungrateful persons most severely. And the
Athenians did erect the temple of the Graces in the midst of their City,
Athenia^s.
to show that nothing should more often come into our memory, then benefits
bestowed upon us. Cicero pro (...). Plaucio.
And therefore Cicero did say, that though he were desirous to be endewed with
all virtues:

Yet none of them did he more hunt after then to seem, Thankfulness.
and be accounted thankful. For that sath he is not only the greatest, but also
the mother of all virtues. Chilo one of the vij. wise men of Greece was wunt to
say. Chilo.
That no man living could accuse him of vngraetfulnes: for their was none that
ever did him a good turn, but he did requite the same.

Also for this virtue did King Pyrrhus pass all the other of his time (as
those which write of him do say) for all his diligence was cheefely employed
in rewarding them to whom he was any thing bound. Pyrrhus.
Heerof it was that hearing the death of Aesop, Aesop.
he wept bitterly (not because he was dead, for he knew the nature of all me^
to be such, as always they should not live) because he was so negligent in
rewarding his pains taken for his profit. And being of one of his friends
demanded the cause of his grief, he gave that reason before mentioned, and
added that it was not one thing to owe goods and good will. For he which owes
goods unto any manne, though he dye to whom it is due, yet will it be as
welco^e unto his heirs, as if it had been sooner repaied: but he which owes
goodwil if it be not requited before his death, it can no ways be repaied. Well
this Magnifical, cannot commit yt he be found either negligent in requiting,
or forgetful of receiving a good turn. But heerof hereafter.

Of Constancy. Cap. 32.
NOw that we know what is good and to be desired, and also what is it and to
be despised, Constancy
it is meet that in that good purpose taken, we persevere and continue. The
virtue which teaches us how to do so is called Constancy. There he which
confound this virtue with Continency. Contine^cie
But Aristotle does distinguish them properly, and says it is the duty of
Constancy to resist dolors of mind, and of Continency to repel all foolish
pleasure. So that the one makes a man chaste in body, the other continuing in
a thing well deliberated. Cicero says that Constancy is ye health of the mind,
so that by the same he understands the whole force and efficacy of wisdom,
and that appears very well by her contrary. For Foolishnes is nothing but a
lightness and inconstancy of mind. Foolishnes
Wherefore this constant man cannot be to much praised seeing that either whole
wisdom, or the very force of wisdom is in nothing more appare^t then in
Constancy. The which will the better appeer by the examples of true Constancy.
Who will not highly commend and heartily desire that he were that Pomponius
Atticus, Pomponius Atticus.
so praised for his great constancy. For he under the conduct of Lucullus
fighting against Mithridates, and being sorely wounded was taken and brought
before the King: Mithridates.
which seeing Pomponius said unto him in this wise: Tell me Pomponius, if I so
provide that thou be healed of thy wounds and brought to perfect health again,
will thou not love me therefore, and afterward be true and trusty unto me? I
cannot choose but love, answered he, if you for your part will reconcile your
self to the Romans: if otherwise you will, I neither can nor will come into
freendship with you. Whose Constancy when Mithridates perceived, he did not
only provide for his health, but esteemed him as one of his Princes about him.
Or that Fabricius who will not desire to be? which, Fabricius.
being sent of the Romans Ambassador to king Pyrrhus, to will him to leave
afflicting them with war, would neither be corrupted with bribes, nor terified
with the horrible cry of a huge Elephant, from doing his message faithfully.
But we will bring forth examples of more strange and wunderful Constancy. Zeno.
Zeno the Stoike being cruelly tormented of a King of Cypres to utter those
things which the king was desirous to know, at length because he would not
satisfy his mind, bit of his own tongue, and spit the same in the tormentors
face. Anaxarchus. Nicocreo^.
But the constancy of Anaxarchus was more strange, for being taken of
Nicocreon, a most cruel of all other Tyrants, and afterward hearing that by
the commandment of the Tyrant he should in a mortar he bruised and broken into
pieces, said most constantly unto him in this manner: Bruise and break this
body of mine at thy pleasure O Tyrant, yet shall thou never diminish any whit
of Anaxarchus. Then the Tyrant because he could not abide his bold speech,
commanded that his tung should be cut out of his mouth. But Anaxarchus
laughing at his madness, thought he should never have his mind, and therefore
he bit out his own tongue* and spit the same by mamocks upon the tyrants face.
How wunderful was the Constancy of C. Marius, which to recover his health did
not only give him self to be sawed a sunder, C. Marius
but stood so quietly while it was a doing, as if not he but an other man had
felt the pain. What should I here make mention of Leena that Harlot, Leena.
which was so commended of the Athenians, that for her constancy she was
honored, and to keep her in remembrance, a brazen Lioness was erected and ye
without a tung: because that she being most cruelly tormented, and by all
diuilish devises tempted to utter those which with her did conspire against the
tyrant, wuld for all their torments speak never a word, but remained dum? Or
to recite the manner of Epicharius constancy were a long thing: Epicharius.
which being apprehended for conspiring the death of Nero, and on the rack
drawn, and every way hailed and pulled to confess, who with her went about
the murdering of him, would not speak one word, but took all punishme^tes
patiently: and thereby showed her self to have a more manly courage then many
grave men, which through pain did accuse their fellow conspirators. 2. Mach^.
7
Here I must leave out the example of that mother which seeing her Sons
tormented before her face, was so far from lame^ting their death, or
cou^sailing the^ to save their lives, ye she willed them boldly to go into ye
hands of the tyrant, and having so animated them, her self after that manner
was with fire and faggot consumed. This virtue was so highly commended of
Cicero, Cicero de faelicitate et miseria.
that he was persuaded that a man might atchiue immortality thereby, as did M.
Regulus, which he said was not so commended because he had been twice Consul
and once had gloriously triumphed, M. Regulus.
as for keeping his faith given to the Carthagenians, and suffering his eye
lids to be cut of, and so to stand against the Sun until he dyed. But of this
no more only for the better knowing of this virtue, with Lactantius we will say
that Constancye except it be in truth, Lactantius de vero cultu. cap. 14.
and in a good cause is impudency. Now to that which follows.

Of Suffering. Cap. 33.
OF Suffering we spoke before when we spoke of ye part of Te^perance, which is
called Moderation, and therefore in the explicating thereof, now we will be ye
more breef. Sufferng.
Suffering is a notable virtue and teaches us to go forward in an honest matter
without greef and grudging. For this virtue are all good Captains commended,
for without the same, every labor will be loathsome, and every thing will strike a
terror. And therefore their names which especially have excelled heerin are
wunderfully celebrated of all Historiographers. C. Marius
C. Marius is reported very quietly without any sign of a troubled mind to
bear the labors which belong to a Captain. In all things saving authority he
would be like a common Soldior: he would fare no better then they did, his bed
was no easier then the rest of his men: in all pains that should be taken he
would be formoste. By which his familarnes, humblenes, and quiet bearing of
things, he so did win the hearts of the common people, as it was commonly said
in every man's mouth, that the Romans should never end their war begun, except
C. Marius were made general Captain: which being blazed at Room, from a bace
condition he was created Consul. The like virtue had Sertorius, for he culd so
well away with the warriers life, Sertorius alter Ha^niball.
that the Celtibrians noble fighters, and courageous fellows did prefer him
before all the Captains that then were living, and commonly called him another
Hanniball. As these have been famous, for this virtue, so (others which to
recite were long, Fabius Maximus
and for brevity sake I omit) especially Fabius Maximus could suffer best. He
was wunt to say that it was his part which governed others, not with words
and whips to wax cruel against male factors, but with suffering and gentleness
to draw them to his mind. For he said it was an absurd thing to do that unto
men which he would not do to beasts. Gentelnes.
And again he said it was not to be hoped for, that a man endued with reason,
will be called to the embracing of honesty, rather by severe punishment, then
by gentleness, when as we see wild beasts by cruelty cannot be tamed, but by
gentle handling. Moreover he said it was not the part of Justice to show more
favor to Beasts then to men: or not to do unto men, which we are commonly
and continually wunt to do unto beasts: to give bread unto beasts and blows
unto men, to cherish unreasonable creatures, and correct most cruelly a
reasonable man. By these reasons he armed him self both to adventure all
things with his soldiors fellowly and patiently, and also to use no severity
toward them which did sometime violate his laws. But of this latter part
we shall have occasion to speak hereafter when we come to Justice.

Of Patience. Cap. 34.
PAtience is defined of Cicero to be a voluntary aduenturing of hard things
for the desire of virtue. Patience.
The excellency hereof is known and perceived no way better then by her
contrary which is Impacience, what a foul vice Impatience is, Impatie^c.
they can tell which have the administration of things and here the sword in
common weles. Socrates being on a time kicked at, Socrates.
by a dissolute fellow was asked of the standers b^, how he could suffer him
self so to be misused: he asked them, what they would have him to do? Marry
said they take the advantage of the law. Then said he, you have made a good
reason I pray you if an Ass should kick me, would you counsel me to call him
before the Judges. Socrates thought no difference between such an indiscreet
fellow, and an Ass: and again he thought he should run into great
reprehension, if he should suffer a Beast and not suffer a man

Xenocrates also for his patience was Xenocrates.
much commended: for though he were of his master Plato unjustly accused of
ungratefulness, yet was he nothing moved therwithal. And being asked why he
did not answer Platoes defaming of him, made this answer, That which I do
is good, and profitable for me. Rare was that patience of Eretricus a yung man
toward his father. Eretricus.
For coming from Zenoes school (where he had of long time been taught) ho^e
to his fathers house, his father asked him what he had learned. The yung man
said he would tell him by and by. But his father being cholerik, was very
angry, and gave him a blow or two. His son hearing those patiently said,
This have I learned of master Zeno, to bear quietly the words and blows of
my father at all times. The patience also of Lycurgus is much spoken of:
Lycurgus
for after yt he had lost his eye by ye misuse of Alcander, and that the
Citizens had brought Alcander unto him desiring him to appoint what punishment
he wuld upon him: Alcander
would not do as they requested him, but let his enemy go quietly without
molesting him, which patience was profitable. For he afterward proved a good
and honest Citizen. The like is reported of Eusebius. For when a wicked woman
infected with the heresies of Arrius, Eusebius.
had wilfully thrown a stone at him, and there withal had wounded him to
death, he was so far from taking revenge, that he swear his friends upon his
death bed, not to punish her therefore. Notwithstanding these examples of so
godly men, and the manifold exhortations of the best to patience, yet have
their been some of that opinion as they have thought it meeter (I will not say
honester) to revenge, then to forgive: and that it is a part of justice with
injuries to requite iniuryes. Arist. li. 1. ca. 23. rhetor. ad the odecten.
Of which opinion Aristotle is. And Cicero in his offices defines him to be an
honest man, which will profit as many as he can, and will hurt none except he
be injured hi^ self. Whose words Lactantius does very notablely refute in
this wise. Lactantius de vero cultu. cap. 18.
O what a simple and true sentence has Cicero corrupted with adding but of two
words: for what need was there to ad, except he be injured? but only to
ingraft wickedness in the mind of an honest man, and to make him be without
patience, which is the greatest of all virtues? He says a good man may hurt,
if he be injured. But when he does hurt it must needs follow that he lose the
name of a good man. For it is no less evil to requite the^ it is to offer an
injury. For from whence do fraies, fighting and contentions arise, but only
because that wicked men laying aside all Patience, seek occasion to move
troubles and tumults? Now if against their madness, a man will set patience (then
which virtue nothing does better become a man) all troubles will easily be
extinguished, and quenches the same even as water puts out fire. But if
Impatience be set a against misuse, it is so far from being quenched, that it
ministers matter of continual debate, and even as it were Oil poured into
fire it raises such a flame, as not a river, but ye effusion of much blood can
extinguish the same. And therefore very necessary is patience, which prudent
Cicero would take from a virtuous man. This only virtue is the cause that no
evils be done: and if every man had this gift, no wickedness nor deceit would
be in the world. And therefore what can be more contrary to the nature of an
honest man, then to submit him self to Anger that can dispoile him not only
of the name of a good man, but also will not suffer him to be called a man. For
as Tullie him self says, and truly, to hurt another, Anger.
is not according to man's nature. For both beasts if you move them either with
heel or horn will set against you: and Serpents and savage Beasts will not
trouble you, except they perceive you persecute the^ to slay them, and (that we
may return to the examples of men) ignorant and foolish men, when they are
hurt and injured, are led with a blind and unreasonable fury to hurt and
requite injuries done unto them. And therefore in what shall a wise and good
differ from a foolish and wicked man, but only that he has a singular
patience which fools want: but only that he can assuage his anger, which
those which have not grace and goodness cannot bridle? But forsooth this thing
deceived him, because when he speak of virtue in what quarrel soever he
overcame, he supposed that same to be virtue, and could not perceive that a man
submitting him self to Anger, and favoring those affections which he should
withstand, and so rushing in to what part so ever wickedness did prououke him,
did violate the office of virtue.

For he which bends him self to revenge does prepare him self to imitate
his doings of whom he is moles^ed. So he which imitateth an evil man cannot
be a good man in any sort. And therefore by these two words he takees from a
good man two of the cheifest virtues, and will not have a wise man to have
Innocence and Patience. Hitherto Lactantius, whose words together with those
before mentioned examples, may sufficiently set forth both the very nature of
this virtue, and confute all those which will not allow of Patience.

Of Stabilitie. Cap. 35.
THe last of the parts of Fortitude, is Stabilitie, a virtue most meet for
him which would be a valiant man. Stabilitie. Perseverance.
It has a great affinity with those three immediately mentioned parts of
Fortitude. It is a continuing in that which is well begun. And therefore it is
called sometime Perseuera^ce, because it does persevere and continue in a good
thing* and sometime Pertinacie. Pertinacie
And heerof proceeded that saying of Hanniball to his Soldiers, Pertinax and
stable virtue overcomes all things. And that Pertinacie is sometime taken for
Stabilitie it may apapeere by the common voice of the people of Rome, for they
called Seuerus ye good Emperor because of his stable wit and judgment Seuerus
Pertinax, which never they would have done had not ye same been a good word.
Seuerus Pertinax^
And yet those Latinists which write of the true nature of words, take the
same in the wurst part for an obstinate continuing in a naughty matter, or
for a depending of ones brain in an error against the mind of many.

So that Pertinacie shall be one of the extremes of Stabilitie, and the other is
Leuitie. Whereof one teaches how to be to firm in a naughty cause, Leuitie.
the other to fickle in a good: both unmeet for a man, and for both have many
been disprased. A. Vitellius.
As A. Vitellius a most victorious Emperor of all others. He would say and
unsay with one breath, as wavering in all his doings as a wethercock.

Also Sextus Pompeius, for this vice was much defamed. Sextus Pompeius.
It is written of him that he was lucky in ouercomming his foes. But as often
as he perceived his enemies to be put to flight, then was he careless and
would not persevere in that which he had well begun, and therefore sometimes he
was plagued: for his conquered enemies gathering them selves together would
unawares set upon him, and so take reueng of their former foil. Pyrrhus for
many virtues was extolled with divine commendations, Pyrrhus.
yet one thing he lacked which obscured the rest of his glory. For he was
excellent in getting, but in keeping he was the wurst of a thousand. And
therefore as often as he brought under his subjection any City, in hope still
to subdue, lost the former. Which made King Antigonus to compare him to a dice
pla^er, Antigonus
which in hope to gain, does oftentimes leese not only that which before he
wan, but also his own proper goods. And such was the (...) of Pyrrhus, all his
care was to (...) and never to keep that which already he had gotten: so that
hope of victory and good Fortune clean ouerthrewe his judgment which should
have told him that it was no less virtue to keep things gotten then to be
desirous of new. Here will we leave speaking of Fortitud^ and her parts, and
descend into justice whose nature, parts, and excellency shall be dec^a^ed.

Of Justice. Cap. 36.
WE are now come to ye last enemy of wickedness, which is Justice. Justice.
A virtue so necessary, as without the same all other are lame and imperfect.

For as the Poets by the name of one of the Muses understand all: so attain
one of the virtues perfectly, and you know all: Vertutu^ imperio.
for what is Fortitude without wisdom, but rashness: or wisdom without
Justice, but craftiness: or Justice without Temperance, but cruelty. or
Temperance without Fortitude but sauadgenes? So that none can have one, except
he be adorned withal. And amongst them, this last for worthynes is not the
least. Plato de legibus,
Nay (if Plato may in in this thing be credited) of all the gifts of God
Justice is principal. And therefore in many places he calls God the author,
cause, and beginni^g of Justice. This Justice was feigned of the Poets to be a
virgin, and to reign among men, to whose precepts as long as they listened, they
possessed all things quietly, and a golden world. Iustitia virgo.
But when they began to be rebellious, to follow wickedness and to contemn her
Laws* then Deseruit propere terras iustissima virgo
Et Iouis in regno caelique in part resedit:


This righteous maiden forsook this world and returned to the kingdom of
Jupiter: so that since her departure we in this world have had in sted of
love, hatred: for peace, troubles: and for an happy life, a miserable estate.
By which sentence of the Poets, no other thing is meant, but that Justice is a
divine and celestial virtue, which if me^ would embrace, they might live
quietly from troubles and happily to their hearts desire.

Tullie confirms that of Plato and the Poets, Cicero de legibus.
and says, that of all things contained in the Books and volumes of
Philosophy nothing is more to be commended, then that which gives us to
understand we are borne to Justice. But the excellency of this virtue will be
the better perceived, if we call into remembrance of how many kinds justice
does consist. The Philosophers make four sorts of Justice, Justice of iiij.
kinds
and say that all Justice is either Celestial, Natural, Civil, or Judicial.
The celestial Justice is that, Celestial Justice.
whereby we are driven to the confessing there is a God creator of all things,
known of none perfectly, and as he is, but by his woorks, and yet knowing all
things: which is not only the Creator but the keeper of all things in their
kind from destruction without whose care nothing is, has been, or can
continue: which though he have a care of all things created by him, yet most
especial of man and therefore has not only endued him with reason and
speeches, whereby he may both conceive as well that which has been, is, or may
be, and also utter and express that which is conceived unto others, but also
has made him a beholder of the Heavens, and not only has endued him with
reason, and with that gift of beholding the firmament (which no other creatures
do) but also has brought all other things as well senceles as having life: as
Fowls, fishes, and four footed beasts, under his power either to kill or keep
them, and at his pleasure to use them. So that this divine and celestial
justice is a perfect consideration, and a dutiful acknowledging of Gods
omnipotency, which Justice had many Philosophers even by the instinct of
nature. Natural Justice.
Natural Justice is that which all people have in them selves by nature, and is
always and in all places one and the same. Which is not only proper and
peculiar unto man (as was the former celestial Justice) but also many brute
Beasts do participate the same. The properties of this Justice are many as to
have a care of our selves, not wilfully to run into perils and dangers: Next to
have an affection toward them which move of us, as our children, and not to
suffer them to be molested of any* Thirdly, to relieve our Parents, kinsmen and
neighbors, if there be any in poverty, and to help them when they be in
troubles. Lastly to hear good will to all, and willingly to offend none. And
there is almost no beast, and certainly there can be no man, which has not
these cares sometime in his mind, and does not thinck that he should first
love him self, then his wife and children, next his parents, kinsemen and
acquaintance, and lastly bear a general good will unto all men, and do unto
every manne, as he would be done unto. And therefore it is called Natural
Justice, because naturally in man there be some sparks of virtue, and no man
is so destitute of grace, but sometime or other (though he never herd of God
and his threatenings to wicked livers) does repent him of his wickedness.

Now the Stoiks did not only thinck Justice to be natural, but they thought
virtue in general to be naught else but an obsolute and perfect nature. And
they judged (as in the beginning of this Book we told) the cheifest happiness
not to swerve from the laws of nature. And the ancient Academicks to this
purpose defined justice to be nothing else but a perfect knowledge of good and
evil agreeing to natural reason. By the which two kinds of Justice, we see
that Justice is often times referred as well to our selves, as unto others. So
that they are much deceived which say, that Justice of all virtues is another
good, and does those things all together which are not profitable to him
which does them, but unto others to whom they are done: and that it is no
Justice to help our selves. But that opinion is against the authority of
Aristotle, and reason, which any will grant if he (...) enter into his own
conscience but a little. Now to Civil Justice: Civil Justice.
Pomponius Laetus says, Pomponius laetus de legibus
that Civil Justice is ye which is made either by ye laws of nature, ye
statutes of the people, the consultations of Senators, ye devises of princes or
authority of grave and wise me^. So that civil Justice is only among civil
men, in common weles. Cicero defines the same to be an habit of the mind,
giving unto every man according to his d^^serts. And Aristotle says it is a
ver^^^ of the mind, rewarding all men acti^^^ding to their worthiness. Quales
principes tales subditi.
This Justice (...) all moral virtues accompany, by whose counsel Justice
does behold what is good or otherwise, who is worthy of preferment, or no. Of
all others, Princes and such as are in authority, Such princ^s, such people.
ought to have this virtue. For what soever such men do allow, it is embraced
of the vulgar sort. And therefore says Plato, that the alteration of a Prince,
brings the alteration of a common weal. For as a good Prince more by the
example of godliness, the^ by godliness it self does persist: so a wicked Prince
more by the example of ungodliness, the^ by y^ thing it self does corrupt the
manners of his Subjects: for the common sort of men persuade them selves all
that to be well done which is done by example. Again those arts and
occupation which a Prince does esteem of, Isocrates ad Dimonicum.
flourish and are practiced of all men, and those which he contemns, are
obscure and of no price. Which made Isocrates to cou^sail his King to cherish
those which were studious of good letters, and to make much of profitable
occupations, but unprofitable and servile (as unmeet for a common well) he
should reject, and nothing regard, Egyptians.
will you know what made the Egyptians to be so notable Mathematicions?
Ptolomie their King spent most of his time in that study. Ptolom.
What made the Persians so to be delighted in beastly pleasure, Persians.
Xerxes.
but only because that Xerxes their King was so delighted therewith? Or what
made the Roman gentlemen in the time of Nero, to be so lasciuiously bent, Roman.
but because their prince Nero did by his example prove that to be lawful
which in deed was most hurtful to common well? Nero.
It is therefore the part of every Prince and Magistrate, that he with all
care beware lest by evil example, he bring a wicked custo^e into his dominion.
It was very wisely by law decreed among the Persians, Custom.
that if any of their Contrie did imitate the behauior of strangers, Persians.
and so trouble common orders, he should therefore loose his life. Lycurgus was
want before the cheef of the Lacedaemonians to say, Lycurgus
that magistrates should be more vigila^t in seeing ye no corrupt and wicked
manners were brought into their city, then to avoid a bodily piague and
infections of the bodies of the Lacedaemonians. The consideration whereof made
the Cretensians as often as they would curse their enemies to wish no other
plague to come among them, Cretensia^s
then that their people might be delighted in wickedness. Xerxes.
And Xerxes being on a time greatly offended with the Babylonians, thought to
revenge him self upon them: Babylonians.
and he had no better way to wreak his anger, the^ so to prouid as they should
not be exercised is warlike affairs or profitable things, but live altogether
at ease, in pleasure. And therefore he brought among them minstrels, allowed
stews, suffered them to be free from punishment for any offense. Which custom
came at the length to such an habit, as they proved the most wicked people
under the Sun: and in all ye world was there not a more abominable place then
Babylon. It is therefore expedient that a prince do exercise and esteem of
civil Justice, ^.
which will not suffer any wicked custom among men, nor permit evil manners to
go uncorrected. ^.
Which virtue made Galba the Emperor to be well reported of in all the world.
For because he would not have the good custom which sometime was among the
Romans, to be broken, and for gotten, which was that every morning and evening
the sons and servants of the Roman people should come before him and show
them selves dutiful and obedient toward him: therefore because he would not
break ye seemly custom, he would be sure ye every morning they should bid
God save him, and evening wish him good rest. And thus much concerning civil
Justice. The last is Judicial which depends upon laws made for the commodity
of a common well, Judicial* Justice.
and that Justice which is exercised according to the laws is called
Judicial. The virtues of the law are four, to bear sway, to forbid, Virtues
of the law.
to punish, to suffer: to bear sway over all, to forbid injuries, to punish
malefactors, to suffer and tolerate the virtuous. The precepts of the law may
be comprehended under these three things, Precept^s of the law.
to live honestly to hurt no man wilfully, to render every man his due
carefully. Discriptio^ of Justice.
This Justice is painted blind with a covering before her face, not because
she is blind, but thereby to signify that Justice though she do behold that
which is right and honest, yet will she respect no persons. Others paint this
virtue after this sort, they fain her to be a Virgin, of countenance grave and
shamefast, having a very sharp sight, and yet of a wunderful modesty, without
austeritie or childishness. By which was meant that a Judge should be a grave
man, severe, and of good behauior, one to whom men without great fear should
not have access. At Thebes were certain Images of Judges without hands and
without eyes, to show that Judges should neither be corrupted with bribes, nor
by any person drawn from that which is right and law. Justice with out hands.
Here I might enter in that question whether a magistrate, or a King should
rule according to the laws written or according to reason. Aristotle in his
politics.
But I leave the same as somewhat unfit for this place, where I do but
explycate the nature of every virtue. Yet this will I say, that according to the
laws written, he should govern, and yet not altogether, Whether it be more
expedient to be governed by a good king, then by a good law.
for then he should execute every thing to the vttermoste (which is the
greatest injury) but should consider circumstances thoroughly, and accordingly
pronounce Judgment, so that especially he obey that law which is within every
prudent man, not written in Books. And that Prince which according to reason,
does govern is called a King. A King.
So that the difference between him and a Tyrant, is because a King rules as
he ought, a Tyrant as he list: A Tyrant.
a King to the profitting of all, a Tyrant only to pleasure a few, and that not
for the love of virtue, but to the increase of wickedness. And thus much
breefly of the four kinds of Justice. Now (as we have done in the other
before mentioned virtues) let us manifest the parts of which true Justice does
consist. Which are in number eight, and are these, Parts of Justice.
Innocence, Freendship, Concord, Godliness, Humanity, Gratefulnes and
Faithfulness.

Of Innocence. Cap. 37.
Innocence (according to the Peripatecions) is an habit of the mind,
Innocence.
so well framed that it will hurt no man either by word or deed. An innocent man
in respect of a good conscience contemns all woorldly things, and will not so
much as in heart covet another man's right, he will come to nothing by wicked
and unlawful means, neither will he injury any man though he might got much
thereby. Cicero therefore calls the same an affection of the mind, which will
not molest, injury, nor hurt any man. This innocent man is he which fears no
man, no law, no witness, accusar, judge, or any but is a free man, and by reason
of his good conscience is out of the limits of the law. He will be sure to give
unto every man his due right, and will obey the authority of no man which will
command him to do any thing that is not good, honest and virtuous. Now the
ungodly perceiving the same, conceive by and by secret hatred against them. And
heerof it comes that innocent and just men of all others are most contemned,
hated and persecuted: and they which live most uprightly and in the fear of
God, are counted idiots and fools, and are judged unworthy to be in a common
weal as Lactantius confirms. Lactan. de Iusticia ca. 9. and. 32
And as he says, such is the vilde nature of the rude and common people, as
they make smallest account of them which are best disposed: and those they
extole to the Skies, Cicero pro M. Fonteio.
which can by wurse means come either to riches or promocio^. Cicero confirms
ye same in a certain oration of his most eloquently: his place though it be
somewhat long, yet will I recite because of the worthiness thereof: his words are
these. M. Aemylius Scaurus a most worthy man of our city was accused of M.
Brutus, M. Aemylius Scau.
whose orations are extant, by which it is apparent that many things were spoke
against M. Scaurus but falcely as all men know. How much did Aquilius hear in
his judgment? How much L. Cotta? finally P. Rutilius? which although he were
condemned, M. Aquilius. L. Cotta. P. Rutilius.
yet in mine opinion he is to be numbered among the best and most innocent men.
That holy and temperate man heard many things in his troubles which tended to
his defamation, and made him to be suspected of lust and incontinencie. There
is an oration of C. Gracchus a man in my judgment of all others most
ingenious and eloquent, in which oration are many things uttered against L.
Piso, L. Piso Frug^.
but against what kind of man? Forsooth of such integrity of life, as in
those days (when it was wunder to see a wicked man, nay none could be found
for conversation dishonest) yet he of all others alone was called by ye name of
a good husband. Which when Gracchus willed to be called before the assembly,
and he which should have gone, asked what Piso he should fetch (because there
were many of that name)? Thou compellest me now said Gracchus to say, mine
enemy that good husband, So that he whom his utter and capital enemy could
not otherwise discribe without he had praised him before, C. Gracchus.
which by that name given unto him for his virtues was both knoween who he
was: and also what kind of man, yet notwithstanding was falsely slaundered and
made to answer unto many wicked accusations, and to clear him self before the
whole court, of many evil reports. M. Fonteius in two accions has been
meruailously accused, M. Fonteius^
and yet nothing is proved, whereby he may be thought either incontinent, a
brabler, unmerciful, or a molester of any man.

His accusers are so far from declaring any notorious vice of his, that for
their lives they cannot find fault with, or blame any thing which he has at
any time spoken. Now if his enemies either had as much boldenes to lie, or
ingeniousnes to fain, as they have will to oppress, and liberty to inuente,
certainly Fonteius at this time should not have better fortune in hearing their
opprobrious talk, then those of who^e before I made mention. Hitherto Cicero.
By which it appears that the virtuous and well disposed, are odious to the
wicked, Cicero pro L. Muraena.
and have been, yea in those days, when as godliness was most exercised. But
what may we thinck to be the cause of this deadly and cruel hatred? shall we
think that verity and truth brings hatred? Or that the wicked be ashamed of
them selves (through giltienes of conscience) and would in no case that there
might be any to reprehend them for their detestable behavior, and therefore
conceive inward malice againg them? Or rather judge that both truethe and
integrity causes this contempt and cruelty of the wicked against ye
innocent? But let the righteous rejoice in their integrity of life and
unpolluted conscience. For (as Tullie says) all of us are willing and will make
haste to repel dangers (which are imminent against the innocent) and though we
be in heart or secretly enemies yet in such troubles, when it stands upon ye
credit or life of a man, we will show the part of most loouing and faithful
friends. Cicero pro posio.
For (as the same Cicero in an other place affirms) as fire cast into waters
is by and by put out and waxes cold: so a falce accusation though it burn
and be never so hot, against a chaste and vncorrupt conversation, is quickly
consumed and vanishes ere one beware without hurting any whit. Consolations
for the slaundered.
And a rumor raised of nothing, vanishes of his own accord, and that vanity
of speech profits nothing, but in making the innocence of him which is
defamed to be more wundred at. And this ought again to comfort, that not
withstanding they are oppugned, yet a time will come when the truth shall be
known, and the false accusations of their enemies shall be made open to all
men. Cicero pro Clurentio
For (as the same Cicero says in an other place very notably) the truth by
the maliciousnes of many oppugned, and (as it were) drowned often times, when
it is supposed never to be seen again, does swim aloft, and is apparent to
the eyes of all men, and this defense of Innocence being stopped of the
malignant, takes breath and heart again to the overthrow of her enemies. Now
let us confirm this which has been spoken by stories and examples. Perseus.
Gorgon. Seraphians.
The Poets fain that when Perseus did show Gorgons head unto the Seraphians,
they were straight way turned into stones, which Perseus was reported to have
done to revenge the death of his innocent mother, Pelydectes
which Pelydectes their king had wickedly murdered. Archias.
One Archias a Poet, because him self in poetry would bear the bell,
murdered an innocent man, one which never had offended him, whose name was
Archilochus (his better by many degrees in that facultie^) which murder being
done secretly none being present or nigh at hand, Archilochus.
Archias was farthest from being suspected of such a (...). Yet
notwithstanding at length he was detected after this manner. As the people of
that contrie according to their custom were about to sacrifice unto their God
Apollo, a voice was heard which commanded Archias (being among the multitude)
to go away lest he by the blood of Archilochus polluted the temple of Apollo.
So that the innocence of Archilochus was illustred, and Archias for his
horrible fact punished: For the people stoned him to death. In like sort
Hasdruball for killing without a cause, an honest Spaniard: Hasdruball.
was killed of the servant of the same Spaniard. Which being apprehended of
the guard of Hasdruball, and afterward condemned, among most cruel torments
did meruelously rejoice that he had revenged the death of his good and so
innocent master. But what should I recite strange and foreign examples, when
daily we see ye innocence has many patrons, and for the defense of such as
are injured are magistrates (as it were masters of the people) appointed to see
that such as are malefactors be seuerly corrected, and such as are quiet and
virtuously bent, be favored and preferred.

Cicero says, that if in complaining of the misuse of the Romans, Cice. act. 6
in verrem.
he should by speaking so strain him self, as his strength should fail him and
yield up the Ghost^, that death of all others would seem unto him most
pleasant and honorable. So that innocence neither can lack praises, patrons,
nor reuengers. It may for a time be oppressed, but it will rise again: it may
be obscured, but it will shine again: Quin. li. 1 cap. 20. de institution^
orato^ia.
it may be overwhelmed, but it can never be drowned. Quintilian says very well
that Providence, meaning God, has given especially this unto man, that by
honesty he should receive most comfort. And Tullie says that the remembrance
of a good conscience, Cice. li. 6. epistolaru^ familiaru^
is a comfort in adversity. And therefore this virtue, if it were as well
practiced in woork and conversation, as it is praised in word and orations,
less impiety toward God, less enmity among men, less iniuring one
another, there would be. For every man should consider yt he is borne to help
and not to hurt: to profit and not displeasure his fellow neighbors: if not
for fear of punishment in this world and everlasting pain in the world to
come, yet because he is Animal sociale, a creature whose nature is not to be
without company and neighborhood, which hurtful persons in that which in them
lies, would not have as appears by their killing, undoing, or molesting
their fellow Citizens. But I may not stand long upon any particular thing, and
therefore I will cut of the commending of this Innocent man, only with Plato I
say, Plato.
that this is he that well may by trusted of every man: to whom without fear of
reueling or disclosing of them, any may unfold his secrets: Theognis
and with the Poet Theognis I say, that of all treasures in a common weal,
this Innocent man is most to be esteemed and accounted of, nay nothing can be
compared unto him, nether gold, nor silver, nor any treasure. Now to that
which follows.

Of Freendship. Cap. 38.
PYt^^goras defines Freendship to be an equal agreeing together. Cicero says,
Freenship
it is a wishing of good things unto a man for his own sake, who^e he looueth.

Of these two with a little addition we will make a full definition of freendship
in this wise. Freendship is a natural goodwill of well disposed persons,
caused through likeness of manners and motions of the mind, fancying each other
for nothing else but only for the increase of virtue, not for any pleasure or
profit.

This definition shall be verified in that which follows. Three kinds of
freendship.
And that we may do it the better we will divide the same into her kinds (and
therein we follow Plato) which are three, to wit, a Natural freendship, a
Civil, and a Hospital. The natures of these in order shall be declared. And
first of that which is first placed.

Of Natural freendship. Cap. 39.
THe natural Freendship shall be declared by the division of ye same. Natural
freendship of what sorts.
It is divided into Piety, Kockring and kindred. The first again is divided
either into the love toward God, toward our parents, or toward our
contrie. Of our love or duty toward God we will not in this place talk of,
because hereafter we shall have a fit and proper place for the same. To the
duty toward our parents, Love of parents.
Isocrates adhorteth us in this wise: So behave your self toward your parents,
as you would have your Children love you. And nature wills us so to do. For
what is more according to nature, then to love them of whom we are borne?
Besides the exhortation of Isocrates, and the commandment of nature, many
examples of godly children may inuit us to immitation. Wunderful was the love
of Simon the Athenia^ toward his father. Simon Atheniensi^
For being for det cast into prison, where he died miserably, and by reason of
ye severe laws, could not be brought out of prison and buried, except first
the money were paid: and having not wherwithall to discharge ye det, Simon
went to the Prison, and caused those irons which were upon his father, to be
laid upon him self, and so delivered him, and remained in prison surety for
the money. Astapus Amphonius.
Astapus and Amphonius two yung men bare such love toward their parents,
that their City being burned they took them upon their shoulders and carried
them through the midst of the fire. A maid of Athens.
Also a maid of Athens, her father being cast into prison, where he should
have sterued for want of nurishment, craved so much leave of the keeper, that
every day she might have access unto her father. Whom with her milk she
preserved from death a long time. By this virtue Metellus got a name, Metellus
Pius,
and was called Metellus Pius, as we would say godly Metellus. For his father
being banished his Country (this Metellus being but a child) he went to the
Senate, and humbly beseeched them in most pitiful sort, that his father
might be sent for home and called from banishment. Love of our ^rince and
co^trie.


The love of our Country and Prince should be great. For (as Plato and Cicero
do say) no man is borne for him self, but a part of our birth our Country,
a part our Parents, a part our friends challenge as due unto the^. For as
laws are given for the commodity of all* not that a few may be enriched and
the rest beggered, even so should every true subject prefer a common profit
before a private, and an universal before a peculiar. Of this matter we shall
hereafter in the end of this Book speak, and therefore now will we be the more
breef. Only we will say that a betraier of his Contrie is little more to be
reprehe^ded them he which caring not for the common profit, only bends all his
endeavor to the enriching of him self not caring how many he brings to beggary.
By which it appears that he of all others is much to be commended, which in
defense and benefitting of his Contrie, will neither care for lim, lands, nor
life, but prefers ye prosperity of his Country before all other things.
Cicero li. 3 de finibus
And this according to Ciceros mind. Which consideration have many in foretime
ingrafted in their minds. And therefore the Emperor Otho when he saw that
either he must leave his Empire, Otho Imperator.
or keep the same with slaughter of many subjects, determined for the sauegarde
of his people to forsake this world. His friends and subjects desired him to
alter his mind, but no persuasion could move him, but answered the^, that
rather then by his life there should be civil discention and continual
discord among them, if he had a thousand lives, he would leave them to bring
them quietness. King Codrus also understanding by the Oracle that except he were
slain: Codrus.
his people the Athenians should never subdue their enemies, put upon him the
armor of a common soldior, and went into the fore front of the battle, where
he was slain, and so brought quietness unto his people and subjects. That great
care of delivering his contrie Athens from servitude, Aglaurus
made Aglaurus to cast him self hedlong from the walls of Athens. For it was
told him that except some body would kill him self for his contries sake,
Athens should be conquered, which thing when Aglaurus did hear, straight way in
that manner as I have told, he rid him self of this world, and his contrie
from thraldom. Iphigenia
Iphigenia likewise a woman, because yt by her blood her enemies vnsatiablenes
might be quenched she committed her self to be sacrificed.

There was a temple at Athens called Leocorium, Leocoriu^.
which is by interpretation, the temple of ye peoples daughters. It was erected
in honor of the death of three women called Theopa, Eubula and Praxithea,
Theopa. Eubula. Praxithea
which for the preservation of Athe^s were offered unto Minerua. For the Oracle
had said yt the town could not flourish except they were killed. By the praise
of which it appears, how great their sha^e is which have no care at al
whether their contrie flourish or come to decay. Now it appears how unworthy
of all men they are to receive any benefit of a country, which for a little
profit or preferment, will seek to bring the same into servitude.

Of which some (were it not that I had reserved their names, because they are
famous, unto a more fit place in the end of this Book where I shall talk of
Faithfulness) I would recite, but I must be breef. Here might be moved a
question, whether the love of our parents, or of our King and contrie be
greater. Many reasons might be brought to the confirmation of either part, as
of the one we receive life, by ye other we keep life: Whether the love of
parents or Prince be greater.
of the one food, by the other fame: of the one we are cherished, by the other
many thousa^ds are preserved from defamations, from invasions, from servitude
and misery. Now which is greater let others judge* I will now come to the next
part of Natural freendship which is indulgence or cockring of Children,
Indulge^ce or cockri^gs
a great and unspeakable goodwil which parents do show toward their Children.
Herein ought great heed to be had lest to much good will be not showed toward
our wives and children, for thereby we may fall into as great blame as by
ouermuche severity: and in both have many offended as in rough and sharp
dealing, Oppianicus, Domitius, Medea. Nero, Periander, Herod, the father of
Atalanta, and others.

Oppianicus.
Oppianicus, contrary to the common nature of parents (which commonly are wunt
to be more covetous of riches for their Childrens sake, then otherwise they
would) he, Cicero pro A. Cluentio. Domitius
I say, was content for money to forsake his children, as Tullie does report.
Domitius detested his son Nero (a man as it proved, worthy to be detested)
for no other cause, but because be had begotten him upon Agrippina. Medea,
Medea. Nero.
being forsaken of Jason, murdered her own sons. Nero killed his own
wife, some say, with spurning her. Periander Herod.
The like is reported of Periander. Herod was so destitute of all fatherly
affection, that he commanded his own and only child to be murdered among
that general killing of Innocents in Jury. Augustus
Which when Augustus the Emperor did hear, he said that he had rather be Herod's
hog then his child. For to kill an Hog among the Jews was sacrilege but he
thought it no sin to (...) his Son and heir. Atalanta.
Atalantas father was so unnatural, that as soon as she was borne he
commanded her to be cast among wild beasts, saying that he needed no women.
As this overmuch cruelty of parents toward their children, and husbands
toward their wives, is to be detested: so again to much cockring and
kindenes does as much harm, and many for the same have been infamous: as
Ptolomie of Egypt, Ariobarzanes of Cappadocia, Seleucus of Syria, Claudius and
Augustus Emperors, and others. Ptolomie Ariobarzanes. Seleucus.
Ptolomie, Ariobarzanes, and Selucus, put them selves out of Princely
authority, to prefer their sons. But such over kindness is not to be liked
of, for it is the cause of much mischief, and oftentimes hasteneth their
deaths. Historiographers write that Prusias the king of Bithinia, Prusias.
was murdered of his own son when he had committed the rule of his kingdom
unto him, Darius also lay in wait to kill his father Arataxerxes, Darius.
Artaxerxes. Eucratides.
who had displaced himself to make him King. Also Eucratides King of ye
Bactrians, after he had vanquished and put to flight Demetrius King of ye
Jews, was slain by his own sons, whom he had left to guide and govern his
people in his absence. Princes therefore ought to have great care how they
depose them selves out of princely throne, and leave the tuition of their
people, unto others, when as many of their own children have been so well
rewarded. Claudius.
Claudius the Emperor did so bear with his wife in her naughtiness, that at
length she took the boldenes of an harlot: and his ouerte^dernes caused her to
do that openly which before she did secretly and with fear. Well in this kind
of love a new must be observed. Here again may be moved another question.
Whether the love of parents toward their children be greater, Whether the
love of parents toward their children be greater the^ contrary.
then the love of children toward their parents. Many reasons may be brought
to prove, and many examples to confirm either part, some we have already in
this chapter recited. But certain it is that the love of parents toward their
children is greater and that is proved by two reasons. The first is this: By
how much more any man knows the thing which he looueth, then the thing
knows him: by so much he looueth it better. But a father does better know
the son, then the son does know the father: and therefore the father
does love him better. Again an Artificer does love his woorkmanship, and
the thing wrought by ye woorkman. But the father is like a woorkman, and the
son as the woorkmanship, and therefore he does better love his son, then
his Son can fancy him. Whether a father does love his children better then
ye mother.
And therefore is it said that this natural and fatherly affection does
always descend, but it never ascends: Again it may be moved whether a father
does fancy better his children then the mother. It is thought that the mother
does. And the philosophers prove it by this reason. They which take the
greater pains in getting any thing, love that which is gotten more entirely,
then they which take less pains. But the mother does with greater pains
attain to the^ then the father: and therefore her love must needs be greater.

Now to the last part of this natural freendship. Reason wills that as
first we should abooue all things love God, Kindred.
our parents, Contrie, wives, and children: so next we are bound in conscience
to make much of those which are of our kin and acquaintance. And therefore who
is he that does not quake for fear, when he hears but the mentioning of
Tiberius Caesar, Nero, Artaxerxes, Ptolomie and other most unnatural wretches?
Tiberius Caesar.
It is written of Tiberius, that he murdered his sons, killed his kinsemen,
slew his dear friends, and afterward thought him self an happy man, because
like Priamus he remained after ye death of his kin. Priamus Nero. Ataxerxes.
Ptolomie Lysimachus. Philip. Cleopatra
Nero slew his mother and his master. Artaxerxes his sister. Ptolomie also
his sister, and his sisters sons called Lysimachus and Philip. Another
Ptolomie also most unnaturally murdered his own Son, begotten of his
sister Cleopatra. Therefore how necessary and abooue all this natural
freendship is to be sought for, it is apparent. Without which we can neither
serve God, neither our Parents and kinsefolke, to whme especially we are bound,
with a more straight chain and surer link the^ to any others.

Of Civil freendship. Cap. 40.
Civil Freendship is of three sorts. The first is a common or general good
will, Civil friendship of three sorts.
whereby we wish well unto all men, and are provoked the^unto by the rites, laws
and customs of our Country, or otherwise by any common thing to all men. And
therefore it is a great cause of love and amity among men to be under the
same Princes, to be in subjection to the same laws, to be of one society, of
one Contrie, City, Common freendship.
to be of one religion. etc. There be also many things which men have in
common, and belong as well to the one as to the other, as Churches, market
places, stages, guildhalles, places appointed to the use of all men, and do
conioine men in gadwil meruailously. And this common amity is so requisite, as
without the same there is no difference between brute beasts and men: we
should without the same live in solitarines, never without snares to entrap us,
and mischeefes to bereave him of al ioies. Which made Cicero to say, Cicero pro
S. Roscio.
that he which would cut of this common freendship, did even as it were go
about to take the Sun from the world. And in a certain Oration of his he has
a pretty place to the praising of this Freendship, where he says, that those
citizens which will not willingly help one another, do in that which in
them lies, go about to overthrow the common estate of a common weal, and to
disturb the fellowship of this life. For says he, nature has not so made us,
that of our selves we can do all things without the aid of others, and one is
more apt to one thing then an other. And therefore goodwil is gotten, that so by
helping one another according to their calling the common profit may be sought
for. Epicures.
The Epicures whose indeuores are t'encrease pleasure, do altogether comme^d
this kind of Freendship abooue any other, as that without which no pleasure
could be in this life. But their freendship is naught else, but that which we
call Good fellowship, Good fellowship.
which in deed continues but a time as long as pleasure lasts, but no
pleasure: no Freendship. The nature of this freendship shall be better declared
hereafter both when we shall speak of Concord, and also of the other parts
of this Civil freendship. The second kind of this Civil Freendship, is that
which is gotten not without pleasure or profit, but only by virtue and likeness
of manners This freendship brings to pass, Perfect Freendship
that among men there be a great agreement both in will and in woorking. For
as Salust saeith: this is perfect and unfeigned freendship, to think one and the
same thing. And as Tullie says, Cicero pro Cu. Plancio.
there is none more certain token of true freendship, then is consent and
communicating of our cogitations one with another. This freendship is only
between honest and well disposed persons. The end of true freendship.
For the consent which is between wicked men, is not freendshippe, (whose end
is the increase of godliness) but a faction to il purpose and disquieting of the
common weal. Isocrates writes very well of this matter and says, that the
greement of the wicked is easily upon a a small occasion broken, but ye
freendship of the virtuous continues for ever. And will you know in deed who
is a true and perfect friend? Then harken unto a learned man. A
Be not drawn away with fair words, nor seduced with wickedness, nor ouerco^e
with injuries, love with all your heart unfeignedly, Notes of unfeigned friendship.
and then shall you be a perfect friend. This freendship has many notees to be
known by. For it is a freendship for her self, it is the greatest ye most
perfect, ^he best, the most surest and therefore it is the rarest freendship. It
is called a freendship Per se, because the spring of the same is that which is
only good of it self, and that is virtue. It is ye gretest, because it is for
the sake of that which is greatest, which is only virtue. It is the most
perfects, for what is more perfect then virtue? It is the best, because both
the cause and end thereof is virtue. It is the surest and continues longest:
for no adversity can break the same, no sickness can weaken it, no time can
alter it, no death can dissolve it: and therefore it is rare and among few. And
what meruel? For what is less esteemed then virtue? or who cares almost for
her? And therefore the cause being rare, and little esteemed, the effect must
needs be rare, and therefore no meruail though this Freendship be little
embraced. Amicoru^ paria.
In all Grecia being so populous a Contrie, there was scarce three copel that
were faithful friends. It was a rare thing in those days, when so few were
celebrated for their unfeigned freendship, but much more wunderful is it in
these days. For who will be content to lose his life for his Damon, Damon.
Pytheas.
as did Pytheas? Or who will say he is Orestes, when he is Pylades, for the
sauegarde of his friend? Nay, Orestes. Pylades.
that is a great thing: who will in these days almost for go his goods (do I
say all his goods?) nay, who will forgo but part of his goods, to ^a^ue his
friend from misery? Such friends are as rare as were those Grecia^ friends.
Well this freendship is not popular, it is peculiar unto few: for many cannot be
in perfect freendship together: goodwill there may be, but unfeigned Freendship
cannot be. For as a kingdom cannot have many governors, nor one wife many
husbands and love the^, and be looued of them entirely: so one cannot love
many, and be loved again heartily without hypocrisey. For as mighty fluds,
Faithful Frendshipe among few
by how much they are brought into small rivers, by so much they loose of their
strength: so love cannot be borne to many without abating the force thereof.
The more it fa^oureth, of the less force: but the fewer, the more faithful.
Vis vnita fortior.
That is a true saying in Philosophy Vis vnita fortior, at parts in plures
secta peribit, Strength is the^ weakened when it is divided. Cicero writing to
his friend Atticus, Cicero ad Atticu^. li. 1 epistolaru^
declares the want of a true friend, the place though it be long, yet because
of the worthiness thereof I will recite. Know you my friend that at this time
there is nothing that I stand more in need of, then that man to whom I may
unfold the secrets of my heart and freely communicate (as if I were alone)
those things which any way trouble me, whose wisdom is great, with whom I may
talk boldly and familiarly with out faining, without disse^bling, without
biding any thing from him. My brother and most plain. simple and faithful
Metellus is absent, no man but a shore* and air, and mere solitarines.
Metellus. Atticus.
And you (my Atticus) which oftentimes with loving talk and grave counsel
have lightened my heart of many sorrows, which have been in public offices a
partener, and privy to all my private affairs, and a partaker of all my
thoughts and consultations, where art thou? Alas (seeing the want of thee and
Metellus) I am now so destitute yt all the joy and pleasure I have, is which my
wife, my daughter and my honey sweet Cicero, offer unto me. For ye ambitious
fained and fickle freendship (in our court) has a certain outward show, but at
home, and my heart it does not delight. And therefore when my house in the
morning is well filled, and when we go to the count compassed about with
flocks of friends, The ex^l^^cie of a godly friend
among them all I cannot meet with one with whom I may either jest merrily, or
talk familiarly. And therefore your coming is much wished, and your sight of
me is hartelie desired. etc. By which appears the excellency of this
freendship. For he does not only prefer ye same before the common freendship
which is among men, but also before ye love which is between parents and
their children.

And certainly to a faithful friend nothing can be compared. For he, when all
is gone will continue. And if you respect either pleasure or profit: he is
most to be wished. For what pleasure is greater then to have one with whom we
may talk merrily: and without fear utter even the very secrets of our hearts?
Again what profit is like a friend to whom in necessity we may fly for
succor, in adversity is a bulwoork against invasions, and a refuge of whom we
may be bold, which is one man continually? And come wealth, come woe, come
prosperity, come adversity, is no chaungeling? Now to that which follows.

The last kind of freendship is called Sociall or Fellowly freendship. The
cause of which freendship is only perfect, Felowly freendship.
and therefore it differs from these abooue recited kinds of Amity. For as
the one has pleasure for her end, and the other virtue: so this has profit.
Such is the freendship of crafts men and merchants: but this does continue but
for a time as the first. And therefore when pleasure is gone, love is none: and
farewell goodwil (say they) when goods are consumed. Of this freendship Cicero
wrote notably, to this purpose. This word love from whence freendship is
derived, Cicero. li. 1 de natura Deoru^: et li. 2. de finibus.
is charie and dear: which freendship if we embrace only for our own sakes
and profit, not for his whom we love and bear good will unto, then is it not
to be called Amity, but a certain chopping and changing of good will for
gains, and freendly words, for profit and commodity. After which sort we
should love our feeldes and pasture ground, and our beasts and cattle,
because we hope to receive profit of them, but the freendship among men should
be free without hope of reaping earthly commodity. But if we only bear
goodwill in hope to receive gain, if there be no kindenes which is cause of
freendship, and makes the same of her own nature, or for none other cause to
be desired, there is no dout, but that we may prefer groves and lands before
friends. For they bring most profit to their owners. And therefore it is meet
that he which would be counted my true and faithful friend, should love me
for mine own sake, not for my goods and riches. And again Cicero in his second
book De Finibus, declares the nature of this freendship in these words: what
place has freendship, or who can be a friend unto any man which does not love
his friend only for his friends sake? And to Love (from whence freendship is
derived) what other thing is it, D^finition of Love.
but to wish unto him whom we love, all kind of goodness, glory and
prosperity, although no commodity do return to us at all? etc. But some will
say (says he) I follow gain and profit. And then shall your freendship
continue as long as you reap commodity.

And therefore true is that saying of a learned man, It is hard in prosperity
to know whether our friends do love us for our own sakes, or for our goods:
Adversity tryes a friend.
but adversity proves a friend. For neither does prosperity manifest a
friend, nor adversity bide a flatterer. And thus much breefely of Civil
freendship. Of all these kinds of civil amity, but one can truly be
commmended (for praise belongs only to virtue) the other be necessary (for
without them no estate can flourish) but they are not of continuance. Now to the
last kind of freendship.

Of Hospitality. Cap. 41.
AS the Natural and Civil freendships had their parts, Hospitality of what
sorts.
so has this Hospitality hers. For the learned divide this freendship this
hospitality into four parts. Whereof one they call a glorious entertainment
of men, only to be well thought of: another is a covetous kind of
Hospitality, only for ye penny: the third is a courteous receiui^g either of
our friends* or strangers: the last is a religious entertainment of all such
as truly without hypocrisy serve God. Glorious hospitality
The first is a glorious (altogether a vicious) Hospitality of the which
Tullie makes mention in this sort: Cicero in Officiis.
Hospitality is well co^me^ded of Theophrastus. For it is a glorious thing to
have the houses of noble men open, for noble gests to enter. If he had said it
had been a glorious thing that noble men's houses should be a receptacle and
place of releef unto poor men oppressed with miseries, he had spoken very well,
but saying they should be open to noble men, such as themselves are, he
seems to break ye precepts of Justice. For hospitality should be only for
the releef of such as are pinched with poverty, which noble men are not
troubled with: for in any place they may have to their desire all things. Again
a just man will do nothing but yt which is a benefit: but it is no benefit,
which is done in hope to be well rewarded afterward. As they do intertain men
because themselves at their pleasure may have the like at their hands, whom they
have so well entertained. So yt this kind of hospitality is nether good
because it is not toward the^ which indeed should be releued, neither is it a
benefit, A benefit.
because they which are entertained are bound to requite ye same with the like:
Lactantius de vero cultu cap. 12.
and therefore it is much to be dispraised as Lacta^tius also affirms. The
second is a covetous, a kind of Hospitality only for lucre, not for any love
at all. And such are Tauerners, Inholders, and such like, which receive men
only for profit.

This kind of Hospitality in some respect is good and necessary. For
notwithstanding their insatiable desire of worldly goods, which they have that
keep them, yet cannot trauailers and strangers be without them: but do rejoice
that for money they may have meat and rest to relieve them selves. The third is
a courteous Hospitality, Courteous hospitality
and is divided into (...) and I (...) (as the Greeks do say) (...) is a kind
of Hospitality, when men do receive strangers only for courtesy and good
will, not for any hope of praise or desire of profit. Of this does Massurius
Sabinus make mention where he says, Massurius Sabinus.
that the manner was among the ancient, that ye first place was given alwais to
the Magistrate, the second to a stranger, the third to clients, the fourth to
kinsemen, the fifth to neighbors, and thereby it appears that strangers were
much made of, and lovingly in treated. Caesar in his Commentaries does much
commend the Germans for their courtesy toward Alians and strangers, Germans.
and he says it was not only a most horrible thing esteemed of the^ to
molest a stranger, but also showed the^ selves defenders of them, from all
such as did persecute and would plague them. And moreover he reports that not
only in such manner they did show them selves toward them, but also would
cherish them with meat, drink, clothing, and lodging. This kind of
Hospitality to Kings and princes has brought much glory and mightily
confirmed Freendship. The courtesy of the greater Scipio toward Massinissa
King of the Numidians, Scipio. Massinissa.
brought such profit to the Romans, as he of some writers is called a third
preserver of the city of Rome from destruction, and therefore is joined
companion with elder and yunger Scipio. Which he did because of the great
freendship that he found at their hands, being a stranger at Rome. But yet
many being loouingly entertained in straung contries have required those of
whom they were welco^med, in most villainous manner. T. Se^pronius, Gracchus
T. Sempronius Grachus, withal his army were betrayed in to the hands of
their enemies the Carthagians, which put them to death, by the means of on
Flauius, whom Sempronius had so much made of. Flauius.
And therefore great care ought to be had, whom we intertain and show courtesy
unto. (...) is an Hospitality which private persons, and neighbors have (...)
them selves, when (...) make merry with another. A thing very commendable and
increases much love among them. Religious ^ospitalitie
The last is Religious, by which Christians receive such as profess true
religion, or else are persecuted for the same. In this Hospitality are to be
considered four things, the causes, the parts, the rewards, and the
punishment of such as esteem not the same hospitality. The causes are four,
first the commandment of God, Causes of Christian hospitality
as in S. Paul's Epistle to ye Hebrews it is commanded by the spirit of God,
yt we should not be forgetful of Hospitality. The second is charity, Heb. 13.
by which all men, especially Christians are linked and bound in conscience to
relieve each others necessity. The third is the fickle estate of mankind. No
man has a continual assurance of any thing, and therefore because we may be as
they are, we should help them being from their friends in a strange contrie.

The last is, because we must of necessity. For he that receives them,
receives Christ: and he which cares not for them whom he does see, how
can he love him whom he does not see? Parts of Christian hospitality
The parts are three: loouingly to inuit, courteously to entreat, and quietly
to suffer them to depart. Which may be gathered out of Genesis, Gen 2. (...)
18.^^ 19.
where Abraham does desire those strangers which were come unto him, yt if he
had found favor in their sight, they would not leave him but go with him to his
house and rest them selves: and so did Lot. The rewards of such hospitality
are marvelous great. Rewards of Christi^^ hospitality* Math. 10. Psalm. 41.
Christ says, yt whosoever receives a just man in the name of a just man,
shall receive the reward of a just man. And in the lxi. psalm it is thus
written. Blessed is he that has compassion upon the poor and needy for in the
dreadful day the Lord shall deliver him. And truly this hospitality in the
sight of God is so precious a thing, that he which does give but a cup of
cold water in his name, shall not go unrewarded. We see yt Abraham thinking he
had receued a man, receued God him self. Abraham
And Lot received Angels in ye shape of men. And who ca^ tell (says Ambrose)
whether he welcome Christ or no, when he makes much of strangers? Now see
what benefit comes of this hospitality besides that which we have already
spoken of. Lot for his hospitalitiescaped ye fire of Sodom and Gomorra. Lot.
Rahab for her hospitality was preserved with all hers from death and
destruction. Rahab.
Elias restored from death to life the son of her which had lodged him.
Elias.
But what should I spend many words? This christian Hospitality is twice
rewarded, in this world and in the world- to come. A punishment for neglecting
Christian hospitality Math. 10. Jacob. 2.
The punishment for contempt heerof is eternal pain in the lake which burns
for ever with fire and brimstone.

Christ says, he that receives not you receives not me. And S. James writes
that he shall have judgment without mercy, which is void of mercy. And
therefore let us take heed lest if we be negligent or careless in receiving
such strangers, that after this life the kingdom of God (a receptacle for all
such as fear god) be barred from us. And let us so behave our selves, that in
the day of judgment when all flesh shall rise again to receive according to
their deserts, we do hear that terrible saying of Christ, I was comfortless
and you cared not for me.

Wherefore for these causes recited, or for hope of reward, or else for fear of
punishment, let us do good unto all, especially such as are of the householde
of faith, the servants of God. Now let us prosecute our purpose, and speak of
that which follows.

Of Concord Cap. 42.
WIth Freendship has Concord great affinity. Concord
For even as Freendship and Amity joins a few together in good will: so
Concord linketh many and a whole multitide. This concord as M. Varro says is
derived from consenting of many hearts together. Discord is clean contrary. For
by it the people can agree in no thing. The praises of Concord are many and
singular. For some call it a tower of strength, invincible against all
invasions. Others affirm that no other thing is meant by those towers of
Adamant (which the Poets talk of) but the love of citizens, Turres adama^tinae
who by no force, strength, or policy can be over come, as long as they in
heart hold together, and by discord shrink not away from their brethern.
Animal se^piternu^ concordia
Some compare it unto a creature whose life would continue for ever, if it
killed not him self. Seleucus considering how goodly a thing it is for brethern
to hold together in unity, Seleucus.
called his fifty sons together and after this manner adhorted them to
concord. He took a bundle of darts fast bound together, and willed them to
break it: but they seeing it was impossible, answered they could not. Then
vnlosing the bundle, he gave unto each of them a dart and willed them to break
the^, which they did easily. Then he desired them to commit that which was done
to perpetual remembrance, and counseled them to hold together, lest being
at discord, their enemies bring them to slavery, when by their concord they
could not. And notable was ye oration of Menenius Agrippa unto the dissentious
people of Rome, Menenius Agrippa.
bending the^ selves against the senators. In which he brought many strong and
good reasons to the turning of their minds from discord: but his cheifest was
fetched from a fable of the members of man's body. Which he brought forth (as
Fenestella and others do testify) in this manner. Fenestella
In those days when every part of man had not only reason, but speech, it is
said, that they being much offended that all they should employ their labor
for the belly, and the belly do nothing but consume that which was provided,
conspired among them selves how they might bridle and bring under the belly, at
length it was decreed that the hands should not minister to ye mouth, if ye
hands did, ye mouth should not receive it, nor the teeth grind it: and whilst
they were thus at discord, all were brought low. And therefore he desired by
that example to beware of civil dissension, l^st utter destruction come upon
them. To this concord nature many ways inuiteth us. For we se that all
beasts in their kind be at peace one with another. Reasons to the embracing
of Co^corde.
For one Dragon bends not him self against another, nor one Lion fights with
another, and the co^corde which is between ravening Woulues all writers do
celebrate. Erasmus de quaerimo ma pacis.
Again by the consideration of our selves we are driven to the praising and
practicing of concord. For what is more contrary then the soul and the body?
and yet nature has so framed the^, that take the soul from the body, and the
body is but a dead carcass. And therefore if we would live, an unity must be
between them. For separation of either bringes distructio^ to one. Again ye
health of our body what other thing is it, the^ a consent of diu^^s qualities:
of which if one should rule more the^ another then (...) needs follow y^ many
and dangerous diseases do arise? Of the same discord, co^^s those mortal
diseases which we are so plaged wtall oftentimes. And therefore if we would have
our bodily health, we need must seek for a te^perature of those elements of
which all things are compounded. Finally if we compare our estate with brute
beasts, we shall find that without Concord we are most miserable. For unto
the other creatures God has given one thing or other for defense against their
enemies, but man is naked, both without strength, and agilitie in comparison
of the^, and no other way can help or defend him self without succor of other.
By all which it is apparent that without concord man is most miserable. He
which is desirous to read more of this mattter, may do well to peruse the
oration of Erasmus de Querimonia pacis. Now as the natural body of man (as
we have proved both by that of Agrippa) and other arguments without concord
cannot long continue: so neither the civil body, when the members be not in
quiet and at concord. Examples to confirm the same are infinite, of which I
will recite one or two. We read that Syracusa by the contention of two yung men
about an harlot, Syracusa.
was almost brought to desolation. For some taking one part and some another,
they grew to such a multitude as open war was between them. Through which
broile it came to pass, that the nobility and magistrates, were either slain
or brought to slavery, and the rude and rascal people invaded and spoiled
their city at their pleasure. We se the fruit of discord. Grecians.
The Grecians as long as they were at peace among them selves, were conquerors
of all men: but after that civil dissension was among the^, they were so far
from being victors of the rest, that they became villans, and a laughing stock
unto all the world. The like happened to the Jews. Jews, Romans Caesar.
Sylla. Cynna. Marius.
And the Romans which before by concord became the Lords of the earth, after
(through Caesar's ambition, Syllaes rablement, Cynnaes slaughter, and the cruel
murdering of the people of Rome by Marius rebellion) they became, which had
been glorious, most odious unto the world. Wherefore at this time I will recite
no more examples, only with that of Cicero I conclude in this manner: Wherefore
even for Gods sake, Cicero prolege Agraria ad populum.
come to your selves you Tribunes and rulers of the people, avoid their company
and forsake them of whom if in time you do not take heed, you will be forsaken
and left in the briars, come to us, and be at unity with honest men, defend
the common well with common aid, cleave not unto parts.

The common well has many wounds, much conspiracy there is, many wicked and
pernicious cou^sails are taken, no foreign invasions, no King, no people, or
nation is to be feared (against such we are good enough) it is an hidden secret
and domisticall mischeef, which troubles us and brings a terror. To the
avoiding of which, every man should put to his hand, and remedy the same
carefullye.

Of Godliness. Cap. 43
Godliness
Godliness has many definitions. For Cicero says, it is a Justice of men
toward God. The Peri^atecions say, It is a religious worshipping of God.
Hermes Tresmegistus, calls it a knowing of God. Somewhat we touched this before
speaking of natural freendship, and talked thereof when we declared what was
celestial justice. No (...).
Now will we talk more at large of the same. This Piety, Godliness, or knowledge
of God: or as Aristotle says, religious worshipping of God, or Justice of me^
toward God, as affirms Cicero, is only proper and peculier unto man no other
creature does communicate the same. For all other things which man is adorned
withal, some other beasts has, though not in perfection and in such sor^e as
man, yet after a sort. As to reason and utter our secret cogitatio^s by mouth
is proper to man, and yet brute things have a kind of rasoning. For one does
know another voice, as an horse knows another by his neighing, and one dog
another by barking. Nay they can give signs and shows of reioising when they
are merry, and they make the weker with a strange noise to quake and tremble
for fear. And every affection by so^e certain voice or other they can expres so
yt what their meni^g is may be known. But we because we understand the^ not,
persuade our selves they have no such thing, and they perhaps says
Lactantius, wunder as much at us as we do at them. Lactantius.
Again it is proper unto man to show forth some external sign of inward
reioising and yet we see certai^ tokens of gladness in other creatures, as in
the Dog which will give most manifest signs either of grief or gladness,
so^time by grinning, sometime by sorowing, by licking of us and leaping upon
when they are delighted, and by arring, harking, and hiding of the^ selves,
when they are pe^siue, and with howling will show forth their greef oftentimes.
So that of those things which are most particular unto man, we see even brute
beasts to be partners. Again it seems that reason and forecast were an
especial gift only belonging to man: And yet we know many creatures to have
the same as well as man, Providence or forecast.
though not in such excellency. As we know the Foxes to have their diversity
of holes, that look what snares so ever be laid to entrap the^, they may have
some ready way or other to escape all danger. Bees.
Again how wunderful do Bees behave them selves? do they not labor aforehand,
that afterward they may live at ease? what pains do they take? how dutifully
do they serve their King? how justly do they punish Droanes, such as will
take no pains? how artificially do they build their celles and resting
places? Lactantius de falsa sapientia cap. 10
which when Lactantius put before his eyes, he said, that he was in dout
whether the studiousnes of Bees, were perfect prudence or no. Again how do the
Ants, or Emets labor in summer, that in the winter they may live without penury.

It were a long and an endless thing to recite the nature of all creatures. By
this which I have mentioned, it may appear that those things wherein man does
most glory, as most peculier unto him, brute creatures do communicate. So
that either he must have so^e other thing more peculiar, or else he cannot say
this am I endued withal abooue all things else. And that is the knowledge of
God. No creature has any intelligence at all of God or goodness. And that is it
which Tullie says: Of so many creatures there is none besides man, which has
any understanding of God: Cic. Tus. quaest. li. 1
and among men there is no people so uncivil and void of humanity, which
does not know there is a God, although what manner of God he be, they are
ignorant. So that Religion it is only which discerns a man properly from
other creatures. Porphyrius. lib 3. de sacrificiis.
Porphyrius does affirm, that every thing endued with sense and memory is a
reasonable creature, and has not only speech, but wisdom in their doings,
and can both conceal and reveal their meaning. And he says, if all be not
understood it is no meruel: for we understand not the language of many nations,
except we have spent some time in lerning of them. And moreover he affirms,
that in time past men had the perfect understanding of the sounds and voices of
beasts. Which Virgil witnesses, speaking of Helias the prophet. And such men
were Calchas and Mopsus, Calchas. Mopsus. Tyresias. Thales. Apollonius.
and Tyresias, and Thales, and Apollonius. But to come to our purpose, certain
it is that no creature except man, did ever know there was a God, and no
people are so barbarous but will confess the same. And therefore the Poets to
provoke men to the fear of God, fained after this life good men to enjoy all
kind of prosperity, to want nothing but according to their hearts delight to
consume their time: again the wicked to be plagued with all kind of misery,
at no time to take rest, but continually to be tormented with perpetual pains.

Elysi^ campi.
Also they fained the Elysian feeld^ places of all joy and happiness for such as
had observed the laws of reason, ingrafted in the minds of all men. Heerof
ca^e that of the ancient poet Musaeus, Musaeus poeta.
which said that for godly and valiant men was prepared a drink for taste most
comfortable, for continuance everlasting, which they should use after this
life. And for the wicked ones, whose delight is in wickedness and impiety, said
Deiphilus a comicall Poet, was prepared places of vn^^st and such as should
grievously torment them in the world to come. All which fictions of ye poets,
was to another end but for the increase of godliness. Of which virtue had the
Cretensians such a care, Cretensians.
that one of the especiallest things which was taught their children, was the
Psalms made in praise of their Gods. For three things they by law commanded
the Schoolemaisters* to commit to the minds of their children. The first was
the laws of their contrie. The second, the psalms in praise of their Gods.
And the last was the names of such men as had given their lives in defense of
their contrie.

Aeneas having license* to take of his substance ( Troie being destroyed) what
he had most mind unto* forsook all, Aeneas.
to have his Deos penat^^, Gods of wood, or silver, which wore in his house.

The first precept that Isocrates gave unto Prince Demonicus was (...), Fear
God. Isocrates.
The first law that should be given at any time to men, Plato*
says Plato should be to the increase of Godliness.

The office of the Athenians.
The cheifest oath which the Athenians took was this: Pugnabo pro sacris, et
cum aliis, et solus: In defending Religion, both with others and alone will I
fight against my foes. By which it is evident what a great care heathen men,
ignorant of true worshipping of God, have had of Religion. Poets by fictions
have commended, Orators have exhorted unto it, Philosophers have thought it
most requisite in a common well, Common people have sworn to defend it, Noble
men above all have preferred it, Kings have professed it. Athenia^s.
Among the Athenians no king was created before he had taken orders, and was a
Priest. And they judged the best man for authority and wisdom, to be the
fittest man to offer sacrifice to their Gods. To the shame of Christians now a
days, which think the wurst man good enough for that rowme: and the most
abject, to serve the turn well enough. Romans.
The ancient Romans through the instinct of nature only, did so reuere^tly
think of Religion, that they sent their Children, yea the most noble men of
Rome sent their sons into Hetruria, to learn the manner of serving God. Now
an abject gentleman (what should I say a noble man?) thinks his child to good
to learn and profess true religion. But because I will not digress, I will
bring forth one example more. Massinissa having received of his lieutenant
goodly and great teeth of Iuerie in token of goodwil (which his Captain had
stolen out of a religious place) and understanding how he came by them,
Massinissa.
commanded certain of his nobility to carry them back, and say, that their
king though he liked them greatly, both for their bigness and artificial
setting out, yet understanding that they did belong to such a place, with
speed caused them to be carried back. Which answer of his to be seen of all
comers, was written in that Religious house with golden letters. This being
spoken of the excellency, and favorers of religion, we will now show what
plagues and severe punishment has chanced unto the co^temners thereof. It is
written of Brenus king of the frenchmen, Brenus.
that after he had overcome the Macedonians, he came to the Temple of Apollo,
but there derided not only him, and all religion shamefully: and was minded to
spoil the Churches there about of all their goods and treasure, but gooing
about the same, there came suddenly such an earthquake, that many of his men
were consumed thereof, all sorely hurt, and him self brought into such a
disquietnes of mind, that being weary of this world: he desperately killed
him self. Also one Conomachus went about the like attempt, Conomachus.
but his reward was no better then the soldiors of King Brenus.

It is reported likewise that one Pherecydes an Assyrian, Pherecydes.
for contemning God and godliness, was so consumed with worms, that ^e fled for
shame all society of men. If it were my purpose to make any long discourse
hereof, many and terrible plagues might be recited which have chanced upon
the despisers of religion, which neither care for God nor man, and think all is
one, whether they live honestly or wickedly, but I leave them. Any reasonable
man, any thing inflamed with spiritual motions, those abooue recited examples
will cause both to forsake impiety and embrace religion. But as Tullie says,
Cicero de deumatione lib. 1.
Rare and few are those men, which call them selves from the world, and are
taken with an earnest desire of heavenly things. To conclude this Chapter and
to show what is true godlynes and religion. It is requisite that we have the
understanding of this will of God by his word, No religion without the work of
God.
for without the same our sight is but blindenes: our understanding, ignorance:
our wisdom, foolishnes: and our devotion, diuilishnes.

Of Humanity. Cap. 44.
HVmanitie is a virtue which ought to be observed of all such as will be called
humane or courteous. Humanity
For nothing is either so agreeable to man's nature, as to hurt none* or so
contrary as to offer injury to any. Of this virtue was Herles called (...)*
Hercules.
because he would injury no man. And heerof (some think) the name of Alexander
is derived. For (...), signifies to defend. And all such as deliver men out
of troubles, Alexanders.
may be called Alexanders. And certainly man c^n have no better thing gi^ him
of nature, then to be willing: and if power answer to that will* no greater
thing can there be, then to profit and pleasure many.

The Athenians counted this virtue of humanity and affection one to another,
Athenia^s
for a Goddess, and therefore did sacrifice unto her. Lycurgus
Lycurgus to bring his people to the embracing of this virtue, did accustom
the^ to have no proper thing belonging unto them, but made them altogether to
bend them selves to the benefitting of their common well. He did the same that
one might think of another as members of one body, children of one mother, and
commons of one common weal.

As by public authority among the Lacedaemonians and Athenians it was
commended, so privately of many virtuous and godly Princes it has been sought
for. And therefore Scipio (of whom we have made so honorable mention
oftentimes) was commonly wunt to say, Scipio.
he had rather salve one citizen, the^ flea a thousand enemies. Contrary to ye
diuilish custom which was among the cruel Scythians, which was to put men
to death for every small offense. Scythians
For this clemency and humanity is Alexander the great much commended. It was
apparent by his well entertaining the wife of Darius and other noble women his
captives. Alexander.
The which courtesy of his made king Darius to send of his nobility to thank
Alexander, for ye same. Far from this virtue was Phalaris, Phalaris.
and all other outrageous and cruel tirants, which were so far from sparing
their captives, that they exercised all kind of cruelty even against their
own subjects. Pantaleo^.
Pantaleon king of the Alians, was most void of this virtue. For those Legates
or Ambassadors which came unto him, and brought those news which liked him
not, he would enforce to eat their own stones. Tryzus.
But one Tryzus passed all other that ever I read of in cruelty. For standing
in continual fear of losing his life (his cruelty was such) he made a law, to
be rid from fear, that none of his subjects, should talk together of any
private affairs. A strange kind of cruelty not to suffer me^ to talk
together. But if that had been all, in some respect it had been tolerable.
But perceiving that by signs and tokens they did manifest each others greef,
and thereby his former commandment to his mind was not obeyed, he charged
the^ that for their lives they should neither speak one to an other, nor so
much as give a sign whereby one might know another intent. This pssed all
that other cruelty, and may se^me incredible, Aelianus de varia Historia. lib.
14.
that either any man would give such a commandment or any men abide the
same, Aelianus reports it. As Tyrants are far from humanity: so all those
which do glory in the effusion of blood. Ha^niball.
And therefore Hanniball (when he beheld the feelde overflowed with blood) for
saying, O noble fight, is numbered rather among savage beasts, then civil
creatures. And Volesius being Proconsul under the Emperor Augustus, Volesius.
for saying O princely act, when he had commanded three hundred in one day to
be executed with death, is judged void of this virtue, and is adjoined to
those tyrants, and Hanniball, an example not imitable but detestable.

Humaniti^e teaches us to abandon cruelty* to love and cherish one another,
even because we are men of one nature reasonable and by that reason gentle with
out cruelty* not f^^r^e without mercy as are beasts savage and unreasonable.
This virtue the Greeks ^all (...), by a most sig^^ficant word, which is as
it were, love of mankind. It has many branches and properties pertaining to
it (all to r^^ite were a long l^bor) some I must needs for illustrations
sake, for it is pitiful and takes compassion on the afflicted. Pity.
Phocian had this virtue, for his manner was to defend such as were in
misery, and oftentimes the wicked, Phocian.
his nature was so good. For which he was reprehended of his friends (for they
would not have him to maintain malefactors in their naughtines) to who^e he
answered that he did the same because they stood in need thereof, but good me^
could lack no patrons. Also he would visit such as were imprisoned, though they
were breakers of the law, and relieved them with good counsel, as he did
Aristogiton, Aristogiton.
whom he could not better comfort then in prison. By this virtue are they
poor seen unto whersoeuer they be either in our houses, Poverty.
or in the common well. And for ye same while the world shall continue Cimon
(not Timon) the Athenia^, will be commended. Cimon Athemensis
He would relieve the poor, comfort the imprisoned, and do good unto all
which were oppressed, especially such as did belong unto him, or had dwelt
with him any long time.

Not like that elder Cato, Cato senior. Vngratfulnes.
whose manner was to sell his old servants which had served him a long time,
as we do beasts, he would not keep them, a foul blot for so famous a man.
The lack of this virtue also brought infamy unto Pericles. Pericles.
For being called to authority he would not esteem of his old acquaintance,
no not of his master Anaxagoras, Anaxagoras.
which had filled him with so many good precepts, and instruc^ions of
Philosophy, nay he did so neglect him as he was through extreme poverty about
to have rid himself out of the world, had not Pericles in time relieved him.
Heerfore is Caligula much commended: Caligula.
for he would always have some poor folk in his house, and oftentimes with
meat from his own table relieve them. And the old Romans of the welthier
sort, Romans.
had such consideration of the poor, that after them selves had been served,
the poor were seen unto and had continually at their hands. And that the
beggars and such like should the better know, when the Princes and rich men
were at their meat, in many places trumpetes and such instrumets were sounded,
Of this matter somewhat in the latter end almost of the 31. Chapter of this
Book was recited, and therefore we will cease at this time. By which it
appears what a goodly thing it is to have humanity, and to dele withal men
as we would be served our selves. And again how odious they are which neglect
ye same, as those which we have recited, cruel tyrants and tyra^nicall
captains, and those Myson and Timon Athenians, called because they hated
ma^kinde (...). Myson. Timon.
Here for ye better conceiving of this virtue, I will ad the counsel of
Lactantius, Lactantius de vero cultu. cap, 12.
and so end this chapter: his words are these. He which has not abundantly
to bestow upon the poor, let him give according to his ability, and
according as he does excel in riches, let him exceed in Liberality.
Liberality.
Neither think thereby that thou shall consume thy stock and substance. For
thou may give liberally, and yet live welthyly, and in this manner: spend not
idlelie, but such vain expenses which you were wunt to be at, turn to better
use: with that which before time you were wu^t to bye cattle, now redeem
captives: with that which you did feed beasts, now nurish men: with that
which you maintain soldiors, bury the poor. What does it avail you to make
your horsekeepers rich men? and nurish up naughtines? Turn that which otherwise
will be spent wickedly to good use, that so for earthly gifts, you may receue
an eternal reward in ye kingdom of God. Hither to Lacta^tius. And thus much of
humanity.

Of Gratefulnes. Cap. 45.
GRatefulnes, according to the judgment of Cicero, is a virtue not only the
greatest, Gratefulnes.
but also the mother and spring of all other virtues. It is called in latin
Gratia, which is diuersely taken, for sometime we understand thereby the
affection which is borne to a man: Gratia.
and heerof comes our English phrase, he is gracious in such a man's eyes,
meaning thereby that he is belooued. Sometime it is taken for the effect or
declaration of that goodwil: and therefore a benefit so bestowed we say is given
gratis, freely of grace and mere goodwil. Lastly it is taken for a keeping of
such a benefit in memory. And of that we mean at this time to make a few
words.

To the stirring of men to Gratefulnes the better, of the Poets were famed
certain virgins which were called Graces, Graces Vng^^es. Agl^ia. T^^^eia
Euphrosyne.
which were in number three, their names were Aglaia, Thaleia, and Euphrosyne
all naked and linked together. There number signifies three distinct things to
be considered in benefits: to give, to receue, to recompense. By their names
are understood ye ends and effects of such as give and receive good turns.
Benefits.
The first is called Aglaia, in latin Sple^dor, as we say glitteringnes, by
which is meant, Aglaia.
yt he which has received a good turn, should not be ashamed to confess ye
same and report it abroad. And heerof it is said that thankfulness does
consist in two things: in truth and Justice. Truth does acknowledge what is
received boldly, Thankfulness.
without keeping close the same. Those which have not this quality, are
counted of all men most ungrateful: for there is no more manifest sign of an
ungrateful mind, then to dissemble a det, when you are not able to discharge
it. Seneca.
And Seneca to this purpose says, that he is an ungrateful person with who^e the
excellency of a benefit perishes, but he is more ungrateful which will forget
the same. It is a token that he has corrupt eyes which is afeard to behold
the light, but he is altogether blind which can behold ye sun. It is impiety
not to love our parents, but not to acknowledge the^ is more the^ madness.
Hitherto Seneca. Justice does render goodwil for goodwil and one good turn for
another.

Thaleia.
The second Grace is called Thaleia, which signifies liuelines or to flourish.
By which no other thing is meant but that we should alwais keep a benefit in
remembrance. The last is called Euphrosyne, Euphrosyne.
because she is always cheerful and of a merry countenance. Whereby is meant,
that he which will bestow a benefit, must give it cheerfully and willingly.
For the nature of man is such, as it thinks not that well given, which is not
willingly given. Heerof is it said, that that is a double benefit which is
quickly bestowed. And how much it is lingered before it is bestowed, so much it
leeseth of his grace when it is bestowed. We had rather leese all, then long
for a thing. The Poets therefore to declare the duty both of him which will
be a benefactor, and him which has received a benefit, have given these
names to the Graces. The two first tell how he should behave him self that is
adorned with a good turn. He must truly acknowledge a good turn, without
hypocrisy: and justly requite the same without partiality: and also never
commit that a benefit freendly bestowed, The duty of a benefactor.
be unkindly forgot.

A giver must speedily without lingering, and cheerfully with a good will do a
good turn, otherwise it leeseth his grace: and he which would be pleasured,
had rather bye it full deerly, the^ beg it importunely.

The barenes of the Graces is also a signification of his duty which will be a
benefactor. For he must not only do the same willingly and speedily, but also
simply and to a good purpose. For he which conferreth a benefit, for any other
intent then for mere goodwil is no benefactor, but a malefactor. And therefore
says Ajax, mentioned of Euripides, Ajax.
(...), The gifts of an enemy are no gifts, and better vntake^ then received.
For as good it were to eat meat from a Serpents mouth, as to take a benefit of
our enemy, in both danger, in both death. A benefactor must therefore give
cheerfully, speedily and simply. They are linked together and yet but two at
once not altogether: whereby is signified again the office of him which has
received a good turn. For if Euphrosyne come to any body, she will be sure to
send back her two companions. And that is, he which has received a benefit,
should not only remember it, but requite the same liberally and frutefully
according to the nature of the Earth, which renders more fruit then it
received seeds. So that by the names, number, nakedness and going of the Graces
are fully described the properties both of a benefactor, and also of him
which is plesured. Now will we recite some, which of a number have been
notable for this virtue, that those precepts and these examples may stir us the
more carefully to study to have grate full minds. T Po^ponius Atticus.
T. Pomponus Atticus (as Cornelius Nepos writes of him) would never forget a
good turn: and those benefits which he had done, he would so long remember,
as he to whom it was done: was thankful.

Homer.
Homer also (as Herodotus writing of his life said) did never forget a benefit
received: and though his ability was such a^ he could not requite, yet his
nature as such, as he did always remember his freeds and benefactors. And
therefore he does often times render many thanks unto Mentor, M^ntor. P^enius.
Tychus. Mentas. Chilo.
Phenius, Tychius, Mentas and others which in his miseries had relieved him.

Such another was Chilo a Lacedemonian, for he was wunt to say that he never
was ungrateful in all his life to any man. The Grecians to Hippocrates showed
them selves grateful, Grecians. Hippocrates.
for having foretold a plage to come, and cured many dangerous diseases, in
token of gratefulnes, they appointed those honors and feasts to him which they
celebrated in honor of Hercules* Egyptians.
The Egyptians likewise most abhorred ungratefulness of al vices. And therefore
after their manner do sacrifice unto their Gods, and show themselves thankful
for all benefits, especially because it had pleased the divine majesty to give
the^ wholesome water. Among these is Craesus numbered. Craesus.
For being relieved before he came to his kingdom by one Pamphaes, Pa^phaes.
afterward in token that he had not forgotten his benefits, sent unto him a
Chariot laden with silver. Venus. Phaon^
Venus was not ungrateful unto Phaon for his plesuring her, not knowing who she
was for she gave him a box of such a precious ointment that being anointed
therewith all, he should to the sight of men appear most beautiful. But what
do I recite so many men, when as unreasonable and most cruel beasts are not
forgetful of a good turn. It is reported that in Patra a city of Achia there
was a yung dragon nurished and brought up, Patra.
with which the son of him that ought the Dragon, would continually be playing.
At length the Dragon being come to huge bigness was carried and left in ye
wilderness. Afterward it came to pass that the boy being grown to man's
estate, went with his companions into a contrie not far of to see some shows
and pastime: and returning homewarde in the wilderness near unto the city,
thieves beset them: whereupon they sent forth a loud and pitiful cry which
pierced the ears of the Dragon: which by and by succored them, killed the
thieves, and saved the young man his benefactor with his fellows* Aelianus de
va^^a Historia. l^b. 13. I^^ratitu^e. Cicero ad A^^^cum epist. li. ^.
This does Aelianus make mention of. Contrary to this virtue is Ingratitude, a
vice of all other most to be abhorred. And therefore says Cicero, I never
knew a more ungrateful thing in which vice all wickedness is contained. And
in Latin there is a pretty saying, Omnia dixeris, si ingratu^ dixeris, you can
not call him worser the^ call him ungrateful. Wherefore to put men in mind of
Gratfulnes, Etheocles
Etheocles erected a temple unto ye forenamed Graces, and gave great revenues
to the maintaina^ce thereof. Athenia^s.
And the Athenians y^ men should continually call into their minds, good
turns bestowed upon the^, did place the temple of Graces in ye midst of their
city. To conclude this chapter, and also at one word to show the excellency
of this virtue, I will recite a notable place of Cicero, which is this: Cicero
pro Cn. Plancio.
Although I desire to have all virtues within me, yet is there nothing that I
would rather, then that may seem and be grateful. For this virtue is not only
of all others the most excellent, but also the mother of the rest.

What is Piety, but only a grateful goodwil toward our parents? Who are
good citizens? who in war, who in peace deserve well of their contrie, but
those which bear in remembrance the benefits of their contrie? who are holy?
who are religious, but those which with mind fulness, ascribe those honors unto
the immortal Gods which belong unto them? What comfort can there be in this
life without freedship? Again, what freendship can there be among ungrateful
persons? Who is among us all liberally brought up, in whose mind does not
continually remain his parents, his masters, and instructors? yea and that
very place where sometime he was taught and brought up? who at any time either
had, or does possess, such riches that may be kept with out the help of many?
which verily, remembrance and thankfulness being removed, cannot be at all.
Truly I am persuaded that nothing does so properly belong unto a man, as not
only by a benefit, but also insignificatio^ of beneuole^ce not to be bound unto
any. And more over I think nothing so unseemly, so wild and beast like, as to
commit that, whereby you may seem not only unworthy of a benefit, but also
vanquished and overcome. Hitherto Cicero with whose words I conclude.

Of Gentleness. Cap. 46.
Facility or Gentleness is a virtue meet for all men. Facility.
It has a great affinity with humanity, and therefore in the discourse thereof
we may be the more breef. Which virtue as it becomes every man, so especially
a Prince. For greatly are inferiors bent to perfect obedience when they
perceive their Prince gentle and easy to be spoken with all, not scorneful, or
full of disdain. And therefore says Terence I have found yt nothing is better
for a man then facility. And another said very well, that a Prince should be
for countenance so amiable, and for behauior so gentle toward his subjects, as
none at any time should go from his presence pensive or troubled in mind.
Which made Isocrates to counsel prince Demonicus to show him self mild and
gentle toward his familiars, not lofty or disdainful: for a disdainful
person no man can abide.

No let us place before our eyes examples of Gentleness, Julius Caesar.
and by them behold the worthynes thereof. Julius Caesar was wunt to say, that
of all miseries, the gretest was in old age* to remember his practiced
cruelties, and therefore to avoid that remembrance he would never exercise ye
same. Alexander magnus.
Alexander Magnus did as much abhor cruelty as any man, it appeered in the
denying the request of his own mother, when she desired him to execute an
innocent. Sabacus.
Sabacus a certain King of the Egyptians, did so embrace this virtue, as he
would not put to death (I will not say the innocent) those which were justly by
the laws condemned: but would put them to some or other servile Office in his
Rea^^e, that so they might get their sustenaunce and live.

M. Antonius Pius.
M. Antonius for his virtue called Pius, was of so good nature, that he would
admit into his familiarity and that oftentimes, those which for condition were
very bace, but yet the wisest men: and would of them secretly demand what the
vulgar sort of men commonly did think of him: if they had told him of his
vices, he would amend them: if of his virtues, he would increase them. Ptolomie
a king of Egypt was of ye same nature: for he would refuse no man's company
that was for Judgment wise, Ptolomie
and for behauior virtuous, especially he used one Galetes (a yung man for
years, but for wisdom ancient) very familiarlie, Galetes.
by reason whereof much good was done in the country. On a time as they were a
hunting together, it fortuned that in their sight did appear certain
malefactors (which were condemned) going to execution, those did Galetes first
espy, and thereupon showed the^ unto the king, and said thus unto him: O King
since it has so hapened that we have met with these miserable men, if it be
your pleasure, let us set spurs to our horse and set them free. The King much
delighting in his good nature, obeyed his wholesome counsel and saved their
lives which were past all hope of salvation. By which appears what good or
evil those which are about Princes may do if they will.

Darius (to end reciting of examples) did much labor to be counted a merciful
Prince: Darius.
and therefore oftentimes he would call before him his under officers, and
demand of them what fines and tasks they received of his people: which if he
perceived to be very much, he would cut of more then the third part: if they
said it were but reasonable, he would of that forgive his people the one half.
Was ever such a Prince heard of?

Well, I will conclude with Cicero, Cicero li. 1 epist. ad Q. Fratrem.
and say, that to be abstinent, to bridle our affections, to punnish evil
dooers, to keep and observe the laws justly, to be easy in learning out
matters, in hearing and admitting men, is more noble then painful. For to do
those things does consist rather in a willingness of mind, then in the labor
of the body.

Of Faithfulness. Cap. 47.
WE will conclude these virtues with Faithfulness. Faithfulness.
A virtue without which not only the parts of Justice, but also all other
virtues are lame and imperfect. It is thus defined: Faith is a constancy and
performance of that which is promised.

This virtue (as is said before) is not only the foundation of Justice
according to Ciceros mind, but also of all other virtues. For without this,
what is Prudence, but Deceitfulnes? what Temperance, but Luxuriousnes? what
Fortitude, but Cowardnes? And Justice her self what is she but Cruelnes?

The ancient, in times past, he athens and Philosophers, The manner of taking
oaths in old tie.
when soever they gave their faith, they would call their Gods to witness. And
therefore we shall find often times in comicall Poets these words. Dij vostram
fidem, taking them to witness, as knowers of their meaning. Cicero episto. 12.
libro 7. epistol^ru^ famil*
Cicero makes mention of a strange kind of swearing, writing to Trebatius,
used among certain. For their manner was to take Jupiters stone in their hands
and speak these words: Even as I cast this stone away, so let Jupiter cast me
out of the society of all good men, if willingly I break promise. Sychians
The Scythians had their kind of swearing after a strange manner. For when for
any thing of great importance they should take an oath, Perjured persons.
they would swear by the Kings throne. If any were perjured, he was by the
law adjudged to dye. The Romans when they made a covenant, Romans.
would take an Hog, and having put it in a mortar, would break it to pieces,
wishing that as that Hog was broken, so their bones might be broken in pieces
which did break their faith. Medians. Arabians
The Medians and Arabians likewise had their kind of swering. For as often as
they plighted their faith to any, they would prick one of their fingers, and
each of them should lick it, signifying thereby that their blood should be
shed, which kept not covenants. The Arabians in doing thereof, would call up on
Bacchus and Vranias, Bacchus. Vranias.
and take them to witness. By Bacchus they supposed all holy orders and rites to
be present. For Bacchus is as it were the president of all sacrifices and
always was true of promise. By Vranias they understood all the celestial
powers, the Gods. For Vranias signifies an harmony of consent of all the
Heavens. This being spoken of the manner of some in taking oaths, let us bring
forth examples of such as have been found faithful, and are celebrated for
the same of good writers.

Lycurgus.
Such a man was Lycurgus. For notwithstanding he were desired by the people of
Sparta (his brother Polydectes being dead) to take the government of Sparta
upon him, Polydectes.
yet would he not, because the son of his brother and heir of the crown,
Charilaus
named Charilaus was alive, but so long ruled as the yung prince came to
lawful age, and then resigned his kingdom and acknowledged his nephew to be
his Lord and King.

Such another was Alexander (not seldom times, Alexander. Parmenio
because of his wunderful virtues recited) for being by Parmenio (a fit man to
counsel such a prince) willed on a time to break his faith and promise,
answered, If I were Parmenio, I would do as thou haste counseled me, but it
is not lawful for Alexander in any case to do so. He knew very well that
nothing brought such reproach and shame to a Prince, as to be faithless.

But of all men and all nations under the Sun, was none comparable to the
Romans, Romans.
for this virtue of keeping promise. And that shall we find to be most true,
if we do either consider them generally and their whole nation, or
particularly, and some especial men of that contrie. That generally abooue
other nations, it may be gathered of many examples.

The Romans being in war with the Carthagenians, Duellius Cornelius Asina.
Hamilcar
made one Duellius Cornelius Asina, chief Captain, which upon certain
conditions, made truce with Hamilcar, and thereupon resorted each to other
loouingly: but the Carthagenians (as they were and have been counted
Faedifragi, Carthagenians. faedifragi
breakers of their faith) meant nothing but treachery, and therefore one a time
having invited him to come and communicate of matters, cast violent hands
upon him, and dealt with him and his men rigorously.

It happened after that the Carthagenians being sorely foiled in battle,
were enforced to send Legates to Rome to entreat for peace. Hamilcar was chosen
Ambassador, but he calling unto mind their il entreating of Cornelius Asina,
refused to go. Then they chose Hanno, Hanno.
which went boldly to Rome to the Senate house, where one of the Tribunes
began openly to accuse him of unfaithfulness: but the Consuls hearing thereof,
commanded him to hold his peace, and said unto Hanno: Fear not, for the
faithfulness of the Romans, does rid thee from all fear of revenge: and though
we have thee now in our claws, and may do with thee what we list, yet shall
it not be said that tretcherously we will deal with any. But a more manifest
example is that which follows.

Ptolomie a King of Egypt (not knowing by hear say, Ptolomie
but having tried by experience the great fidelity of the Romans) in his
death bed committed his heir being then but a child, to the keeping of the
Romans. Which elected one Aemylius Lepidus to govern him and his Realm,
Aemylius Lepidus.
which did not only carefully see unto the yung Prince, but mightily
augmented his kingdom, and being come to age willingly resigned up the same.
Examples of particular men have been such as the like we shall not read of any.

S. Po^peius Antonius Octauius.
S. Pompeius entering league with Antonius and Octauius, invited them on a time
to a banquet. Being at the same Menodorus chief Admiral of Pompeius Navy,
Menodo^rus.
sent a messenger to put him in mind of his fathers traitorous death: and he
promised if it were his pleasure, he would so work as neither Octauius nor
Antonie should escape: But Pompeie answered almost as Alexander did Parmenio,
that he did judge it extreme wickedness to deal in such manner with any, but
thou Menodorus which carest for nothing and delightest in perjury, may if
thou will without my consent. The faithfulness of M. Attilius Regulus got him
more glory then all his triumphs. M. Attilius Regulus
As these are celebrated and with praises lifted up to the Heavens for their
faithfulness, so have their been as many defamed for their unfaithfulness and
under that are comprehended liers, Lying.
Parthians
especially perjured persons and traitors. For lying and dissimulation have the
Parthians come odious to all the world. It was in their Creed (as they
commonly say) that men ought by all means they could, Cicero pro L. Flacco.
so deceive their enemies. Such were the Grecians, who^e Cicero in a certain
Oration after this manner discribeth: Grecians.
I ascribe to the Grecians knowledge of many sciences, I will not take from
them eloquence of speech, invention, sharpnes of wit, plenty of matter, but
yet this I must needs say, that holy and religious bearing of witness, and care
of keeping promise, Perjury. Egyptians.
was never of them regarded.

The Egyptians could in no case abide perjury, and therefore if any were found
in the fault, he lost his life without redemption. The Potes also fain certain
by the Gods appointed, with grievous torments to punish forsworn persons:
Palalicidij. Gaude^tius Merula de Memorabilibus, lib. 3. cap. 3 Aleos. Olochas.
such executioners were called Pallicidij.

Gaudentius Merula does report, that in Bythinia there is a river called of
some Aleos, of others Olochas, of which if a forsworn man do taste, his
intrals by and by are set en fire, and so dies miserably. If this were in
every city throughout the world, less impiety, less perjury would be
practiced of men. I read moreover of other rewards of perjury, whereof I will
recite one or two.

One Tremelius by this became not only odious to all men, Tremclius.
but also did so stain his posterity, as that blot could not be washed away,
no not by the virtues of his Children in many years: I say by Perjury he got
unto him an odious name and was called Tremilius Scropha, Scropha.
because having stolen a Sow of his neighbors, he forsware that ever he had
the same.

It is to be wished that all forsworn persons, either might drink of that
water before mentioned, or might by some name become odious or have that plague
continually (for oftentimes no dout they have) which Polymachus was tormented
with all. Polymachus.
He is written because of perjury to have an intolerable vexatio^ of mind,
and every night was so bitten with Mice and Rates as at no time he could take
rest.

Here it will not be amiss to recite that excellent place of Tullie, Cicero
pro Q. Roscio
showing the difference between a liar, and a forswearer of him self: his
words be these. But what difference is there between a liar and a forswerer?
He which uses to lie, has accustomed to forswear. Whom soever I can get to
lie, I can easily intrete to forswear him self. For who soever has once gone
from the truth will not make a greter conscience to be led to perjury, then he
was to lying. The difference between a liar and a forswerer.
For who in prayer to the Gods, is not moved with a trust of his own
conscience?

And therefore what punishment of the immortal Gods to perjury, the same
should be appointed for lying. For the Gods are wunt to be angry with men, not
so much for the framing of words (in which an oath is comprehended) as for the
malice by which baits and snares be laid.

The last enemy to Faithfulness is Treason, Treason.
a thing of all others before God most odious, among men least prosperous, as
by the events thereof may appear. I will for order sake of an infinite number,
recite a few to confirm this matter.

The betrayers of Pompeie unto Caesar of all other men, were most odious unto
him, and therefore caused them to be slain. Cassius. Brutus. A. Trebonius.
Dolabella. C. Octauius. Lentulus Spinther. Augustus Cicero. Antonius
Those traitors which conspired Caesar's death, never prospered. Cassius and
Brutus which were the chief hasteners of his death, killed them selves when
they had thought to have lived at most quietness. A. Trebonius another which
conspired his death was murdered of Dolabella, C. Octauius, and Lentulus,
Spinther of Augustus, Cicero of Antonius, and almost none of an infinite of
those conspirators, but of one or other suffered a most shameful and odious
death.

Scylla did betray her own father unto Minos through hope he would be her
husband, but came it so to pass? Scylla. Minous.
Nay he cast her hedlong into the bottom of the Sea and drowned her therefore.
Who would be a Traitor?

Tarpeia for love of gold did betray the Capitol of Room unto King Tatius
King of the Sabines. Tarpeia. Tatius.
And had she that which was promised? yea. And inioyed the same to her desire?
Nay, but with receipt of them received her deadly wound. Who would be a Traitor?
One did betray his Prince Attalius to Theodorus in hope of promotion.
Aattalius. Theodrus.
And came he to it? Nay, but was promoted to the gallouse. A good reward, and
yet worthy enough for a Traitor. Then who would be a traitor? Nay, read over
books, peruse Chronicles, study Historiographers, and you shall not find one
of many thousands, which has prospered. For as Tullie says very notably. No
wise man at any time will trust a traitor. Cicer. act. 2. in Vcrem.
And he is worthily hated of all men, which bears not a faithful heart unto
his contriemen:

And who is it having received a been fit of a traitor, Caesar.
but will say of him as Caesar said of one Rumitaleus which had betrayed
certain towns unto him, Rumitaleus.
that he liked ye things betrayed, but the traitor he did abhor and utterly
detest?

And who will not with Antigonus make much of a traitor going about to
pleasure him: Antigonus
but having his purpose, who will not hate him to ye death? Then if this be the
reward of traitors and treasons, more then Devils incarnate are they, which
to pleasure their enemies will displeasure their friends. And to profit their
foes, will bring confusion not only upon their fauorors and contrimen, but
also upon them selves. Then who would be a traitor, to be trusted of no man,
to be hated and abhorred of all?

Thus have I both spoken of the Pe^turbacions, and also of the virtues, though
not in such sort as I would, yet as well as for the time which I have
bestowed in writing thereof, as well as for my poor and small ability I could.
The which if God grant me leisure according to my mind: may both in better
words be set out to delight, and in better order to profit, in the mean time
I have to request your worship to take this in good worth, and to think that an
extemporall thing cannot be compared with that which is labored, neither a
first copy, with a second or third.

The giver of all goodness, God almighty, Conclusion
increase these gifts with which you are especially before many adorned, and so
asist you and all other good gentlemen and Christians, with his holy spirit,
that affections may so remain within you as they do not reign and stir to
wickedness, but that (they being either banished, or abated and bridled by the
spirit of God) you may embrace virtue, which God has promised in this world to
reward, and in the world to come not to see unrequited.

Finis, et Laus Deo.
A
ABstinence 116. b. Active felicity. 84. Adversity. 31. b. 54. b. 75, b. 180.
Aegritudo, 39 b. Aegrotatio, 39. b. Affections. 91.94. Afflictation, 60. b. 91.
Amatoriall fury, 17, b. Ambition, 10. b 13. b. 38.69, b Amicorum, paria, 177.
b. Anger, 2, b. 13. b. 14.15, 16.159. Angor, 50, b. Antes. 95. An army like a
living creature, 34, b. Arrogancy, 147. b. Astutia, 105. b Auaritia. 130. b.
Augures, 96.
B
Bacbiting. 142. Bashfulnes. 29. b. 30. Bees. 90. b. 187. b. A benefactos
duty, 195. b. Benefit, 141.195. Beutie, 18. b. 41.78. b. Bigness. 78. b.
Blustering, 114. b. Boasting, 8. b. 142. Boldenes. 139. b. Bonorum diuisio. 64.
C
Calliditas, 104. b A Captains duty. 34 b Carefulnes, 60. Caves, 150. Causae
secundae 73. Chastity. 121. b. 124 b Children 70. Circumspection, 93.94.
Civil Justice. 163. A civil man, 85. Cloacae, 150. b. Concord. 184 185.
Confidence, 143. b. Conscience, 36.117. b. 166. b 170 Consolation for the
slandered. 168. b Constancy, 153. b. Consuls. 92. b Contemplatio, 82.83.
Continency, 116. b. 153 b. Conturbation, 34.. Covetousness 2. b. 12 12. b.
13.130. b. 173. b Counsailers, 104 143. Craftines, 104 b Custom, 164
D
Delectatio^, 5. Desire. 24. b. 77. b. Despair. 16. b 61. Diligence, 29 60. b
98. Discord 15. b Docilitie. 97. Dolus non decet forte^. 27 Dread. 31. b.
Dreams. 37 Dru^kennes, 13^.
E
Eleos, 40. Eloquence, 79. Emulation 11. b. 46. b. Envy, 44. b 45. Equanimitie
108. b Equity, 106. b Evil affections 91. Evil manners 91. b Evil things, 41.
Extemporall, stuff, 55. b
F
Facility, 198. b Faithfulness, 200. Fame, 8. b. 68 Familiars, 145. Whether a
father loves his children better the^ ye mother. 175. Fear, 26.26. b 39.94 139.
b. Fearful men of two sorts, 36, Fearfulnes. 35 b. 36.38. b. Felicity, 63,
64.84. Felicities parts, 64. Felowly friendship, 179, b. Foolishnes, 153 b.
Forecast, 32.187. b. A forswearer differs not from a liar, 204. Fortitude,
36, b. 77, b. 83 137.138.138, b. Fortune, 64. b Freting, 50, b. Freendship.
18.40.66, b. 170, b. 176, 177 Furies of four sorts, 17, b.
G
Genius, 145. Gentleness, 156, b. 198, b. Gladness 26. b Godliness. 43. b. 186, b.
Goods of fortune, 41. b. 65, b. Goods of nature. 41. b. 72.74 b. Goods of the
mind, 41. b Good things, 41. Graces. 194. b Gratefulnes, 194. b, Gratia, 194.
b.
H
Happiness, 41, b. 163. Hardness, 130. Hatred. 15.20. Heed, 26. b. 100, b.
Health, 74 b. Honesty, 126, b. Honor. 68. b. 69. Hope, 32. b. 143. b,
Hospitality, 180, b. 181.182 Humanity. 191.
I.
Idleness. 13 b. 28, b. 29.90. b Ielosie 49. Ilwil, 4. b. Impatience, 157.
Intest, 10.20, b 22, Incontine^cie. 119. b. Indifferent things. 41.
Indulgencie, 173. b. Ingratitude, 197. b. Innocence, 159. b Insulatation, 7. b
Intellestuall virtues. 86. b Inuidia comes virtutis, 44. Iracundia, 16. b
Justice. 83.108 137. b. 161.161. b. 165.
K
A King who, 166. Whether it were better to be governed by a good king then a
good law. 165. b Kindred, 175, b Knowledge of things to come, why peculiar to
God. 32. b. Kockrig* 173* b
L
Lamentation. 59. b Laus praemiu^ virtutis, 131. b Precepts of the law. 165.
Virtues of the law. 165. A liar a forswerer. 204. Liberality, 132. b. 149. b.
194. Liberaries, 150. Lying. 203. Longing, 24. b Love, 17.18.19
20.21.22.23.24.180. Love of parents, 171.174, b. 175. Love of price 171. b.
Whether we ought to love our parents or Prince more. 173. Lust, 2. b. 11. b.
26. b. 39. Lururiousnes, 10.
M
Magnanimity. 140. Magnificence 149, b Man discribed, 79. b. Manners, 164.164.
b Marmaids, 140 b Mela^cholicie, 79. Men are of two sorts, 81. Mercy meet for
a Prince, 44. Metuus quasi motus animi, 26* Miserari, 40. Miseratio. 40
Mesereri. 40. Misericordia, 40. Moderation, 129. Modesty, 111. Maeror, 54.
Molestation, 60, b, Monstru^. 75. b. Moral virtues: 86. b Mourning, 56
Munificence, 150.151. b Musicians, 135. Myce, 95.
N
Natural friendship, 172. Nature. 29 72 74.98. Needines, 12. Nobility, 41.66.
b. 99. b Noblemen of best capacity, 99. b
O
Oblectation, 6. b Obtrectation, 49. Orators, 9. Oaths. 200. b Over boldenes,
145 b.
P
Palenes, 14 b Parcere, 130. b Parcitas, 130. b Patience, 32.141. b. 157.
Pauor, 33. Pensiuenes, 54. Perjury 201.203. b Perseuera^ce, 159. b Pertinacie,
159. b Perturbations. 1.3.18. Philosophers. 113, b Physicians, 107 Piettie, 43.
b Piget, 30. P^^tie, 39, b 40, b. 42 43.193, Plaiers, 127. b Plenty, 13.
Pleasure, 3. b 13. b. 39.80, 164. b Poets 9 129. b Poverty. 13.193. To presage,
103, b. Presaging, 145. Prodigality, 9. b. 12. Pro;^^aries, 70 ^^^^oecitie,
(...) Providence, 94. b. 95.96.187. b Prudence, 82. b. 87^94 b 137, b. 187, b
Pudet. 30. Pudicitia 121, b
R
Ratiocinatio, 89 b. Reason, 89 No Religion without the word of God. 191.
Riches, 13.13, b. 41.65, b
S
Sadness. 51, b 53, Sagacity, 104 Sagire, 103, b. Sanguines, 79. Security, 148
Shame fastenes, 114. Sickness, 75. Slouthfulnes, 27, b. 59, b Sobernes, 133.136,
b Sobriety, 133 Sobrietas. 133. b. Solstitium, 51, b. Soothsaiers, 96, b
Sorrow, 26, b 39. Sparingnes, 130.132, b Stabilitie, 159* b Stout of body, 77.
Stout of mind, 77. Strength, 141.76, b Subtletie, 105, b Swearing, 200, b
Suffering, 129.155, b
T
Temeritie, 102. Temperance 82, b. 83.109.137, b Terrestitia, 51, b Terror, 30.
Thankfulness, 152, b. 195. Things indifferent, 41. Tower of mischief 12.
Treason, 204. b Trembling, 33. Tristitia, 51, b Troublesomnes, 59. Trust, 143.
b. A Tyrant, 166.
V
Valiant who, 30, b Valiant men of three sorts, 77. Versutia, 104. b Virtue,
1, b. 41.41, b. 68, b 80 85, b. 86, b 109.161. Visions, 36, b. Vis vnita
fortior, 178, Understanding, 90 Ungratefulness, 152, b. 193. Voluptas. 4.
Voluntas, 4.
VV
Warines, 103. Will, 26, b, Wisdom, 88 Tokens of a good Wit, 97. Word of god
191. Wrath, 13, b. Wylynss, 104, b.
Z.
(...) 49, b.
A view of examples before mentioned.
A.
ABraham. 77.183. Accius* 96. b. 102, b. 147. Achilles* 7.. b. Adriani
sempulchru^. 151. Aegeria. 95. b Aegyptia^s. 60 76. b 90 b. 164.203. b
Aelianus. 136.192, b. 167. b Aemylia. 124. b. Aemylius. 48 b. 117.167.202. b.
Aeneas. 189. Aeschines. 50 Aeschylus. 16 b. Aesculapius. 132. b. Aesop. 153.
Agamemno^. 37. b. Agesilaus*. 48. b. Aglaia. 194. b. 195. Aglaurus. 172 b,
Agrippa. 184 b. Ajax. 196. Alcander. 157. b. Alcebiades. 46.97. b. 140. b.
Alecto. 16. Aleos. 203. b. Alexander. 8.16.21.27.32, b. 37, b. 43.46. b. 111,
b. 133. b. 143.145, b. 149.151. b. 191.199.201. b. Ambrociotes 62. Amaebeas,
117. Amolpis. 95. b. Amphonius..171. b. Anacharsis. 135.136. Anacreon. 22.
Anaxagoras. 57.82. b. 152. b 193. b. Anaxarchus. 154. b. Anaxilaus. 141
Androclidas. 144. b. Antea. 117, b. Antigonus* 19. b. 47.106. b. 112 b. 160. b.
205. b Antimachus. 17. Antipater. 38 149. Antomedon. 129. Antonius Pius. 43. b
Antonius. 61. b. 97. b. 105.108. b. 134.199. b. 202. b 204. b. Apelles. 25. b.
106. b. 147. Apicius. 10. b. Apollo. 17. b. 95. b. 105. Apollonius. 188. b
Apollophanes 87. b Aquilius. 167 Arabians. 201 Arcagatus Vulnerarius 42
Archiaes. 169 Archilochus. 169 Architas. 84 Argos. 25. b Ariadnes. 17 b
Ariartes. 23 Ariobarzanes 174 Aristides. 11.20.45. b Aristippus. 63 b. 66
Aristogito^, 69 193 Aristomachus, 22 b Aristophanes. 9. b Aristotle. 15.48. b.
62.63 b 84. b. 151. b 158 Armenia. 124 Artaxerxes. 174. b, 175. b Artemesia.
150. b Asian kings. 7 Assyrian kings 21. Astapus. 171. b Astu. 105. b
Atala^ta. 9.194 Athens. 25. b. 45. b Athenans. 40.60, b, 76. b. 152. b. 189, b
191. b. 197 b Attalus. 47. Atticus. 129.140. b. 154.178. b Attilius. 203.
Augures. 96 Augustus. 174 204. b Aulus Gellius 4 Aulus Trebonius. 204. b Aulus
Vitellius 24. b. 36. b 160
B.
Babylon. 135 Babylonians. 121.164. b Babylo^s walls, 158 b Bacchus, 17. b
134.138. b. 201 Barula, 47. b Battyllus, 22 Bellerophon, 60.117. b M. Bioulus,
129. b Bion, 87, b Biorex, 101 Bocchus, 47 Brenus, 190 Brutus, 33. b 52. b. 61.
b. 204, b Byzentius, 36. b.
C.
Caesar, 11.24 b 42.52. b. 100. b, 136, b. 140, b. 146, 186.205. b. Calanus.
133, b Calchas, 16, b 33, b. 188, b Caligula, 36.193. b Callimachus, 66, b
Callipho^, 63 b Callistes, 128 Capitoliu^ Romae, 151 Carthagenians, 202.
Cassander, 38. Cassius, 52. b 61, b. 105.204 b. Castor, 138. b Castrinus, 144
Catiline, 23 Cato, 5.12. b. 20, b 29, b. 62 113. b, 131.193. Catulus, 113.
Caucasus, 52 A Centuria^ of Caesar's, 144 Cephalus, 23 b Q. Cepio, 193. Cestos,
10. Cethegus, 55 b Charilaus, 201, b. Chilo, 94, b. 152, b. 196, b Chrysippus,
17, b. 147, b Cicero. 9.14.15 b. 18, 38, 42 46.48, 48 b. 50.52.55. b. 59, 67,
68, 69, 70, b. 71.81, 84, 89, 98, b. 115, b. 127, 130, b. 134, 152, b. 168,
178.179. b. 186, 188, 198, 200, 203, 204, 204, b. 205. Cimon, 193. Claudia,
124, b Claudi 9, 174 b Cleopatra, 61 b. 175, b Clinias, 14.22, b Clito, 16.
Cloacae, 150, b Clodius, 22. Codrus, 172, b Coecilius, 33, b Colapho^, 25, b
Coloslus, 151 Conomachus 190, b. Consuls, 92, b Corinthians, 121, 128.
Cornelia, 70 Cornelij foru^ 150, b Cornelius Asina, 202. Coruinus, 136 b.
Cotta, 167 Cotys, 128 M. Crassus, 33. b. Cratus 23, b, 66 Cretensians, 164, b.
189. Critias, 145 Craesus, 105.197 Crotone salubrius, 76. C. Curio, 102 Q.
Curtius, 33. b. Cynna, 186. Cyparissus, 22, b. Cyrus, 124.
D.
Damon, 177 b Darius, 35.174 b. 200 Degonetes, 23 b. Deiphilus, 188, b Demades.
50 b. 98, b. Demetrius, 19 b. 28 Democritus, 66* 80, b. 148, b Demosthenes 27,
b. 29.48 b. 50* 55, b. 98 b. 115. b. Denomachus 63, b Dio, 113 Diodorus 63 b
Diogenes, 4. b. 29, b. 82, b. 111 b Dionysius, 16 b. 68.^34.142 b. 151, b
Diripentina, 123 Dolobella, 204, b Domitian, 150 Domitius, 173, b. Druidae, 96.
Duellius, 202 Dypsas, 13.
E.
Elias, 183. Elpinor, 10. Elysij campi, 148, b. 188, b Empedocles, 62.
Epaminu^das, 40, b. 96 Ephicrates, 34 b. Eperarius, 155 Epictetus, 139
Epicures, 63, b 37. b, 176, b Epimenides, 85 Erasmus, 68 185. Ere^^icus 157 b
Erotes, 99 Etheocles, 197. b Euagoras, 48. b Eubula. 173 Eucratides, 174, b
Euphrosyne, 194, b. 195. b Euripides, 32.146. b Eusebius, 158.
F.
Fabius. 10, b 48, b. 69.93, b 94.156. Fabricius. 154 Faunus, 135, b
Fenestella, 184. b Flaminius, 93, b. Flauius, 182 Fo^teius 167, b Fortunatae in
sulae, 148, b Fortune, 64. b Fortunes Image, 22, b. 36. b Frugipiso 167
G.
Galba. 36, b. 143.164, b Galetes, 199, b Garama^tines, 35, b Gaudentius,
Merula. 203 b Genius, 145. Germa^s. 181. b Gorgon. 168 b Gracchus, 167 182.
Graces 194, b Graecians. 186 197.203. Gryllus, 57. b Gurges. 10, b 69. b.
Gyges, 144.
H.
Hamilcar, 202 Hannibal. 8.21.26, b. 38.105 b. 113.129, b. 192, b. Hanno. 202.
Harmodius. 69. Hasdrubal. 169. Hector, 7. b Helensimage 22, b. Heraclitus, 4,
b. 83, b. Hercules, 48.80.138, b. 191. Herillus, 63. b 85, b. Herod, 173, b
Hiero, 75.124 Hieronimus, 63. b. Hipparchus, 87, b. Hippocrates. 147, b. 197.
Homer, 25.48, b. 196, b Horatius Puluillus, 58 Hortensius, 50
I.
Jason. 17, b Idaea. 83, b Jews, 186. Indians. 90, b Insulae fortunatae, 148,
b Job, 77 Joseph, 117, b Iou^anus Po^tanus, 91 Ipingenia, 33.172. b Isocrates,
65. b 91, b. 127, b. 149, b. 163, b, 189. Iuba. 102, b. Iugurtha, 47. Iulia,
71. Iulij forum, 150, b. Julius Caesar, 8.150.199 Jupiter, 10.81.95, b. Ius,
25, b.
L.
Lacedaemonians, 54, b. 135. Lactantius, 1, b. 14.62.66 72, b. 77, b. 128, b.
155, b. 158.166, b. 181.187 b. 194 Laodice, 23 Leaena, 57, 154, b Lelius, 126.
Lentulus, 55, b 204, b Leocriu^. 172, b Leonidas, 138 144. b. Lepidus, 61.202,
b Leucates, 23, b Leuij forum, 150, b. Lot, 183 Lotophagie, 28, b. Lotus, 28, b
Luceius, 119 Lucretia, 122, b Lucullus, 131 b 164.191 b. 201 b Lycurgus, 95.95,
b. 157, b. Lysander, 17. Lysimachus, 47.175, b
M
Magicia^s, 69. Marcellus, 68, b. 94.140 Marius, 11.31.47.101.103.132.154, b,
156 186 Marmaides, 140, b. Marsias, 47, b Massinissa, 137 182.190 Massurius 181
b Mathona, 130 Mausoli sepulchru^ 150 b Medea, 17, b. 25, b. 173, b. Medians,
201. Memnon, 142 Menelaus. 33 b Menenius, 184, b Menedorus, 203. Menophilo,
123. Mentas, 196 b Mentor, 196 b Mercuri 9, 95 b Merula, 203, b Messagetans,
121. b Messalonians 135, b. Messalina, 120 Metellus, 93, b 171, b* 178, b
Methridates, 123.154. Meton, 85. Metrodorus, 63, b Milciades, 48 Miles
gloriosus, 8, b. Minerua, 88.92. Minos, 95, b. Minous, 205 Minutius, 104
Minyas, 95. b Moninus, 66 Mopsus, 17.188, b L. Mummius 117 Mutius Sceuola, 30,
b. Musaeus, 188, b. Muses, 17, b Mycerinus, 130. Myson, 52, b 194.
N.
Nabatheis. 28, b Nero. 36.144.164.173, b. 175. b Nestor. 37, b Nicanor, 123.
Niceratus. 17 Nichomachus 25, b. Nicias. 26, b. Nightingale. 5. b. Nouellius.
134, b. Numa Pompilius. 95.95 b
O.
Octauius. 202, b. 204, b. Olochas. 203 b Oppianicus 173. b Orestes. 36.178.
Orestilla. 23. Otho. 102.172 Ovid. 91.
P.
Pachetes. 62. Pallas. 27, b. Pallicidij. 203, b. Pamphae^s. 197. Panaetius,
32. Pantaleo^. 192. Parmenio. 27.201, b. Parthians. 203 Pasiphae^. 22.2, b.
Patra. 197. Paulus Aemylius. 48. b L. Pedanius. 22, b. Penelope. 25. Perdiccas.
32 b Perianderi. 16, b. 173, b Pericles. 193, b Peripatecio^s. 1.63, b.
Perpenna 149 Persepolis. 21, b. Perseas 168, b Persians. 114.164. Phalaris.
192. Phaon. 23, b 197. Pheacons. 28 b Pheneus. 196, b Pherecydes. 190, b
Philip. 42, b. 111, b. 130.134, b. 175, b. Philostrates. 61, b. Phocion. 4, b
149.193. Pub. Pilatus. 22, b. Pindarus. 22. L. Piso. 167. Pittacus. 135 b
Plato. 17.48 b 65, b* 75.84.142, b. 151, b. 170, 189. Plautus. 19. Plinius. 58,
b. Plutarchus. 81 Politianus. 44, b. Pollux. 138, b Polydectes. 169.201, b.
Polymachus. 204. Pompeie. 9.11* 149.160.202, b. Pompilij sorum. 150, b.
Pompilius. 95.95, b. Pomponius. 129.131.154.163.196, b. Popilia. 120, b
Popilius Siloe. 101, b. Porphyrius. 188. Praxithea 173 Pretus. 117. b Priamus.
175 b Proletaries 70 Promachus. 133* b Prometheus. 52. Protheas. 151 b Prusias.
174 Ptolomeie. 37, b. 47.75.126.164.174. b. 175.199, 202, b Puluillus. 58
Pylades. 178 Pyramides. 151. Pyrrhus. 153.160, b. Pythagoras daughter. 123. b.
Pythagorici. 52.86. Pytheas. 177 b Pythius. 151
Q.
Quintilian. 127.169* b
R.
Regulus. 155, b 203 Rhaab. 183. Rhadamanthus. 95.95 b Rhascopolis. 105.
Rhascus. 105. Rhodes. 25, b Rhumitaleus. 205, b Romans. 16, b 135.135. b. 164
186.189, b. 193, b. 20.201, b. Rome. 45. b Romuli lex 135, b. Rutilius. 51.167.
S.
Sabacus. 199 Sabies. 28. Salamis. 25, b Salluste. 16.50 Sappho. 23, b. 25.66,
b. Sardanapalus 6, b Saturnus. 52, b Satyrus. 152 Scaurus. 48. b 117.167.203. b
Sceptici. 108, b Sceuola. 30, b Scipio. 48, b. 59.119.125, b 131.146, b. 152
182.191, b. Scropha. 204. Scylla, 22, b. ^05. Scythians, 6, b 191, b. 200, b
Seleucus. 20.47.174.184. Semiramis, 20, b. 22.22, b 23. Sempronij forum. 150, b
Sempronius, 182. Seneca, 195. Seraphians, 168. b. Sertorius, 101.148, b. 156.
Seruilia, 20, b. Seuerus Pertinax, 160. Siloe. 101, b Simon, 171. Simonides,
32, b. Smyrna, 25, b. Socrates. 87.88.108, b. 114, b. 128.136, b. 145.157
Solon. 30, b. 70* b. 110, b. 136. Solstitiu^. 51, b Soothsaiers, 96, b.
Sophocles, 16, b. Sostratus, Spargapises, 135. Spartanes. 55.70.122, b.
Spinther, 204, b. Spurina, 24.80, b. Stesichorus, 6 Stesilia, 20. Stilpo, 51.
Stoikes, 1.18.63, b. Straton. 75 Sturmius, 79 b Sylla, 7, b. 11.30, b. 47.149
150, b. 186. Syracusa, 185 b P. Syrus, 129, b
T.
Tarentines, 22* b. Tarpeia, 205 Tarquinius, 116.150. Tatius, 205. Tentoria^
women, 123, b. Terence, 66 Thais, 21, b. Thalcia, 194 b 195* b. Thales, 84, b.
188, b. Thamyras, 47, b. 148. Thebes, 45, b. 150, b. Themistocles
11.20.48.67.69.98.115. Theodorus, 205. Theodosius, 14. Theognis, 170 Theopa,
173 Theophrastus, 11, b. 51 Thermopylas, 138. Theseus, 17, b 32.48.115.
Thobias, 77. Thomiris, 135. Tiberius, 27.37. 112, b. 175, b. Tigranes, 35.124.
Timanthes, 33 Timarchides, 70, b Timocreon, 45, b. Timomachus 25, b. Timon, 4,
b, 46, 194. Titus, 43, b. 152 Trebonius, 204, b Tremelius, 203 Troie, 22, b
Tryphon, 126 Tryzus, 192 Turres adama^tinae, 184 Tuscia, 125 Tychius, 196 b
Tyndarides, 25, b. Tyresias, 189 b Thyrhema^s 121.
V.
Valerius, Coruinus. 136. b Varro, 26. Varus, 102. b Venus, 4.17 b 25, b.
88.197. Verres, 143 Vespasianus, 43. b. 136, b Vesta, 95, b Vincentius, 76, b
Virgil, 48, b Vitellius, 20 b 36. b. 160. Ulysses, 33, b Volesius, 192. Volupe,
4 Volupia, 4 Vranias, 201 Vtica, 102. b
VV.
Wales of Babylon, 50, b VVo^ders of the world, 150, b.
X.
Xantippe, 108, b. Xenophon, 22, b. 42, b. 57, b. 59 Xenocrates, 118, 134.157.
Xerxes, 164, b 164, b.
Z.
Zeno. 18, b. 63, b. 107.148.154. Zeuxes, 9.
FINIS.
These and such like fault as not willingly commit. we pray thee (good
Reader) friendly to correct.
Leaf. Line. Escape. Amend. a, b. 23. sharply simply 25. reign remain 3.
20. contritions commotions 5, b. 16. are as it as it 6, b. 20. it so so 7. 25.
for if they come to a custom they for if it come to a custom it 7, b. 20.
Scylla Sylla 21. dicsomendes him? disco^mends him? 10. 13. banes bones 11. 28.
except he except ye 11, b. 28. it reigns, it it reigns. 31, b. 16. of
weakness or weakness 47. 12. Marcius Marius 51. 7. presuming suing 73. 11. from
an for an 73, b. 4. and mankind as mankind 23. every particular every
particular thing a particular thing is aparticular 77, b. 12. should have his
own his own 78, b. 25. a babbler a lubber 78. 5. A mean in all A mean as in all 84, b. 10. a fellow a felowlie 16. semblied semblies 88. 22. Aristootle
Aristotle 107. 4. defend them deceive them 108, b. 18. erane erant 111. 3.
Contine^cie, Pudicita, Continency, Chastity, Pudicitia, 129, 14. all was
always 20. as ignorant was ignorant. 130. 20. as Coniungata, and each as
Co^iugata are fefcht. 137. b. 1. to vanquishe to vanquish 139. b. 17. this
virtue boldness this virtuous boldness 143. b. 19. then at hand or at hand.
150. 18. Then afterward Them afterward 150, b. 22. m. Walls of the world
Walls of Babylon. 25. five fullongs fue furlongs 151. 3. eu^lin^es volumes 159.
21. speak spoke 161. 10. m. Vertutum imperio Virtutum connexio. 26. and a
golden and had a golden 162, b. 7. which move us which are nigh unto us 11. if
there be any in if they be in 163, b. 19. does persist does profit 168. m. 28.
Cicero pro posio Cicero pro Q Roscio. 174, b. 21. a new must a mean must 175.
10. does love his does better love 11. and ye things wrought by the workman
then ye thing wrought by the workman, does him. 183. 10. in the.lxi. in
the.xli. 189. 21. Deus pinates Deos penates 189, b. 1. m. The office The oath


