A Garden of spiritual Flowers. PLANTED BY Ri. To. Will. Per. Ri. Gree. M. M.
and Geo. Web.


LONDON, Printed for T. Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop entering into
the Exchange. 1610.

A Direction unto true happiness, standing of three parts: published especially
for the use of those that have heard the same handled in the course of the
Ministry.
Admonition to the Reader.
I Pray thee (gentle Reader) first learn to understand this direction,
examining it in every point, so that thou find it true, and agreeing with the
holy Scripture. Then consider how thou likest and allowest of it. Both which if
thou do, thou shall easily find and feel the whole to work upon thee, as
it is to be desired. The first part by diligent meditation, will humble and
bring thee low in thine own sight, and raise in thee a true sorrow of heart,
by seeing thy deadly misery. The second part, by the working of Gods Spirit,
shall settle thee in most clear safety and peace, by seeing thy self
delivered from the same misery. The third part will show thee how to chang thy
life, and conform it unto the will of God, and give thee direction how to
walk with God daily. If thou dealest not soundly with thy self in the two
former parts, never set upon the third. And although thou attain to the use
of them both, yet shall it be meet for thee to prove thy self daily by them,
that thine estate may be found good indeed, and after make the third part
instead of a daily direction for thee, until thou see thy self reformed, and
made like unto it; which is the true use of it. For he that is come to
repentance in truth, must make daily* use of them all three.

A GARDEN OF Spiritual Flowers.
The first part.
EVery one that will be saved, Romans 5. 12.
must first know and be persuaded in heart of his miserable estate, lay de
forth in these eight points following, and be truly humbled thereby.

1 That we were created happy in the loins of Adam: Genesis 2. 6.
which happiness he lost by his fall, Ephe. 2. 1. 2. 3.
and we through him, and so are brought to utter misery.

2 That this our misery consists first, Romans 5. 12.
in our guiltiness by Adams transgression, Psalm. 5. 5.
and our own both original and actual sins: and secondly, in the desert
and punishment thereof, Romans 5. 12.
which is death temporal of the body, and eternal both of body and soul;
with all the calamities that appertain to them both.

3 That our sinfulness is such, Genesis 6. 5.
as it continually defiles all our actions, our thoughts, words and deeds;
and that the punishment, Deuteronomy. 27. 27
which is Gods curse, is such, as lies upon us always, and in all places; so
that we are nothing but a lump of sin, Romans 1. 18.
and under the wrath of God continually.

4 That no man is able to satisfy for his sin, Mat. 1. 26.
to appease Gods wrath, and to come out of this misery, by any thing that he
can do, Psalm. 49. 7. 8. 9.
or that may be done by any other man for him. And that none is able to bear
and overcome the intolerable weight of that curse of God, Psalm. 130. 3.
which hangs over him for his sin.

5 That they which know not this, still go forwards in it without trouble of
mind, thinking their case good enough. They that only know it, being full of
poison and rebellion, Romans 7. 8. 9.
for the most part rage against the doctrine thereof, and become more greedy to
go on in all evil, when they see their sin forbidden; or at least they
abide still in it. Act. 2. 37.
But if any be pricked in conscience, and humbled by this, he makes a right
and profitable use of it; as shall be seen in the sixth point.

6 That seeing it is thus with men; they who have not mourned, and yet see they
have cause, must sorrow and weep, Act. 2. 37.
turning their laughter into wayling, Joel. 2. 12. 13.
and their joy into heaviness, till they see themselves delivered from this
woe; Mat. 11. 28.
for they are not to be ignorant, Ezra. 10. 2.
that there is hope.

7 That to attain this mourning, (which is hardly wrought in us) these means,
and such like, are to be used. 1. That we harden not our hearts in hearing the
Law, Psalm. 95. 7.
but suffer it to work upon us. Heb. 4. 7.
2. To be willing to examine our hearts and lives for the finding out of some
special sins: Psalm. 4. 4.
and when we see them, Lament. 3. 40.
we do not lightly pass them over and confess them, 1. Sam. 15. 30
but aggrauate them to humble us. Dan. 9. 3. 5.
3. That we consider the greatness of the punishment, with the eternity
thereof. 4. An holy despair of any remedy from our selves, or any other
creature. 5. A persuading of our selves, that many are damned for those sins
which we live in. Luke 1. 26. 6.
That we weigh and consider our mortality in this life, and the uncertainty
of our death; Psalm. 90. 12.
and finally, use all the afflictions which God lays upon us unto this end.
1. Cor. 11. 32.


8 That this mourning and sorrowing for sin, Heb. 12. 16. 27.
and the woe it has brought upon us, cannot appease Gods wrath toward us: but
is required of all unbelievers to break their hearts, and cause them to lament
after God; not to justify them before God, 1. Sam. 7. 1.
but to make them fit to receive the Gospel, and prepare them to hear his
voice that says: Come unto me all ye that travel, Act. 2. 37.
and are laden, Math. 11. 28.
and I will give you rest. For although men can not make account of the
remedy, Math. 9. 12.
except they feel their need and misery; yet if any rest in this sorrow, and
seek not the remedy following, in the next part, he shall never be happy:
For it shall either vanish and be forgotten in time, leaving no Fruit behind,
1. Kin. 21.
or drive them to utter despayring. Mat. 27. 5.


The Second part.
HE must know and be persvaded, John. 3. 16.
that he is as fully and clearly restored unto happiness, 1. Tim. 1. 14. 15.
16.
as he was deeply plunged into misery: 1. Pet. 1. 18. 18.
which is declared in the eight points following.

1 That God has provided a remedy against all this misery* Mat. 1. 21.
by which we may be set free from it. This remedy is perfect satisfaction, and
perfect righteousness; 1. Ti. 2. 16.
whereby only we may be freed from death, and restored unto life: so as Gods
justice may be fully answered, all our sins forgiven, and we adopted unto
everlasting life.

2 That this remedy is not to be found but only in Christ Jesus, Act. 4. 12.
who being both God and Man has in our Nature, Esa. 53. 5.
suffered the punishment due unto our Sins, to deliver us from the same, and
fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, Romans 5. 18.
to justify us before God: and so delivering us from sin and death, 1. Cor.
1. 30. 31.
has restored us to righteousness and life; being made unto us from God his
Father, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; that
whosoever glories, may glory in the Lord.

3 That the only means to receive Christ, and in him salvation, is Faith in
the Person, Ioh. 1. 12.
mentioned in the former part of this Direction: seeing Christ has plainly
affirmed, that he is a Physician to such sick ones, Luke. 5. 31.
and calls them to receive; Mat. 11. 28.
that is, to believe it. Which Faith, Romans 10. 14. 17.
is a wonderful and supernatural grace of God, whereby we receive Christ and
all his benefits, and is ordinarily wrought in men's hearts by the outward
Preaching of the word, and the inward operation of the Holy Ghost. Act. 16. 14.
Therefore such as seek this, must hear Sermons often and diligently, they
must be much moved and drawn by the reports of other Godly; Ioh. 1. 43. 47
as Andrew by Peter, and Nathaniel by Philip. And they must be encouraged to
believe, Act. 19. ^6.
by the example of others, who were as far off as they: 1. Ti. 1. 16.
they must use good company, Act. 9. 26. 27
as Paul when he was cast down, sought to join himself to the Apostles: and
reverence Gods graces in the Ministers, and in his people. By these means many
have been added to the Church and believed. 1. Cor. 14. 24.


4 That by this glad tidinges, Acts. 2. 47.
preached in his name, and the other means, God draws the hearts of such as
shall enjoy it, Ioh. 7. 37.
after they know that there is a remedy, to hunger after it, and desire it
above all other things, John. 6. 44.
not fleetingly nor houertly, but fervently and constantly, so as nothing can
satisfy them without it; and to prize it above all other things: which grace
being a peculiar gift of the Spirit, Mat. 13. 46.
is not without Faith in some measure. And though it be not in full assurance
by and by, yet so, as they never cease till they can apply it to themselves.
Which shall be, when they have felt the sweetness of Christ, when they see
they take the yoke upon them, Mat. 11. 29.
and be willingly subject to his word and commandment: Then they shall find
rest unto their Souls.

5 That we therefore feeling what great need we have of it, as having been
pricked in our hearts for our sin and damnable estate, and been broken
hearted, and having this fervent desire after it, and so highly esteeming it,
as nothing more, may apply it to our selves, and do rest persuaded (for all
our unworthiness) that it is ours, and freely bequeathed to us of God, 1. Ioh.
3. 23.
because Christ is given of God, and has given himself for such. And for our
better encouragement hereunto, we are to know, that Christ commands,
exhorts, and beseeches us to believe in himself; so that we need not
fear that it is presumption thus to do.

6 And seeing we are so fearful at our first calling, that we dare not think
we have faith, Judge. 6. 17.
know that these are sure tokens of it, if we strive against doubting: Judge. 6.
13.
if we not feeling it, complain bitterly of the want of it; 1. Pet. 2. 2.
if we seek fervently to be settled in believing; Psalm. 32. 5.
if we desire to search out the sin which may possibly hinder us, to expel
it: and some one of these, or other graces like them, shall ever be seen in
the believer by such as can judge, though not always perceived of the party
himself: even as by moving breathing, feeling, etc. it is gathered, that life
is in the body, which lies for dead.

7 That by all good means we confirm this faith in us daily: Heb. 10. 38.
the means are partly those which are set down in the third point of the
third part, and namely the examples of others, who of weak became strong; Heb.
11. 34.
the often and due considering of Gods love, that it is unchangeable, Ioh. 13.
1.
and our own experience, who believing the Promise when we thought it
impossible, Psalm. 77. 1. 12.
may much more now be persuaded of it, and of the favor of God, especially
seeking it penitently as we did then. But if we grow not, we began but
counterfaitly.

8 That if our Faith be confirmed, and we persuaded of our salvation and Gods
favor, it will appear in us by these signs, which may be called inseparable
companions to it. Romans 5. 11.
First, that we have peace with God, 1. Pet. 1. 8.
and rejoice for it sensibly. Cant. 5. 8.
Secondly, that we love the Lord most dearly, 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
and Gods People heartily. Psalm. 77. 6.
Thirdly, Psalm. 126. 12.
that we have our hearts enlarged to praise God secretly and openly, for so
great kindness, as to prefer us before so many thousands. Fourthly, John.
14. 22.
to wonder at it in giving thanks* 1. These. 5. 14.
Fifthly if we pity, comfort, and strengthen others. Sixthly, if we long to go
hence, 2. Cor. 5. 6. 8
where we are absent from the Lord. And seventhly, desire to go home to him.
Ier. 31. 18. 19.
And lastly, if we mourn for our unkindness past, Romans 5. 8.
toward God, who was so kind to us, even while we wandered from him.

The third part.
He must understand and practice to the end of his life, Tit. 2. 11.
that manner of conversation, which GOD has appointed and commanded every
faithful Christian to walk in, Ephesians. 2. 10.
after he has once believed; 1. Pet. 1. 17.
as it is showed in the eight points following. Romans 6. 4. 5. 6.


1 That he that is saved by Christ, is also by him mortified unto sin, 2.
Cor. 5. 17.
and regenerate unto righteousness and true holiness; and finally is become a
new creature, 1. Ioh. 5. 20.
and being now by Faith in Christ, made the child of God, does withal receive
of God, a mind to know him, Romans 6. 2. 4. 5. 6.
an Heart to love him, a Will to please him; Romans 6. 25.
and in some measure also Strength and power to obey him: Romans 7. 14.
and although with imperfection, yet with manifest difference from his former
estate: and contrarily he does hate sin, as he loves goodness.

2 That the believer being thus sanctified and changed, Pro. 4. 23.
must give all diligence to keep his Heart in that estate afterward, and
endeavor to practice the godly life in his particular actions; that is, Mat.
4. 10.
deny all ungodliness in his behavior, and worldly lusts in his heart: and
contrarily live soberly himself, in moderating his affections in all lawful
lyberties, righteously toward men, in giving every one their due; Act. 26. 18.
and holily toward God, in worshipping and serving him only. In which things
stands our true repentance.

3 That unto every one that has Faith, and is truly (though in weakness)
reformed, God gives willingness, readiness, and desire to use the means
which he has ordained for the keeping and confirming of himself in this
Christian course. 1. Pet. 2. 2.
Unto which are necessary these two things: 1. Pet. 2. 2.
a certain direction and order of proceeding in this estate by observing our
selves, that in one thing as well as another, we keep a good Conscience: Act.
13. 1.
or if we be overtaken and step out of the way, yet that we lie not still,
Ier. 8. 6. 7.
but return. And that Armor of a Christian set down; the chief parts
whereof are these six: Sincerity, Ephe. 6. 14.
Righteousness, Faith, Hope, Preparation for afflictions, and Knowledge of
Gods word to descerne the deceitfulness of Sin. For the keeping of these,
we must pray often and earnestly, Luke. 18. 1.
with watching; adding thereunto Hearing of the Word preached, and the use of
the Sacraments, Reading, Luke 22. 17.
Meditation, Conference, Good example of others, Gods benefits and
chastisements daily meditated of, and rightly used, and our own experience.

4 That out of all that has been before set down, and namely in these three
former points, we gather out a direction, to guide our selves every day unto
our end: a sum whereof is this. First, Job. 1. 5.
that every day as we search and find out our sins, we heartily dislike and
renounce them, and repent. Secondly, that every day we be raised up in assured
hope of the pardon of them, by the promise of God in Christ. Heb. 11. 6.
Petition. 5.
Thirdly, that every day we keep our hearts in frame, weaned from carnal
liberty, and fit to any duty. Heb. 3. 12.
Fourthly, Act. 24. ^6.
that every day we be strongly armed against any known sin. Fifthly, that
every day we endeavor to do any duty commanded. Deuteronomy. 5. 20.
Sixthly, that every day we pray for all necessaries; and namely that we watch
and pray to be strengthened against sin, Mat. 26. 41. Petition 4.
and steadfast in our Christian course. Seventhly, that every day our thanks
for benefits already received, These. 5. 18.
and other still certainly hoped for, be continued. Eighthly that every day we
hold fast and keep peace with God; Romans 5. 1.
and so lie down in it. Phil. 4. 4.
These are not so enjoined every day, as though it were enough barely to think
of them every day; but that we be accompanied with the most of them through the
day, and strengthened with the rest; I mean Prayer and Thanksegiuing. So that
by the help of them all, we may be made able to pass the day both in company
and solitariness; at home and abroad, in afflictions and prosperity; and in
all our actions of the day to honor God therein, according to that which is
written; 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Whether we eat or drink, etc.

5 That we be watchful to withstand and avoid all the lets which may hinder
this course, as want of the means, and namely the help of the word preached,
slothfulness, carelessness in observing our ways, a yielding to temptation,
commonnesse and boldness in sin, Apo. 3. 17.
and a thinking that we are well enough already; weariness in doing good,
untowardness, custom in sin, and long lying in it; the using of ill Company,
worldliness, profaneness of heart, Iere. 13. 23.
looseness of the eye, ear, tongue, etc.

6 That the Lord has commanded, and does promise to perform, 1. Pet. 1. 5.
that every one of his faithful servants, shall persevere in this course, by
that power he gives them by Faith. This persuasion is no small encouragement
unto continuance and constancy, in hope, patience* and well doing.

7 That least we deceive our selves, we be able to prove and do often indeed
prove as we shall see cause, that our repentance is sound, which may appear to
us by these notes: First, if our hearts be changed. Romans 12. 2.
Secondly, if we avoid one sin as well as another. Iam. 2. 10.
Thirdly, if we keep our hearts with all diligence (having so often found them
false and deceitful) so that good life may come from thence. Pro. 4. 13.
Fourthly, if we labor to please God according to his word, as well in well
doing, 2. Chr. 25. 2.
as in the deeds themselves. Fifthly, Prou 4. 18.
if we still go forward in this course without fainting or discouragement, as
our knowledge increases; and if we fall asleep, and offend against our
knowledge that we complain of our corruption, Can. 5. 2.
and be not quiet, Can 3. 4.
until by relenting for our sin, and earnest suing to God, he return to us
again and receive us; which he will do, and then be more careful afterward
against the least occasions.

8 That this course brings sound Wisdom, Experience, and Comfort; and
teaches us how to carry our selves in all estates and conditions of life:
whether of trouble or peace, and to answer all the ca^els and quarrels of the
Devil and his Instruments. it brings us into most inward acquaintance and
communion with God and Christ; makes us ready to die, fit to live, and to
find greater gain in both, 1. Ioh. 1. 3.
then in any other estate. And in one word, happy here, and happy ever.
Whereas without it, the beauty and benefit of the Christian life, Phill. 2*
21.
is smally or not at all enjoyed: (...). 1. 2.
nor after the Kingdom of Glory possessed. (...) 19. 28. 29.


The Conclusion.
I Have set before thee (gentle Reader) a frame of a Christian course, in these
three parts. Now when in knowledge, living, and going about the practice
hereof, it is entered upon, and thus far raised up; yet it is but an house
vntiled, and vndawbed, without windows, doors, implements and other
furniture: and therefore not so to be left. Some never do so much as enter
upon it* some beginning, do not finish it. And yet the first sort may be long
beating about it: The last are grosely deceived to let it stand unperfected,
and therefore never reap the benefit of it. Such are they, who having begun
in all these three parts, leave off, as though they had done all. But the true
Christian, having laid for himself this good foundation, builds thereupon
proportionably, as the Apostle says, Ephse. 4. 16.
and so reapeth a sure and constant fruit of his labor: notwithstanding all
the troubles and dangers that may assail him. And if thou go about to be
directed by this, Mat. 7. 24.
take heed it wax not loathsome to thee in time; and so used for fashion, and
not to govern thee, for then thou loosest the benefit of it, (as one that
eats meat with a full stomach, and not for hunger) and it shall loose her
beauty with thee. And yet through sloth, Pro. 27. 7.
negligence, and love of this world, with the pleasures of it* and manifold
discouragements, this will come to pass.

FINIS.
By RICHARD ROGERS.
Directions how to live well, and to die well.
IN the Morning awake with God; and before all other things, offer up unto him
thy Morning sacrifice of prayer; therein remembering: First, to give hearty
thanks unto him for all his mercies, bodily and spiritual; and namely, for
thy late preservation: Secondly, make an humble Confession of thy sins: with
earnest desire of pardon: Thirdly, ask such necessaries as are requisite for
thy soul and body, with fervent request to be relieved in them: and namely,
desire his blessing upon thy labors in thy calling in the day to come.

In what place soever thou art, let this persuasion abide in thine heart, that
thou art before the living God: and let the remembrance hereof, strike thine
heart with awe and reverence, and make thee afraid to sin.

Make conscience of idle, vain, dishonest, and ungodly thoughts: for these are
the seeds and beginnings of actual sin in word and deed.

Have special care to avoid those sins which thou find thy nature most
prone unto; and eschew those prouocations which were wont most to prevail
against thee.

Follow with faythfulnesse and diligence, thy lawful particular calling, in
which thou art placed.

Think euer-more thy present estate and condition to be the best estate for
thee, what soever it be; because it is of the good providence of God.

Look well to thy carriage in company, that thou do no hurt by word, or
example; nor take any from others: but endeavor rather to do good.

Use civil honesty toward all men: Good Conscience and good Manners, must
go together.

If at any time against thy purpose thou be overtaken with any Sin, lie not
in it, but speedily recover thy self by repentance.

When any good m^tion or affection does arise in thine heart, suffer it not to
pass away, but feed it by reading, meditating, or praying.

Esteem of every present day, as of the day of thy death: and therefore live
now, even as though thou were now dying: and do those good duties every day,
which thou would do if this were thy dying day.

At the end of the day, before thou lie down in thy bed, call to mind how
thou have spent the day that is passed: thy misdoinges repent, and praise God
for assisting thee with his grace in the duties which thou have performed.

Sleep not at night, before thou have commended thy self by prayer, into the
hands of God: for thou know not whether (fallen asleep) thou shall rise
again alive.

Let Prayer be the Key to open the Morning: and the Bar to shut in the
Evening.

Walk as the Children of light. Ephe. 5. 8.
As the just live by faith, so the just live the life of Faith. Now they live
the life of Grace; one day they shall live the life of Glory.

DIRECTIONS HOW TO DIE WELL.
Think that the greatest work thou have to finish in this world, is to die
well; and to make an happy departure out of this World. They which die well
die not to die, but to live eternally.

Be every day ready to leave this life. That man does finish his days in best
sort, that every day esteems the last day of his life, to be present and at
hand.

Endeavor before death come upon thee, to pull out this sting; and take from
him his power and strenght by humbling thy self in the time present, for all
thy sins past; and by turning thy self unto God for the time to come. That
man can never die ill, that has a care to liuewel.

Inure thy self by little and little to die, before thou come to that point that
thou must needs die. He that leaves the World, before the World leaves him,
gives Death the hand like a welcome Messenger, and departs in peace.

Chiefly when thou art visited with Sickness, or Old Age, think either of
these, a Summoner, warning thee ere long, to appear before the great Lord,
Judge of all the World; therefore now, prepare to set all things in good order,
and make thine accountes ready.

Make a new examination of thy life and conversation passed. Make a new
confession unto God of thy new and particular sins, as God sendes new
corrections and chastisementes. Make new Prayers, and more earnest then ever
before, for pardon of thy sins, and reconciliation with God in Christ* By all
means avoid those sins, which thou find and feel to incense the wrath
of God against thee.

Seek reconciliation with thy neighbor, by free forgiveness of them that have
offended thee; and earnestly desire to be forgiven of all that have been
offended by thee. Set thine House and Family in order, by disposing of thy
worldly goods in thy Will and Testament; thereby shall thou die not the more
quickly, but the more quietly; and prevent the brawles and iarres that
otherwise (when thou art gone,) may arise among thine Heirs. Thou partest from
earthly possessions, and art going to take possession of Heavenly. In the last
agony of Death, when all things in and of the World do fail and forsake
thee, rest thy self by Faith, on the favor and mercy of God in Christ, and
comfort thy self in the Lord thy God: What shall separate from the love of God
in Christ? nor life nor death.

Let thine Heart and Tongue be still employed in prayer to the Lord: First, for
patience in thy trouble: Second, for Comfort in thine affliction: Third, for
Strength in his mercy: Fourth, for Deliverance at his pleasure. Yea, endeavor
even to die praying. When thou art in the deapth of Miseries, and at the gates
of Death, there is a deapth of Gods mercy; which is ready to hear and help
thee: Misery must call upon Mercy.

Be willing and ready to depart out of this world without murmuring or
repining, whensoever, wheresoever, or howsoever it shall please the Lord to
call thee. For why should thou unwillingly suffer a short Death, that will
bring thee to the fruition of eternal Joys? Persuade thy self, that if thou
live by the mercy of God, thou shall do well: But if thou die, doubt not but
thou shall do better. And with a free heart speak it: Come Lord Jesus.

Lastly, when thou feel Death approaching, commend thy departing soul into
the holy hands of God: He gave it, to him surrender it again. So, laying thy
self down to sleep and rest, God shall make thee dwell in everlasting
safety.

The Grave is radie for me.
A good life till death; John. 17. 1.
and a good death after a good life: are the best means to attain an eternal
happy life in heaven. As Death leaves thee, so shall Judgment find thee,
Christ is to me both in life and death, Phil. 1. 21.
advantage.

To preserve thine heart in cleanness.
Often meditate of God, and good things.

Carefully watch over thine outward Senses; chiefly thine Eyes, and thine
Ears.

Be always doing something that is good.

To preserve thy Tongue from sin.
Forethinke whether it be lawful and fit to be spoken.

Avoid all superfluity of words, and needless speeches.

Affirm no more then thou know to be true.

To keep thy life in holiness.
Do all things as in Gods sight.

Eschew the company of those that are ill disposed.

Think daily of thy death; and that last great account.

FINIS.
By Will. Perkins.
CONSOLATIONS For all troubled Consciences.
Written in manner of a Dialogue.
Sinner. GOOD Sir, Esa. 50. 4.
I know the Lord has given you the tongue of the Learned, to be able to
minister a word in time, to him that is weary: therefore I pray you, help me
in my misery.


Minister. Ah my good Brother! What is the matter with you? and what would you?


Sin. I lived a long time (the Lord he knows it) after the manner of the
world, in all the lusts of my filthy flesh, and then I was never troubled; but
it has pleased God of his infinite mercy, to touch my heart, and to send his
own Son that good shepherd Jesus Christ, to fetch me home to his own fold,
even upon his own neck: and since that time, it is a wonder to see, how my
poor heart has bin troubled, my corruption so boyles in me, and Satan will
never let me alone.


Min. Your case is a blessed case: for, not to be troubled of Satan, is to be
possessed of him; Col 1. 13.
that is: To be held captive under the power of darkness, and to be a slave
and vassal of Satan. For as long as the Strong man keeps the Hold, Luke (...)
all things are in peace. Contrariwise, he that has received any true sparkle
of Faith, Mat. 16. 18.
shall see the gates of Hell (that is) the Devil and all his Angels, in their
full strength to stand up against him, and to fight with an endless hatred,
for his final confusion.


Christian. But this is my trouble of mind, has made me oftentimes fear,
least God would reject me, and utterly deprive me of the kingdom of heaven.


Min. But there is no cause why it should so do: for why, or how should Heaven
be your resting place, if on Earth you were not troubled? How could God wipe
away your Tears from Heaven, if on Earth you shed them not? You would be
free from Miseries: You look for Heaven upon Earth. Bradford.
But if you will go to Heaven, the right way is to sail by Hell. If you will
sit at Christ's Table in his Kingdom, you must be with him in his temptations.
You are as Gods Corn; you must go under the Flaile, the Fan, the Millstone,
and the Oven, before you can be Gods Bread. You are one of Christ's Lambs,
look therefore to be fleeced, and to have the bloody Knife at your throat all
the day long. If you were a Market-sheepe brought to be sold, you should be
Stalled and kept in a fat Pasture: but you are for Gods own occupying;
therefore you must pasture on the bare Common, abiding storms, tempests,
Satan's snatches, the worlds wounds, contempt of Conscience, and frettes of
the flesh. But in this your misery, I will be a Simon unto you, to help you
to carry your Cross; so be it you will reveal your mind unto me.


Chr. I will do it willingly: my temptations are either against my faith in
Christ, or against repentance for my sins.


Min. What, is your Temptation as touching Faith?


Chri. Oh woe is me! I am much afraid least I have no Faith in Christ my
Savior.


Min. What causes this fear?


Chri. Diverse things.


Min. What is one?


Chr. I am troubled with many doubtinges of my salvation; and so it comes into
my mind to think, that by my incredulity, I should quite cut off my self
from the favor of God.


Min. But you must know this one thing, that he that never doubted of his
salvation, never believed; and that he which believes in truth, feels many
doubtinges and wauerings, even as the sound man feels many grudginges of
Diseases, which if that he had not health, he could not feel.


Chr. But you never knew any that having true Faith, doubted of their salvation.


Min What will you then say of the man that said; Mat. 9. 24.
Lord, I believe; Lord help my unbelief? And of David, who made his moan
after this manner: Is his Mercy clean gone for ever? Does his Promise fail
for evermore? Has God forgotten to be Merciful? Has he shut up his tender
Mercy in displeasure? Psalm. 77. 9.
Yea (he goes on further) as a man in despair. And I said, this is my death.
Hereby it is manifest, that a man endued with true Faith, may have not only
assaults of doubting, but of desperation. This further appears, in that he
says in an other place: Why art thou cast down my soul? Why art thou
disquieted in me? Wait on God, for I will yet give thanks: he is my present
help, and my God. Psalm. 42. 11.
And in very truth, you may persuade your self, that they are but
unreasonable men that say, they have long believed in Christ, without any
doubting at all of their salvation.


Chr But David has more in him then I have: for me thinks there is nothing
in this wicked heart of mine, but rebellion against God: nothing but doubting
of his mercy.


M. Let me know but one thing of you: These doubtinges which you feel, do you
like them, or do you take any pleasure in them? and do you cherish them?


Chr. Nay, nay; they appear very vile in mine eyes, and I do abhor them
from my heart; and I would feign believe.


Min. In Man, you must consider his estate by N^^ure, and his estate by Grace:
In the first, he and his flesh are all one, for they are as Man and Wife; Romans
7. 5.
therefore one is accessarie to the doings of the other: When the flesh
sins, the man also sins, that is in subjection to the flesh: yea, when
the flesh perishes the man likewise perishes, being in this estate with the
flesh a loving couple, they live and die together. But in the estate of Grace,
though a man have the flesh in him, yet he and his flesh are divorced a sunder.
This diuorcement is made, when a man begins to dislike and hate his flesh, and
the evil fruits of it. This separation being made, they are no more one, but
twain; and the one has nothing to do with the other. In this case, though the
flesh begette sin, and perish therefore; yet the Christian man shall not
endure damnation for it. To come more near the matter: You say, the Flesh
begets in you wauerings, doubtinges, and distrustinges: what then? it troubles
you, but fear not, remember your estate; you are divorced from the flesh, and
you are new married with Christ. If these sins be laid at your door, account
them not as your Children, but renounce them as Bastardes: Say with Paul, I
doubt indeed, but I hate my doubtinges: and I am no cause of these; but the
Flesh in me, which shall perish, when I shall be saved by Christ.


Chr. This which you have said, does in part content me. One thing more I pray
you show me concerning this point, namely how I may be able to overcome these
doubtinges?


Min. For the suppressing of doubtinges, you are to use three meditations. The
first, That is Gods commandment, that you should believe in Christ. So S.
John says: John. 1. 3. 23.
This is his Commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus
Christ. Thou shall not steal, is Gods Commandment; and you are loath to
break it, least you should displease God, and pull his curse upon your head.
This also is Gods Commandment; Thou shall believe in Christ, and therefore you
must take heed of the breach of it, least by doubting and wavering, you bring
the curse upon you. Secondly, you must consider, that the promises of
salvation in Christ, are general; or at the least indiffinite, excluding no
particular man; as in one for all, may appear; God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him shoud not
perish, but have everlasting life.

Now then, so often as you shall doubt of Gods Mercy, you exclude your own
self from the promise of God, whereas he excludes you not. And as when a
prince gives a Pardon to all Thieves, every one can apply the same unto
himself, though his name be not set down in the Pardon: So the King of Kings
has given a general Pardon for free remission of sins, to them that will
receive it. Believe therefore that God is true in his Promise, doubt not of
your own salvation, challenge the Pardon to your self. Indeed your name is
not set down or written in the Promise of Grace; yet let not any illusion of
Satan, or the consideration of your own unworthiness, exclude you from this
free Mercy of GOD: which he has also offered to you particularly; first in
Baptism, then after in the Lords Supper; and therefore you are not to waver
in the applying of it to your self.

Thirdly, you are to consider that by doubting and despayring, you offend God
as much almost, as by any other sin: Romans 4* 18.
You do not above hope, believe under hope, as you should do. Secondly, you
rob God of his glory, in that you make his infinite Mercy to be less then
your sins. Thirdly, you make him a liar, who has made such a Promise unto
you. And to these three meditations add this practice: When your heart is
toyled with unbelief and doubtings; then in all haste draw your self into
some secret place, humble your self before God, pour out your heart before
him; desire him of his endless mercy to work Faith, Romans 10. 12.
and to suppress your unbelief; and you shall see, That the Lord over all, is
rich unto all that call upon his name.


Chr. The Lord reward you for your kindness; I will hereafter do my endeavor
to practice this your counsel. Now I will make bold to show an other, that
makes me to fear, least I have no Faith: And it is, because I do not feel
the assurance of the forgiveness of my sins.


Min. Faith stands not in the feeling of Gods mercy, but in the apprehending
of it: which apprehending, may be when there is no f^eling: for Faith is of
invisible things. Heb. 11. 1.
And when a man once comes to enjoy the thing believed, Romans 8. 23.
then he seaseth to believe: and this appears in Jobs example, Job 13. 15, 16*
when he says: Lo though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and I will
reprove my ways in his sight: he shall be my salvation also: for the hipocrite
shall not come before him; he declares his Faith: Yet when he says presently
afterward: Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy* he
declares the want of that feeling which you speak of.


Chr. Yet every true believer feels the assurance of Faith: otherwise Paul
would not have said: Prove your selves whether you be in the faith or not.


Min. Indeed sometimes he does, but at some other times he does not: as namely
at that same time when God first calls him, and in the time of temptation.


Chr. What a case am I in then? I never felt this assurance: only this I
feel, that I am a most rebellious wretch, abounding with a whole sea of
iniquities. Me thinks I am more ugly in the sight of God, then any Toad can
be in my sight. O then what shall I do? Let me hear some comfort from thy
mouth, thou man of God.


Min. Tell me one thing plainly? You say you feel no assurance of Gods
mercy.


Chri. No indeed.


Min. But do you desire with all your heart to feel it?


Chr. I do indeed.


Mi. Then doubt not, you shall feel it.


Chr. O blessed be the Lord, if this be true.


Min. Why? It is most true, for the man that would have any grace of God
tending to salvation, if he do truly desire it, he shall have it: for so
Christ has promised: I will give to him that is a thirst, Reave. 2. 6.
of the Well of the Water of life freely. Whereby I gather, that if any want
the Water of life, having any appetite after it, he shall have enough of it:
and therefore fear you not; only use the means which God has appointed to
attain Faith by, as earnest Prayer, reverent hearing of Gods word, and
receiving of the Sacraments; and then you shall see these things verified in
your self.


Chr. All this which you say, I find in my self, by the mercy of God; my
heart longs after that Grace of God which I want. I know I do hunger after
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof: and further, though I
want the feeling of Gods mercy, yet I can pray for it, from the very root of
my heart.


Min. Be careful to give honor to God, for that you have received already:
for these things are the motions of the spirit of God dwelling in you. And I
am persuaded of this same thing, that God which has begun this good work in
you, will perfect the same unto the day of Jesus Christ.


Chr. The third thing that troubles me, Phil. 1. 6.
is this: I have long prayed for many Graces of God, and yet I have not
received them: whereby it comes often to my mind, that God loves me not, that I
am none of his Child: and therefore that I have no Faith.


Min. You are in no other case then David himself was, Psalm 69. 4.
who made the same complaint: I am weary of crying; my throat is dry, mine
eyes fail, whiles I wait for my God.


Chr. But David never prayed so many years without receiving an answer, as I
have done.


Min. Good Zachary waighted longer on the Lord, before he granted his request,
then ever you did. It is like he prayed for a Child in his younger years, yet
his prayer was not heard, before he was old. And further, you must note* that
the Lord may hear the Prayers of his Servants, and yet they be altogether
ignorant of them: For the manner that God uses in granting their request, is
not always known; as may appear in the example of our Savior Christ: Heb.
5. 7.
who in the days of his flesh, did offer up Prayers and Supplications, with
strong crying and tears unto him, that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared: and yet we know that he was not freed
from that cursed death, but must needs suffer it: How then was he heard? On
this manner. He was strengthened to bear the death: He had an Angel to
comfort him: He was afterward freed from the sorrow of death. And so it is
with the rest of Christ's body, as it was with the head. Some being in want,
pray for Temporal blessings: God keeps them in this want, and yet he hears
their Prayers, in giving them patience and strength, to abide that want. Some
being in wealth and abundance, pray for the continuing of it, if it be the
will of God: The Lord ^linges them into a perpetual Misery, and yet he hears
their Prayers, by giving them blessedness in the life to come. You pray for
the increase of Faith, and Repentance, and such like graces: you feel no
increase after long prayer; yet the merciful God has (no doubt) heard your
prayer, in that by delaying to perform your request, he has stirred up in you
the spirit of Prayer, he has humbled you, and made you feel your own wantes,
the better to depend on his mercy, for the beginning and increasing of every
particular Grace.


Chr. the fourth thing that troubles me, is that I can not feel Faith purify
my heart, and to work by love, in bringing forth lively fruits.


Min. If this be so continually, that Faith bringes forth no fruit, it is
very dangerous, and argues a plain want of Faith: yet for a certain time it
may be so. Faith has not only a Spring time, and a Summer season, but also a
Winter, when it bears no fruit. And there is many a true Christian, like the
bruised Reed, that is ouerturned with every blast of Wind: and like the Flax
that has Fire in it, which by reason of weakness, gives no heat nor light,
but only a smoke.


Chr. Thus much shall suffice for my first temptation, wherein I take my self
satisfied. Now if you please, I will be glad to rehearse the second.


Min. I am content, let us hear it.


Chr. I am afraid least I have not truly repented: and therefore that all my
profession is only in hypocrisy.


Mi. What moves you to think so?


Chr. Two causes especially: The first is. They which repent, leave off to
sin: but I am a miserable sinner, I do continually displease God by my evil
thoughts, words, and deeds.


Min. You need not fear: for where Sin abounds, (that is, the knowledge
and feeling of sin, Romans 5. 20.
) there Grace abounds much more.


Chr. I find not this in my self.


Min. But yet you find thus much in your self: Those corruptions which you
feel, and those sins which you commit, you hate them, you are displeased
with your self for them, and you endeavor your self to leave them.


Chr. Yea that I do with all my heart.


Min. Then how miserable soever you feel your self, by reason of the mass of
your sin, yet you are not subject to condemnation: But shall most certainly
escape the same. Romans 8. 1.
Take this for a most certain truth, that the man that hates and dislikes his
sins, both before and after he has done them, shall never be damned for it.


Chr. I am even heart-sicke of my manifold sins and infirmities; and those
good words which you speak, Cant. 2 5.
are as Flagons of Wine, to refresh my weary, laden, and wealtring soul. I
have begun to leave sin and wickedness, and to detest it long ago. I have
been often displeased with mine infirmities and corruptions. When I offend God,
my heart is grieved; I desire to leave sin, I fly the occasions of sin: I
would feign fashion my life to Gods word: and I pray unto God, that he would
give me grace so to do: and yet (which is my grief) by the strength of the
flesh, by the slight and power of Satan, I am very often overtaken, and fall
marvelously both by speech and by deed.


Min. Have courage (my good brother) for whereas you have an affection to do
the things that are acceptable unto God, it argues plainly, that you are a
member of Christ, according to that of Pau^. They which are of the spirit
savor the things of the spirit. Romans 8. 5.
Well then, if Satan ever object any of your sins to you, make answer thus:
that you have forsaken the first husband the flesh, and have espoused your
self to Christ Jesus: who as your head and husband, has taken upon him to
answer your debtes: and therefore if he urge you for them, refer them over
unto Christ: for there is no suit in Law against the wife, the husband living.
Yea I add further. If you be ouercarried with Satan's temptation, and to fall
into any sin, you shall not answer for it, but Satan; it shall surely be
reckoned on his score at the day of Judgment; for he was the author of it. If
you fall by the frayltie of your flesh, it shall perish therefore; but you
shall still have Christ your advocate.


Chapter Indeed (as you say) I have in me an aflection to please God; but when I
come to perform my obedience, there I fail.


Min. Therefore mark this further, as long as the Children of God are in this
life, God regards more the affection to obey, then the obeydience it self.
And they shall be unto me, says the Lord of Hoastes, in that day I will do
this for a flock, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own Son, that
serves him. The Father when he shall set his Child to do any business, Mal.
3. 17.
though he do it never so untowardly, yet if he show his good will to do the
best he can, his Father will be pleased: And so is it with the Lord toward his
Children. You look to have some perfection in your self, but in this life you
shall receive no more but the first fruits of the spirit: Romans 8. 25.
which are but as a handful of Corn, in respect of the whole Corne-field: And
as for the accomplishment of your Redemption, you must wait for it after this
life. You would be kissed with the kisses of Christ's mouth: but here in this
world, you must be content, if you may with Mary Magdaline, kiss his feet;
for the perfection of a Christian man's life, stands in the feeling and
confession of his imperfections: And (as Ambro^e says,) That the obedience due
unto God, stands more in the affection, then in the work.


Chr. But why will God have those whom he has sanctified, labor still under
their infirmities?


Min. The causes are diverse. First, hereby he teaches his Servants to see in
what great need they stand of the righteousness of Christ, that they may more
carefully seek after it. Secondly, he subdueth the pride of men's hearts, and
humbles them by counteruayling the graces which they have received, with the
like measure of infirmities. Thirdly, by this means, the godly are exercised
in a continual fight against Sin, and are daily occupied in purifiing
themselves.


Chr. But to go on forward in this matter: There is an other cause that makes
me fear least I have no true repentance.


Min. What is that?


Chr. I oftentimes find my self like a very Timber-log, void of all grace
and goodness, froward and rebellious to any good work; so that I fear, least
Christ has quite forsaken me.


Min. As it is in the straight Seas, the Water ebbes and flows; so is it in
the Godly: in them, as long as they live in this World (according to their own
feeling) there is an access and recesse of the Spirit. Otherwhiles they be
troubled with deadness and dullness of heart, as David was, who prayed to the
Lord; Psalm. 1^9. 88.
To quicken him according to his loving kindness, that he may keep the
testimony of his mouth. And in an other place he says, Psalm. 119. 5.
that Gods promises quickened him. Which could not be, unless he had been
troubled with great dullness of heart. Again, sometime the spirit of God quite
withdraws it self, to their feeling, as it was in David: In the day of my
trouble (says he) I sought the Lord, and my soul refused comfort: I did
think upon God, and was troubled. I prayed, and my spirit was full of anguish.
Again: Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he show no more
favor? Psalm. 77. 2. 3. 7.
Has God forgotten to be merciful, etc. The Church in the Canticies
co^plaineth of this: Cant. 3. 1.
In my bed I sought him by night, whom my soul loved; I sought him, but I
found him not. And again: My Well-beloved put in his hand by the hoale of the
Door, and my heart was affectioned toward him: I rose up to open to my
Well-beloved, and my hands did drop down Mirrhe, my fingers pour Mirrhe upon
the handles of the Bar. I opened to my Well-beloved, but my Well-beloved was gone
and past: Mine heart was gone when he did speak. I sought him, but I could
not find him: Cant. 5. 4. 5. 6.
I called, but he answered me not. Contrariwise, God at some other times, Romans
5.
sheds abroad his love most abundantly in the hearts of the faithful. Cant.
1. 13.
And Christ lies between the Breasts of his Church, as a Poesy of Mirrhe
giving a strong smell.


Chr. But how can he be a Christian, that feels no grace nor goodness in
himself?


Min. The Child which as yet can use no reason, is for all that, a reasonable
creature: and the man in a swounde, feels no power of life, and yet he is not
dead. The Christian man has many quames come over his heart, and he falls
into many a swounde, that none almost would look for any more of the life of
Christ in him: yet for all that, he may be a true Christian. This was the
state of Peter, Luke 22. 31.
when he denied our Savior Christ with cursing and banning: his Faith only
fainted for a time, it failed not.


Chr. I have now opened unto you the chief things that trouble me, and your
comfortable answers have much refreshed my troubled mind. The God of all
mercy and consolation, requite you accordingly.


Min. I have spoken that which God out of his holy word has opened unto me; if
you find any help thereby, give God the praise therefore, and carry this with
you for ever: Act. 24. 22.
That by many afflictions both in the body and the mind, you must enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Raw flesh is noisome to the stomach, and is no good
nourishment before it be sodden: And unmortified men and women, be no creatures
fit for God; and therefore they are to be soaked and boiled in afflictions,
that the fulsomenesse and ranckenesse of their corruption may be delayed, and
that they have in them some relish acceptable unto God. And (to conclude) for
the avoiding of all these temptations, use this sweet Prayer following, which
that godly man M. Bradford made.


A comfortable and godly Prayer, for a troubled Conscience.
OH Lord God, and dear Father, What shall I say, that feel all things to be
(in manner) with me as in the wicked; Blind is my Mind, crooked is my Will,
and perverse Concupiscence is in me as a Spring of stinking puddle. O how
faint is Faith in me; How little is my love to thee, or thy people? How great
is my selfeloue? How hard is my heart? By reason whereof, I am moved ^o doubt
of thy goodness toward me, whether thou art my merciful Father, and
whether I be thy Child or no: Indeed, worthily might I doubt, if that the
having of these were the cause, and not the fruit rather of thy Children: The
cause why thou art my Father, is thy merciful goodness, grace, and truth in
Christ Jesus; which can not but remain for ever. In respect whereof, thou have
borne me this good will, to bring me into thy Church by Baptism, and to
accept me into the number of thy Children, that I might be holy, faithful,
obedient, and innocent: and to call me diverse times by the ministry of thy
word, into thy Kingdom: beside the innumerable other benefits always
hitherto powered upon me. All which, thou have done of this thy good will, which
thou of thine own mercy bear to me in Christ before the World was made.
The which thing as thou requirest straightly that I should believe without
doubting, so would thou that I in all my needs, should come unto thee as to
a Father, and make my moan without mistrust of being heard in thy good time,
as most shall make to my comfort. Lo therefore to thee dear Father, I come
through thy Son our Lord, our Mediator, and Advocate, Jesus Christ, who
sits on thy right hand, making intercession for me. I pray thee of thy great
goodness and mercy in Christ, to be merciful to me a sinner, that I may in
deed feel thy sweet mercy as thy Child. The time (O dear Father) I appoint
not, but I pray thee that I may with hope still expect and look for thy help:
I hope that as for a little while thou have left me, so thou will come and visit
me, and that in thy great mercy, whereof I have great need, by reason of my
great misery. Thou art wont for a little season in thine anger, to hide thy
face from them whom thou love: but surely (O Redeemer) in eternal mercies
thou will show thy compassion. For when thou leauest us, O Lord, thou do not
leave us very long, neither do thou leave us to our loss, but to our lucre
and advantage, even that thy holy Spirit with bigger portion of thy power and
virtue, may lighten and cheer us, that the want of feeling of our sorrow, may
be recompensed plentifully, with the lively scent of having thee to our
eternal joy: And therefore thou swearest, that in thine everlasting mercy
thou will have compassion on us: Of which thing, to the end we might be most
assured, thine Oath is to be marked; for thou say: As I have sworn, that I
will never bring any more the Waters to drown the World; so have I sworn, that
I will never more be angry with thee, nor reprove thee. The Mountains shall
remove, and the Hills shall fall down; but my loving kindness shall not move,
and the bond of my peace shall not fail thee: Thus say thou the Lord our
merciful redeemer. Dear father therefore I pray thee remember, even for thine
own truth and mercies sake, the promise and everlasting covenant, which in
thy good time, I pray thee to write in my heart, that I may know thee to be the
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent, that I may love thee
with all my heart for ever: that I may love thy people for thy sake: that I may
be holy in thy sight through Christ; that I may always not only strive
against sin, but also overcome the same daily more and more, as thy Children
do, above all things desiring the sanctification of thy Name, the coming of
thy Kingdom, the doing of thy will on Earth, as it is in Heaven, etc. through
Jesus Christ our Redeemer, Mediator, and Advocate. Amen.

FINIS.
Short Rules sent by M. Rich. Green-ham, to a Gentlewoman troubled in mind,
for her better Direction and Consolation, as also very necessary for every
Christian to be exercised withal.
THose temptations shall be laid to your charge whereunto you yield, etc.
Yield not therefore, but resist, as Saint I^mes bids.

2 No motion shall hurt you whereunto you give not consent in heart: You have
no sin which in heart you long to be freed from; you want no goodness, which
in heart you covet to have.

3 Where Sickness is at the highest, there is hope of diminishing: so likewise
in temptation.

4 It is a great mercy of GOD, to discern a temptation, in time of temptation.

5 When you would do any good, or receive any good, offer up your endeauours,
actions, and means, in a Sacrifice to God in Christ: beseeching God to give
his holy Spirit to sanctify his own Sacrifice.

6 If you have received but a little release of temptation, give thanks, and
you shall have more.

7 It is a sin as well to deny Gods gifts* as to presume of them.

8 Temptations smoothereth as fire: burns more inwardly.

9 Be persuaded always you are in the presence of God and his Christ: and
frame your actions accordingly.

10 Be more afraid of secret sins, then of open shame: lay this foundation
sure, that there is mercy with Christ Jesus.

11 Remember the former mercies you have received, and think your present
estate, to be none other then the estate of Gods Children: if you be grieved,
pray to God: if relieved praise him: there is a vicessitude of grief and
comfort, as of light and darkness.

12 Beware of a discontented mind in any case: yea, be contented to have your
desires denied you of God: and if your Prayer be not heard of God, vex not
your self too much; neither vehemently covet, nor be grieved for any thing,
saving the having, or loss of the favor of God.

13 Labor for meeknes and patience, and be ready to kiss the Rod, and to
offer up all to him, of whom you have received your self: for if you struggle,
it will fare with you as with a Bird in a Grinne, the more she strives, the
faster she is. We must use the Word in troubles and temptations, as a sick man
does his meat, which though he eat against the stomach, and presently feels
no benefit of it, yet we know by experience, it does him good, and himself
afterward shall perceive it.

14 The patient bearing of Misery, is an acceptable Sacrifice to God; for when
the Goldsmiths puts a piece of Gold into the fire to make better use of it,
it seems to the unskillful, that he utterly marreth it. So the Children of
God in affliction, seem to the judgment of the natural man, undone and
brought to nothing: but spiritual things, are spiritually discerned.

15 Believe always your estate to be the work of God; and vary not therein:
for your humiliation, your consolation, is the glory of God, and the good of
many others.

16 Beware that you do not often alter your judgment of your estate: as
saying sometimes, It is Gods work, sometimes Melancholy, sometimes your
Weakness and simplicity, sometimes Witcherie, sometimes Satan: for the
diverse thoughts will much trouble you: You may think Melancholy to be an
occasion, but no cause; and so of the rest. Therefore look steadfastly to the
hand of God surely trusting on this; that he not only knows thereof, but
that whatsoever is done directly or indirectly, by means or immediately, all is
done and governed by his Divine providence, for our good.

17 Say not you cannot be helped: for that may hinder the work of God. Say
not, If I were in such a place, and such a place, I should be well; for God is
infinite, and therefore every where: as well where you are, as where you would
be.

18 Whereas in consideration of the falling away of many, excelling you both in
the ages and graces of the new birth, you fear you shall not persevere unto
the end: your meditating and collection is good, so long as it preserues you
from the carelessness of the flesh: but it is evil when it would dissolve the
assuredness of your Faith. Indeed so long as you look upon your self, you
have cause to fear, because you are unable to prolonge, as you are to begin
new birth: but if you look to God, you have nothing but matter of Faith; for
that when he once loves, he loves for ever. Again, as a man swimming in the
deep of Waters, is never in danger of drowning so long as his head continues
above the Water: so though you swim in deep seas of dangerous temptations, yet
are you sure and secure, because Christ Jesus your head, is still above all
your troubles; and therefore able to draw you his Members to the Shore of
Salvation, without all peril of perishing.

19 Believe that GOD the Father does govern your temptation, that the holy
Ghost shall and does assist you, that Jesus Christ was tempted to overcome in
you, that the Saints on earth do pray for you; even those which never knew
you; but do pray for the tempted ones.

20 None can judge of the work of the Spirit, but by the light of the Spirit:
as none can judge of the Sun, but by it self.

21 Dispute not with God, least you be confounded: nor with Satan, least you
be overcome.

22 Be ever persuaded, your punishment is far beneath your sin.

23 In such multitudes of Gods mercies as you enjoy, marvel not you have some
crosses, least we should despair: likewise crosses with blessings, least we
should presume.

24 In any outward blessing which you see you can not have, beseech God you may
never be vexed for it.

25 No shame, grief, or sorrow, pleases the Lord, which goes altogether
separated from a sweet persuasion of his favor. Again, our pleasing our
selves in the assurance of pardon, is not acceptable to God, which altogether
respects the care of espying, bewayling, and avoiding of sin. Wherefore let
this be the bar and bond of your affection in these cases: so long as Christ
goes with you, so long as the Mercies of God accompany you, so long as the
Grace of the Spirit shines upon you, be dealing with your sins, and condemn
the^ unto death. Likewise while you are tender of Conscience, afraid of Sin,
reverently persuaded to walk holily with your God, laugh at Satan's
accusation, despise destruction^, set at naught the terrors of Hell. You never
err, but by failing of one or both these points, that is; eythere in your
griefs, you are grieved without comfort; or in your joys, you rejoice without
reverence: and as in unnecessary griefs, you find no spiritual pleasure; so
in unadvised joys, you can find no spiritual profit.

26 It is the policy of Satan, to blind and besot with a quiet possession of
an unjust mirth, thereby to keep them from the true sight of their sins, so
to oppress the sweet flock of Christ, with false and causeless fears,
thereby to keep them from the glorious feeling of their Redemption. He
knows (to his grief) that Joy may be temporally interrupted, but not finally
or eternally be denied you. Therefore he plyeth himself, though he cannot
extinguish it; yet to diminish your just and royal right in your Christ: In
regard whereof you stand guilty of not maintayning the Lords royalty given
to the Elect, if in the least measure you yield to these slavish fears of the
adversary. This subtle Serpent is not ignorant that by these pensive
practices, he does wear to a dullness the edge of your prayers, and that he
draws from you with an uncomfortable teadiousnesse, the fruits of your
faith; and consequently by these means, you are deprived of the fruit of a
more comfortable service to your God. The weak ones fearing also by your
example, the profession of Christ to be strickt and comfortless.

17 A straight course of Religion is somewhat an uncomfortable companion; but
blessed be that mortification which so far estrangeth us from the world* that
it changes us to the similitude of Christ; to whom we must be confirmed in
sufferings, that we may be like him in glory: Suffer not your heart to be
straight, narrow, and uncomfortable in heavenly thniges, this draws away both
the breath, blood, and life of true godliness: the Lord keep you from evil.
The Lord satisfied you with gladness. The Lord give you the spirit of prayer,
and hear your prayers. The Lord be your teacher, and your comfort: Oh pray,
pray, pray, It is the best sacrifice to God, and the most comfortable duty
you can do: I am not loath to put you in mind of these things, you have many
carfull for you in other things. Oh pardon me if I be bold in this one thing:
I trust I rejoice more in the good of your soul, then ever I should rejoice in
the fruit of mine own body. It should be a thousand deaths; yea a thousand
hels unto me, to see your soul miscarrie. Oh let me be accepted more then a
civil Friend, more then a Frind of the world. Give me this benefit, to be
thought further then a friend of the flesh.

That Man may thankefully receive, patiently bear, and joyfully ouerpasse the
cross of Sickness: it is profitable for him to meditate principally (among
others) of those points following.
1 Who is the author and sender of Sickness.
THe Scriptures does teach us, that all Sickness of body, proceeds from God:
as appears by these places.

The Lord shall make Pestilence to cleave unto thee, Deuteronomy. 28. 21. 22.
until he has consumed thee from the land whither thou go to possess it.

The Lord shall smite thee with the Consumption, and with a Fever, and with a
burning Ague, and with fervent heat.

The hand of the Lord was against the City with a very great destruction: 1.
Sam. 5. 9.
and he smote the men of the City both small and great; and they had Emrods in
their secret parts,

1 In that God is the author of Sickness, we may learn these Lessons.

1 We must not ascribe our Sickness to Chance or Fortune: for it is the will
of God.

2 Look not too much to the means of thy Sickness: as to Cold, Surfeting,
infected Houses, etc But lift up thine eyes to Heaven, remembering that the Lord
has sent it.

3 Storm not against Sickness with murmuring or impatience: for thou can
not resist it: Romans 9. 19.
The Lord has sent it, and who has resisted his will?

4 Iu Sickness seek to the Lord for remedy: for he sent it, and he must take
it away: Hos. 6. 1.
so it is written; Come and let us return to the Lord; for he has spoiled,
and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind us up.

We must not therefore either, 2. King. 1. 3.
1 Seek ease by unlawful means, as by Witchcraft, Coniuring, Charming, etc.
For Ahazia is rebuked for that in his sickness he sent to ask counsel
concerning his recovery, of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron. 2 Depend too much
upon the lawful means: as upon the Physician, 1. Chro. 16. 12.
etc. It is noted for the sin in Asa, that being diseased in his feet, he
sought not the Lord in his disease, but to the Phisitio^s: that is, the
Physicians only.


2 What provoke God to strike man with Sickness.
The Scripture does teach us, that the Sin of man, is commonly the cause why
he is smitten with sickness.

If you will not obey me, Leuit 26. 14, 15, 16.
nor do all the commandments, etc. then will I also do this unto you: I
will appoint over you fearefulnes, (or a hasty Plague,) a Consumption, and the
burning Ague, to consume the eyes, and to make the heart heavy.

David's mistrust in numbering the people, 2. Sam. 24. 15.
was scourged with a Plague of three score and ten thousand men.

Of the Plague, we have among the rest these particular sins set down, as
the causes of it.

1 The neglect of Gods service.

Moses and Aaroa desire Pharaos leave to go and sacrifice to the Lord in the
Desert, Exodus 5. 3.
least for want thereof, he bring upon them the Pestilence.

2 The abuse of the Sacraments.

For this cause (says Paul) that is, 1. Cor. 11. 30.
for abusing the Lords Supper, (as is before in that Chapter) many are weak
and sick among you, and many sleep.

3. Disobedience to Governors.

The Israelites for rebelling against Moses and Aaron, Number. 16. 49.
dyed of the Plague, fourteen thousand, and seven hundred.

4 Murmuring against God. Numb. 14. 3. 12.


The Israelites murmured against God, because he led them no sooner into the
Land of Canaan; and because the Land was no better: therefore threatened to
smite them with the Pestilence, and to destroy them.


And no doubt these sins and offenses principally, are among others: the most
sensible and apparent causes of the Plague among us.

1 The contempt of the hearing of the Word. -- 2 The neglect of the
communication of the Sacraments. 3 Our unruliness, and disobedience to
Magistrates. 4 Our murmuring against God in the late time of Famine.
In that Sin is commonly the cause of Sickness, learn these Less^ns.

1 Look not too much on the means whereby, or the manner how thou art
afflicted: but look especially to thy Sin, as the principal cause of it.
We say commonly, I took my Sickness by such a Journey, by such a Surfeit, in
such an infected House, etc. True, those were the outward means: but it was
thy Sin within thee, which provoked God to offer those means to thee, and to
make them strong and effectual to afflict thee.

2 When thou art visited with Sickness, enter into examination of thine own
Heart, what Sins do principally reign in thee, and do provoke God to smite
thee in that manner.

3 By Fasting, and Prayer, and Repentance, turn to the Lord thy God, that he
may in mercy forgive thy sin; and consequently, take away thy affliction.

4 Learn thereby to loath and avoid Sin, which so incenseth God, and
afflicts thee.

But note by the way, that, 1 Sin is not always the cause of the cross;
John. 9. 2. 1.
as may appear by the answer of Christ to his Disciples concerning the man
which was borne blind. 2 Those that are afflicted, Luke 23. 1. 2. 3.
are not always greater sinners then others; as appears by the answer of
Christ to those which showed him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their own Sacrifices.


Therefore when thou see thy neighbor afflicted, neither judge him rashly to
be worse then thy self: nor excuse thy self presumptuously, to be better or
more righteous then he.

3 To what end God smites man with Sickness.
God which is infinitely good, seeks nothing in afflicting his children, but
their good: as namely, he does visit us with Sickness for these causes.

1 To draw us to repentance and amendment of life; 1. Cor. 11. 32.
least our sin be our destruction, when we are judged: we are chastened of
the Lord, because we should not be condemned of the world.

2 To humble the pride of our hearts, by the feeling of our own frayltie and
misery: Psalm. 107. 12.
when he humbled their hearts with heaviness, they fell down, and there was
no helper.

3 To try and examine us, whether we still stand as fast to God in the time of
adversity, as we seemed and promised to stand to him in the time of
prosperity. Christ when he suffered, Psalm. 21. 18.
is said to be tempted: And they that suffer, are said to be tempted; that is,
tried and proved in affliction, as Gold is tried in the Furnace.

4 To shake off from us carnal security: for prosperity makes us careless.

In my prosperity I said, Psalm. 30* 6.
I shall never be m^oued, for thou Lord of thy goodness, hadest made my
mountain to stand strong: but thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled.

Therefore this must teach us to apply our sickness unto the right end: Not
the more the hand of God is upon us, the more to harden our hearts (as Pharaoh
did in Aeg^pt.) But our visitation must make us better: namely, it must make us
more penitent for our sins, more humble in heart, more steadfast in faith,
and more watchful over our souls; least that if we profit not by so
effectual a means, our sickness be unto us but the beginning of evils.

4 How a man may gather comfort to himself in Sickness.
1 Let the Sick man consider that his visitation is sent of God, Ephesians. 2. 4.
who is rich in mercy, Exodus 34. 6.
and abaundant in goodness and truth, Heb* 12. 7.
and loves him in Christ. 1. Cor. 10. 13


From thence he shall gather, that, 1 God corrects him of love, as a Father;
and punishes him not as a Judge. 2 God will lay no more upon him, then he will
make him able to bear. 3 God will give an issue to the temptation in due time,
as shall be best for him.


1 Let the sick man consider how little his pain is, Job. 2. 7.
in respect of that which God could send. Does thy Head ache, or thy Heart pant,
or thy Foot or Belly grieve thee? Is one member distressed? Yet is not thy
case like Jobs: all his members were afflicted at once. He was smitten with
Boyles from the soale of his foot unto his crown. Is thy whole body
afflicted? yet is not thy case like David's, when being distressed in soul, he
cried out saying: Psalm. 55. 4. 5.
My heart trembles within me, Mat. 12. 50.
and the terrors of death are come upon me: Luke 16. 24.
Fear and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible fear has covered me.

Is thy soul distressed? yet is not thy affliction like those which lie
yelling in Hell in fire inquenchable, weeping and wayling, and gnashing their
teeth; and have not so much as a drop of cold Water to cool their tongue.

Then think thus with thy self: Is one member grieved? GOD could smite all.
Am I heart sick? God could enlarge mine heart, and therewith, all my pain
seauen-fold more. Am I distressed in soul? Luke 12. 5.
God could give me over into desperation. Am I distressed both in body and
soul? God could throw both body and soul into Hell fire. Thus may thou
gather comfort in thy greatest pain, by considering how much less thy pain
is, then God is able to inflict.

3 Let the Sick man consider, Psalm. 14. 3.
how much less his pain is, Iam. 2. 3.
then he deserves. Romans 6. 23.
All are gone out of the way: And in many things, Deu. 27. 26.
we offend all. Now the reward of sin is death: that is, the curse of God,
Hel-fire, utter confusion both of body and soul. The damned in Hell would
gladly suffer the panges of death for ever, that they might be eased of their
torments but for a while. Thus may thou gather comfort to thy self, by
considering how sparingly the Lord scourges thee, when as for thy desert, he
might utterly confound thee.

4 Let the sick man consider, that the best Saints of God have been subject
to the like distress; and have been visited with the like cross of sickness.

Jacob wrestled with God, Genesis 48. 1.
and prevailed with men: yet subject to sickness.

Job an upright man and a just; Job. 27.
yet was he smitten with Ulcers, from the head to the foot.

Elizeus an holy Prophet, 2. kin. 13. 14.
the spirit of Elias was double upon him: yet he sickened and dyed.

Hezekiah, 2. kin. 20. 1.
an holy King, there arose none like him, either before or after him: yet was
he sick to the death.

Jesus loved Lazarus; Ioh. 11. 15.
yet he sickened and died of it.

Of this Meditation, the sick man may gather this comfort.

Surely, notwithstanding my sickness, my part may be among the holy
Patriarchs, Heb. 12. 6.
Prophets, and Saints of God, beloved of Jesus Christ; for thus were they
visited. Yea, this argues that I am of their number: for God scourges every
Son that he receives.

5 Let the sick man consider how great the joys of Heaven are, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
which are laid up in store for him, if he patiently abide the Lords
visitation, even such as the eye has not seen, neither has the ear heard,
neither is the heart able to conceive; so will he say with Paul, Romans 8. 28.
I count that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory
which shall be showed to us. Thus will the hope of the joy to come, assuage the
pain of the present malady.

6 Let the sick man consider, Luke 24. 26.
that such things Christ himself suffered, Heb. 4. 15.
and so entered into his glory. And now being in his glory, he sees, feels,
and pittieth the distress of his members. For we have not an High Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things
tempted in like sort; and therefore knows the better to pity us.

From this Meditation will arise this comfort. Does he which redeemed me,
both see and feel mine afflictions? Surely then will the same my Redeemer,
comfort me in measure sufficient, and release me in time convenient.

5 How a man should hehaue himself in the time of Sickness.
Concerning spiritual things, let the sick man thus exercise himself.

Let him be occupied in prayer: In which prayer, let him crave of God, 1 The
sight of his sins. 2 Sorrow for his sins. 3 Forgiveness of his sins. 4
Faith to believe that his sins are forgiven. 5 Patience and constancy in his
trouble. 6 Deliverance in good time, which way it pleases God.


So are we commanded to do, and so have the Saints left us an example.

Is any man afflicted? Iam. 5. 13.
let him pray.

Is any merry? let him sing Psalms.

Ezekiah being sick, 2 king. 20. 2
turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord.

2. Let him be occupied in reading of the word, for he shall find, 1 Examples
of Gods mercy, showed upon the afflicted. 2 Comfortable promises of strength
and deliverance made to the Saints. 3 Instruction how to bear, and what use to
make of his visitation.


All these (and more then these) shall he find in the Word: whereof David said.

Thy Word is sweeter then Honey, Psalm. 19. 10.
and the Honey comb.

Except thy Law had been my delight, Psalm. 119. 92.
I should have perished in mine affliction. Esa. 66. 23.


3 Let him meditate of the other life which he is passing unto, where he shall
have Saboth upon Saboth: Reave. 21. 4.
that is Rest for euer-more. Where the Lord shall wipe away all tears from his
eyes: and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying; neither
shall there be any more pain: for the first things (that is, the worst
things) are there passed over.

Concerning temporal things, let the sick man observe these points.

1 Let him seek the help of the Physician; and all other lawful means of
recovering health. Eccle. 38. 1.
Honor thy Physician for thy necessities sake, for God has created him.

The Lord heals not now either miraculously (as he did Peter's wives mother)
or contrary to means, Mat. 8. 15.
(as he did Hezekiah, 2. kin. 20. 7.
with a cluster of Figs, or the eyes of the blind with Clay.) But he smyteth
by means, Ioh. 9. 6.
and he heals by means. To that end has he given to man the knowledge of
the secrets and properties of natural things: and to that end also has he
put that nature and strength into Herbs, Spices, Roots etc. that they may be
sovereign to our Diseases. So that whosoever despises in sickness, the
lawful means which God offers for recovery, that man is guilty of his
own blood in the presence of the Lord.

2 Let him dispose the goods of this world which God has given him, by his
Will and Testament.

Isaiah the Prophet wills Hezekiah to put his House in order, 2. king. 20. 1.
because he should die and not live. Of this so doing, will follow this good.

1 He may dispose of his Goods which God has lent him, as they may most
glorify God (which gave them,) after his decease.

2 He shall cut off much occasion of contention and strife among those whom he
leaves behind him.

3 His mind shall be the quieter, and the more heartily bent to God, and to an
other world: when he has set at a stay, the goods of this life, according to
his Will.

So^i Deo Gloria.

FINIS.
By M. M.
A short Direction for the daily exercise of a Christian, both on the Saboth
day, and also on the week days.
And, Here first, what Exercises are to be done upon the week day, unto the
daily practice of a Christian life.
EVery Morning so soon as thou have broken off thy sleep, though presently
thou do not arise; yet presently remember so soon as thou do awake, thou
do awake with God: that is, enter into holy and divine meditation; and let
thine heart be taken up about heavenly things: As for example. 1. To meditate
of Gods kindness and love toward thee. 2. To meditate upon the great
refreshment which by that nights rest thou have received, Psalm. 5. 3. 4.
and the manifold dangers of the night which thou have been preserved from, by
the which many have miscarried; and so might thou, had not the Lord defended
thee from it. 3. To meditate upon thy sins, thy deliverance from the guilt
and punishment thereof by Christ: As also upon the changes and alterations in
the World, Psalm. 119.
upon the pains of Hell, and the joys of the World to come. These, and such
like meditations, will keep thy mind from idle and wandering wicked thoughts,
they will revive thy soul, and take order for the better keeping of thy life
in a godly and religious course all the day after.

The second Exercise.
For Morning prayer.
AFter thou art risen, let it be the first work thou take in hand in the
Morning, to betake thy self to Prayer unto Almighty God, that throughout the
whole day following, Dan. 6. 10.
God may bless thee in thy labors, Hos. 14. 2.
and thou may be in safety under his protection. Psalm. 3.
And let this be done solemnly upon thy knees, Psalm. 116.
(and not as many do, lazing upon their Beds) that it may be done with an
humble, pure, and sincere devotion. If thou be an House-holder, or Master of a
Family, let it be thy care to be stirring with the earliest, and so call
together thy Family; and there with them, solemnly and upon thy knees, offer
up to God the sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving, either in that form of
Prayer which in the latter end of this small Treatise I have set down, or in
some other, tending to the same effect.

The third Exercise.
Employment in our calling.
AFter Prayer ended, Genesis 3. 19.
betake thy self to thine ordinary Calling and Vocation, Ephe. 4. 28.
or do that whereunto thy ordinary business calls thee; 2. These. 3. 6. 10.
and so that thy Family do the like: 1. Cor. 7. 20.
remember that thou must give account for the time idly spent; Pro. 20. 4.
and yet in thy labor take heed that thou do not mind thine own profit in
such wise, Colos. 3. 14.
as that thou cool any Grace thereby, Dan. 12. 3.
or quench holy affection in thee.

Rules for the behauing of thy self Christian-like, in employment about thy
worldly business, and enjoying the benefit of the same.
1
Keep a narrow watch over thy heart, words, and deeds, continually; and see
that thy time be not idly, carelessly, or unprofitably spent: follow thine
own business, shun meddling in other men's matters: be not a talebearer,
nor a tale-receiuer: deal justly and uprightly with all men: let thy
conversation be without covetousness, and without prodigality: serve the Lord
in singleness of heart: be doing good, and abstain from all appearance of
evil.

2 How to behave our selves in company.
IN all companies, whether it be of thine own Family or strangers; Pro. 20, 5.
be they superiors, Col. 3. 12.
equalles, or thy inferiors, have a special regard so to carry thy self,
Iud. 20.
as to be harmless and free from giving any evil example, 1. Sam. 23. 16*
either by word or deed: James. 3. 6.
but carefully mark and shun the occasions thereof, Heb. 10. 24.
and prouocations thereunto.

3 How to behave our selves in solit^rinesse.
WHen thou art free from company, and in solitariness alone by thy self, 1.
Tim. 6.
have a care that thou do not spend that time ill; Ephesians. 5. 16.
that is, that in thy behavior thou attempt none evil and unlawful thing;
Mat. 13. 8.
and that thy thoughts be not ranging or wandering, Psalm. 19. 14.
but keep within compass: Psalm. 119.
Be frequent at such time, in divine meditations and soliloques unto God,
Soliloque. Aug aph. 5.
redeeming the time to the best uses that thou can.

4 How to use Prosperity.
IF thou be in prosperity, Ier. 9. 23.
and have store of this worlds good, Luke 6. 29.
be circumspect and wary, Luke 6. 23.
that thou do neither swell and be insolent; 1. Tim. 4. 8.
neither idly or loosely abuse the same to carnal liberty: Josh. 15. 9.
but Psalm. 3. 2.
use them soberly, and to the good of Gods Children: How to carry our selves in
adversity.
and be so much the more fruitful in good works, by how much the more thou
have received them. Psalm. 37.
If thou be in misery, affliction, or calamity, James. 1. 2.
fret not, neither be impatient in them; 1. Pet. 1. 6.
but receive it meekely, and make good use thereof.

The fifth Exercise.
Giving thanks both before and after meals.
When thou adressest thy self to Dinner, or to Supper; or when thou receiuest
any good blessing at the hands of God, remember that thou be still thankful
unto him: put not a morsel of any thing into thy mouth in thy meal, Ephesians. 5.
before thou have desired Gods blessing upon it; H^b. 13.
and after that tho^ have received it, Psalm* 1^3.
and fed thy self with it, Psalm. 11.
forget not to return thanksgiving unto the Lord for it: And think not this
sufficient if thou thy self perform this duty, but have a care to cause thy
Children, thy Servants, and all thy Family, to do the same.

The sixth Exercise.
Evening Exercise of Reading, Catechizing, Singing, etc.
IN the Evening, when thou make an end of thy bodily work, be not thou
unmindful to separate some time, for the putting in practice of the exercises
of Religion in thy Family: Genesis 18. 19.
cause thine Household to come together; 2. Ti. 30. 15.
then either read thy self, Col. 3. 16.
or cause some of thy Family to read something either out of the Bible, Psalm.
55. 17.
or out of some godly Book, Dan. 6. 10.
expounding the same: Josh. 24. 13.
Examine thy Family in that which they hear read, Act. 10. 2.
Catechize them in the principles of Religion, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
sing Psalms together with them* 1. Pet. 3. 5.
to Gods glory. So shall thou find the Evening thus spent, in this kind of
exercises, will bring much more joy and comfort to thine heart, then spending
of the evening in Cards, Dice, and other kind of Gaming; wherein worldlinges
do take their felicity.

The seventh Exercise.
Evening Prayer.
AS thou begannest the day, 2. These. 9. 17
so end it with Prayer: cause thy Family to come together, meekely upon your
knees, let hearty Prayer be made unto Almighty God. And suffer none of any
understanding in thy Family to go to their Beds (unless Sickness, or some
other extraordinary necessity move them to it) before this Exercise be
performed.

The eight Exercise.
Meditation in our Bed.
IN thy Bed before thou fall asleep, look back unto the former works of
the day; call thy soul to a scrutinie, to give up an account how thou have
spent the day past, Ioh. 5. 14.
how thou have past it over: Ephesians. 4. 26.
And how far thou have walked with God, Heb. 3. 12.
and wherein (as thou art able to remember) thou have Job. 1. 5.
offended, and then craving pardon for those sins whereunto thou art privy,
and entering into a resolution (as much as possibly thou may) for the time to
come, to abandon and forsake them. Commit thy self, both body and soul, into
the hands of God; who after these exercises thus spent, will give unto thee an
holy and sanctified rest and sleep.

Wisdom shall commune with thee when thou wak^st, and guide thee when thou
walk.

Saboth Exercises; or a short Direction how that day, may be best sanctified
and kept Holy.
The first Exercise.
Early sanctifying the Saboth day.
AS every day a true Christian so soon as he is waking, should awake with
GOD; so specially upon this day, which the Lord commands so straightly to be
kept Holy unto himself: And therefore upon the Saboth day early, thou must
awake with God, and separate thine affections from all earthly things; Psalm.
92.
and thou must have a care to be stirring somewhat more betimes upon this day,
Leuit. 23. 23
then upon the other days; Act. 20. 27.
That so thou may begin to keep it holy, even at the very beginning of
the day.

The second Exercise.
Private Prayer.
BEing risen, 1. These. 5. 16, 17.
assemble thy Family together, jointly upon your knees, with humble and
sincere devotion make your prayers unto him; humbly thanking his divine
Majesty for all his benefits, particularly for his protection over you the
night past, desiring pardon of your sins, etc. and craving his assistaunce to
direct you for the better keeping of the Saboth holy.

The third Exercise.
Private exercise before the public meeting.
THe time before the public Exercise, spend with thy Family in reading,
Catechizing, singing of Psalms, etc. preparing thy self and them, against the
public Exercise.

The fourth Exercise.
Timely coming to Church.
WHen the time is come for the public assembly, Act. 10. 33.
to meet there together at the public Exercise, Pro. 8.
so that both thy self, Psalm. 110.
and those which do belong unto thee, assemble timely, there to be with the
foremost; that so thou be not wanting at any part of the Exercise performed
there by the assembly. Being there assembled, learn to demean thy self
after this manner.

Reverence in behavior in the Church, and at the entering into it.
1 When thou art entering into the House of God, into the Church the place of
public meeting, look unto both thy feet (says Solomon,) Eccle. 4. 17.
that is Consider whither thou art going, and what to do; Isa. 6. 9.
for the place thou art going into, Genesis 28.
is Gods House, there thou go to hear God speaking unto thee by his
Minister; and to speak unto him by Prayer. And therefore look that thou come
thither, with a zealous and godly preparation.

2 When thou art thither come, if the public Exercise be not yet begun, then
as soon as thou come into thy Seat, fall down upon thy knees, and make
this, or some such like oratorie Meditation.

A Prayer to be said before the public Exercise do begin.
O Most mighty and eternal GOD, before whose presence, together with the
rest of this Congregation, I vile and sinful wretch, at this time, do present
my self to hear thy holy Word: and to offer up the sacrifice of Prayer and
thanksgiving unto thee: bless (I beseech thee) this our meeting; sanctify
and prepare my heart, that it may be apt and fit for this Exercise, which now
we have in hand: inflame my heart with zeal, and teach me how to pray: open
mine ears, that I may hear; and mine heart, that I may understand that which
shall at this time, out of thine holy Word be taught unto me. Take from me all
wandering and by-thoughts, and grant that now and ever, I may hear thy Word
effectually, and pray unto thee sincerely, through Jesus Christ.

How to pray in the Church.
THis preparation made, and the public Exercises beginning, in the public
Prayer of the assemble, be not rash with thy mouth, Eccle. 5.
to utter a thing before God; for God is in the Heaven, and thou art on Earth,
therefore let thy words be few. Think not that the mumbling over a few
Prayers does merit at Gods hands; or that thou shall be heard for thy much
babbling; but let thy prayer come from thine heart. When the Minister prays in
the behalf of the whole Congregation, let thine heart join with him. Often
times stir up thy self in Prayer, and rouse thy self up from thy natural
dullness and backwardness in this kind, by inward sighs and groans; and take
heed that thy heart be not tossed about with vain imaginations and fantasies,
when thou should lift up pure hands and heart (as the Apostle speaks)
unto God. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
The like observe in the singing of Psalms, which is a kind of Prayer.

How to carry our selves in Sermon time.
THen after public Prayer, in time of the Sermon, when the word of God is
preached before thee, remember the counsel of the Wise man: Eccle. 4. 17.
Be near to hear; that is, be attentive, hearken with reverence to that which
shall be delivered: which that thou may the better do, observe these
Directions: have thine eye fixed most commonly on the Preacher, that so thou
may keep it: and thy thoughts from idle wandering; mark the Text, observe
his Division, mark how every point is handled, quote the place of Scripture
which he alleges for his doctrine proof, fold down a leaf in your Bible,
from whence the place is recited, that so at your leisure, after your return
from the Church, you may examine it: apply that which is spoken, to thy self;
and endeavor to be bettered by it. Continue in thy attentive hearing, without
weariness, from the beginning unto the end of the Sermon; and see that thou
depart not (unless infirmity of health, or some other very necessary
occasion call thee away) before with the rest of the Congregation, by after
Prayer and singing of Psalms, thou have rendered thanks, for the comfort and
instruction which thou have received.

The fifth Exercise.
How to carry our selves after our departure from Church.
AFter the return from Church, revive thy memory with a brief repetition in
thy mind, of that which thou have heard, before thy sitting down to dinner:
Luke 24. 13.
and then with thanksgiving* receiving the blessing of God to thy bodily
comfort, Deuteronomy. 6.
be mindful to season the same with good and godly talk, to the glory of God,
the comfort of thy soul, and the edification of those which are about thee.

The sixth Exercise.
Mixed Exercises to be done between or after the public Exercises.
Between the public Exercises, Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
as also when both of them are finished, Act. 17.
use meditation, Psalm. 147.
and conference about heavenly things; Heb. 6. 1.
assemble thy Family together, confer with them what they have learned at
the Sermon; instruct and catechize them; read or cause to be read somewhat of
the Bible, or some other godly Book unto them; sing Psalms together with
them, and keep them in from idle and vain Exercises.

And withal, remember upon this day especially, 1. Cor. 16. 1.
the works of Mercy As God has blessed thee with earthly things, Nehe. 8. 10.
so remember to help the poor and those which are in misery. Acts. 36.
If any of thy neighbors be sick, James. 3.
visit him: Job. 31.
if any be at ^arre, endeavor as much as in thee lies, to be a make-peace
between them.

And so with godly Christian exercises, conferring, reading, and singing of
Psalms, with private Prayer also, and calling thy self to account how that
day has bin spent, continue the residue of the day; that so after an holy
keeping of the Lords day, the Lord may give thee an holy and quiet rest: and
prosper thee the better the week following; yea, the whole residue of thy life.

For the Sacraments.
How to use the Sacraments.
AS concerning the Sacraments; when the Sacraments of Baptism is to be
administered; haste not forth of the Church (as many do) but continue thy
presence, that there thou may aright (unto thy comfort) consider with thy
self thine own receiving heretofore into the visible body of Christ's Church
and Congregation: as also that thou may offer Prayers unto God for the
Infant which is to be Baptized, like as others did heretofore for thee. And for
the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord so prepare thy self according to the
direction in the Catechism, as to be ready to receive it (if it may be) even
so often as thou shall perceive it to be administered. And when thou approchest
to the Table of the Lord to receive it, come with all reverence; and let thine
heart be rapt with heavenly meditation: when thou see the Bread and Wine
delivered, let thine heart within thee meditate so zealously and fervently upon
the Passion of our blessed Lord and Savior for thy redemption; as if with
thine own eyes thou did then behold his Body nailed on the Cross, and his
precious Blood shed for thy sake: let this, and such like meditations, enter
into thy mind; and be not found unthankful.

Rules as concerning Reading.
IN reading, first; Take heed what Book thou do read; that they be not
leawd and wanton, nor needless and unprofitable, not sauouring of Popish
superstition. But either the holy Scriptures, or other sound and godly Authors.
In reading of the Scriptures, read not here, and there a Chapter, (except upon
some good occasion) but the Bible in order throughout, and that as often as thou
can, that so by little and little, thou may be acquainted with the whole
course and History of the Bible.

3 In reading of other good Books, read not here a leaf of one, and a
Chapter of an other (as idle Readers use to do for novelties sake) but make
choice of one or two sound and well pende Books; which read again and
again, for confirming of thy memory, and directing of thy practice.

4 Before reading, pray unto God to bless thee in that action.

5 In reading, settle thy self to do attention.

6 After reading, apply it to thy self for thy instruction, in thy practice
and imitation.

A Prayer to be used before reading.
O Lord, whose word is a two edged sword, to cut down all things that shall
rise up against the same, bless me, I beseech thee, in the reading of this thy
holy and heavenly Word; prepare me with reverence to read it, enlighten mine
understanding to understand it; work in me, work in me, true obedience to
submit my self unto it; that I may lay it up in the closet of my heart, and
bring it forth in life and conversation, through Jesus Christ, etc.

This Prayer is to be made, before the reading of the Bible: which holy Book
of God (beside other private readinges of it) it shall be very good if thou
read it after this manner, in thy house before thy Family; one Chapter in the
morning, an other at meals, an other in the evening before Prayer: Beginning
at the beginning of the Bible, and continuing to the end.

Of singing of Psalms.
How to carry our selves in singing of Psalms.
OFten sing unto the Lord, Col. 3.
and to thy Souls comfort, James. 3.
in Psalms, Himmes, 1. Cor. 14.
and spiritual Songs: behave thy self reverently in that action, bare
headed, and with all due reverence, as in the presence of the Lord: remember to
sing David's Psalms with David's spirit; sing with spirit, and sing with
understanding; regard that, more then the tune. All the Psalms be very good
and comfortable; yet more especially thou may use this choice.

Sing In the Morning. Psalm. 3. 5. 16. In the Evening. Psalm. 4. 92. In time of
heaviness. Ps. 6. 13. 31. 91. After benefits, public. 80. 90. 137. private,
28. 126.
Commonly at all times, Psalms 1. 8. 12. 15. 23. 25. 26. 30. 34. 46. 47. 67.
84. 100. 101. 103 116. 119. 146. etc.


A thanksgiving before meat.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, which of thy unspeakable mercy toward
us, have provided Meat and Drink for the nourishment of our weak bodies;
Give us grace to use them reverently, as from thy hands, with thankful
hearts: Let thy blessing rest upon these thy good creatures to our comfort and
sustentation: and grant we humbly beseech thee, good Lord, that as we do hunger
and thirst for this food of our bodies, so our souls may earnestly long after
the food of eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, Amen.

A thanksgiving after meat.
TO thee O Lord, O God, which have created, redeemed, continually preserved,
and at this present time fed us, be ascribed all honor, glory, power, might
and dominion, now and evermore. O Lord preserve thy Church universal, this
Church in which we live, the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and the
Realm: Grant thy Gospel a free passage; confound Antichrist and all
Heresies; finish soon these days of sin, and bring us to everlasting peace,
through thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God.

A Prayer for Morning.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.
O Most mighty and eternal GOD, who art the creator, guider, governor, and
preserver of all things, both in Heaven and in Earth, vouchsafe we humbly
beseech thee, to look down with the eye of pity and compassion upon us,
miserable and wretched sinners; who at this time are prostrate here before
thee, to offer up this our Morning Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving unto
thee. And although we be unworthy, by reason of our manifold transgressions,
to present our selves before thee: yet we humbly beseech thee, for thy Son
Christ Jesus, our blessed Lord and Saviors sake, to accept of us, and to
grant these our Prayers and petitions which we do make unto thee.

We render unto thee Lord, most mighty and most merciful, humble and hearty
thanks for all thy Blessings, and thy Benefits from time to time bestowed
upon us; for our Election, Creation, Redemption, Justification, Vocation, that
measure of Sanctification in this life, and the assured hope of Glorification
in the life to come: As also for our Health, Wealth, Peace, and Prosperity:
for the free passage of thy glorious Gospel; for sparing us thus long, and
giving us so large a time of Repentance; as also for all other thy Benefits,
whenever or howsoever bestowed upon us: We give thee humble and hearty
thanks more particularly for thy gracious protection of us this night past,
and delivering us from all the perilles and dangers of the same. And seeing
thou have brought us to the beginning of this present day, we humbly beseech
thee Lord, to protect and keep us in the same: watch over us with thy
prouidenc; Shelter and defend us from all the assaults of the world, the
Flesh, and the Devil. Keep us from all sin, especially from those sins
whereto by nature we are most addicted; Make us sorrowful for our sins past,
and seal unto our hearts, we humbly beseech thee, full assurance of the
forgiveness of them, in thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ: Increase our
Faith, our Zeal, and our Knowledge, and make us daily more and more to
increase in piety, and true holiness. Set a watch O Lord, before the door of
our Hearts, that they think not; before the door of our Lips, that they
speak not; before all the parts of our body, that they do not any thing
which is amiss, or may breed offense. Bless us also we beseech thee, in our
calling wherein thou have set us: prosper that which thou have given unto us,
and which in thy fear we set our hands unto. Stir us up to employ our
selves faithfully, religiously, and industriously, in our calling: give us all
things needful for this present life; and grant that we may so pass through
things temporal, that our affection by them may not be withdrawn from things
eternal.

Neither do we pray for our selves alone, but for thy whole Church, and every
particular member thereof. Comfort o Lord them that are comfortless,
strengthen the weak, uphold them that stand, raise up them that are fallen,
send help, comfort, and consolation in thy good time, to all thy Children that
are in need, misery, sickness, trouble, or adversity. Bless this Church and
Commonwealth wherein we live: enter not into Judgment with the great and
crying sins of this Land, but first remove from us our Sins, and then take
away thy heavy Judgments, which either already are fallen upon us, or
shortly we must needs fear that they will befall us. Give thy Gospel a
free passage daily more and more: convert, or else confound those which repine
and hinder the propagation of the same. Reform those things which are amiss,
and grant that thy glorious Majesty may be exalted in this Nation evermore in
sincere, pure, and holy worship: power down all thy Blessings both
spiritual and temporal upon our dread Sovereign Lord the King, the Queen,
the Prince, and all their royal issue: grant them a long, happy, prosperous,
and religious life here in this world, and in the world to come, life
everlasting. Bless (good Lord) with all blessings the Nobility of this Land,
the Magistracy, Gentry, and Commonaltie of the same: be merciful unto all
those whom thou have made near and dear unto us; send forth painful
Laborers into thy Harvest, and bless those whom thou have already sent;
particularly, good Lord in mercy behold thy Serueant whom thou have ordained
to break the bread of life unto us; give to him O Lord, the Door of
Vtteraunce, let thy blessing rest upon his labors; assist him in his
Mediation, and in his Studies, that both by life and doctrine, he may be a guide
unto us in the way which leads to eternal life. These things, and all other,
which thou know meet and requisite for us, for thy whole Church, and every
particular member thereof, we humbly crave at thy hands, in the name of thy
Son our Lord and sauionr Jesus Christ, concluding these our Petitions with
that form of Prayer which he himself has taught us, saying. Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer for Evening.
O Eternal God, and in Christ Jesus, our loving and merciful Father; We
poor, wretched, and miserable sinners, do prostrate our selves before thy
divine Majesty, humbly acknowledging, and from the bottom of our hearts
confessing our manifold sins and wickedness, which from time to time we have
committed against thee. O Lord we have sinned, we have sinned; our sins are
more in number then the Sands of the Sea, or the Hairs of our Heads; neither
do we know whither to fly for comfort and help against the same, but only
by appealing from thy Justice, to thy Mercy. To thee therefore do we come, in
the name and meditation of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, humbly beseeching
thee for his sake, to pardon and forgive us all our sins, whether they be
sins of omission, sins of commission, sins of ignorance, or sins of
wilfulness; whether in thought, word, or deed, committed against thy divine
Majesty. O Lord throw them out of thy remembrance, that they may never
hereafter rise up in judgment against us to condemn us. And grant unto us, we
beseech thee, the assistance of thine holy spirit, that we make a better
conscience of our ways, and walk more zealously and sincerely before thee
then heretofore we have done. O make us heartily sorry as becomes thy
children, for that we have offended thee so merciful and loving a Father.
Frame us daily, and fashion us to the likeness of thy well-beloved Son Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior, that in knowledge and true holiness we may
glorify thee before the world, and by the fruits of piety and
righteousness, may be assured and certain of thy spirit, and of thy love
wherewith all thou love us: work in us a certain Faith and an assured Hope
of thy Promises, the true fear of thy Majesty; a perfect hatred and
detestation of all sin and wickedness: work in us a sincere love toward thy
children, and amongst our selves Patience, Knowledge, Virtue, Love, Compassion,
with all other graces of thy Kingdom, that in all our behavior, thou our good
God, may be glorified by us, and in us.

Stir up, O Lord, our dull and sluggish nature to call upon thee continually:
Frame us wholly unto thy will, and make us to be content in what estate soever
it shall please thee to set us; that so we living here in this world, in thy
fear, and dying in thy favor, in the end, may attain to a joyful
resurrection unto eternal life.

In the mean while, good Father, be merciful unto us, in the things of this
life even so far forth as thou shall see it most meet and requisite for us.
Grant us, if it be thy blessed will, the continuance of the blessing of
Health, Peace, and Maintenance; and together with them, we beseech thee, let
us have thy holy Spirit, to instruct us in the true and lawful use of them,
that we may more earnestly and seriously labor in our places and callinges
wherein thou have set us, to the promoting and increase of thy Kingdom, and to
the benefit and comfort of thy Children. Be merciful, good Lord, unto thy
Church universal, scattered abroad upon the face of the whole Earth; send
help and comfort to all our Brethren wheresoever, which are in need,
affliction, or misery: beat down the fury and rage of Antichrist, and his
Kingdom, and daily more and more increase the number of thy faithful flock.

And forasmuch as it has pleased thee in mercy, above all other Nations of
the earth, to power down the sweet stream of thy blessings upon this little
Island in which we live, by promoting of thy Gospel, and overthrowing of
Idolatry. We beseech thee, to continue toward the same, and to establish in
this thy Church a pure, perfect, and sincere Regiment thereof, that in the
same, thy most glorious Majesty may be exalted in sincere, pure, and holy
worship; and that this thy Church may flourish and increase, being through thy
safe protection aided, supported, and miraculously defended. Guide and rule, we
beseech thee, with thy holy Spirit every part and member thereof, especially
thy gracious Servant our dread Sovereign Lord and King; grant unto him, O
Lord, a pure and perfect zeal above all things to promote thy glory; give
unto him the spirit of Wisdom, Discretion, and Government, that with all
equity and justice he may see this whole Realm peaceably and quietly
governed: Deliver him, O Lord, as hitherto most wonderfully thou have done,
from all foreign, and homebred Traitors; and grant unto him, if it be thy
will, a long and quiet reign over us, to the benefit of thy Church, and the
advancement of thy glory. Bless also, we beseech thee, with abundance of
blessings, both spiritual and temporal, the Queens Majesty, the young
prince, with the rest of the King and Queens royal issue, and make them
worthy instruments of thy glory, when time and occasion shall serve thereunto.
Bless O Lord, the Nobility, the Gentry, the Commonalty, all the Estates of
this land. Comfort al them that be comfortless; and remove thy heavy
judgments from those places on which they are fallen: lastly, for our selves,
we become again humble petitioners unto thy divine Majesty. Bless us O
Lord, and this whole Family with thy grace and peace; make us thankful for all
thy blessings from time to time bestowed upon us; forgive us the sin which
this day past we have committed against thy divine Majesty. And as thou have
brought us to the beginning of this present night, so protect, guide, and
defend us we beseech thee in the same. Deliver us, and all that does belong
unto us, from Fire, Robbery, or any other peril or danger, which this night
may befall us: give unto our bodies quiet rest and sleep, that they may be the
better enabled to undergo those places and callinges, wherein thou have set
us: watch over us, over our souls, and keep them from all sin and
uncleanness, from all evil motions, idle fantasies, vain dreams, and
sinister imaginations, and prepare us daily more and more against the coming
of thy Son Christ Jesus. And now, O Lord, we have commenced our suites unto
thee; our Understanding is weak, our Memory is frail, and we are not worthy
to pray unto thee; more unworthy to receive the things we pray for: and
therefore we commend our selves and our prayers unto thee, in the name and
mediation of thy Son our Savior, humbly beging and craving both these our
former Petitions, and all things else needful for us, in that form of prayer
which he has taught us, saying: Our Father which art in Heaven. etc.

FINIS.
GEORGE WEB.
Good Counsel.
1
Do nothing but by good advise, take counsai^e of the Wise:
So that the clouds of ignorance may vanish from thine eyes.
2
Whose hap it is to have a friend, that faithful is indeed,
Is worth much more then kinsmen are, that fail when we do need.
3
For Kinsmen gape for Kinsmens death in hope to reap the gain
Of that they never labor for: by any kind of pain.
4
The company of him that is wise, although he be but poor,
Is better then the Fool that is rich, who lays up craft in store.
5
Spare not to spend thy Gold and wealth for meat and drink, and cloth:
For Wisdom, Learning, and for health, or else to spend, be loath.
And ten times blessed the man is thought, that from leawd Women flies:
And can correct his Ear sometime, and Eye, from what he sees.
7
The Wisemen seeks unto the Rich, The Rich not to the Wise:
And why? because that worldly folks good Science do despise.
8
He that has Wit and Learning both, and cannot guide the same.
Is like a Bell that wants sound, or Cripple that is lame.
9
Loose not thy Friend for slender cause, but keep his friendship still:
For if thy Foe thee friendlesse know, then will he work his will.
10
Since life is short, then live at rest, love quietness always:
For he that is alive to night, may die within a day.
11
Do good with riches while they last least when thou would, thou want:
A little thing does help them much, with whom all things are scant.
12
The greatest wisdom in thy wealth is for to watch thy Foe,
For every man is not thy Friend, that like a friend does show.
13
When Markets barren be of Corn and Victuals to be sold,
There hunger is: so is there grief with him that has a Scold.
14
Thy secrets seem not to impart, not to thy only Child:
We see by proof, where men have trust that often they be beguild.
15
Make of men, that be more worth then any Gold or Treasure:
In bragging Doults no wise man can take any kind of pleasure.
16
The Covetous Man is never rich, but still he scrapes for more:
To see his Neighbor live at ease, does make his eyesight sore.
17
The Patient have ever praise; the Proud does reap disdain:
And Jack will be a Gentleman, if Office he obtain.
18
The liberal man he couets not the thing that is not his:
For still in wishing others goods, no liberal dealing is.
19
A wise man learnd may knowledge give, and minish not his store:
The Rich man if he give his goods, receivers make him poor.
20
The sickness sore is perilous, when men be sick for Riches:
It spoils them of their sleep by night, and them from conscience twitches.
21
He that will call upon thy cost so fast for Wine and Beer;
Will be full loath to thee or thine, to make but half the cheer.
22
Thy trencher neighbor ever mark* he loves thee for his panch:
Of thanks to grow tenth part again, from him there springes no branch.
23
Likewise the godly meaning man, which does the others good:
Those that do taste thereof (we see) desires most his blood.
24
But if thou give, give the^ that want that shall thou have again:
To give to them that needs not, thy gift is lost in vain.
25
Let no Man weep for him that is slain, but weep for him that slew:
The danger of the one is past, the other does ensue.
26
Beware thou keep not company with such as be too stout;
Nor with such men as quarrel much, the end is bad no doubt.
27
Nor to be angry with the man that is prouder then thy self:
For Pride consists not in birth, in goods, in land, or wealth.
28
Ten times unhappy is the man, that dwells in malice still;
For he shall never live in rest, that looks to have his will.
29
Before thou sleep, call thou to mind what thou have done all day:
And if thy Conscience be oppressed, to God for mercy pray.
30
Lead such a life that still thy soul may stand in state of joy,
Although the world a thousand ways, thy careful conscience noy.
FINIS.
A godly Meditation to be had in mind at our going to bed.
BEware, let not the sluggish sleep, close up thy waking eye,
Until such time with judgment deep thy daily deeds thou try.
He that one sin in conscience kepes when he to quiet goes,
More ventrous is, then he that sleeps with twenty mortal foes.
Wherefore at night, call well to mind, how thou the day have spent:
Thank God if naught amiss thou find if ought, betime repent.
The frisking Flea resembles well the crawling Worm to me:
Which in the Grave with me shall dwell where I no light shall see.
The nightly Bell which I hear toule, when I am laid in Bed,
Declares that Bell which for my soul, shall sound when I am dead.
And since my Bed a pattern is of Death, and fatal Hearse;
Beware, it shall not be amiss, thus to record this Verse.
My Bed is like my Grave so cold:
And Sleep, which shuts mine eye,
Resembles Death: Clothes which me fold, declares the Mould so dry.
The rising in the Morn likewise, when sleepie night is past,
Puts me in mind how I shall rise to Judgment at the last.
I go to Bed as to my Grave,
God knows when I shall wake:
But Lord, I trust thou will me save, and eke to mercy take.
THE SOLACE OF THE SOVLE.
With fiery wings sublime thy self my spright,
Mount to the throne where never change shall be:
The Earth despise, in that take no delight,
Where naught but change, presents it self to thee:
Low shadows here, true substance reigns above:
Then scorn the worst, and learn the best to prove.
Let not Conceit, deluded with Vaine-showes,
Transport thy doom, to fix assured trust
In brittle stuff, by course which ebbes and flows,
And must dissolve in end, to rotten dust.
Such subject base, and matter vile by kind,
Should not subdue the force of heavenly mind.
From living Fire, thou first eternal came,
Not thrall to Death, a vassal to thy good,
A Lamp of light with ever burning flame,
Infusde with Grace, and nursed with Angels food:
Stain not thy birth, nor worth of so high price,
Nor bastard prove, to follow cursed vice.
Great be thy gifts, and virtues, if thou please,
To know, to judge, to rule all things at will:
The World was made for thine aspect and ease,
And naught therein, might breed thee harm or ill:
In liew of these, there is required but this.
To love and fear the Lord of joy and bliss.
Then wake my soul, exalt thy self on high,
Be blind no more, but use thy force and might:
Let Folly sincke, let painted Pleasure die:
Shun Darkness deep, and seek the blessed Light:
For Earth yeeldes toil, care, discord, pain, and grief:
But Heaven gives rest, peace, comfort, and relief.
FINIS.
A GARDEN of Spiritual Flowers.

2 Part.

Yielding a sweet smelling savor in the Nosthrils of each true-hearted
Christian.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for T. Pauier, dwelling at the sign of the Catte and
Parrets near the Exchange. 1613.

A GARDEN OF Spiritual Flowers.
A Threefold Alphabet of rules concerning CHRISTIAN practice.
A
1 AWake with GOD in the morning, and before all things give him your first
fruits and calves of your lips, 1. in Confession of sins: 2. Petition of
necessaries for body and soul. 3 Thankfulness for mercies received, Josh.
24. 15.
especially your late preservation, rest, and protection of you and yours. 2
Account it not enough that your self serve GOD, Genesis 14. 14. and 18. 19.
unless you see all in your charge do the same. 3 Arm your self against
whatsoever the day may bring forth, and upon all occasions think on your
happy redemption, with much thankfulness for so happy conjunction of justice and
mercy.
B
1 BEware of occasions of sin, and wisely inure your self in subduing the
least, that at length the greater may be foiled. 2 Believe all that God
speaks unto you out of his word, 1 Samuel 10. 16.
but not all that man tells you: nor tell to another all that you hear; but
only the truth, and that neither all nor always. 3 Before you do take in
hand any thing, 2 Samuel 2. 1
counsel with Gods word if it be lawful, and then perform it with prayer,
that it may be as successful as lawful.
C
1 CArefully set your self in Gods presence all the day long, that setting him
at your right hand you may not fall. 2 Carry your self unto all as the weak
may be won, 1 Cor. 10. 32.
the strong comforted, and the wicked ashamed. 3 Consider the dignity of your
soul, Mat. 15. 18.
how beautiful it is to God and his Angels, so long as you keep it unspotted;
that so you may cleanse your heart from the first motions of sinful thoughts,
as Lust, Anger, Envy, Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, and the rather because the
least sin deserves death.
D
1 DAily, Morning and Evening at least, solemnly on your knees make confession
and requests with thanksgiving: first, preparing your heart to seek the Lord.
In the Morning think that that day may be your last day: and when you go to
bed you know not whether you shall rise, unless it be to judgment. It is
safest therefore to use prayer, as a key to open the Morning, and as a bar or
lock to shut in the Evening. 2 Delight to do all the good you can to Gods
children; Gal. 6. 10.
and to receive all the good you can from them. 3 Distrust not Gods providence
in any matter, 2 Chr. 16.
although you see the means wanting; neither when you have them let them be
relied on more then GOD himself; but let him be prayed unto for the prosperous
use of them.
E
1 EXercise your mind in meditating often on the works of Ier. 12. 2.
God, as his creating and governing of the world, his prospering and punishing
the wicked, his blessing and correcting his children, his preparing of
unspeakable joy for the one, and unutterable torment for other. But especially
on the Sabbath add to these meditations the holy exercises of prayer,
preaching, Sacraments holy conference, and such like. 2 Esteem of every one
better then your self, Romans 12. 16.
and the more you excel another, be so much the more humbled. 3 Examine your
thoughts well whither they tend before you fulfill your own desires; Romans 14.
23.
if you find them unprofitable, curious, vain, or such as you cannot yield a
sufficient reason to God or man for, kill them in the shell, let them not live
or breath longer in you.
F
1 Fear GOD and keep his commandments: Eccles. 12. 23.
for, this is the whole duty of man. 2 Fly and avoid places and persons
infectious, Pro. 5. 8. and 6. 27. 28.
vvanton, idle, unthrifty and bad company, which are to the soul as poisoned
and infected air to the body. 3 Follow with faithfulness and diligence your
own business in the lawful and particular calling wherein God has placed you;
Eccles. 1. 13.
only be careful in your earthly business to carry an heavenly mind.
G
1 GRow up daily in the practice of every commandment, and in the faith of
every promise of God; seeing God would have the planted in his house thrive,
well liking and more fruitful in their age. He that is not best at last may
seat whether ever he were good. 2 Give no offense justly unto any man whether
within or without: 1 Cor. 10. 32.
for woe to them by whom offenses come. 3 Grieve for nothing in the world so
much as for your own sins, Romans 7. 8.
and in them for nothing so much as for offending so loving a God; and that not
only in committing of evil, but also in omitting of good.
H
1 HVmble your self for your sins, 2 Cor. 11. 31.
that the Lord may raise you up; for he that judges himself aright, shall
never be judged of the Lord. 2 Honor all men in their places; 1 Pet. 2. 17.
but no man so much for his greatness as for his goodness: and thus shall you
imitate the Lord himself, who accepts not persons; Act. 10. 35.
but in every nation accepts him that fears him. 3 Have special care to
avoid the sins which you have found your self most inclined unto, and which
have in times past most prevailed: for sin is loath to be said nay, and Satan
seeks reentrie.
I
1 IVstifie Gods wisdom in all his proceedings concerning your self and
others, his power in sustaining, his providence in maintaining, his Justice in
punishing, his love in correcting, his bounty in promising, his faithfulness in
performing, his grace in giving, his mercy in taking away: and in all things
from the heart, bless the name of the Lord. 2 In every company receive some
good, and do some also to your power; leave no ill savor behind, you, neither
do hurt by speech, silence, countenance or example. In your praises be
discreet in saluting courteous, in admonishing brotherly; and wise in moving
and entertaining speech or conference. 3 It is fearful to sin, Psalm. 15. 3.
but more to live in it; and therefore register all your sins daily, bewail
them all times, pray for pardon of them and strength against them; contemn
none as counting it little, because God has condemned it, and Christ has died
for it, or else must you eternally.
K
1 KNow GOD in Christ, Job 17. 3.
which is life everlasting: kiss the son of GOD, lest he be angry; and
know your self to be a believer, and that Christ is in you and you in him. 2
Keep as your vows with God, Psalm. 15. 4.
so your lawful promises with men; for faith and truth must kiss each other
in Christian conversation. 3 Keep out wandering and worldly thoughts as much as
possibly may be, Prou. 4. 23.
narrowly watching your heart; for such as you suffer that to be, such will be
your words, deeds, and whole conversation.
L
1 Love all things for Gods sake, and GOD only for his own; and look you
make him your friend, whosoever be your enemy for it: this you shall do, if
as an obedient child you live in the eye of your heavenly father. 2 Look upon
the lives and behauiours of the wicked, to avoid them, of the godly to imitate
them, upon the life and death of them both, as also your own not far off; to
make you loathe this world, and long after the life to come. 3 Let your meat,
Luke 24. 34.
apparel, recreation be lawful, needful, and moderate.
M
1 MAke no mention of God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
or any word or work of his, but with fear and reverence; nor of any man but
with love, and carfulness, using his name as you would have him to use yours.
2 Mark other men's profiting in religion to provoke your self, their slips to
make your self more wary, their risings to be thankful to God for them. 3
Meditate often upon the four last things, 1. Death, 2. Judgment, 3. Heaven,
4. Hell.
N
1 Never make show of more holiness outwardly, Romans 12. 11.
then inwardly you have in your heart, which GOD sees, in which he desires
truth: nor please your self with your unprofitableness, unfitness, or
unwillingness to good. 2 No man is owner but steward of that he has: you must
therefore impart of the blessings you have to those that stand in need, wisely,
heartily, and in due season. 3 Note your own special corruptions, 1 Cor. 11.
28.
whether they grow strong or weaker, and how your self can resist them; and
if any assault you more strongly, pray and make the matter known to God. The
best way for a woman solicited to folly, to be rid of the tempter, is to tell
her husband.
O
1 OFten speak to the praise of GOD, never of your self; Prou. 17. 27. and
10. 19.
for other things, because many words want not iniquity, speak as few as you
can, or rather none then unprofitable. 2 Open not your mouth to speak Psalm.
15. 3.
of other men's infirmities especially behind them, nor before them without
grief and sorrow. 3 Of every idle word, Mat. 12. 36.
account must be given, and much more of every wicked word: and therefore
let your speech be gracious, poudred with salt, and tending to edification.
P
1 PRaise the Lord for every new benefit bestowed, 1 These. 5. 18.
and then by it promote his glory, the Churches good, and your own salvation;
esteeming of graces given as spurs to godliness, and pledges of eternal
life. 2 Prevent anger before it kindle, Eccles. 7. 11.
it is wisdom to quench the first sparkle of fire before it begin to flame.
Consider, 1. The original of anger, being pride or self-love: 2. The cursed
fruits, by giving place to the Devil: 3. Gods patience: 4. Gods image in your
brother: 5. Your own weakness in the same kind: 6. The wrong is not remedied
by revenge, but enlarged; nor the wrong doer amended, but imitated. 3 Prepare
your self for death, and pull out his sting: 1 Cor. 15. 56.
first by bewayling sins past: 2. turning to God in time to come: 3.
purposing a new life. None can die ill that bath had a care to live well.
Persuade your self, if you live well you shall do well; but if you dye well,
doubt not but you shall do better.
Q
1 QViet your heart and be still under the correcting hand of God; Psalm. 39. 9.
because, 1. he does it: 2. for your best: 3. he will moderate it: 4. supply
strength: 5. seasonably deliver out of it. 2 Question not whether others should
do you good, Math. 5. 39.
or you them first; it is praise worthy to be first in well doing: and if you
do good to your enemies, your reward is with God. 3 Quench not the spirit, 1
These. 5. 19.
nor suffer any godly motion arising in your heart to pass away, but feed it
by reading, meditation, prayer and practice.
R
1 Read daily something of Gods book for the increase of knowledge and
conscience; Psalm. 1. 2.
and add hereto meditation and prayer: for these three, says Luther, make a
divine: all time thus spent is well redeemed. As for lascivious and idle
books, shun them as rocks. 2 Rejoice in the good you know by another;
praise God for it, pray for the increase of it. But if you know any evil by
any, mourn for it; and if you can, by brotherly admonition amend it. 3
Refrain your ears, Job 31. 1.
eyes, mouth and hands, from hearing, seeing, speaking, or performing any
wicked and vain things; knowing that death often enters in at the windows.
S
1 Stick to God as well in adversity as prosperity, Iam. 1. 2.
the one being as necessary as the other. If you want necessaries, humble your
self for them: if you have them, be humble with them; and use them well lest
you forfeit them. 2 Seek reconciliation with your neighbor, Mat. 5. 23.
freely forgiving those that have offended you, and earnestly desiring to be
forgiven of all that have bin offended by you. 3 Study to approve both your
heart to God, Mat. 23. 26.
and your life to Gods children in your particular calling, and especially to
such as to whom God has joined you: as if a servant, in obaying; if a Master
in ruling; if an husband in loving; if a wife in reuerencing: for a good
conscience, a good name, and good manners must go together.
T
1 TAke heed of performing holy duties for fashions sake, Heb. 3. 12.
or without feeling and profit, for this is hypocrisy or profaneness. 2
Thankfully requite, Rom 1. 12. 16. and. 1. 12.
at least with, 1. acknowledgement, 2. hearty affection, 3. prayer, the good
you get by any man; for there is no member of the body but stands in need of
other men's gifts. 3 Think it the greatest work in the world to dye well:
which to do you must invre your self to die before hand; 1. by dying to your
sins: 2. leaving the world in affection, before it actually leave you: 3. in
your last leaving of it, do it willingly, yea joyfully, whenever,
wheresoever, or howsoever God shall call you.
V
1 VOw to God and keep it, Eccles. 5. 3. 4.
especially strive in performing the solemn vow of your baptism, and the
covenants which you renew in the Lords supper. 2 Variance and discord with men
will not stand with your peace with God. 1 Ioh. 4. 20.
If you love God you will love men also, for Gods image, or else for his
Commandments sake. 3 Use the world as not using it, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
and your prosperity and liberty to be bettered by them. That is not gained
which is gotten with the loss of your soul: and then is the soul exchanged
with an handful of the world, when it is not gotten and held: 1. in Christ
restoring it: 2. with Christ the chief gain: 3. for Christ the Lord of it.
W
1 VVAit upon the Lord and he will direct your way, Psalm. 37. 34.
become his servant, for this is the way to attain your truest liberty. 2
Weep with them that weep, and fellow-feele the afflictions of the brethren
that are in the world. Ezech. 9. 4.
Christ in heaven accounts the sufferings of his Saints his own: and we his
members upon earth must do the same. Religion and mercy are well matched by
God, and must not by man be divorced. As for the miseries and sins of the
age wherein you live, mourn also for them, and pray to God for remedy. 3 Wish
not a long life so much as a good life. He has lived long who has lived well.
A short life in grace sets into the everlasting life of glory.
Finis.
Five Rows of Precepts, both for the inward and outward ordering of a
CHRISTIAN life.
The first ROW, concerning our thoughts.
1 THat I be careful to keep a better vvatch over my thoughts, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
words, or deeds, then heretofore I have done, to do them more warily, for
Gods glory, mine own comfort, and my brethrens benefit.

2 That I cleanse my heart from the very first motions of all sinful thoughts
as of lust, anger, envy, pride, covetousness, malice, stubbornness, evil
suspicion, knowing that the least sin deserves death, and does deprive me of
part of the comfort of my salvation.

3 That all my lawful affections be moderate and without excess, Ephesians. 4. 1.
and greater always upon heavenly things then on earthly.

4 That I fulfill not my mind in all things: for then shall I often sin. I
must therefore consider whether that be lawful which I do desire, and for the
glory of God.

5 That I bestow no more care or thought upon the world then I must needs, for
the moderate maintayning of my self, 1 Timothy 6. 8
and those that belongs to me, lest my thoughts be too much distracted from
heavenly things.

6 That I suffer not my mind to be occupied with unprofitable cares, or vain
meditations, for which I cannot give a sufficient reason to God or man, if I
were asked.

7 That I think better of my brethren Romans 12. 16.
then of my self: and the more that I excel in any thing, the more humble I
be before God and men.

8 That I take some time every day to meditate upon the word of God, Psalm. 69.
9.
or some other good books, and the rather for the miseries of the time, and
the iniquirie of the age wherein I live, and pray to God for remedy.

9 That I think often on the vanity of my life, Tit. 2. 3.
upon my departure hence, daily looking for my Savior in the clouds, and
wishing rather a godly life then a long.

10 That I carefully meditate and remember every good thing that I hear or
learn, Acts 17. 11
that I may readily practice it when time and occasion shall serve.

The second Row of Precepts, for our SPEECHES and WORDS.
1 THat I remember, that such as my speech is, such is my heart: for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And that both my heart and mouth go
together.

2 That my speech be gracious, Col. 4. 6.
to the edification, good, and benefit of them with whom I speak, and not to
their evil or sinning.

3 That my speech be always more and more joyful, earnest, and comfortable
when I speak of heavenly things, then earthly things and matters.

4 That I remember I shall answer for every idle word.

5 That multitude of words be often sinful: Iam. 1. 16.
let me speak therefore as few as I may; yea to be rather silent then to
speak unprofitably.

6 That my words be no greater or any more then my matter deserves, nor bear
a show of vice in me, or of any excessive affection.

7 That as I believe not all things that are told me, Luke. 2. 19.
so I tell not all I hear, but tell the truth only: though not always.

8 That I delight not to speak of other men's infirmities, especially behind
their backs, and speaking before them with grief and wisdom.

9 That I speak not of GOD but with reverence, Romans 9. 5.
knowing that I am not worthy to take his name in my mouth.

10 That in praises I be discreet, Gal. 6. 1.
in salutations courteous, in admonitions brotherly.

The third ROW, concerning actions respecting GOD.
1 THat I use daily prayer to God every Morning, Psalm. 55. 17.
Noone, and Evening, that he would guide me in my affairs, for his glory and
mine own comfort.

2 That I register up all my sins committed against him in every matter, and
with grief bewail them at fit time, craving pardon for them, and strength
against them.

3 That every day something of Gods word be read, Psalm. 1. 2.
and meditated on, that I may thereby increase in godliness.

4 That whatsoever I take in hand, I first take counsel at GODS word, whether
it be lawful or no, be it for my profit, or pleasure, and then that I do it
with prayer, at least in my heart.

5 That I give thanks to God for every benefit I receive, and then dedicate
the same for promoting of his glory and the benefit of his Chruch.

6 That I sanctify GODS Sabbath duly, Exodus 20. 8.
in using the holy exercises of prayer, preaching, meditating, and receiving
the Sacraments at their time.

7 That any means that God has appointed for any matter, be not more relied
upon then God himself: but that he be first prayed unto for the prosperous
use of the means.

8 That I stick to God as well in adversity, Psa. 65. 11.
as in prosperity, knowing the one to be as necessary for me as the other:
yet let me pray for my necessaries, and be humble when I have them, that I use
them well that I lose them not.

9 That I mark my profiting in religion, prepare my self to hear Gods word,
attend when I am there, consider and meditate of it after my departure.

10 That I love all things for Gods sake, Psalm. 3. 8.
and God only for his own: that I make God my friend, and then nothing can
be mine enemy, and covet in all things to serve God sincerely.

The fourth ROW, respecting our LIVES.
1 THat I refrain my ears from hearing, Exo. 23. 1.
my eyes from seeing, my soul and body from fulfilling, any vain or wicked
thing.

2 That my apparel, Ephesians. 5. 1. 6. 1.
meat, and recreation be needful, lawful, and moderate.

3 That with all care I redeem the time, knowing that I shall answer for every
idle hour.

4 That I be as sorrowful for the good deeds I have omitted, as I am joyful
of the good deeds I have fulfilled.

5 That my especial sins and corruptions be inquired into, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
and thought upon with grief, whether they are weakened in me, or remain
still in their old strength, and whether I resist them with more and more
faithfulness every day.

6 That I remember with humility, all the good motions: and actions God works
in me, that they be pledges of my salvation, spurs to godliness, and comfort
against tentations.

7 That I suffer not my self to be pleased with unprofitableness, that is,
with unwillingness toward good.

8 That I follow my lawful calling so carefully for the good of Gods Church,
Genesis 3. 19.
or Commonwealth as feeling my misery by Adam, I be humble thereby.

9 That I take revenge of my self for my slippery sins, or sinning, beating
down my body that I sin not again.

10 That I never make more show of holiness outwardly, Esaias 58. 5. 6.
then I have inwardly in heart.

The fifth ROW, concerning our actions toward others.
1 THat I remember, that whatsoever I have which may be used toward others, God
has bestowed the same upon me for others benefit.

2 That I count it not sufficient that I my self serve God only, Genesis 18. 17.
but also that I cause all that are in my charge, by all means, to do the
same.

3 That I consider that I am but Gods steward in his benefits he has lent me,
and therefore I ought to employ them vvisely, to those that need, heartily and
entirely.

4 That I behave my self toward all so sincerely, 1 Cor. 10. 32. 33.
that I may win the weak, comfort the strong, and make ashamed the wicked.

5 That as I receive good in company, so I do them some good to my power.

6 That when I know others to sin I mourn for it, 1 Cor. 5. 2.
and amend it if I may, by brotherly admonition.

7 That I rejoice and praise the Lord for any good thing that he sends unto
men, acknowledging it is for mine and other godlies sake, through Christ, that
God vpholdeth the world.

8 That I strive not whether they should do good to me, 1 These. 5. 15.
or I to them first: but that I benefit even mine own enemies; knowing my
reward is with God.

9 That I be careful to use the good I can receive by any man, knowing I am
but a member of the body, and stand in need of other members.

10 That I carefully crave the prayers of other brethren, Romans 15. 16. 30.
and their praises to God also, for the gifts I have received: and so shall I
feel my fellowship in the body more effectually.

FINIS.
An order for the government of Hous-holders and their families, according to
the word of GOD.
THe word of the Lord teaches us, that it is not only required of Masters,
Parents, and Hous-holders, that they themselves have a care to live in the
fear of God: but also they ought to see their whole families to do the same.
And that this charge is laid on them, note these places of Scripture following.

Exodus 13. 8. Thou shall show thy Son in that day. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
Deuteronomy. 11. 9. Thou shall rehearse my will and commandments to thy Children. For
as we are Masters and Fathers in earth, and look to be served and obeyed: So
I acknowledge for mine own part, that I have a Father and Master in heaven;
whose will I must obey, in governing the people committed to my charge,
according to his will. This did faithful Abraham, called the Father of the
faithful (Genes. 18. 19.) whose example (by Gods assistance) I intend in some
measure to follow, to show my dutiful obedience, that the Lord may show his
mercy on me and mine, as he promised and performed to Abraham; And therefore
have taken this order for the government of my house as follows.

FOR THE SABBATH.
1 FIrst, because our God has sanctified one day to himself, that is, the
Sabbath: I ordain and command that all my people shall repair to the church,
accompanying me both fore-noone and afternoon; there to stay and abide,
during the exercise of the word of GOD read and preached; prayers, and
partaking of the Sacraments: And shall behave themselves there reverently, as
those that come to appear before Gods Majesty.

None shall travel on the Sabbath without urgent necessity, nor absent
themselves from the Church, without just cause made known before to me.

None shall use at that day running to Revels, haunting of Alehouses, etc. But
spend the time after the public exercise of the word, in such godly manner,
as God teaches in his word; as reading the Scriptures, Iam. 5. 12.
singing of Psalms, talking of his Commandments, Dent. 6. 7.
and meditating of GODS creatures, Isa. 85. 13.
to his glory.

Again, seeing the Sabbath is the market day, or day of preparing food for our
souls: every one shall (being demanded) give an account of some thing that he
has learned, as well in the Church to the Minister, as also in my private house
when I my self, or some other by mine appointment, shall examine him, that I
may know how he has spent the Sabbath, and profited in knowledge.

2 SEcondly, I ordain and take order, that every Morning there be a general
meeting of my servants, before they go about their ordinary business, (all
excuses set apart) joining themselves together, and commending themselves to
God by faithful and hearty prayer and blessing, without which our watching and
labor is in vain, Psalm. 127. 2
as David notes.

Also our rest and sleep being a gift of God, for the obtaining whereof, I
appoint in like manner, that there shall be every Evening the like assembling
of all my people (worldly excuses put apart) to bestow together some convenient
time in Prayer, singing of Psalms, and reading the Scriptures, or some other
godly matter.

3 THirdly, seeing the creatures of God are sanctified unto us by the word of
GOD and prayer, and that we ought not to receive them without giving thanks
to GOD for them, as SAINT Paul teaches: 1 Timothy 4. 4. 5.
Therefore I command that some one (in the behalf of the rest) both before
and after meat whenever they receive it, do with all reverence praise GOD
for the same, the residue yielding consent by their reverent silence.

4 FOurthly, concerning the common behavior of my people every where; I
straightly forbid to swear in vain by the reverend name of GOD, or otherwise to
use it vainly and irreverently: I utterly forbid all jesting and scoffing at
Gods most sacred word, his true religion, the Preachers and the professors of
the same, all cursing, lying, slandering, and filthy and unclean talking: I
utterly forbid all maintenance of Popery and Superstition, and what else soever
may offend the Majesty of God.

If any offend against these or any of these orders above mentioned, through
weakness and not of malice, he shall be once gently admonished, Mat. 18. 17.
If he offend the second time, to be more sharply reproved: 1 Timoth. 15. 20.
But if he offend the third time, he shall confess his fault before the whole
household assembled together, showing himself sorrowful for his fault,
craving pardon of God, and reconcile himself to the household whom he has
offended.

But if there be any of my family that obstinatly refuse to bear this the
Lords yoke, and to be subject to his ordinance, he shall not continue in my
house, but I learn of David, (Psalm. 101. 6. 7.) a man chosen after Gods own
heart, to drive such wicked ones out of my house and sight, and seek for such
as fear God, and will make such my servants; least entertaining and nourishing
the wicked into my house, my negligence be punished as was Elies; who being a
hous-holder and a Father, was said to have honored his children more than God;
because he entertained them without punishment, he was deprived of both his
sons in one day, and himself brake his neck, etc. 1 Samuel 2. 31. 1 Samuel 3. 13.
1 Samuel 4. 17. 18. And Solomon says, Pro. 3. 33.
that the curse of God is in the house where the wicked are, but he powers his
blessings upon the habitation of the righteous.

Therefore I further add, that such guests as repair to my house, refusing to
be subject to these ordinances of the Almighty, and will not join with me
and my people to serve the Lord. I refuse to be companion with such, or to
receive him to be my guest, (for such procure Gods wrath, as before is said,)
but I will say with David, Psalms 119. 63. Those shall be my companions that
fear God, and keep his commandments: and those shall be my guests that be
godly, just, and fear God. And as for the wicked and rebellious against the
ordinance of God, seeing they are darkness, with whom light has no communion,
and seeing they are as pitch, very likely to defile a man, I will say to such,
as our Savior said of the like: away from me ye workers of iniquity. And
with that godly housekeeper David; Psalm. 119. 115.
Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my God.

Ios. 24. 15.
I, and my house will serve the LORD. Hest. 4. 16.
I, and my maids will serve the Lord. Cornelius with his household feared God.
Act. 10. 1.


A Scoare of wholesome Precepts, or Directions for a Christian life.
1 Account not of your self better then you are, for the more base you are in
your own conceit, the more glorious are ye in the sight of God; for God
regards a lowly mind, as the poor Publican that did deny himself had more
favor in the sight of GOD, then the proud Pharisie, that boasted of himself.

2 Speak not of God but with reverence, knowing that we are not worthy to
take his name in our mouth, much more we ought not to take it vainly.

3 Hold fast to God, as well in prosperity, as in adversity; for in adversity
we come to God, but in prosperity we forget our selves often: Also, if you be
in adversity despair not, but weight upon God for deliverance, and he will
send it when there is no hope of it, to the glory of his own name, and for the
good of his children, as Daniell from the Lions.

4 Buy and redeem the time past with repentance; look to the time present
with diligence, and to the time to come with providence.

5 Let not malice make you to reveal that which friendship bound you once for
to conceal.

6 In Praising be discreet: In saluting courteous: and in admonishing
brotherly, not hastily and angerly.

7 Read something of Gods word daily, and do not only count it sufficient
that you serve God truly your self but also look that all your charge and
household do the same truly.

8 Whatsoever blessings ye crave of God, ask them in the name of Christ. For
no man comes to the Father but by me, Ioh. 14. 6.
says Christ.

9 Whatsoever you take in hand, before you do it ask counsel of God,
vvhither it be lawful, and then do it with peace of heart, if it be lawful.

10 Look that Meat, Apparel, and Recreation, be needful, lawful, and
moderate.

11 Take heed of presumptuous sins, for though many presume that God is a God
of mercy, yet though he be a God of mercy to the penitent, yet he is a God of
Justice also.

12 Forsake the World, and fly to God; for it is impossible, that a man loving
the World, should have any comfort from God, for the love of the World is
enmity with God; besides keep not any thing of the World to you, that may draw
you from God; for God will not have part of the Man, but the whole Man.

13 Be always armed against temptations, for those that belong to CHRIST must
look for temptations always: and think not if that ye have overcome any
temptation, once or twice, or often, that then you are freed: for Christ was
tempted often, so were the Apostles, they had one time peace and then
persecution; and then peace and after persecution, so always an intercourse:
and when they were in peace, they made ready to be armed for temptation,
knowing that they should have temptation: therefore this life is called a
Christian warfare.

14 Besides, if ye are tempted and tried, it shows manifestly that ye belong
to God: for God scourges every Son that he receives: Besides, those that
have no temptation or trial, it shows manifestly they belong to the Devil:
for what need has be to tempt them whom he has already in bondage?

15 Fly from all sins in general, endeavor, and then God will accept your
endeavors though weak and imperfect, through the perfection of Christ; and
stick to no darling sins; for the Devil can as well hold a man insubiection
by one sin, as by all sins.

16 Let the words that you speak proceed from the good Spirit, and not from
the flesh, for if they do, GOD abhors them.

17 As God does abound in mercy and goodness toward you, so be you enlarged
to him in obedience.

18 When ye are tempted at any time by the Devil, or his Ministers, be sure to
have the word of God to answer him: for the word is compared to a two-edged
sword, that does not only defend us, but also offend our enemies.

19 Christ, he used Scripture to repel the devil, he could have driven the
devil away with the breath of his Nostrils, but he did answer him with
Scripture, to show us example, that if we were tempted at any time, we should
with Scripture repel him And that every one may know them the better, they
must read them often, use conference, and marking the true meaning of the
words, and conferring one place of Scripture with another, and praying to God
for to give them the blessing of understanding it truly, and the like.

20 Follow your Betters, observe and mark the Wise, accompany the honest, and
love the godly.

FINIS.
PSALM 90. 31. Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
THE Text is a Prayer of Moses, and it has three parts.

1 A Lesson. 2 Scholar. 3 Schoolmasters.
1 The Lesson, to number our days, which may be numbered four ways.

1 The account which Moses makes: the days of our life are threescore years
and ten, this number every child can tell.

2 By comparison of three times:

1 Past, which being once gone and and past is nothing now it is past, were it
a thousand years it is but a thought.

II Future, which being to come, it is not yet certain whether it will be to
us or no.

III Present, which is but at the instant.

3 Deduction, or Abstraction: thus, take from 70. years 35. spent in sleep,
and fifteen years of our child-hoode, the time of our vanity; and ten
years allowed for eating, recreating, idle talk, iourneyes, etc. then there
will be found but ten years remaining well spent: whereof Lord how little is
spent in thy service? These three ways of numbering may be taught us by men:
the fourth way God only can teach.

4 By a Christian and heavenly Arithmeticke, that is, so to number as we may by
due consideration of the shortness and uncertainty of our life, apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

The Lesson contains an eleauen points of wisdom, to be learned from the
vanity of our life: for if by Gods Spirit we be persuaded that every hour may
be our last, it will cause us:

1 To set our house in order, that is, to have our last Will always ready, as
God charged Ezechia, Esaias 38. 1. lest death prevent us.

2 To repent speedily: with haste to turn from all our sins, lest hereafter
it be too late: Psalm. 95.
while it is called to day harken.

3 To bear all affliction with quiet and patient mind, seeing they cannot be
long; Phil. 4.
Patient, the Lord is at hand.

4 To redeem our time having misspent much, Ephesians. 5.
and the remnant being so little and uncertain: as haruest-men and travelers
which have loytered the forepart of the day, the more bestirre themselves the
latter part.

5 To be fruitful in all good works, and constant in well-doing, without
weariness: seeing the time is short, and there will be an end, and the hope
shall not perish, and that we shall find all our good works in life eternal.

6 To esteem wisely of the things of this life which tarry with us but a
while, as comforts of our pilgrimage, and testimonies of Gods love, and pledges
of better things laid up in heaven for his.

7 So to use the world, as if we did not use it, fixing our delight on GOD, and
the things of heaven, which wither not.

8 To be more studious of holy Scripture, seeing the things which we are to
learn are many and weighty, and our space to learn in so little.

9 To busy our selves much in the religious education of our children, seeing
we are shortly to leave them, and religion is the best inheritance we can
leave them, and we to leave them to a wicked world.

10 To be full of good counsel toward others, and our selves to be more
capable of counsel.

11 To think every word of God to be sweet and comfortable to our selves, and
to fear God.

2 The Scholar, Moses, who had learned the wisdom already; yet desires to
be taught: how much more cause have we so to do?

3 The Schole-maister, God, by his spirit, to whom we must therefore pray in
faith, and submit by our obedience.

Finis.
The degrees whereby Gods eternal Council proceeds in the saving of them
who are to be saved.
ROMANS 8. 29. 30. THE most just and merciful GOD having from everlasting
propounded to glorify himself by mankind.

And to that end decreed to create all men righteous in Adam. Genesis 1. 26.


Also to suffer Adam (for just cause being left to his own will) to fall, and
by his will in disobedience to enwrap his whole kind in sin and death. Romans
5. 12.


Setting all men (being now a lump of corruption) in his sight, 1
Foreknowledge.
there were some of them in whom he took pleasure: 1 Pet. 1. 2.
setting his love on them, for no other reason but because he would, and was
pleased so to do.

Being pleased with some he chose them, 2 Election.
and severed them from the rest, Romans 9. 11.
by eternal election.

Whom he had thus chosen and culled out (as it were) of the whole lost Mass, 3
Purpose.
them he purposed to save, Ephesians. 11.
to the glory of his mercy. Vessels of mercy.

After this he predestined, 4 Predestination.
that is, foreordained or appointed before, to give them a Savior, even his
own son to be incarnate, and dye for their redemption.

And to give them to him as his peculiar, to be grafted in him as his members,
and made partakers of all his graces.

According to this fore determination 5 Calling.
and appointment, he called them in time, putting faith into them to receive
Christ, being offered in the word and Sacraments.

Then, 6 Justification.
even at the same time, he justifies them by faith in his Son.

He sanctifies them also by his sp^r^^ to live a new life. 7 Sanctification.


Lastly, 8 Gloryfication.
at the end of their life he glorifieth them.

As a builder coming to a heap of stones. Note that four of the former 8.
degrees are executed in time, though they were decreed before all worlds.
First, he likes some: Secondly, he chooses them: Thirdly, he purposes to use
them: Fourthly, he fore-ordaines with himself to hew them: Fifthly, he sets
men on work to square them. So is Gods proceeding.

Those that shall be glorified are predestined to be like to Christ. First,
in the end, which is glory, joy, and dominion in heaven. Secondly, in the
means, which be, 1. Holiness of life, 2. Suffering affliction.

Christ, the first borne, excels all his brethren: first, in Nature: 1.
Divine, being the only begotten SON of God. 2. Humane, his manhood being
conceived by the holy Ghost.

Secondly, in Office: being, 1. that Prophet, to teach the Church perfectly the
whole will of GOD. 2. That high Priest, by Sacrifice and Intercession to
pacify Gods wrath. 3. That King, mightily to protect and rule his people.

Thirdly, in Glory, bliss and dominion.

FINIS.
The Examination and trial of our Christian estate: whereby we may easily
discern whether we abide in the state of Nature, or the state of Grace;
whether slaves to Sin and Satan, or servants and heirs to Christ and his
Kingdom.
YOu who have walked in this little Garden, and gathered such flowers as may
make a Nosegay smelling sweet unto your souls, and to expel such stinking
weeds of sin as might bring poison to the same; be not less mindful to
apply the sovereign salve of these sacred comforts to the upholding of your
souls, then men are used to be for the preserving and curing of their weak
and decayed bodies: and for this purpose, behold the carking care of vvorldly
men, who to advance themselves in these outward things, never cease to afflict
both soul and body, so they may effect what themselves so much desire. And
that they may the better perceive the increase of their laborious toil, who
does not often with a serious eye behold and see into his present estate,
whereby they may discern in what estate they stand? If therefore men be thus
careful and provident for those things which concern this present life, both
which (even life and estate) in a moment may be taken from them, and the
inioying of them brings no true comfort, but manifold griefs and sorrows to
the soul: how careful then should we be to take an account of our
spiritual estate (by considering how much more precious the soul is then the
body, the estate of Grace then the state of Nature) how we have grown rich in
the graces of Gods spirit, which bring not only true comfort to us for this
present life, but give assured testimony of eternal happiness in the life to
come? And as no man can truly know his profit or loss in temporary things,
but by knowing his first and present estate, so no man can well discern his
progress and gains in spiritual things, till he truly know his first and
natural estate.

For the better examination and trial of our spiritual estate, let us
consider, what we are by Nature. The Apostle Ephesians. 2. 3. tells us, that
all men by nature are in the state of condemnation: every man by nature is dead
in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. he is as a loathsome carraine, Man's misery in the state
of nature.
or a dead corpse, lying rotting and stinking in the grave, having in him the
seed of all sin. From this estate none are exempted, as Job 15. 14. Which
woeful estate came upon mankind by the fall of Adam, Romans 5. 1. we being then
in him, and now of him, that is, we are so descended out of his loins, that
of him we have not only received our natural and corrupt bodies, but also by
propagation have inherited his foul corruptions, as it were, by hereditary
right.

This infection extends it self universally through the whole man, both
soul and body, both reason, understanding, will, and affections, Ephesians. 2. 1.
For, First, Sin extends it self to the whole man, both soul and body.
in the mind there is nothing but blindness and ignorance concerning heavenly
matters. Secondly, the Conscience is defiled, being always either benumbed
with sin, or turmoyled with inward accusations and terrors. Thirdly, the will
of man only wills and lusts after evil. Fourthly, the affections of the
heart, as Love, Joy, Hope, Desire, etc. are moved and stirred to that which is
evil, to embrace it; and they are never stirred to that which is good, unless
it be to eschew it. Lastly, the members of the body are the Instruments and
tools of the mind for the execution of sin.

In this estate no man can please God in whatsoever he does: Man in the state
of nature cannot please God.
for till we be in the state of grace, our best actions are sinful, as
Preaching, Prayer, Almesdeedes, and the like: as it is written, Job 14. 4. Who
can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean?

A man in the state of Nature may do those things which are of themselves
good, A natural man may do that which is in it self good, but not good to
him that does it.
but they utterly fail in the manner of doing them, they do them not as they
should be done, that is, in Faith, Love, Zeal, conscience of obedience;
neither yet with cheerefulnes, delight, or feeling, but even as it were,
forcing themselves to do the outward action, as Caine, the Pharisees, Ananias,
and Saphira.

So long as men be merely natural they have no sight of their own miserable
estate, A merely natural man cannot see his misery.
or of the blessed estate of the godly. For, the natural man understands not
the things that be of God: he being at enmity with God, and so deprived of his
favor. Consider his estate.

In the soul of man there are but two faculties, A natural man has a mind
that neither sees nor can see the things that be of God.
the understanding and the will: the spirit of God so discribes his
understanding, that not only he says the natural man understands not the
things that are of God, and as if it were not sufficient to express man's
miserable estate, he adds, neither indeed can he understand them, because
they are spiritually discerned: A will that neither is nor can be subject to
the law of God.
and again, his will he describes it, that it is not subject to the law of
God, neither in deed can be.

Hereby we may perceive the miserable estate of those who are strangers from
God; This sets forth Gods power and grace to be the greater because it
restores man's nature being so far perverted.
what an unhappy condition of life it is that a man should live in such an
estate, wherein do what he can he cannot please God? Let Caine sacrifice
with Abell; let Esau with tears seek a blessing from his father; let the
Pharisie pray in the Temple with the Publican, yet all nor any of these shall
please God, or go home justified: and for worldly glory let him be never so
high amongst men, he is but abominable unto God.

In this state he is not only an enemy to God, The best affections of wicked
men please not God.
but in bondage and a slave to the Devil, having him to reign in his heart as
God, which may be perceived in that he gives obedience to him in his heart, A
natural man a slave to the Devil.
and expresses it in his conversation: and this appears if he take delight
in the evil motions that Satan puts in his heart, How, to perceive our
subjection to the Devil.
and do fulfill the lusts of the devil.

And in this estate he continues, neither seeing nor feeling his misery, nor
desirous to come out of it, neither can he be persuaded that he is in such a
woeful case; as appears in the example of the Ruler, Luke 18. 21. and by the
Church of Laodicia, which being poor, wretched, miserable, blind and naked,
yet she thought her self rich, and wanting nothing. None can be saved but the
regenerate.
Thus he remains under Satan's dominion till he be regenerate and borne
again, and so brought into the state of grace: so that man living and dying in
the state of nature, for any thing I see, cannot be saved: I speak not of
infants and children, whereof some no doubt are saved by virtue of the promise
and covenant, through the election of grace.

Seeing then that the estate of a Natural man is most miserable, and none
grown to years of discretion can be saved (for any thing we know) but the
regenerte, and such as are in the state of grace, I will therefore) for the
better trial of our present estate) show what regeneration is, and the
properties of those in whomsoever this new birth is wrought, and such
quallities as do usually show forth themselves in those in whom soever the
spirit of Christ dwells.

Regeneration is renewing and repayring of the decayed estate of our souls,
What Regeneration is.
or an act of the holy Ghost in Gods elect, whereby they are entered into a
constant and faithful exercise of a godly life.

As there is a Natural birth of the whole man, so there is a spiritual birth
of the whole man, which is, where as the Natural faculties of the soul, as
Reason, Understanding, Will, Affection, and the members of the body also, are
so sanctified and purged by grace, The quality of regeneration.
that we understand, will, and desire that which is good: for till a man be
borne again, he can no more desire that which is good, Till a man be borne
again he cannot desire that which is good.
then a dead man can desire the good things of this life.

The signs of regeneration are. First, a true touch of conscience for our
sins, both original and actual: Secondly, a godly sorrow and grief of
heart for offending GOD by our transgressions: Signs of regeneration.
Thirdly, an earnest desire after Christ and his righteousness, testified by a
constant and diligent use of the means, the word, prayer, and Sacraments,
wherein GOD gives grace and assurance of mercy: Fourthly, an unfeigned turning
to God from all sin by new obedience in life to please God in all things.

Further there are eight signs and tokens whereby all men may certainly know
that they are sanctified, regenerated, Eight infallible signs of regeneration.
and shall be saved. First, a love to the children of God. Secondly, a delight
in his word. Thirdly, often and fervent prayer. Fourthly, zeal of Gods glory.
Fifthly, denial of our selves. Sixthly, patient bearing of the Cross, with
profit and comfort. Seauenthly, faithfulness in our callings. Eighthly, just
and conscionable dealings in all our actions amongst men.

In whomsoever this work of regeneration is wrought, Where there is
regeneration there is also mortification.
there is ever found the action of mortification, for he that is resolved to
endeavor his godly repentance, and labors the reformation of his sinful
life, must labor two things principally and of necessirie, Mortification and
Regeneration: he must first destroy his sinful estate, before he can
obtain the estate of grace: for God and the gifts of God, are so absolutely
holy, as that they cannot admit any mixture with sin and wicked actions.

Mortification is a decay and perishing of the deeds of the flesh by the grace
and operation of Gods Spirit, What Mortification is.
which deeds of the flesh are not only our evil actions, but our desires and
carnal affections also: Mortification consists in two things.
which mortification of a Christian, consists in two things: first, in subduing
by an holy discipline our inordinate lusts, which naturally rebel against the
love of God: Secondly, in a patient bearing of the cross of Jesus: except we
make some profit in the first, it is certain we shall never proceed in the
second: wheresoever Mortification is, there is also Sanctification.

Seeing that Mortification is the forerunner of Sanctification, A trial of
Mortification.
hereby we may try how far we have gone in the same. Experience teaches that
the nearer a man draws to death, the less motion is in him, but being dead,
he moves not at all: so is it with the spiritual man, the farther he goes in
Mortification the greater is his progress in Sanctification.

By which Sanctification try thy self, Sanctification a true mark of a
living soul.
and see whether or no thou have gotten life, by the righteousness of Christ:
deceive not thy own heart in the matter of salvation; assure thy self so far
forth thou do live as thou art sanctified. As health is in the body, so is
holiness in the soul: a body without health falls out of one pain into another,
till it dye: and so a soul without holiness is polluted with one lust after
another, till it dye.

Our Sanctification must be both in Soul and Body: We must sanctify both
body and soul to the Lord.
it is not enough to cleanse the hands, feet, eyes, and tongue, but we must go
yet further, and be penitent in heart: for blessed are the pure in heart, such
shall receive the blessing.

We must consider in this work of sanctification, What is required to be
sanctified.
from the direction of Gods word, whether our thoughts, words and works be
cleansed from their inward and outward corruptions, and that they be
sequestered, and made impropriate to God: so that if we have set our very
thoughts apart to God, then there is holiness begun, and then we are meet for
a sanctified use: so if we be to serve for a holy use, we must not be for when
and for what we list, but taken up in thought, word, and deed, to serve the
Lord: we are not to bestow our thoughts on all things, but refer them to the
Lord mediately or immediately.

If our Sanctification be effectually wrought in us, Our sanctification must be
constant and continual.
it will be constant and continual: so that we shall not deliver an holiness
to GOD for a time, or in some causes, or for some persons, but we must
thoroughly fulfill the days of our holiness, It must not be maimed.
not presenting a maimed holiness. As in the Law it was not permitted to offer
a lame or maimed beast, though it wanted but the tail, which was a small
thing; yea, even for that defect the Lord refused it.

There are many professors which would needs be men sanctified, but they are
loath to be cleansed. Others when they cannot away with this strictness to
continue say on this manner; Let us prepare rivers of sin, for Christ shed
streams of blood, the more we sin, the greater glory will come to Christ.
And thus they stand at a stay, their holiness is a standing holiness, it fills
not* they still lie in their pollutions: their motion is but from the house to
the Church, and from the Church home again; and at the years end they are as
at the beginning, like a horse in a mill, that makes many circuits, from
Morning till Night, and then is but where he was at first.

From Sanctification arises repentance; From sanctification arises repentance.
for a man cannot hate his sins before he be sanctified, and he cannot truly
repent for them before he hate them.

Repentance is a constant returning from all sin unto God, What repentance is.
or an inward sorrowing and continual mourning for sin, joined with faith
and humiliation, and both inward and outward amendment: inward, in changing the
thoughts and affections of the heart, and outward, in changing the words and
works, from evil to good: I say it is a turning, not from one sin unto
another, as from whoredom to theft, and the like, neither is Repentance every
sorrow, but sorrow for sin: not for some sin, but for all sin: not for an
hour but for ever. Every sorrow is not repentance, for so should worldlings
repent: every pant for sin is not repentance, so should Pharaoh repent: all
weeping and lamenting is not repentance, so should Esau, Judas, and Caine,
repent: every little humbling of our souls is not repentance, for so should
Ahab repent: all good words and good purposes is not repentance, for so should
every sick man repent: every cry to God for mercy is not repentance, for so
should every fool repent.

Hereby it may appear what repentance is, Many are deceived in repentance.
as also how many are deceived in repentance; and therefore that we may the
better try our repentance, let us know that repentance is when a man turns to
GOD, How to try our repentance.
and brings forth fruits worthy amendment of life.

This turning to God has two parts; the first is a purpose of heart and
resolution never to sin any more, but to lead a new life: the second is an
holy endeavor and labor in man's life and conversation to purify and cleanse
himself from sin: for a man must be renewed, and come to an utter disliking
of his own sin, before he will turn from them and leave them.

By this it may appear that there is one manner of sinning in the godly, and
another in the ungodly, though they fall both into one sin.

A wicked man when he sins, The difference between the godly and wicked in
one and the same sin.
in his heart he gives full consent to the sin, but the godly, though they
fall into the same sin with the wicked, yet they never give full consent: for
they are in their wills, minds, and affections, partly regenerate, and partly
unregenerate, and therefore their wills do partly will, and partly abhor that
which is evil, according to that of Paul, Romans 7. 22. And that the Godly man
never gives full consent to sin, it is evident by three tokens.

First, Three tokens manifesting this difference.
before he come to do the sin he has no purpose or desire to do it, but
his purpose and desire is to do the will of God, contrary to that sin.
Secondly, in the act or doing of the sin, his heart rises against it, yet by
the force of temptation, and by the mighty violence of the flesh he is exhaled
on, and pulled to do wickedness. Thirdly, after he has sinned, he is sore
displeased with himself for it and truly repents.

A manifest example hereof we have in Peter and Judas: Peter before the
denying of his Master had no purpose so to do, but rather to dye in his
cause: in the act, he had a striving with himself, as appears, by this, that
first he answered faintly, I know not what thou say, and yet after, when
the assault of Satan more prevailed, he fell to swearing, cursing, and
banning; after his fall, he repented and wept bitterly for it: all was contrary
in Judas, who went with a full intent to betray his Master, for the Devil
made him yield and fully consent to do it, having long tempted him unto it,
and entered into him: afterward when Christ was betrayed, Judas was not
sorrowful for his sin with godly sorrow, but in a despair of mercy hung
himself.

Although this which has been said may be sufficient to prove our repentance,
Seven signs of true Repentance.
whether true or false, good or bad: yet to make it more apparent, consider
seven special signs, set down by the Apostle, The first is Care.
2 Cor. 7. 11. The first is, care; Every one that has a godly sorrow, and true
repentance, is not sloathfull but diligent; not careless, but careful to
avoid all sin as well as any one: as also he is most careful to do that which
is good, not for fear, but for love; not because man but because God
commands.

The second is, The second is a clearing of our selves.
a clearing of our selves, that is to say, when a man has the feeling of
sin, and shunneth it, and Satan accusing him, he cannot abide and bear that
accusation, but is disquieted till he have gotten pardon of his sin, with as
much earnestness as for the most waightiest thing in the world, confessing the
action and indictment, and desiring the pardon of it, by which he may be able
to answer his accusers.

The third is Indignation, The third is Indignation.
making men angry against those sins which before they liked: yea, to be out
of patience with themselves, that they were such wretches, and so careless
to be ouer-taken with them, and to take on, as it were, with themselves, that
they have slipped into such sins: for true godly sorrow does ever bring such
Indignation.

The fourth is Fear, The fourth is Fear.
that is, an affection fearing sin, because it is sin, fearing to offend
God because of his mercy and goodness, and benefits received, not flying or
departing from God, but drawing nearer unto him when they have offended him.

The fifth is a Desire, The fifth is Desire.
which is a fervent affection to God and his word and to spiritual and
heavenly things. This is manifest in the example of the Iaylor, who after he
was smitten with sorrow and true repentance, came with this note to Paul,
saying, What shall I do to be saved?

The sixth is Zeal, The sixth is Zeal.
which makes men zealous for God and his worship, zealous of piety and good
works, not to do them carelessly and negligently, but it makes them do
(though with great labor and cost, yea danger and hazard) those things which
they see they ought to do.

The seventh is Revenge, The seventh is Revenge.
that is, the penitent man is so offended with the sin he has committed, that
he will be revenged of himself for it, as for example, if he have offended
in gluttony, he will revenge himself by fasting two or three days after; if
he have offended in whoredom, he will be revenged of his lusts by bewayling
of them ever after: and so of other sins. By these it may appear what true
repentance is.

In whomsoever true Repentance is thus found, it ever proceeds from a true
and justifying Faith: for none can repent or practice this duty of Repentance,
but those who have Faith and Grace: without Faith it is impossible to please
God. I will therefore first declare what Faith is: Secondly, the trial of
Faith: Thirdly, the fruits of Faith: and lastly, how Faith is kept.

Faith is a wonderful grace of Gods Spirit, What Faith is.
whereby the elect do apprehend and apply Christ and all his benefits unto
themselves particularly.

To make trial in our selves whether our Faith be true and sound or not: Try
it two ways.
This will appear two ways: first, by the beginning of the wrath of GOD for
the same. Secondly,



Further, A further trial.
for the trial of our Faith, Christ tells us that the more we are distracted
with worldly cares, the less is our belief in God; for distrustful care
comes from unbelief in Gods providence, and the less we trust in God for
temporal things, the less do we believe eternal mercies, for the same
faith lays hold on both: but if we can truly depend upon God for temporal
blessings, in the sober use of lawful means, then we shall rely upon his
mercy for the salvation of our souls.

This trial is not made in prosperity, The trial of our faith is not made in
the time of prosperity.
for when God sends abundance, every one will trust in him, but when want
comes then is trial of thy faith: if then thou rely on God, though means
fail, thy faith is strong, but if thy heart be oppressed with sorrow and fear,
and thou make no conscience of unlawful means, then suspect thy self, thy
faith is none at all: for the Just shall live by faith.

Thus much of faith, Our union with Christ.
and the trial thereof: now follow the fruits and benefits thereof. By means
of this special faith the elect are truly joined unto Christ, Three especial
benefits had by our union with Christ.
and have a heavenly communion with him, and therefore do in some measure
feel his holy spirit moving and stirring in them.

The elect being thus joined to Christ, What Justification is.
there arises three wonderful benefits from it: Justification, Adoption, and
Sanctification.

Iustificationn is, From Justification arises diverse benefits both outvvard and
inward.
when the elect being in themselves rebellious sinners, and Gods own enemies,
yet by Christ they are accepted of the Lord, as perfectly pure and righteous
before him.

From true Justification proceeds Reconciliation.
by which a man Justified is perfectly reconciled to God, because his
Afflictions are not punishments for sin but fatherly chastisements.
the second is, that afflictions to the faithful are no punishments for sin,
but only fatherly and loving chastisements: for the guilt and punishment of
sin was boren in Christ; now therefore if a Christian be afflicted it is no
punishment: for then God should punish one fault twice, once in Christ, and the
second time upon the Christian, which thing does not agree with Gods Justice:
the third is, that the man Justified does merit and deserve at Gods hands the
kingdom of heaven: for being made perfectly righteous in CHRIST, and by his
righteousness, he must needs merit eternal life, in and by the merit of
Christ.

Inward benefits proceeding from Justification are those which are inwardly
felt in the heart, and serve for the better assurance of Justification, and
they are chiefly four.

The first is, peace of conscience, arising Peace of conscience.
that his sins are freely pardoned, and the wrath of God fully appeased by
the merit and suffering of Christ Jesus, by a lively faith applied.

The second is, entrance into Gods favor, Entrance with boldness into Gods
presence.


The third is, a spiritual Joy in their A spiritual Joy in the heart.
even then when they are afflicted, because they look certainly to obtain the
kingdom of heaven.

The fourth is, that the love of God is Feeling of Gods love.
that is, that the holy Ghost does make the faithful very evidently feel the
love of God toward them, and does as it were fill their hearts with it.

In whomsoever these singular benefits are thus to be found, The graces of God
and his spirit are not severed.
there is ever to be found assuredly that the spirit of God dwells in them,
and in that the spirit of God dwells in them, it imports not only a familiar
presence, but also a continuance thereof: he dwells not for a month, as a guest
for a Night, but for ever: how ever by temporal distractions he humble us, yet
shall he never depart from that soul which once he has sanctified to be his
own habitation: and this comfort is confirmed to us by three sure arguments.

The first is taken from the Nature of God: 3 Arguments to prove that the
regenerate are sure of perseverance.
he is faithful, says the Apostle, by whom we are called to the fellowship
of his son, who will conserve us to the end, and again, says he, I am
persuaded that he which has begun his good work in you, First, from the
nature of God, that begets us.
will perform it, until the day of Christ.

The second argument is taken from the nature of that life which Christ
communicates to his members, The second, from the nature of the thing begotten.
it is no more subject to death: we know that Christ raised from the dead, dies
no more: this life is communicated to us, for it is not we that live, but
Christ that lives in us.

The third is taken from the nature of that seed whereof we are begotten: The
third, from the nature of that seed whereof we are begotten.
for as the seed is, so is the life that comes of it: now the seed says the
Apostle is immortal; We are borne anew, not of mortal seed, but immortal;
our life therefore is immortal.

As the first greatest question in religion is concerning the Savior of the
world, The second main question in religion is, who are Christians.
Mat. 11. 3. so the second is concerning them who are to be saved: if the
judgment be referred to man, every man accounts himself a Christian; if
judgment be sought for from the Lord, he gives an Answer to all, If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.

Hereby every Christian may have a notable rule how to try his own estate: A
sovereign rule whereby Christians of all sorts must be tried.
for to destroy the pride of all their glory, (with one word) who esteem
somewhat better of themselves for the privilege of their estate, when they
excel others, here it is said, Romans 8. 9. If any man, he speaks without
exception, be what thou will beside, never so noble, never so rich, never so
learned, if thou have not the spirit of Christ, thou art none of his.

Again, we see that Christ and his spirit cannot be sundred: let no man say
he has Christ, except he have the spirit of Christ: he is not a man who has
not a soul, so he is not a Christian who has not the spirit of Christ, John
4. 13. And as CHRIST and his spirit cannot be sundred, so cannot the spirit be
sundred from the fruits of the spirit. Now the fruits of the spirit, are Love,
Joy, Peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: if the spirit of Christ dwell in us, and if we live in the spirit,
let us walk in the spirit: and this may be a conviction to carnal professors,
that while they say the spirit of Christ is in them, they declare none of his
fruits in their lives and conuersations.

We are to know that the operations of the spirit are twofold; The operations
of the spirit are twofold.
the one is general, and the common operation which he has in the wicked, for
he illuminates every one that comes into the world. Caiaphas, External,
common to all men.
and Saul can prophecy, and Judas can Preach, it is from him: this way he
works in the wicked, not for any good to them, but for advancement of his
own work: the other kind of the holy ghosts operation is special and proper
to the godly, by which he Internal, proper to the godly.
but proceeds also to their hearts, and works this threefold effect in it,
Sanctification, Intercession and Consolation.

First, 3 Effects wrought by the special operation of the spirit in the godly.
he is unto them a spirit of sanctification, renewing their hearts by his
effectual grace: he first rebukes them of sin, awakes their consciences by
the sight thereof, and gives them a sense of that wrath which sin has
deserved; whereof arises heaviness of heart, sadness Sanctification.
lamentation in their speech, and such an alteration in their whole behavior,
that their former pleasure becomes painful unto them, and others who knew
them before, wonder to see such a change in them.

From this he leads them to a sight of Gods mercy in Christ, he inflames their
hearts with an hunger and thirst for that mercy, and works in their hearts
such a love of righteousness, and hatred of sin, that now they become more
affrayd of the occasions of sin, then they were before of sin it self:
This resistance of sin, and care to avoid the occasions of sin, are undoubted
testimonies that Christ dwells in us.

This is the first operation of the spirit, but it is not all, he proceeds
further by degrees: for the kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed
into the earth, which grows up he cannot tell how: first, it sends forth the
blade; secondly, the ears, and then the corn: so proceeds the kingdom of God
in man by degrees.

Intercession.
so long as we are bound with the cord of our transgression we cannot pray, but
when he loses us from our sins, he opens our mouth to God, he teaches
us to pray, not only with sighs and fobs which cannot be expressed, but also
puts words in our mouths, such as we our selves who speaks them are not able
to repeat them again.

Consolation.
if he be unto thee a sanctifier and intercessor, he shall not fail at last to
be thy comforter: if at first, after thou have sent up supplications thou find
not his consolation descending upon thee, be not discouraged, but be more
humbled: for our sin shortens his arm, and the hardness of heart holds out his
comforts: we must fall down with Mary, and lie still washing the feet of
Christ with our tears, before he takes us up in his arms to kiss us: and if
we find these effects of his grace going before the humiliation of the heart,
That christian who has Gods spirit knows he has him.
and the grace of prayer, we may be out of doubt that this consolation shall
follow after.

By this it is evident, that he that has the spirit of Jesus knows that he
has him: and herein consists the chief glory of a Christian, It is the
glory of a Christian that Christ dwells in him.
that he has such a guest to abide with him for ever, whereby unspeakable
blessings are vouchsafed unto him.

First, where this holy spirit comes to dwell, The benefits that come by
Christ's dwelling in us.
he repayres the lodging: man by nature being like to a ruinated palace, is
restored by the grace of Christ: as to the soul the Lord stirs up new lights
in the mind, restores life to the heart, communicates holiness to the
affections, so that whereas before the soul Repayres the lodge.
defiled with all sorts of vilde and unclean affections, the Lord Jesus has
sanctified it to be a holy habitation to himself: the body is repaired partly
when the members thereof are made weapons of righteousness in this life, and
partly in delivering them from mortality, which shall be done in the
resurrection. Prouides all necessaries.
he is not burthenable, after the manner of earthly Kings, but his reward is
with him.

We may further consider those excellent benefits that we have by the spirit
of Christ dwelling in us: 3 Three special comforts by Christ's dwelling in us.
first he gives life to the soul, and makes it to live the life of Christ,
Gal. 2. 20. secondly, when soul and body are sandred by death, he leads the
soul to live with him in glory: and thirdly, he casts not off the care of the
body, but preserves the very dust and ashes thereof till the day of the
resurrection: O what a kindness is it that the Lord will honor the dead
bodies of his children!

Surely there was never a house so well paid for in the world: O how happy is
he who has such a guest to dwell with him: what recompense have thou to look
for? he dwells with thee on earth, thou shall dwell with him in heaven; he a
few years with thee, thou with him for ever.

The second maine benefit arising from our union with CHRIST, The second maine
benefit is Adoption.
is Adoption, whereby they which are justified are also accounted of God as his
own children.

From Adoption proceeds many other benefits: From Adoption proceeds many
benefits.
first, the elect child of God is hereby made a brother of Christ: secondly,
he is a King, and the kingdom of heaven is his inheritance: thirdly, he is
LORD over all creatures save Angels: fourthly, the holy Angels minister unto
him for his good: fifthly, all things, yea, grievous afflictions, and sin it
self, turn to his good, though in it own nature it be never so hurtful: and
lastly, being thus adopted, he may look for comfort at Gods hands answerable
to the measure of his afflictions, as God has promised.

The inward assurance of Adoption is by two witnesses: The assurance of
adoption by two notes.
the first, is our spirit, which being often feeble and faint, God has given
us of his own spirit to be a fellow-witnesse with our spirit: this testimony
of the holy Ghost is best discerned in the time of trial, and at the hour of
death, which a reprobate cannot have at all, though indeed a man flattering
himself and the devil imitating the spirit of God, does usually persuade
carnal men and hipocrits that they shall be saved. But that Devilish illusion,
and the testimony of the spirit, may be discerned by two notes.

The first is, The first is, fervent prayer.
fervent and hearty prayer to God, in the name of Christ: for the same spirit
that testifies unto us that we are the adopted children of God, does also make
us cry, that is, fervently, with sighs and groans, pray to God: now this
fervent praying, can the Devil give to no Hipocrite, for it is the special
work of the spirit of God.

The second is, The second is, a Filliall love.
they which have this special testimony, have also in their hearts the same
affections to God which children have to their father: namely, Love, Fear,
Reverence, Obedience, Thankfulness, and the like: for they call not upon God
as upon a terrible Judge, but they cry Abba, that is, father: and these
affections they have not whom Satan deludeth with a fantastical imagination
of their salvation.

The third maine benefit is, Sanctification, the third maine benefit.
inward sanctification, by which a Christian in his mind, in his will, and in
his affections, is freed from the bondage of sin and Satan, and is by little
and little enabled by the spirit of Christ to discern and approve that which
is good, and to walk in it.

Now this Sanctification is through the whole man, in the spirit, soul, and
mind. Sanctification of the mind.
The sanctification of the mind is the inlightning of it with the true
knowledge of Gods word: it is of two sorts, either spiritual understanding, or
spiritual wisdom.

Spiritual understanding is a general conceiving of every thing that is to be
done, The difference betvveene spiritual understanding, and spiritual
wisdom.
or not done, out of Gods word.

Spiritual wisdom is a special grace of Gods spirit, peculiar only to the
elect, whereby a man is able to understand out of Gods word, what is to be
done, or not to be done in any particular things or action, according to the
circumstances of the person, time, and place: the principal point of this
wisdom is to determine of true happiness, whereunto the whole life of man
ought to be directed: which happiness is the love and favor of God in Christ.

To obtain this heavenly wisdom we must be careful of these two things: How
to get true wisdom.
first, to get the Fear of God into our hearts: which is a reverent awe of the
heart toward GOD, What the Fear of God is.
whereby a man is fearful to offend, and careful to please God in all
things: and this we shall get if we receive the word of God with reverence, How
to obtain it.
and apply it to our own souls when we hear it, trembling thereat when it
touches our consciences, and humbly submitting our selves unto it, without
raging or repining: secondly, we must close up the eyes of our minds, that
is, we must deny our own wisdom, and suffer our selves in all things to be
ouerruled and ordered by the written word of God.

To walk in the course of our lives by this heavenly wisdom, How to walk
wisely.
we must in every good action observe these four Rules: first, the thing we
do must be just: secondly, the means of effecting it must also be just:
thirdly, we must keep our selves therein within the lymits and compass of our
calling: fourthly, we must do the thing with an honest and upright heart, and
for this purpose we must always hear the word of God, to tell us what is just.

The sanctification of the Memory is, Sanctification of the Memory.
when it can both keep and remember that which is good and agreeable to Gods
will, where as naturally it best remembers lewdness, wickedness, and vanity.

Sanctification of the Conscience may be discerned by this, Sanctification of
the Conscience.
that it checkes for the least sins, before actual repentance be performed,
and likewise approues our upright walking in the whole course of our life: it
procures peace with God and with man, so far as it is profitable and
expedient, and breeds contentment in the life, in all occasions it procures
cheerfulness in the countenance, and readiness in all our business it makes
us courageous in the truth, and willing to defend the same, it makes us
victorious in troubles, and ready to yield up our lives into the hands of God.

Sanctification of the Will is descerned hereby, Sanctification of the Will.
that it is so far forth freed from sin, that it can will and choose that which
is good and acceptable to God, and resist that which is evil: it is further
perceived by our cheerfulness in well-doing not by compulsion, but of a
willing mind, by resisting as well the occasions, as sin it self, and by
yielding to sin with grief, rising by repentance out of the same.

Sanctification of the affections are known by this, Sanctification of the
Affections.
that they are moved and inclined to that which is good to embrace it, and in
that we can more joy or grieve for spiritual causes then carnal; that they
tend to the crucifying of the flesh, and building forward of the new man, and
are not commonly affected and stirred with that which is evil, unless it be
to eschew it.

Amongst these sanctified affections, four especially are to be marked: Of our
sanctified affections especially four to be marked.
first, Zeal of Gods glory, by which a Christian is thus affected, that rather
then God should lose his glory, he could be contented to have his own soul
damned, as it was with Moses, Exodus 32. 12. and also Paul. Zeal of Gods glory.


The second is, the fear of God: without it a man cannot be wise: it is the
Fear of God.
the first is, a persuasion of heart that we are in Gods presence: the second
is, that being in Gods presence, we stand in awe of him, which is when a man
takes heed to his ways, lest he offend God.

The third is, the hatred of sin, because Hatred of sin.
and especially of a man's own corruptions, wherewith a Christian is so
turmoyled, that in regard of them, and for no other cause, he desires to be
out of this most miserable world, that he may leave to displease God.

The fourth is, Joy of heart, in consideration Rejoicing at the day of
Judgment.
in regard whereof they shall lift up their heads, because the full
accomplishment of their redemption is at hand

The sanctification of the body is, Sanctification of the body.
when all the members of it are carefully kept and preserved from being means
to execute any sin* and are made the Instruments of righteousness: for every
member is to be kept pure and holy.

To maintain and keep a true and justifying faith (by which we are united
to Christ, How to keep faith.
and thereby enjoy all blessings) is to maintain true religion, both in life
and death, and for this end these rules must be remembered.

adding one observation to another, so our hearts may be grounded in the love
of God.

Because there is nothing that does more evidently distinguish between the
regenerate and unregenerate man, then such fruits as each of them do usually
bring forth in their lives and conuersations, I will therefore show the virtues
of the one, and the vices of the other, with their several discriptions:
whereby every man may perceive in what estate he stands, whether the child of
God, or the child of the Devil, whether in the state of grace, or in the
state of Nature.

The graces of GODS spirit ever in some measure appearing in the child of God
effectually called, justified, and sanctified, are: Love, Mercy, Meekness,
Patience, Humility, long-suffering, Peace.

Love, What love is.
is properly an affection of the heart, which binds us to love God, because
he has loved us, and to do unto men as we would be done unto, or whereby one
man is well pleased with another. Now our love to God must appear by the
effects thereof.

First, The first property of love, it longs to obtain that which is beloved.
it is the nature of love, that it earnestly desires and seeks to obtain that
which is beloved: hereby thou shall know whether thy affection of love be
ordered by Christ, or remain as yet disordered by Satan.

The affection which Christ has sanctified will follow upward, seeking to be
there where he is: so carnal love will carry miserable man captiued to the
bottomless pit of hell: but holy love being as a sparkle of heavenly fire
kindled in our hearts by the holy Ghost, ascends continually toward God from
whom it came not suffering us to rest till we enjoy it.

The second trial of our love is Obedience, The second effect is obedience.
and an holy care in all our callings to serve and honor the Lord.

The third trial of love is Bountifulnes: The third effect is bountifulness.
experience proves that every lover bestows bountifully on that which he
loves.

The fourth trial of love is readiness to suffer affliction for the cause of
God.

For the farther trial of our love, let us consider what our Savior Christ
says, Math. 5. 44. I say unto you, love your enemies; bless them that curse
you; do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt and persecute
you.

The love here commanded, How to love our enemies.
comprehends these two things: first, to be lovingly affected in heart
toward an enemy: secondly, to be lovingly affected in speech and action. For
the first: love in heart comprehends all good affections that one man bears
to another, as mercy, compassion, meekness, and desire to do him good: for
the second, it is set out unto us in three branches: first, bless them that
curse you: where is commended all good speech, both unto, and of our enemies:
secondly, do good to them that hate you: where is prescribed all loving usage
in action, by affording all the help and comfort we can: thirdly, pray for
them that persecute you: that is, for their good estate in this life, so far
forth as it serves for Gods glory, and for their conversion, and salvation, in
the world to come.

For the affection of the heart, Examples of love.
take Christ's example, who so loved his enemies, that he shed his own heart
blood for their salvation. For love in courteous speech, In David.
see David's practice toward Saul, his professed enemy, 1 Samuel 24. 7. and
Chap. 26. 9. 10. For doing good in action read, Exodus 23. 4. 5. If thou meet
thine enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall bring him home again:
and Pro. 25. 21. If thy enemy be hungry give him bread to eat, if he be
thirsty, give him drink: see the practice hereof in Elisha, In Elisha.
when GOD delivered them into his hands that did seek his life, he brought
them to Samaria, 2 Kings 6. 14. 19. 21.
and when the King of Israel would have slain them, he forbad him; nay, he
caused the King to refresh them with water and bread* and so sent them away to
their own Master. In Christ.
For praying for our enemies, we have the example of our Savior, In Steven.
the Prophets, and Steven, who prayed for them that put him to death.

Mercy, What Mercy is.
is an holy compassion of the heart, whereby one man is moved to help another in
his misery: first, I call it a compassion of heart, because it makes one man to
put on the person of another, and to be grieved for the misery of another, The
effects.
as if it were his own: secondly, it is called the bowels of compassion,
because when a man's heart is touched therewith, his very Liver and intrailes
do stir in his body, and are troubled in him: thirdly, this virtue of mercy
moves the heart to help another that is in misery: for help in misery is a
notable fruit of true compassion, neither can they be severed, for in the
compassion of the heart, and in the act of relief stands true Mercy.

The duties of Mercy are answerable to man's misery: The duties of Mercy.
now man's misery is either in soul or body: the greatest miseries of man are
in his soul as ignorance, impenitency, and trouble of conscience. Man's bodily
miseries are sickness, thirst, nakedness, and the like: and to these the works
of Mercy are answerable: Mercy toward the Soul is when a man is careful for
the salvation of another, using means to bring a man from spiritual
darkness unto light, from the power of Satan to God; from the estate of
sin and danger of Hellfire, to the state of grace, in true faith and
repentance, and so eternal life: and look how far the soul is more excellent
then the body, so far does this work exceed any work of Mercy that
concerns the body: Mercy toward the body is called alms, or relief, whereby
a man's outvvard necessity, for food, raiment, or such like, is supplied.

Hereby it may appear who is a merciful man: Who is a merciful man.
namely, such a one as has his heart touched with compassion toward the
misery of another and thereby is moved to help and relieve him in soul and
body, according to his estate: and such a man is blessed by the testimony of
Christ himself, howsoever in the world he may be despised.

To move us to this duty, Motives to mercy.
let us mark these things: first, the state of the merciful is here pronounced
blessed of Christ: secondly, mercy is a gift of the spirit, and the grace of
Gods elect, which always accompanyeth the happy estate of those that be in
Christ: thirdly, hereby we become like unto God our heavenly father: fourthly,
hereby we are made Instruments of GODS mercy to them that be in misery.

For the furtherance of us in this so excellent a duty, Rules for the exercise
of Mercy.
we must observe certain Rules. First, we must exercise three of our Senses:
Seeing, Hearing, and Feeling, in other men's miseries. For seeing, Deuteronomy. 15. 9.
we must be very wary it grieve us not to look upon our poor brother, 1 Rule.
but we must see and behold his misery and distres, whether it be in soul or
body: this is the Lords practice, Exodus 3. 7. 9. Secondly, if we cannot come to
see a man's misery, then we must be content to here of it, and give heed and
credit to the true reports that others make thereof to us: this was the
practice of Nehemiah: Nehem. 1. 3. 4. and Chapter 2. 5. Thirdly, for Feeling, if
the Lord shall afflict our bodies with sickness, or our souls with temptations,
we must be willing to suffer the same patiently, that thereby we may be
fitted to take more compassion upon others in like case, and to comfort them
the better, this did Paul and Timothy.

Secondly, 2 Rule.
we must make our particular callings wherein we live, the Instruments of
mercy, and in doing the duties thereof show forth compassion toward others:
first, the Maiestrate must rule and govern in mercy: secondly, the Minister
must Preach in mercy: thirdly, every private man must make the duties of his
calling, works of mercy; the rich man must know himself to be, not a Lord,
but a steward of GODS blessings, and therefore must employ the same in mercy,
by giving and lending unto the poor freely, as God shall minister unto him
just occasion. The Trades man must buy and sell in mercy, dealing justly with
the rich, and showing liberality to the poor. The Master must thus in mercy
use the labor of his Servant; and the Servant thus in mercy do service to his
Master, for conscience toward God: and happy were it with all estates if this
rule of Mercy were observed, the want whereof is the bane of all societies.

Thirdly, 3 Rule.
for the more cheerful practice of mercy, we must lay aside some part of our
goods, for the relief of them that be in misery: many are given to great
excess in fare, and attire, but they may do well to abate somewhat thereof to
bestow it on the poor: for hereby will the rest be sanctified to their more
free and comfortable use. Nay in case of necessity we ought to sequester some
part of our necessaries, for the refreshing of the poor; so did the Church of
Macedonia give above their power to the relief of the afflicted brethren. 2
Cor. 8. 2.

Meekness is a gift of Gods spirit, What Meekness is.
whereby a man does moderate his affections of anger, and bridle in himself
impatience, The effects thereof.
hatred, and desire of revenge: it is a virtue, whereby a man is gentle in
behavior toward all persons, both good and bad, it makes a man with patience
and a quiet heart to bear GODS Judgments, and to put up injuries, and to
bear wrongs, when occasion of revenge is given him.

Meekness is not to be showed in the matters of God, Wherein meekness must
not be showed.
when his glory is impeached: for therein we must have Zeal as hot as fire:
but in the wrongs and injuries that concern our selves. Moses was the meekest
man on earth in his time, Numb. 12. 5. 3. and yet when the Israelits had made a
golden Calfe. Exodus 32. 19. in Zeal of Gods glory, he brake the two tables of
stone, and put to sword the same day two thousand men that had so dishonored
God: the like we see in David, Psalm. 119. 139. and in our Savior Christ, Math.
21. 12.

The ground or cause of meekness is affliction and poverty of spirit: The
cause of meekness.
for, hardly can he be meek and patient in spirit, that has not been
acquainted with the Cross.

To induce us unto this virtue, Motives to meekness.
let us first consider Christ's precept and example, bidding us to learn of
him, for he is meek and lowly: again, consider Gods own dealing with us, we
daily wrong him with our offenses, and yet he bears with us: lastly, the
fruition and practice of this grace has the promise of blessedness belonging to
it, and therefore as we would be happy, so we must get into our hearts the
spirit of meekness, and express the virtue and power thereof in our lives.

Patience, What Patience is.
is a voluntary and continual suffering for the love of virtue and honesty,
and therefore whatsoever happens a wise man, by this virtue he is prepared to
digest and turn it to the best. Or otherwise it is a grace of the spirit,
flowing from grace and hope: whereby we so suffer things that are evil, that
we forsake not those things that are good, by which we may attain to those
that are better.

Amongst all the graces of Gods spirit, Without Patience no grace can be
preserved.
this praise may be given to patience, that it is the keeper of the rest; if
our patience be not first broken, we cannot be induced to the committing of
any sin: sinful concupiscence proceeds from the impatiency of continence;
covetousness from this that we are impatient of our sober estate.

It is the will of God that through manifold afflictions we should enter into
the kingdom of heaven: How to suffer patiently under the Cross.
and therefore when any cross befalls us, walking in our lawful callings, we
must endeavor to subject our selves patiently to the will of God: in
prosperity we are cherefull and thankful, but when affliction comes our
nature will repine. O remember, we say in all estates. Thy will be done: and
therefore in the most bitter Crosses that can befall us we must labor to say
with Job: the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the
Lord. The practice whereof we see in David, 2 Samuel 16. 10. 11. touching Shimei.

Long-suffering is a virtue, Whar long suffering is.
whereby a man does bear with other men's wants, as morositie and hastines, and
in bearing yields, for the maintenance of peace: thus dealt Abraham with Lot,
Example thereof in Abraham.
when their herdsmen were at variance, though he were the superior, both for
age and place, yet for peace sake, he put Lot to choose the place of his abode
whether on the right hand or left.

Humility is a virtue, What Humility is.
whereby one man thinks better of another then of himself: for this makes a
man think basely of himself, The effects thereof.
in regard of his own sins and corruptions, whereupon he is contented to
give place unto others, and to yield of his own right, for the maintenance of
peace: when as on the other side, pride causes men to seek for more then
their due, and so causes contention.

Peace is a virtue, What Peace is.
whereby we have unity and concord with God, and one with another. A twofold
peace.
Now Peace is two-folde, good or evil: good peace is that which stands with
a good conscience and true religion: evil peace is an agreement and concord in
evil, as in the praise of any sin against Gods commandments, and is such as
cannot stand with true religion and good conscience. Good Peace threefold.
The good peace is three-folde: peace with God, with our selves, and our
Christian Brethren; this peace has six heads.

First peace between man and God, True peace has six heads.
which is properly called reconcilation, whereby GOD, in Ghrist, is at one with
man, and man, through Christ, is at one with God: of which when a man is once
persuaded in his heart, then comes this peace: secondly, peace with the good
Angels, for men being at peace with God, then Angels become Servants and
ministering Spirits unto them: thirdly, peace with a man's self, consisting of
two things: first, when the conscience sanctified cease to accuse, and
assurance of Gods favor begins to take his part, to excuse and speak for
him before God: secondly, when the Will, Affection, and Inclinations subject
themselves to the enlightened mind: of which if either be wanting, man is at
war with himself, and the peace of God rules not in his heart: fourthly,
peace of true believers amongst themselves, who before they believe, were as
Lions and Cockatrises: but now in the kingdom of Christ have put off that
savage nature, and become peaceable: fifthly, peace of the faithful with
professed enemies, namely, when they endeavor to have peace with all men:
sixthly, concord of the enemies themselves with the true Church, for often the
Lord restrains the malice of his enemies, and inclines them to peace.

The way to get and keep true peace for ever is this: How to get and keep
true Peace of conscience
first, we must call upon GOD for the pardon of our sins every day:
secondly, we must follow after peace with men in the practice of forgiveness
and reconciliation when offenses grow: for when we are at one with God and
man, we have a blessed peace, and hence will follow peace in our own hearts,
which is that peace which the world cannot give, which while we retain, we
need not fear any evil, no not death it self: for if God be with us, who can
be against us?

There are many other virtues propounded in the Scriptures, which might here be
discribed: but these may be sufficient to declare in whom the spirit of Christ
dwells: for where Christ dwells by his spirit, there are ever the fruits of
the spirit perceived; for the spirit and the effects thereof cannot be sundred:
for every thing brings forth that which is of his own nature: fire sends
forth nothing but heat, the fountain nothing but clear water, and the like.

Now that these virtues may the more apparently show themselves to be the
fruits and effects of the spirit in the regenerate man: I will therefore set
down and discribe such vices as commonly show forth themselves in the wicked,
and are the fruits and effects of the unregenerate: for hereby the child of
GOD renewed by grace, and the unregenerate remaining in the state of nature,
may as easily be distinguished, as white from black being laid together.

I will first begin with Pride, because, since it is a Master Devil, and the
very bane of the soul.

Pride is said to be the timpany of the soul, What Pride is.
because it is a puffing up of the heart and mind, proceeding from the opinion
of some good thing in us more then in others.

His companions are Envy, Companions of pride, five.
Anger, Impatience, Indignation, Self-will, and Obstinacy. Pride is full of
Envy, because the

This sin of Pride of all other is the most dangerous, Pride of all other
sins most dangerous.
because other sins proceed from evil deeds, but Pride is to be feared
even in good and virtuous actions.

Of Pride their are nine branches: Nine branches of Pride.
Presumption, Obstinacy, Hypocrisy, Boasting, Ingratitude, Contempt,
Disobedience, Ambition, and Curiosity.

Pride, How to detest Pride.
if we consider the cause thereof, is momentary and very uncertain: for if it
proceed from Riches, who knows not, that they may be lost in a moment? If
from Nobility or great birth, it may be stained: If from knowledge, it is full
of error: If from strength, it may soon decay: If from Honor, it is but a
ceremony: If from Beauty, Age may wrinckle it: If from good success, time may
alter it: If from dainty food, it may breed surfeiting, which commonly
brings death: If from clothing, what is it but skins, and wool, nay the
very excrements of bruit beasts and stones of the earth? If from health,
sickness may destroy it: If from multitude of friends, are they not like to
water brooks that in Summer become dry, and in Winter frozen? If from
sharpness of wit, there is no man living but is guilty of folly.

The only and chief remedy against Pride is Humility: How to avoid Pride.
for as by Pride we are banished from the presence of God, so by Humility we
are recalled to him again; because without Humility no other virtue
whatsoever, is acceptable in his sight.

The second maine and capital sin What covetousness is.
because the covetous man, the more he has, the more still he desires: it is
also a kind of bad motion whereby the devil intiseth us unlawfully to
withholde our own goods, or unjustly to covet other men's. Four sorts of
covetousness.


Of this sin there are four sorts: the

This viper has nine heads, by which it snatcheth at the trash of the world:
Fraud, Unquietness, Perjury, Bribes, Sacrilege, Theft, Usury, Rapine, and
Simony.

Consider that the matter thereof (which is riches) is most vild and abject,
How to detest covetousness.
or else our Savior would never have committed the purse to Judas: Christ
chose not his Apostles and best beloved from amongst Princes, but poor
fishermen: that no man can serve two Masters, GOD and the World, no more then
he can at one time behold heaven and earth: that riches for the most part are
gotten with pain, preserved with fear, and lost with sorrow: that the
covetous or most wealthiest man, is but as the Mill-wheele, which though it
turn all day about, yet at night is found where it was in the morning: so
howsoever we run about this world for wealth, yet at our death we shall be
found as poor as we were at our birth: that the covetous men are but as
Camels, that all day carry the Kings treasure, and at night are turned into a
filthy stable, being able to show no sign or appearance thereof but their
galde backs.

The only remedy against covetousness, How to avoid covetousness.
is liberality, which is a distribution of those good things that are in our
possession, to the benefit of others: for we have nothing which we have not
received from God, who has given them for the good of others, and will require
an account thereof at our hands.

The third Capital sin is Luxury, What Luxury is.
which may be called the Leprosy of the soul, and is an inordinate appetite
of lascivious and fleshly pleasures.

There are six kinds of this sin: Sorts and kinds of Luxury.
the first is Fornication, which is an unlawful when the married sins with
the married: the fourth is Incest, when the abuse

There are nine forerunners of this sin: Nine forerunners of Luxury.
voluptuous eating, scurrulous talk, a discovered dug, a naked breast, frizled
hair, artificial paynting, costly Perfumes, a rolling eye, an unchaste foot.

Consider that the object whereto it tends, How to detest Luxury.
(which is the corporal fruition of unchaste persons) is though candyed with a
fair outside, inwardly the receptacle of vilde and corruptible baseness:
that lust is never satisfied, but always poor, even in plenty.

That the pleasure thereof is momentany, the punishment eternal, that it
defiles the temple of the holy ghost, which is man's body, consecrated unto
Christ by his precious blood: that it is no sooner inioyed, but it breeds
annoy: that it weakens the powers of the soul, and fills the body with many
diseases: that it shorteneth the life; and shadoweth good report: that it is a
fire whose substance is Gluttony, whose flame is Pride, whose sparkles are
corrupt speeches, whose ashes filthiness, and whose end is Hell.

The best remedy against Luxury is chastity, How to avoid Luxury.
which is of four sorts; either of nature, as of such as are borne chaste; or
by art, as such as are made chaste by men; or by prayer and industry, as of such
as have made themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven; or by marriage, as of
such as live chastely in wedlock.

What Envy is.
for that it eats and frets into the inward man, no otherwise then rust does
into iron; it is a rejoicing at another man's hurt, and sorrowing at his good.

It is of two sorts, It is twofold.
good and bad: good Envy is that when beholding the perfections of another we
are angry with Good envy.
or at least to imitate the good qualities which we see to flourish more in
others then in our selves: this is called emulation.

Bad Envy is, when we grieve that the Bad envy, which has five branches.
or not as well in us as in another, and of this there are five branches,
Detraction, Discord, Murmuring, Hatred, Hurt.

Consider that Envy is the bag and cognizance of the Devil, How to detest
envy.
for the Devil is not better known then by his envious disposition, and
therefore such as give place in their hearts to this vice, are said to be the
servants of the Devil, if servants of the devil they are enemies to God, if
enemies to God, they become subject to eternal damnation.

Of all other sins it is accounted the iustest, for that it takes vengeance
upon it self, for although it ever leuels the dart of mischief against
others, yet it vvounds it self, and is to the heart of man as the worm bred
in the tree, to the wood thereof, by whom at last it is devoured: but say it
were pleasing and plausible in it self, yet consider God will be revenged upon
it, as by the example of Caine his envy toward Abel, Saul toward David,
Haman toward Mordechay* it is to be loathed and abhorred, but being so that it
consumes the heart, dries up the body, vexes the mind, and indangereth the
soul, what can be thought more detestable?

The remedy against Envy is Charity, How to avoid Envy.
or love to do unto others as we would be done unto.

Gluttony, What gluttony is.
the fifth capital sin, may be called the deluge or inundation of the soul,
because it is a ravenous desire to see and fill the stomach beyond the rule or
bonds of nature: Two sorts thereof
and there are two sorts of it: the first, consists in greedy, often and
immoderate desire of delicate meats and variety of dishes: the second is, when
instead of refreshing the body with sufficient moisture, How to detest
gluttony by eleven dangerous effects.
we drown it in the superfluity of drinking.

Of this sin there are eleven dangerous effects: the first, is dullness of
wit, of good Christians: the second, is Impotencie, and punishing Judge.

Besides the reasons before mentioned, Eight circumstances to cause a
detestation of it.
there are eight other circumstances, inducing us to the detestation of it:
First, it hasteneth the desolation of the Body: Secondly, it takes part with
the Flesh in the combat between it and the Spirit: Thirdly, it inureth the
body to an evil custom: Fourthly, it plays the hipocrite with us, appearing
sweet and pleasant at the first, but in the end it byteth like a Scorpion:
Fifthly, it lives continually under the curse of God: Sixthly, it destroys the
sense: Seventhly, to be subject to the desire of the belly is a perpetual
slavery: Eighthly, because of the Judgments of God inflicted upon offenders in
his kind.

To avoid Gluttony, How to avoid gulttony.
we must embrace temperance and sobriety, which consists in chastning and
taming the body by fasting and abstinence.

What wrath is.
and is defined to be a vehement motion of the heart, tending to revenge,
whereby the blood boiling exceedingly, sends up hot and burning vapors to
the brain, so that Reason is smothered, and the will made obedient to the
affections.

Of this sin there are eleauen branches: Eleauen Branches of Wrath.
Malice, Fury, Impatience, Malediction, Blasphemy, Reproach, Revenge,
Contention, Threatening, Cruelty, and Murder.

The means whereby we are taught to detest Wrath and Anger are these: How to
detest wrath.
First, the example of brute Beasts, though never so fierce, will always
show themselves meek and gentle to them of the same kind: the Lion will not
hurt the Lion; nor the Dragon, the Dragon. Secondly, in that we are brought
forth naked and unarmed, signifies we ought to loath cruelty. Thirdly, to
remember what Christ has done for us, and to think that if we expect mercy at
his hands, we ought to show mercy to others. Fourthly, so long as we continue
in wrath all our actions are abominable to God. Fifthly, the wrathful man
lives in a continual Purgatory and Hell of conscience. Lastly, we must not
let the Sun go down upon our wrath.

Anger, or wrath, is to be avoided two manner of ways. How to avoid wrath, or
anger.
First, in respect of others: Secondly, in respect of our selves: we shall the
sooner avoid the wrath of another man, if either we give place to his fury, or
staying by him, use mild and gentle speeches.

The best way to avoid Anger in our selves, is patience, in suffering of evil
with a quiet mind: thinking whatsoever is laid upon us in this life, whether
affliction, persecution, or the like, yet nothing can touch our Soul, and
therefore not to be regarded of us. Besides, to bridle anger, consider the
party with whom we are displeased: if it be a stranger impute it to his
ignorance: if a child, to his folly: if a Master or Father, to his authority:
if a Wife, to her love: if a friend, to his care: if a brother, to his
boldness: if a servant, to his negligence: if a neighbor, to his rashness;
no doubt upon better consideration they will repent them of their ouer-sight.

Idleness what it is.
may be called, The Lethargy of the Soul, being a lazy deiecture of the whole
man, from the laudable exercise of virtue: for that in a manner he becomes
senseless, but in truth, altogether unprofitable.

Of this sin there are eleauen branches: Eleauen branches of it.
Protraction, Remissenes, Negligence, Improuidence, Indeuotion, Sluggishnesse,
Persillanimitie, Irresolution, Desperation, Misprision, and Omission.

Remember that Sloth is a vice which impouerisheth both soul and body: How to
detest it.
the soul, of natural graces; the body of external goods. Remember likewise,
it captiuates, and brings us under the slavish tyranny of our worldly and
spiritual enemies. Remember, it is the root and nest of many other vices; as
by the example of David, who no sooner gave himself to rest, after his
painful wars, but he fell into the sins of Adultery and Murder.
Remember, it is a vice that the very brute beasts abhor; as may be seen by
the Be, the Ant, and other small contemptible Creatures. Lastly, consider all
other Creatures not having life, are so opposite to sloth, as they continually
keep their first course in which they were created, without intermission,
vn-vnlesse it be upon some violent and accidental cause, as we may see by the
Sun, Moon, and Stars: by the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and by the just
return of Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn, and the like.

Consider that we enter into this world, as it were to run a race: if
therefore we run not so as we may get the Goal, we lose the reward. The
best remedy therefore against sloth and idleness, is Devotion; which is a
ready and willing performance of the service of God, and of all other duties
required of us in this life.

The offspring or branches proceeding from these seven master-sinnes, How to
avoid sloth.
are severally described in a Book, called, Two guides of a good life: wherein
you may see and learn how to avoid sin, and follow virtue, to delight in the
one and to detest the other.

If you should not ask me, (having showed how to detest and avoid some sins
in particular) what sin is, and the reward thereof: as also, how to avoid sin
in general: I Will tell you briefly, what I have learned from the mouth of a
right worthy instrument in the Church of God.

Sin is every breach of the Law of God; What sin is.
if it be no more but the least omission of what the Law requires: What the
punishment thereof is.
and the punishment thereof is plagues in this life, death in the end of this
life, and eternal damnation after this life.

S. James, How to resist sin in general.
Chap. 4. verse. 7. says, resist the devil, and he will fly from thee: in
which words is both a precept and a promise: in the precept is two things to
be considered, the action and the object: the action is, to resist: the object
is, the Devil.

For the performance of this action, three things are requisite: first, a
preparation before the combat: What we are to do before the combat with the
Devil.
secondly, how we are to demean our selves in the combat: thirdly how to
carry our selves after the combat.

First, for the preparation, observe these rules set down in the sixth Chapter
of the Ephesians, 7. weapons wherewith to fight with the Devil.
from the 14. to the 19. verses: which weapons there prescribed, are both
defensive and offensive: those and Captain Christ repeld the Devil.
Seventhly, and lastly, that we pray with What to do in the combat.
with all perseverance: which two weapons being added to the rest, are of
force to strike through the very heart of the Devil.

The second thing to be observed, is the manner how we must behave our selves
in this combat; First, we must kill sin in the very conception.
and herein observe these rules. First, kill sin in the very conception (for
it is like a Canker which grows not to ripeness but by degrees) otherwise it
will grow from motion to liking, Sin like to a canker.
from liking to consent, from consent to action, from action to custom, from
custom to hardness of heart, and from hardness of heart to the height of all
sins. If the Serpent once get in his head, he will afterward wring in all
his body. Timothy gives warning to take heed of covetousness which being
once entertained, gives way to many noisome temptations. Ahab desiring
Nabaoths Vineyard, no sooner embraced that evil motion, but presenting it
with a further desire, brought forth fearful and evil effects. That man
that will first walk in the counsel of the ungodly, will next stand in the
way of sinners; and lastly will sit in the seat of the scornful. Judas was
first a cunning dissembler: secondly, a secret thief: thirdly, an impundent
liar: fourthly, a bloody traitor, and lastly, a desperate reprobate. Peter,
first denied Christ faintly: secondly, with an Oath: thirdly, We must deny our
own strength.
with cursing and swearing; wherefore, kill sin in the conception.

Secondly, be sure to put no confidence in thy own strength, for thereby Peter
fell grievously. We must not believe the Devil though he speak truth.


Thirdly, believe not the Devil, although he bring truth in his mouth: our
Savior Christ could not abide the Devil to speak the truth in the maid,
having a spirit of divination.

Fourthly, We must make resistance, which is two ways.
be careful ever to make resistance unto it; and this is performed either by
weakening the ability of sin, or else by opposing his contrary unto sin.

First, First, weakening the ability of sin.
to weaken the ability of sin, is by taking away all occasions to sin, and
by removing all the sustainements thereof, and also making a holy covenant with
every member of our bodies and souls, ever to repel it, never to admit it, by
which means sin may come to be as a lake, into which the current of no
stream runs, which must needs be dried up.

Secondly, Secondly opposing his contraries.
it is done by opposing his contraries unto sins, as Charity to Melice:
Temperance and Sobriety to Gluttony and Drunkenness: Liberality to
Niggardice: Vigilance to Security: Confidence to Distrust: Faith to Infidelity:
Truth to Lying: Chastity to Intemperance, That we compare not the pain of
resistance with the pleasure of sin.
and so of the rest: the practice of one particular was in Joseph with Potifars
wife, How (says he) shall I commit this evil and sin against God?

Fifthly, that thou be careful never to compare the pain of resistance with
the pleasure of the sin, for sin is sweet in committing; If the Devil once be
foiled, he is much quailed, and thou more strengthened.


Sixthly, be assured, that if once thou give the Devil the foil, he will be
afterward less able to assault thee, and thou more able to resist him, and
that with more courage.

To mark the Devils subtilties and cunning devises.
devices, and sleights of the Devil, by which he does assault thee very
cunningly; for he has a near conjecture unto what sins thou art most inclined
by nature, The Devil fitteth his temptations to our inclinations.
and accordingly he fits his temptations. If thou be inclined to covetousness,
he will offer thee Naboths Vineyard, and rather then fail, he will plot means
to slay him, so thou may effect thy desire: If vain glorious, he will make
thee thirst after the life of poor Mordecay: If ambitious, he will stir up
means to drive David out of his kingdom, that Absolon may enjoy it: and thus
he fitteth his temptations to men's natural inclinations: and thus much of the
second place, namely, how we should behave our selves in the combat, when we
are grappling hand to hand with the Devil.

The third and last thing to be considered, What to do after the combat.
is what we are to do after the combat, and that is, presently to prepare
our selves for a new combat: To prepare our selves for a new combat.
For, if we shall consider the malice of the Devil, how he ever seeks our
subversion and ouer-throw, and having once taken the foil, yet is not at rest,
but by other means seeks again to assault us, (for so he did with our head
and captain Christ Jesus three several times one after another) it should in
this case teach us to take heed of careless security, Satan's subtlety
should make us to shun careless security.
as not to think our selves safe when we have given the Devil the foil, but
ever to stand upon our guard, (for if he dealt thus with Christ our Head,
what will he do with the members?) which being conscionably and carefully
regarded, we may then expect an happy issue, which is, that the devil will
fly from us: whereby we may observe and note Gods especial care over us, who
ever gives a happy issue with the temptation, to those that walk in holy
Obedience before him: A special meditation in the time of temptation.
and if we would always in temptations call to mind Gods goodness, his
mercy, and kindness, formerly bestowed upon us, it would be as a bulwark of
defense against the temptations of the Devil. This did Joseph when he was
tempted to filthiness by his Mistress, Genesis 39. he instantly considered how
God had exalted him to great honor, making him chief of his Masters house,
and ruler over all. How (says he) shall I commit this evil, and sin against
my God?

By this that has been said we may learn how to avoid sin; as also to
repel the Devil, which if (through the blessing of God upon our careful
endeavor, through the use of the means) we shall in some measure attain unto;
yet we are not to think we have done enough, and there to rest, but we
must labor and endeavor to do good, and to bring forth fruits worthy
amendment of life: It is not enough to avoid evil, but we must do good.
for every Tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into
the fire: it is not said, every Tree that brings forth evil fruit, or that
brings forth no fruit, but that brings not forth good fruit: now what those
fruits are, which the trees of Righteousness do usually bear, has been
formerly declared.

Now, because we may bring forth such fruit as in themselves may seem to be
good, yet for want of knowledge failing in the manner of doing of them, they
are displeasing and dishonorable to the Lord: know, that in every action
pleasing and acceptable to the Lord, in the doing thereof these five rules are
to be observed: Five rules specially to be observed in every action that shall be
pleasing to the Lord.
First, the person of him must be pleasing to the Lord who performs any action
to him. Before Abels sacrifice was accepted, his person was accepted: It may
be demanded, how we shall know when our persons are pleasing unto God.
Consider by nature we are enemies unto him, and so long our persons cannot
please him, as we be not of Christ, therefore find thy self to be in Christ,
and then thou art acceptable unto God: for God says, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased. Look how CHRIST is unto God, so is every one being
in Christ: If then thou would know whether thou be in Christ, look to thy
Faith, whether it be a justifying faith. Secondly, thou must have the word of
God for thy warrant, being sure that the action thou do be such as his word
allows. Thirdly, the end of the action must be intended to the glory of God.
Fourthly, it must be done in love, which respects the good of others: and
lastly, it must be done within the compass of our callings. It is not lawful
for one to do that which another may; every man may not preach, nor every man
may not govern: therefore content thy self with thy calling, and know what
the duties are that God requires of thee within the limits and bounds thereof:
if these be wanting, either Faith, the Word, the end, or Love, or out of our
calling, the action, though never so seeming good, cannot please God.

If any shall look back to that which has been said (and considers the
estate of the regenerate, and unregenerate man, as also thereby beholds his
own present estate) and cannot find in himself faith and the graces of Gods
Spirit so apparent as has been showed, and so doubts whether he be the
child of God or not, The graces of Gods spirit apparent in some, should make us
labor to find them in our selves.
remembering the Zeal of Moses, the faith of David, the repentance of Peter, as
also finding in himself that he can power forth tears more abundantly for a
temporary loss, as of wife children, friends, goods, and the like, then for
committing many grievous sins, whereby God is dishonored, and himself in
danger to incur the loss of his favor for ever; and heerevpon remembering,
that nothing should be more dear unto him then the honor of God, nothing more
precious and delightful then his Word, his Sacraments, and Sabbaths, wherein
as yet, he sees in himself but small delight, and doubts of his own
salvation: therefore yet know this for thy comfort, Comforts to the weak
Christians.
and be assured, that to doubt of Faith is a testimony of Faith; for he that
never doubted, never believed: and although thou have not the zeal of Moses,
the faith of David, the repentance of Peter, inso full a measure as they had.
Consider, they had a great measure of Gods Spirit, and accordingly the graces
thereof appeared in them: For God requires according to the grace given: and,
although thou have not these appearing in thee, yet if thou do unfeignedly
desire them, and labourest in the use of the means to attain them, thou have
them all in some measure, and they are true in thee. Faith and the graces of
Gods spirit may be true in him who yet desires them not.
The scruple of gold may be perfect gold as well as the whole wedge: so faith
though but as a scruple, may be true faith as well as the greatest measure:
and whereas thou doubtest of thy Salvation, in that thou can more grieve for
a temporary loss, then for the committing of some sin, whereby thou may
loose Gods favor: consider, to the one thou have both nature and Grace to help
thee; Note.
but to the other, Grace only. If then thou find not this great measure of
Grace in thee, be not discouraged: for if any man have a desire to obey God in
all his commandments, he has the spirit, and he who has the spirit is in
Christ and he who is in Christ shall never see damnation: He who has the
spirit of Christ dwelling in him shall never see damnation.
and though he fail greatly in the action of obedience, yet God will accept
his affection to obey, as obedience acceptable unto him, and will approve of
thee for his own work which he has wrought in thee, and not reject thee for
thine. So be it.

Twelve Steps, which a man may stride toward Heaven; and being in the first
step, he may think himself a good Christian: yet except he stride the
thirteenth, he shall miss Heauen-gate, and fall into the fire of Hell, for
ever.
1 HE may have a measure of knowledge of the true God, and of his works, and
governing the world: also of the Trinity, and that Jesus Christ dyed for the
sins of mankind. Which knowledge even the Pagans had, yea, even so as few
Christians attain unto so great knowledge, Mat. 4. 3. 6
and yet he may be damned if he go no further; Mark 5. 7
for Satan knows all this better then any man, being a spirit, and having
the knowledge of Angels and of the Scriptures. Heb. 4. 2. and 6. 4. 5.
Also the reprobates have the like knowledge.

2 He may not only know these things before named, 2 Pet. 2. 20
but also confess them publicly, and believe them to be true. Also he may be
able to talk and dispute of any point of Divinity very cunningly, and be so
great a maintainer of it, that he may be a public preacher: Iam. 2. 19.
yet if he go no further he may be damned; Mark 5. 7. and Mark. 1. 24
for the Devil believes, and publicly confesses CHRIST, Agrippa also
believed all these things: Mat. 8. 29.
also Judas was a Preacher and worker of Miracles. Act. 26. 26 27.
So shall many reprobates.

3 Thirdly, Mat. 10. 7. 8.
he may come to the hearing of Gods word preached, Mat. 7. 22.
which few of the world commonly do, or will do; yea, he may receive the
word, and that gladly, not scorning of it, or thinking hardly of it or of the
preachers: but the cursed ground did so; Mat. 13. 20 21.
so Herod also heard John Baptist.

4 Fourthly, Mark. 6. 20
at the preaching of Gods Word he may be so wonderfully affected, that he may
tremble again, which most men never come unto, desiring to hear it, as a
tale, or for news, or for bare knowledge: but even this did cursed Felix; Act.
24. 26
And Agrippa cried out that he was almost persuaded to be a Christian, Act.
26. 28
both reprobates.

5 He may have a knowledge of his grievous sins, Genesis 4. 13
and a feeling of them, and complain of them to be great and grievous: 1 Samuel
15. 24. 25. and 26. 21.
but so did damned Caine.

6 After he has committed sin, he may be very sorry and troubled before he
commit a sin, and use all means not to do it, which few Christians do,
committing sin without remorse: yet if he go no further he may be damned.
For wicked Pilate did this, striving to set Christ free, Mat. 27. 17. 23.
and pleading for him. Also Herod, being to behead John Baptist.

7 After he has committed a sin, Mat. 14. 9.
he may be very sorry for it, yea, mourn and make satisfaction: yet if he go
no further he may be damned; 1 King. 21. 27.
for Achab did this, mourning and fasting. And Judas also, Mat. 27. 3. 45.
who was so sorry that he hanged himself, and made satisfaction.

8 He may be accounted so glorious a member of the visible Church, as the best
Minister may have nothing to say against him: yea, he may make such a good
confession of his Faith, as he may be partaker of the Sacraments, yet a
reprobate: Ioh. 13. 2.
for Judas was such a one, and Simon Magus. Acts 8.


9 He may lead such a godly outward life, that the true children of God may
think him so good as themselves: he may reverently use all holy and Divine
exercises: he may make much of Preachers: he may show great Zeal at the
beginning, Mat. 26. 22.
yet a reprobate, for Judas was so thought of by the Apostles: he used all holy
exercises with the Apostles and our Savior, Math. 6. 20
Herod made much of John Baptist: 2 King. 10. 16. 18.
Iehu was zealous at the beginning.

10 He may not only pray publicly at the Church, which most men do for
fashion, fear, shame, or company; but also alone betwixt God and himself,
which few do, and God may hear his prayers, also he may desire the godly to
pray for him, if he go no further he is but a reprobate: for the Pharisees went
alone to the Temple to pray: 1 King. 21. 29.
also God heard Achab, Pharao desired Moses to pray for him. Exodus 9. 28
Also Simon Magus, Peter.

11 He may think in his own heart that he is a very good Christian and
beloved of God, Acts. 8. 24.
and thank God for it, and excel in the works of a Christian, move
himself to thank GOD, use Prayer, Fasting, Alms, and upright dealing with
all men, and yet may be damned if he go no further, for the Pharisees had all
these: whom if our righteousness exceed not, Luke 18. 11
we shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

12 After all this godly life led, lying on his deathbed, he may often
remember God and call upon him: he may talk of the joys of Heaven, and think
them happy that be there, and wish himself there: yea, he may dye like a
lamb, and yet for all this be a damned creature: for many shall say, Lord,
Lord, and yet not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 7. 21.
And assuredly, they never said it oftener then when they were sick: and the
foolish VIRGINS desired to enter in with Christ, Mat. 25. 12
and yet were shut out: fear therefore and tremble till you stride the
thirteenth step.

13 The thirteenth step, without the which no man can enter into Heaven, and
be saved, is true repentance, which whosoever has not is yet no true
Christian. And that is a true and unfeigned turning of the heart and soul unto
the Lord God from all our sins, and is caused in us by the fearful sight of
Gods judgment hanging over our heads, moving us to lament our sins from our
hearts bitterly: having a steadfast faith in the mercies of Christ Jesus:
applying them to our selves, for our agreement with God: and leading a godly
life according to Gods Commandments till our death: which true repentance
when it is in any, has the seven properties which are before spoken of.

FINIS.

