The Sum of Christianity, reduced unto eight propositions, briefly and
plainly confirmed out of the holy word of God.

John. 1. 17. The law was given by Moses: but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. Eight Propositions containing the sum of this Treatise.
1. All men have sinned, and have fasted of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23. 2.
There is no name under Heaven given unto men, whereby we must be saved, but
only by the name of Jesus. Act. 4. 12. 3. Salvation by Christ apperteineth
only unto them that believe in him. 4. Faith comes by bearing, and hearing
by the word of God. Romans 10. 17. 5. Let him depart from iniquity, whosoever
names the name of Christ 2. Tim. 19. Who so is in Christ Jesus, is a new
creature. 2. Cor. 5. 17. 6. Thy word is the lantern unto my feet, and the
light unto my pathe. Psa. 119. 105. The commandment is a lantern, and the
law a light, and reprehensions for instruction are the way of life. Pro. 6.
23. 7. The law is spiritual, but we are carnal, even sold to be subject
unto sin. Romans 7. 14 The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other, so that we can
not do the things that we would. Gal. 5. 17. 8. What other helps there are
unto godliness and well doing, commended unto us in the word of God*
The sum of Christianity, reduced unto eight propositions, briefly and
plainly confirmed out of the holy word of God.
The first proposition.
All men have sinned, and have failed of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23.
THere is none that is righteous, Romans 3. 10.
no not one. 1. John. 1, 8. 10
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
If we say we have not sinned, we make God a lier, and his word is not in us.
For proof whereof, there are two witnesses against us. First the testimony of
our own consciences, Romans 15.
wc even by the light of nature accuses us, both of leaving undone many good
things we ought to have done: and of committing many evil things, in deed,
word, and thought. Secondly, the Lord God himself, who is greater than our
consciences, whose wrath from heaven is Romans 1. 18.
manifest against all the ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, as well in
that general curse, Genesis 3. 17.
which is come upon all creatures: as by particular judgments executed
against sin, from the beginning of the world. But especially, he has most
manifestly penned our indictment in his word: where first we are charged with
the sin and fall of Adam, Romans 5. 16. 18.
as guilty thereof unto condemnation. Secondly, that we are borne in sin,
Psalm. 51. 5.
and conceived in iniquity, and therefore by nature the children of Gods
wrath: Ephesi. 2. 3.
being such, Romans 8. 7. 8.
as whose natural disposition is enimitie against God, and whose cursed spirit
lusts after envy. Iam. 4. 5.
Thirdly, that this corruption of our nature, has been most plentiful, Gal.
5. 19.
in bringing forth all manner fruits of disobedience, Romans 5.
causing us to transgress all-the commandementes of God, Romans 3. 20.
as shall most plainly appear, if we examine our selves, and our lives, by the
several precepts of his law, which teaches us, both what duties we owe unto
his Majesty for his worship, and also what unto our brethren for their
profit: so that we may conclude with the Apostle, that all mouths are
stopped, and that all men are come under the condemnation Romans 3. 19.
of God. We must so meditate upon these things, as we may also be affected and
touched with them. Which we shall the rather perform, if unto the unfeigned
confession that we are sinners, we shall in the presence of Gods majesty
consider, first the filthiness and uncleanness of our sins, by comparing
them with that holiness, righteousness, and innocence, which is described
unto us in the Law. Then the greatness of our offenses as committed against
the most glorious excellency of the Majesty of God. Further, the multitude of
our transgressions, which are mo in number than the hears of our head, Psalm.
40. 12
and as a mighty water ouerflowing us unto destruction. Also ye punishment
deserved by our sins, and set down in the word of God. First the curse of
God, entering and remaining upon all his creatures, Romans 8. 20.
subduing them under vanity for our sakes. Secondly, all the adversities and
afflictions of this life, with the diseases of our bodies, and griefs of our
minds. Also death it self which is the dissolution of the soul and the
body. Last of all, Leuit. 27. 26.
the curse of God pronounced in his law, unto everlasting damnation both of
body and soul, with Satan and his Angels in hell fire, the flame whereof
being kindled from the breath of the wrath of the Lord shall never Esai. 30. 33.
be quenched. The misery of him that is in such a case, must needs be
exceeding great, and offers him just occasion with fear and trembling, Matthew.
3. 7.
to inquire what may be his remedy against so lamentable estate. Act. 2. 37.


The second Proposition.
There is no name under heaven given unto men, whereby we must be saved, but
only by the name of Jesus. Act. 4. 12.
THe holy Angels of God can not save us: yea they are justly our enemies for
sin, and the armed soldiers of the Lord to our destruction. Luke. 1. 47.
The saints have need themselves of a Savior, and therefore can stand us in
no stead. As for our selves, if we could (which is impossible) do all the
good things commanded us in the law, it were sufficient, if we were not
condemned for them: it were no reason that by them we should be discharged of
that other bond of our guiltiness, which is against us, in committing of
evil. If we say we will give all that we have unto the Lord, Psalm. 16. 2.
it is nothing unto him: 1. John. 1. 7.
If unto the poor, it is no sacrifice for sin: If we should suffer all
torments of body and soul during this life, we cannot so satisfy the
justice of God, for the least of our sins, which deserves infinite
punishment. There is no help in outward and feigned holiness, Esai. 66. 3.
be it never so glorious in the eyes of men, seeing it is abomination in the
sight of the Lord, how much less shall it avail us, to rest for salvation upon
any of the foolish superstitions Esaias. 29. 13.
and wicked idolatries invented by man. Standing therefore before Gods
judgment seat, condemned for our sins, Romans 5. 1.
we find no peace with his Majesty, but only in Jesus Christ, of whom he
said from heaven, Matthew. 3 17.
this is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. And who witnesses of
himself, saying. So God loved the world, John. 3. 16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that all that believe in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life, who also calls us unto
himself, saying: Come unto me, Matthew. 9. 11.
al ye that travel, and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you. The name Jesus
Jesus.
signifies a Savior, Matthew. 1. 21.
and is expounded by the Angel Gabriel: For he shall save his people from their
sins. Christ.
Christ in Greek, and Messiah in Hebrew, signifies anointed, giving us to
understand, that this is he, whom the father has chosen, John. 6. 27.
sealed, and anointed with his spirit, to be our Prophet, Priest, and King, and
is made unto us from God, wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
sanctification, and redemption, that no flesh might glory before his Majesty,
but yt whosoever glories, might glory in the Lord. Christ, Christ our
wisdom.
the eternal wisdom of his Father from the beginning, was the only Pastor
and teacher of his Church, 1. Pet. 1. 11.
revealing by his spirit unto the holy Fathers and Prophets, the doctrine of
salvation: But in the fullness of time, taking upon him our nature, he came
into the world, our wisdom from God: in his own person, out of the bosom of
his father, John. 1. 18. 15. 15.
declaring unto us all the councels of God, concerning our redemption, and that
in greater measure, and clearenes of understanding, 2. Cor. 3. 18.
then ever before from the beginning. Further as he is the chief pastor and
shephearde of the flock, so is it he in whom all the promises of God are, 2.
Cor. 1. 20.
yea and Amen.

Who is also al, Col. 3. 11.
and in all, Math. 17. 5.
and of whom we have received commandment from heaven, that we should hear
him. He is therefore both the teacher and the thing that is taught. He is made
our righteousness, Christ our righteousness.
first in that he has fully satisfied the justice of GOD, borne the stripes of
our correction, Esaias. 53. 5.
and the chastisement of our peace: Gal. 3. 10
taking upon him the curse of the law due unto us for our sins, and by
bearing and ouercomming the same, has delivered us from the power of sin,
Satan, Heb. 9. 12.
hell, and the wrath of GOD, and made an everlasting atonement upon the altar
of his Cross: Ephesians. 5. 2.
offering up himself an oblation and sacrifice of most sweet savor unto the
Lord. Secondly, in that he has accomplished all the righteousness of the law,
that we in his obedience, having the same imputed unto us, and might be
justified before God, Romans 5. 19.
and obtain the blessing of the law, Gal. 3. 12.
which is eternal life.

He is made our holiness or sanctification, because in him is found the law of
ye spirit of life, which delivers us from the law of sin and of death.
Romans 8. 3.
For it is he only that has condemned sin in the flesh, that is to say,
has perfectly purged and cleared our nature of sin in his own person, by
joining it unseparably unto his deietie: that we being clothed with his most
pure and unspotted humanity, Ephe. 1. 4.
might in all respects appear acceptable and well pleasing in the sight of
the Lord.

He is made our redemption not now to offer up any new sacrifice for sin,
Heb. 9. 28.
which he has already done once for all: But that having all power given to
him, both over things in heaven and things in earth, Mat. 28. 19.
he might rule and govern his Church, by his word and by his spirit,
guyding and defending the same in the Pilgrimage and warfarre of this life,
until the day of our adoption shall appear, Romans 8. 23.
even the deliverance of our bodies; what time he shall return our redeemer
from heanen, and shall change our vile bodies, Phil. 3. 21.
that they may be made like unto his glorious body, according unto that power,
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. In the mean time
sitting at the right hand of GOD our advocate and intercessour with the father,
Romans 8. 34.
not only to make intercession for us, but also to present unto the Lord our
selves, our souls and bodies and all that we have, Romans 12. 1.
and do, Heb. 13. 15.
our prayers and obedience, an holy and acceptable Sacrifice unto his Majesty.

The third proposition.
Salvation by Christ appertains only unto them that believe in him.
HE that believes in the son is not condemned, John. 3. 18. 36.
but has eternal life: and he that believes not the son, is already
condemned, neither shall he see life, but the wrath of GOD remains upon him,
because he has not believed in the name the only begotten son of GOD.
Faith therefore is the only means whereby we possess Jesus Christ, and in him
althe mercies of God unto our salvation: For by faith Christ dwells in our
hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17. 18.
that being rooted and grounded in the love of God, we might be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is that breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know that love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, and to
be filled with all that fulness of God. Faith is that testimony of our
consciences, whereby we are assured from the witness of the Spirit of God,
Romans 8. 15. 16.
that all our sins are pardoned and forgeuen unto us, in the merit of the
Sacrifice and death of Christ, and that we stand justified as righteous before
God, in the perfection of his obedience: and through him are now the adopted
children of his father, and heirs of his everlasting kingdom, Romans 8. 17.
in that we are made members of his body, Ephe. 5. 30.
even bone of his bone, 1. Cor. 6. 17.
and flesh of his flesh, Ephe. 2. 22.
to become with him one spirit, 1. Pet. 2. 5.
and spiritual temple unto God.

The fourth proposition, of the causes of faith, in the word preached and
sacraments ministered.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10. 17.
THis faith is not borne with us, neither grows it out of our corrupt nature,
Ephe. 2. 8.
nor is bought with earthly treasure, nor attained unto by the labor and
industry of man: but is the free and gracious gift of GOD unto his children,
whom he loved from before al beginnings, wrought in their hearts by his
spirit, through the preaching of the Gospel. Which spirit is therefore called
the spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15.
because it bears witness unto our spirits, that we are the children of God,
and heirs of his kingdom, teaching us with boldenes and confidence to cry
Abba father: and the Gospel preached, is called the arm of the Lord, Esai.
53. 1.
and the mighty power of God unto salvation. The ground and foundation of our
faith is the word of God, Romans 1. 16.
especially that part thereof, which contains his most loving promises made
unto us in Jesus Christ. This word was given unto man from heaven, first by
the Lord himself, speaking unto the Fathers in his own person, then by the
ministry of his holy angels, after by his servants the Prophets. Hebr. 1. 1.
Last of all by his own Son, Col. 2. 3.
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid. This world
remains unto us in the records ofthe old and new Testament which books
were written by the holy men 2. Pet. 1. 21.
of GOD his Prophets and Apostles, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
inspired by the holy Ghost, and is profitable, to teach, to confute, to
reprove, to instruct in all righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, and perfectly instructed unto every good work: containing all
things necessary for us to know unto eternal life, Prou. 30. 6.
from which we may not take any thing, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
neither put any thing unto it. This word is plain and easy to be
understood of them that desire to do the will of God, John. 7. 17.
and seek after wisdom in humility, Prou. 6. 23. 8. 9.
with calling upon the name of the Lord. Ephe. 6. 18.
And that the word might be made yet more profitable unto us, it has pleased
ye Lord, unto that liberty we have of reading, hearing read, studying and
meditation of his holy scriptures, knowing the weakness of our capacity,
dulnes of understanding, hardness and vntowardenesse of our corruption, in
great wisdom and mercy to ordeine, that the same word might be applied
unto us, by the holy ministry of preaching, whereunto he sanctifies and
annointeth by the gifts of his spirit, such as he has chosen, and does send
forth into the labor of his harvest. Matt. 9. 28.
Of which S. Paul speaks, when he says, Ephesians. 4. 8.
that Christ ascending up into heaven, and leading captivity captive, gave
gifts unto men, and filled al things, that there might be in his church some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, to the
knitting together of the Saints, to the work of the ministry, and building
up of the body of Christ, until we all come unto the unity of faith, and of
the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, even unto the perfect
grouth of the stature of Christ: and that we might not be tossed and carried
with any blast of doctrine, either by the declining frailty of our own
corruption, or by the exercised subtlety of our adversary. This ministry is
called the ministry, 2. Cor. 18. 19.
and embassage of peace and reconciliation, which the Lord has put in ye
mouths of all his ministers, that being Legates and Ambassadors insteade of
Christ, as if God himself entreated us by them, it might be said unto us in
the name of Christ, be ye reconciled unto God. Math. 5. 13. 14.
These are the salt of the earth and the light of the world. For the same God,
which in the beginning, 2. Cor. 4. 6.
commanded light to shine out of darkness, is he that shines in the hearts of
his servants, that they might give forth the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. Who him self says, that as Moses
lift up the serpent in the deserte, John. 3. 14.
so must the Son of man be lift up, that all that believe in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And S. Paul says, that the Gospel
preached, Gal. 3. 1.
is a most liuelye painting out of Christ before our eyes, 1. Cor. 2. 23.
and a visible crucifying of him in our sight. And though it be counted of the
world foolishness, and esteemed as over weak a means to so great a work,
Romans 1. 16.
yet is it the mighty power of GOD unto salvation, 1. Cor. 1. 21.
and the high wisdom of the Lord, by the foolishnes whereof, 1. Cor. 1.
those shall be saved that believe. It is the Gospel of Christ, and the same
preached, wherewith it pleases the Father, to beget us again unto himself,
Iac. 1. 18.
that we might be ye first fruits of his creatures: being borne a new, 1.
Pet. 1. 23. 25.
not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God, which word
abides for ever: and the same is it, says S. Peter, which is preached. This
is that most excellent form of Doctrine, whereunto the Lord has committed
us to be taught, Romans 6. 17.
that being obedient thereunto, we might be delivered, not only from the
guiltines of sin, but also from the servitude and bondage of the same. As the
Spirit of God, first begins to work faith in our hearts by the word of the
Gospel preached, so does he continue, nourish, confirm, and increase faith
in us, by the self same means. Wherefore S. Peter exhorts us, that as new
borne babes we should long after, that sincere milk of the word, that by it
we may grow up: and coming unto Christ, which is the lively stone, 1. Pet.
2. 2. 5.
our selves also, as living stones, may be builte up a spiritual house unto
God, 1. Pet. 2. 2. 5.
and made an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable
unto God through Jesus Christ. And when we are passed the age of our infancy
in Christ, the same word preached is our sound and fast meat, wherewith the
Lord still feeds us in his family, 1. Cor. 3. 2.
until that, Heb. 5. 13. 14.
having finished the course of this life, and ended the days of our pilgrimage
and warrefare in this world, he take us home into his own kingdom.

Unto the word of the Gospel preached, Sacraments.
for the more strengthening and confirming of our faith, in the assurance of
our salvation by Christ, it has pleased God, in like wisdom and goodness
toward us, knowing our weakness, and pitying our infirmity, to add the use
of two holy Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, The Sacrament of
Baptism, Babtisme.
is an holy sign and seal, John. 1. 33.
annexed by God himself, unto the promises of the Gospel, to witness and
pledge unto us, the forgiveness and washing away of our sins in the sacrifice
of the death of Christ: Act. 2. 38.
and our justification before the Majesty of Gal. 3. 27.
God, in the perfection of his obedience: also our ingrafting into that body,
whereof Christ is the head, Ephesi. 4. 16.
from whom streameth the fountains of life and grace, into all his members.
Further that being baptized into his death, Romans 6. 3.
we shall by the power thereof die unto sin, and by the power of his rising
again, be our selves raised up in a new creature, to walk before him in true
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, Luke. 1. 75.
and that we shall be raised up in the last day out of the dust of earth, 1.
Cor. 15. 29. 23.
and meet the Lord in the air, and dwell with him for ever. In the mean
time, that as we are by one Sacrament of Baptism, Ephe. 4. 4.
coupled unto one head: so we should consent together, in unity of spirit,
preserving the same by the bond of peace, endeavoring those things which first
appertain unto the glory of God, and then not seeking every one his own in
private, 1. Cor. 10. 24.
but as members of one body, mutually the edifying and profit one of another.

The Supper of the Lord, The Supper of our Lord.
being a seal of the same promises, John 6. 51.
further witnesses and seals unto our consciences, that Christ is that
bread of life, John. 6. 51.
which came down from Heaven, and fountain of salvation, of which, who so
tastes shall live for ever. And that as truly as our bodies by natural
means, are made partakers of the creatures of bread and wine, unto the
nourishment of this present life: so our souls, by the hand and mouth of
faith, through the power of the spirit of God, are made partakers of the body
and blood of Christ, that, he dwelling in our hearts by faith, Ephesi. 2.
we might become bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, unto the assured
hope of everlasting salvation. Ephesi. 5. 30.


Also in this Sacrament, is not only confirmed unto us, the mystical union
between Christ and his Church, but also taught us, 1. Cor. 10. 17.
what unity and love ought to be amongst us, which being all partakers of one
bread, and one wine, are first coupled unto one head Jesus Christ, as members
of his body, and then mutually made members one of another.

Unto the worthy receiving of this holy Sacrament, it is required that we
should examine our selves, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
first how we have profited under the word in the knowledge of the mysteries
of our redemption. Secondly, what comfort we have received, by applying the
same unto our own consciences. Thirdly, what grief we have conceived in
heart, for our sins past, and what hatred and detestation of all that is
contrary unto the will of God: what purpose we have, the rest of our life to
cease from sin, and to follow after righteousness, 2. Th^s. 3. 1.
that the Gospel may be glorified in us which do profess it. Last of all,
whether as we assure our selves of peace with God in Jesus christ, Romans 5. 1.
so we be at peace with our brethren, Matthew. 5. 23.
reconciling our selves unto those whom we have offended: and forgiving unto
others the offenses, they have committed against us, Ephe. 4. 32.
even as freely as we would the Lord should forgive us.

The fifth proposition, of the effects of faith.
Let him depart from iniquity, whosoever names the name of Christ. 2. Tim. 2.
19. Who so is in Christ Jesus, is a new creature. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
ALbeit the whole work of our salvation stand sound and perfect unto us in all
respects, without our selves in Jesus Christ, so that we may boldly say with
Saint Paul, being then justified by faith, we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1.
and do glory in hope of the glory of God: Yet is not Christ the minister of
sin, Gal. 1. 17.
nor the Gospel a doctrine, Romans 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
that gives liberty unto evil: but contrariwise the death of Christ, is of
power in those that believe in him, to cause them to die unto sin, and to be
mortified in the old Adam of this flesh, with the lusts and concupiscences
of the same. And the Gospel teaches us, that the true members of Christ, Romans
8. 1.
must and do walk, not after the flesh, but after the spirit, 1. Cor. 6. 20.
offering up themselves, Romans 12.
their souls and bodies, and all that they have, an holy and acceptable
sacrifice of spiritual worship unto God: inquiring to know, and laboring to
perform, that good perfect and acceptable will of God, revealed in his word.
Also the same spirit, which is called the spirit of adoption, because it
teaches us to cry, Abba father, and bears witness unto our spirits, that
we are the children of God, and heirs of his kingdom, being the seal, Ephe.
1. 13.
wherewith he has sealed us, and the gage, whereby he has pledged unto us
all his promises of mercy in Christ, is also the spirit of mortification,
whereby is mortified in us the works of the flesh, our old Adam being
crucified with Christ in his Cross: Romans 6. 6.
and the spirit of sanctification, and of our new birth, quickening in us a
new creature, and fashioning us again after image of God, Luke. 1. 70.
to walk before him in righteousness and true holiness all the days of our
life. Also this doctrine is both taught and sealed unto us, yea the truth and
effect thereof exhibited and performed, in the use of the holy Sacraments,
Romans 6.
which both of them teach us to die unto sin, and live unto righteousness,
and assure us, that as the Gospel was preached unto the fathers, with this
effect, that they might be condemned according unto me^, that is, in the flesh,
1. Pet. 4. 6.
but live according unto God, that is, in the spirit: so the same shall be
accomplished, in all the true members of Christ, Romans 6. 3.
the one by ye power of his death, the other by the power of his resurrection:
which thing ought not a little to comfort and encourage us, in that great and
dangerous conflict, with the flesh, the world, and the devil: when we know
that our victory stands not in our own strength, which is none, but in the
invincible power of him, which came to destroy the works of Satan, and in whose
cross our old man is so mortified, Romans 6. 6.
as the body of sin is weakened in us, which do believe. Unto whom also he
has given that spirit to dwell in us, whereby he has promised to quicken our
mortal bodies, Romans 8. 11.
which now in part are subdued under sin.

The sixth proposition, of the rule of righteousness.
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119.
105. The commandment is a lantern, and the law a light* and reprehensions
for instruction are the way of life. Prou. 6. 23.
THe rule of holiness and obedience, is not our own will, nor lusts and
affections of our corrupt and cursed nature, which evermore rebelleth against
God: Romans 7. 7.
nor the examples and manners of men, or customs and fashions of the world:
but only that most good, perfect and accepable will of God, Romans 12. 3.
commended and commanded unto us in his law: which must in all things be the
light unto our feet, Psalm. 119. 105.
and the lantern unto our paths, Heb. 12.
to direct us to walk with him, and before his majesty, so as we may please
him with reverence and carfulness: which is the second use of the law of
God.

This law of GOD requires at our hands, that we honor, love, fear, and
obey him in all things, and above all, that we trust in him, The first
commandment.
flee unto him in all our needs, calling upon him only, and acknowledging him
to be the creator and governor of all things. That we woorshippe him, The
second commandment.
not with our own inventions, or blind devotions, nor with the doctrines of
men, or after the example of others: but only with that worship, which he
himself has prescribed unto us in his word, 1. These. 4. 4.
without adding thereunto or taking from it.

That we have, The third commandment.
and use in most high reverence his holy name, word and works, and
whatsoever else he is known unto us by, that we know him to be the searcher of
all hearts, the rewarder of all sincerity and truth, and the revenger of all
hypocrisy, blasphemy, false and vain swearing, with all other prophaninges
and abusinges of his most blessed name and religion.

That we sanctify the Lords Sabbath, The fourth commandment.
not doing therein our own will, nor walking our own ways, Esai. 58. 13.
nor speaking our own words, but ceasing from the honest labors of our lawful
callings (much more from vain and hurtful pastimes, Stage plays, Dicing,
carding, etc.) that with all liberty, and quietness, both of mind and body,
we may with our families attend upon those public exercises of religion,
which the Lord has in wisdom and mercy, appointed for his own worship,
and for our edifying: Assembling our selves together, to hear his holy word,
learn and lay up the same in our hearts, for the ordering of our lives,
celebrate his holy sacraments, and with one heart and one voice, call upon his
name, rendering unto his majesty, most humble and hearty thanks, for all
mercies hitherto bestowed upon us, and craving new benefits and blessings at
his hands necessary for us and his whole Church, 1. Tim. 4. 8
both for this present life, and also for the life to come.

The second table of the law requires, that we should love our neighbors
as our selves. The fifth commandment contains those duties, The fifth
commandment.
which apperteine unto our several callings, commanding children, that they
honor, love, Children.
obey, and relieve their parents, remembering that the Lord has made them
instruments of great mercies unto their children. Parents, Parents.
that beside natural duties of nourishment, and providing for them in earthly
things, they bring them up, not in idleness, wantonness, and vanity, but in the
fear and nurture of the Lord, Ephe. 6. 4.
teaching them his ways in their youth, Prou. 22. 6.
that they may not forsake them in their age, and training the^ in such honest
exercises of labor, or study, as whereby they may be prepared, to serve the
Lord in his Church, or in the common weal, for his glory, and the profit of
his people: Chastising them with the rod of correction, Prou. 22. 15.
that both foolishnes may be chased out of their hearts, Pro. 23. 13. 14.
and their souls preserved from death: Also in wisdom when necessity shall
require, provide for them the remedy of their incontinencie, commanded of the
Lord, which is Marriage. 1. Cor. 7. 36.


Servants, Servants.
that they be humbly subject unto their bodily masters in all things, Ephe. 6.
5.
in the Lord, Col. 3. 22.
serving them with all quietness diligence and faithfulness, Ios. 24. 15.
as in the sight of God. Masters, Masters.
yt they with their families serve the Lord, teaching and instructing them in
all the will of God, and knowledge of their salvation. ^en. 18. 19.
Ministering unto them all necessary and just things, for their honest
maintenance, correcting in them, Col. 4. 1.
as well the offenses committed against God, as those committed against
themselves.

Wives, Wives.
that they bear themselves reverently, and obediently, toward their
husbands, in all things, adorning themselves, not outwardly in the body, with
gold and precious attire, but in the inward man of the mind, with humility,
1. Pet. 3. 4.
modesty, quietness of spirit, sobernes, chastity, etc. Husbands, that they
love their wives, as their own bodies, Husbands.
dwelling with them according unto knowledge: giving honor unto the woman,
Ephe. 5. 28.
as unto the weaker vessel, 1. Pet. 3. 7.
seeing they are heirs together of the grace of life, that their prayers be
not hindered. Subjects, that they yield all honor, Subjects.
obedience and tribute, unto their magistrates, not only for fear, but also
for conscience, as unto the ministers of God, Romans 13. 4.
whom he has set over them, for their great and singular benefit.
Magistrates, Magistrates.
that their songues be continually of mercy and judgment, Psalm. 101. 1.
ruling the Lords people committed unto their charge in all peace, godliness
and honesty, punishing the wicked and rewarding the weldoer, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
defending the innocent, stranger, fatherless, widow, and him that has none
to help him, Job. 29. 12.
breaking the iawe of the unrighteous man, Leuit. 17. 19. 15.
and taking the pray out of his mouth: fiinally, not respecting any man's
person, without all corruption to administer justice, 2. Cron. 19. 6.
remembering that judgment is the Lords. The people, People.
that they be obedient unto their Pastoures and Teachers, Heb. 13. 17.
submitting themselves first unto the Lord, and then also unto them, which
watch for their souls, Ezech. 3. 18.
and shall render an account for their blood: that they may labor the work
of the Lords Uineyarde, with joy, and not with mourning, Gal. 6 6.
for that is unprofitable: communicating also with them, all good things,
sowing by this means unto the spirit, that thence they may reap eternal
life. Gal. 6. 8.
Ministers, Ministers.
that they be faithful disposers of the mysteries of God, 1. Cor. 4. 1.
even the treasures of his kingdom committed unto their trust; careful, and
painful in the labor of the Lords harvest, setting always before their
eyes, that terrible day of Gods judgment: and thereby, as also by the love of
Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 11. 14.
to be constrained, to bring men unto the faith: not seeking them selves and
their own, but Jesus Christ, and then those that be his, that they may be
saved: feeding the Church of Christ, not with the doctrines of men, but with the
pure and sincere milk of the Gospel of God. Not in ostentation of any gift, 1.
Pet. 2.
nor desiring to please men, 1. Cor.
but to approve them selves unto every conscience, 2. Cor.
in the sight of God, with all singlenes of heart, and simplicity of speech,
1. Cor.
delivering the word of life, joining spiritual things with spiritual
things, as becomes. Finally, all estates and conditions of men, that
learning their several duties out of the word of God, they reverently
humble themselves unto the obedience of the same.

The sixth commandment forbids The sixth commandment.
all murder and shedding of innocent blood, all fighting, quarreling, and
provoking one an other, all hatred, malice, envy, and desire of revenge: Also,
Romans 12. 19.
it commands all the duties of compassion, in saving, defending, and
releeuing the person, life, and health of our neighbor.

The seventh, forbids all uncleanness, both of body and mind, The seventh
commandment.
in deed, word, gesture, or behavior whatsoever: that we assault not the
chastity of any, nor be accessarie unto their filthiness: 1. These. 4. 4.
It commands us to keep our vessels in honor, 1. Cor. 6. 15. 19.
as the members of Christ, and temples of the holy Ghost, that we may sa^ctifie
the Lord, 1. Cor. 6. 15. 19
both in our souls and in our bodies, which are the Lords: and for the
relief of our incontinencie, to marie, only in the Lord.

The eight, forbids al robbing and stealing, The eight commandments.
al oppression and hard dealing, al injury and wrong, Ephesians. 4.
howsoever it be colloured with Law: all withdrawing and withholding of that
appertains to another: all fraud, deceit, and cosinage in word, weight,
measure, ware, all covetousness and greedines of earthly things, commands us
to acknowledge and reverence the wisdom and goodness of God, in dispensing and
bestowing these outward things: to be content the Lord distribute his
blessing as likes him self, to walk faithfully and diligently in our
callings, Ephe. 4. 28.
laboring with our hands the thing that is good, to be instructed how to want
and how to abound, Phil. 4. 11. 12.
and in all things to be content with our present estate, waiting with patience
upon the good providence of God, in all our necessities. And according unto the
measure we have received, to bear our selves faithful stewardes and
distributers of the several graces of God, 1. Pet. 4. 10.
for his glory, and the benefit of our brethren. The nienth forbids all
false witness bearing in judgment or otherwise, all sclaundering, The nienth
commandment.
backebyting talecarying, discrediting, and dishonoring of others, all lying,
scoffing, jesting, vain, and unsavory speeches, flattering, dissembling and
feining, all uncovering the secreates of our brethren. All bosting, vaunting of
our selves or others. It commands us, to maintain honor and credit of all,
and those especially, to whom the Lord has committed any part of
government, either in his church or in the common wealth: In all our speeches to
be just, simple, modest, and loving. etc.

The tenth forbids the very motions of sin, The tenth commandment.
even the lusts and concupiscences of our cursed nature, that they never rise
up against the Lord, but that we subdue them in their first assault, least if
we receive the temptation with delight, we be further seduced, by the subtlety
of sin, both to consent unto the evil, and to attempt and accomplish the
same.

The seventh proposition
Romans 7. 14. The Law is spiritual, but we are carnal, even sold to be
subject unto sin. Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit, against the flesh. etc.
TRue it is, that we are not able of our selves, Rom 6. 14.
so much as to think any good thought, Jacob. 4. 5
much less to perform any part of that righteousness, which the Law
requires. But this is our comfort, that we are not now under the Law, but
under grace, and although the Scripture says not in vain, that the Spirit,
which is in us, lusts after envy, yet it offers greater grace, because it
says: God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble. This grace
woorketh first, that we know the will of God, and discern that which is
contrary thereunto. Secondly, that we have a will desirous and studious of Gods
glory and profit of our brethren in the accomplishing of his commandments:
Romans 2. 18.
Thirdly also some power through the spirit, Romans 7. 18.
to hate and forsake that, Tit. 3. 8. 14.
which is evil, and to love and follow that, which is good, that our faith may
become fruitful, our love laborious, and our hope pacient, 1. These. 1. 3.
through that communion, which we have with Christ, in the power of his death,
Romans 7. 4.
and of his rising again. For if we be truly come unto Christ, and coupled
with him, the old husband of our corruption by whom we brought forth fruit
unto death, is crucified with Christ in his cross, that we might be espoused
unto an other, even the new man, which is raised up from the dead, to bring
forth fruit unto God. Neither have we now only a commandment unto
righteousness and holiness of life: but there is given us a new spirit, by
which we are regenerated and renewed in the spirit of our minds, to offer up
our selves in soul and body, an holy, acceptable, and lively sacrifice unto
God. And whereas the flesh evermore rebelleth against the spirit, Romans 12. 1^
even in the children of God, we have received promises of aid and assistance
in this conflict, yea of victory and triumph over all our enemies. And that we
might with boldenes come unto our God for aid and defense, we have entrance
by Christ, even unto his mercy seat, and have received that spirit, Romans 8.
26.
which in this part helps our infirmity, and stirs up in us those
groninges, which no tongue is able to express, teaching us to cry Abba
father, and to call upon him in all our necessities, and to ask all good
things at his hands, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
who has made us promises, both of this life, and of the life to come: knowing
this, that he, that has not spared to give unto us his only begotten Son,
Romans 8. 32.
will also with him give us all things, which in his wisdom he sees to be
needful for us. Our help therefore is in the name of the Lord, Which is as
an invincible tower, Prou. 18. 10.
whereunto the righteous flees, and is delivered. Also we know, who it is,
that has said: ask, and ye shall receive: seek, and ye shall find: Matthew.
7. 7.
knock and it shall be opened unto you: even he, which sits at the right
hand of his father, and makes intercession for us. When we pray, Romans 8. 34.
we must pray only unto God, only in the name of Jesus Christ, only for
good things, only to a good end, with our hearts, and not only with
lips: disposing our selves reverently and religiously, as in the presence of
Gods majesty: touched with the want of that we ask: and grieved with the
burden and fear of that we pray against: being assured that the Lord hears
our prayers and will in his own good appointed time grant our requests, as in
his wisdom he knows to be expedient for his own glory and for our
salvation.

There are many notable examples of this manner of praying, in the holy
scriptures, especially in the book of the Psalms, framed according to the
diverse estates and affections of the Servants of GOD. Let us therefore after
their example, examining our selves before the Lord, in mind, body, and
outward conditions of this life, according to our present feeling and sense
thereof, make our humble and unfeigned supplications in his presence, for our
selves, and for all men, Gal. 6. 10.
especially them that are of the household of faith, concluding and sealing up
all our prayers with that form of peticion, which our savior Christ him self
has taught. Our father which art in Mat. 6. 9.
Heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come: thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive the^, that trespass against us: and lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The eight proposition.
What other helps there are unto godliness and weldoing commended unto us in
the word.
THe Lord our GOD knowing the frailty of our corrupt and cursed nature, the
deceitfulness of sin, the power, rage and subtilties of Satan, has in
wisdom and mercy for their further help appointed in his word two kinds
of discipline unto his servants. The one private, the other public, unto the
first appertains all the exercises of repentance, and godliness commended unto
us either in precept or example of the holy scriptures. As our daily consulting
with the word and laws of God, which to be unto us, as they were unto David
the men of our counsel the continual examining of our ways, Psalm. 119. 56.
60.
and turning our feet unto the Lords testimonies, our careful and diligent
hasting, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
and not delaying to keep his commandments The grieuing of our selves with
our sins past, Heb. 12. 1.
the fear of sin present, which is ready to intrapp us, the wise and
circumspect preventing of sin to come, the subduing of the flesh, and bring
it in subjection, after the manner of the Apostle with revenge 1. Cor. 9. 27.
taken upon our corruption for the mortifying of the same, by wtdrawing the
baits, prouocations, and occasions of evil, sobriety and the pure and chaste
use of all the good blessings of God: abstenence, even from lawful pleasures
and profits, when they are either offensive unto others, or hurtful unto our
selves, as otherwise, so by bringing us under the bondage and seruitud of
earthly things, which all of them are ordained unto corruption. 1. Cor. 6. 12.
Fasting, which the Scripture calls the afflicting of the soul, Psalm. 39. 2.
joined with continual and earnest prayer unto God. Job. 31. 1.
Making covenant with our mouths, that they shall not speak evil, and with our
eyes, that they shall not behold vanity, imitating the virtues and godliness
of the faithful, using holy company and conference with them. Hating
detesting and abhorring the ways of the wicked, shunning and eschewing all
consulting and conversation with them. Not ceasing our conflict against sin,
Heb. 12. 4.
even until blood, but casting of the old man, Romans 8. 13.
and mortifying the works of the flesh by the spirit, Ephe. 5. 8. and 11. 9.
to put on the new man with the works and armor of light, to serve the Lord
according to his word.

They which through want of knowledge, or weakness of the mind, are not
sufficient unto the well governing and brideiing of them selves, must as the
Lord has commanded be instructed, and strengthened by others: that either by
merciful admonition and exhortation, they may be recovered from sin: or
else may be saved by terrors and threats of the judgments of God, being
thereby as it were by violence, taken out of the fire of destruction. Unto this
appertains that notable exhortation of the Apostle: Iud. 22.
Let us observe and mark one another (not unto envy or occasion of sin) but to
stir up our selves mutually, Heb. 10. 24.
and even to whet one an other, unto the duties of charity, and to all good
works.

The other kind of discipline is public, consisting of three parts. First of
the preaching of the law, which is as a two edged sword in the hand of Gods
ministers, to offer up his people an holy and blameles sacrifice unto his
majesty, not only opening our eyes, that we may see and know, Psalm. 90.
what is that good perfect and acceptable will of the Lord, but also through
the working of the holy Ghost converting our souls and fashioning them after
the image and similitude of him that made the^. Secondly, admonitions,
exhortations and counsels ministered by such persons, as the Lord has appointed
for the oversight of their brethren. Thirdly, of conuenting of the offenders
before the Church in open congregation to be iudicially admonished, or
according unto the quality and degree of their offense, forbidden the Supper
of the Lord, or cut of from the Church, until by remorse of sin with smart
and shame of punishment laid upon them for the same, they shall with certain
testimonies of true and unfeigned repentance, humbly desire to be restored unto
their former estate, amongst the people of God.

The weakness of conscience must often times be helped by civil punishment
publicly or privately, to be executed by magistrates, parents, masters, and
others, whom the Lord God has authorized and armed with the swoorde of
justice, and rod of correction, not for the profit only of such as
offend, but also for the example and terror of others, that at least by awe
of punishment, they may fear to do evil. For as indulgence and impunitie
nourishes and increases wickedness (as Solomon says) and wicked men: Eccle.
8. 11.
so godly severity of punishment chaseth away sin, and lessoneth the number of
offenders. In punishing it must be remembered, that it be not dumme and silent,
but joined with doctrine, admonition, and exhortation, that the force thereof
may work the more in the heart of the offenders. It may not be the revenge of
our private grief, but of the dishonor of the name of God, and of the breach
of his holy commandments. It must be joined with calling upon the name of
the Lord, that as it is his good ordinance, so it may be both given and
received according to his will, and blessed by his spirit, to the reforming of
those, that have done amiss, and forwarnings of others. Ios. 7. 19.
Finally all means are to be used, that the conscience of the offender may be
touched with the horror of his sin and fear of Gods justice: that we may
clear our selves of all corruption, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
by directing the punishment not against the person, but against the sin:
being grieved, that we are compelled to fly to that extreme remedy, Iosu. 7.
25.
and yet to do it, with a godly courage and zeal, as carried with most just
hatred and indignation against sin,

Unto the abating of the rage of our corrupt and degenerate nature, 2. Cor. 4.
16.
the Lord yields us no small help by afflictions and adversities, which
therefore are called chastisementes and corrections, because we are thereby
reformed: as the Prophet says: before I was corrected, I went astray, but now
I have kept thy commandments. In so much as he professes, that it was good
for him, that he had been afflicted, and acknowledges, that of very truth
the Lord had chastened him: meaning thereby, that as the Lord has couenaunted
with his people all good things, so is it also a part of his covenant, Heb.
12. 6.
to punish and correct his children, as he knows to be expedient for them: 1.
Cor. 11. 31.
the reason whereof is rendered by the Apostle, For if we judged our selves, we
should not be punished: but when we are punished, we are nurtured of the Lord,
that we might not be condemned with the world.

The end of all is, that the works of Satan in the corruption of our nature,
with the fruits of the same, might utterly be abolished, and* that the image
of God, not blemished only, but even cancelled and defaced by the fall of
Adam, might be renewed and repaired in us. The first happens unto us in the
dissolution of this earthly tabernacle, from which time we sin no more, as
appears by that vehement and lamentable exclamation of Saint Paul: Miserable
man that I am, Romans 7. 24.
would God I were delivered from this body of death. The second, though begone
and increased in this life, shall not be fully accomplished, until our Savior
Christ return from heaven, Th^^ 1. 10.
be made glorious in his Saints. For albeit we are now the children of God, 1.
John. 3. 2.
it has not yet appeared, what we shall be, but our life is hid with Christ
in God, and we know, that when Christ, which is our life, shall be made
manifest, we also shall be made manifest with him in glory. Colos. 3. 3. 4.
Then shall we be clothed with that glorious tabernacle, not made with hands,
eternal in heaven: then shall mortality be devoured of immortality: 2. Cor.
5. 1. 4.
then shall Christ, who already is crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2. 9.
return our redemer from heaven, and change our vile bodies, Phil. 3. 20. 21.
that they may be made like unto his glorious body, according unto that
power, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto him self. Then shall it
be accomplished, which is written, 1. Cor. 15. 54.
death is swallowed up in victory, O death, where is thy sting? O grave where
is thy victory? For the strength of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law. But thanks be unto God, who has given us victory by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Therefore let us be strong and immovable in the truth,
abounding always in the work of the Lord, seeing we know, that our labor is
not in vain in the Lord: But the day of our redemption shall once appear,
wherein the trumpets shall blow, and the dead shall rise, those that are found
alive shall be changed, 1. These. 4. 16.
and we all which believe, shall meet the Lord in the air, and so reign
with him in glory for ever, which time should long since have come upon the
world, 2. Pet 3. 9.
saving that the Lord is pacient to vswarde, and will not that any of us
should perish, and not of us only, which now live, but of those also, which
shall be raised up in posterity after us, whom he has likewise appointed unto
salvation, Heb. 11. 40.
and will in his good time call by the ministry of his Gospel, least we
without them should be consecrated in that glory, whereunto he has redeemed
us. The Lord therefore in mercy hasten the fulfiling of the number of his
elect, that the days of sin may cease, and that our savior Christ, as he
appeared in the fulness of time with a sacrifice for sin, so may now again,
Heb. 9. 28.
when al things shall be accomplished, appear without sacrifice unto the
salvation of al those, that wait for his return to judge the quick and the
dead. 1. Cor. 15. 24. 18.
That rendering up the kingdom unto his father God may be all in all. And that
we in ye mean time walking as Pilgrims and strangers in this world holding
forth the light of the holy word of God and bearing our selves as heavenly
Citizens, Phil. 3. 20.
may have a safe and joyful passage ever lifting up our heads with the rest
of his creatures, Romans 8.
and with joy and gladness look for the glorious return of that great God our
Savior Christ, Tit. 2.
unto our full and perfect redemption. And in all temptations and trialles
whatsoever, may find the present hand of the Lord, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
ready for our deliverance, to preserve us by his power unto that inheritance,
which cannot perish, nor be defiled, nor fade away reserved for us in heaven,
Acts 3. 21
which also waits as ready to be revealed upon us in the last time, when all
things shall be restored.

To the Reader.
If happily this little treatise shall seem needless, amongst so many of like
argument: yt may please thee (gentle reader) to understand, that the purpose of
the author in publishing hereof, was especially to help the memory,
meditation, and practice of those, to whom the doctrine herein contained,
has been by the ministry of preaching, in the same order more at large
declared.


