CELESTIAL ELEGIES of the Goddesses and the Muses, dedeploring the death of
the right honorable and virtuous Lady the Lady FRAVNCES Countess of
Hertford, late wife unto the r^ght honorable EDWARD SEYMOR Vicount Beauchamp
and Earl of Hertford.

WHEREUNTO ARE ANNEXED some funeral verses touching the death of MATTHEW
EVVENS Esquire, late one of the Barons of her Majesty's Court of Eschequer,
unto whom the author hereof was allied.

Propertius Eleg. 5. Lib. 3. Haud vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad vndas
Nudus ad infernas stulte vehere rates.
Hor. Lib. 1. Ep. ad Quint Mors vltima linea rerum est. By Thomas Rogers
Esqui^e.



Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke, for I. B. and are to be sold at her
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bible. 1598.

To the Right Honorable his singular good Lord* the Lord Edward Seymor vicount
Beauchampe Earl of Hertford.
BEhold (Right Honorable) in this Theater of mortality a Tragedy, with a
solemn funeral, at which the Goddesses are chief mourners, and the Muses
attendants, wherein death plays the Tyrannical King or the kingly Tyrant,
your de are Lady and wife the subject of his fury, which in a dumb show is
here presented by me: whereof I desire your Lordshippe to be a spectator and a
Judge: If I have wittily plaide the fools part in contriuing the matter (I
think I have played the wisest part:) And then I hope I shall have your
Lordships applause. And that is all I expect.

Your Lordships ever at command. T. R.

Celestial Eligies for the late death of the right Honorable* the Lady
Fraunces. Countess of Hertforde.
QVATORZAIN. 1 Berecynthia.
Drawn in my Royal chariot, crowned with To was,
Through all the kingdoms of the centred earth
With a great Train of the celestial Powers
That from my womb took their immortal birth,
Descend I as chief mourner from the sky,
To solemnize this Countess funeral,
And crown her fame with immortality,
Although her body now to death be thrall:
My daughter Cynthia whilome loved her dear,
Noble she was by virtue, birth, and match,
Matched with a Pear, yet matchles without Pear,
For Peareles she, did others over match,
Wherefore the Fates grown envious of her praise
For virtues sake, ab idg'd her earthly days.
QVATORZAIN. 2. Juno.
I that am both Jove's sister and his wife,
The Queen of heaven, whom Gods and men adore
Hearing the fame of this brave Ladies life,
In mournful habit now her death deplore:
She has putt of all earthly ornaments
And clothed her soul in glories spotless robe,
She has exchanged these mixed Elements,
For that pure Quintessence, the heavenly globe,
Lo how her spright infranchised from thrall,
Of sinful flesh, ascends the Crystal sky,
Scorning to dwell long in this earthly vale,
Where all men rise to fall, and live to die:
Therefore she soard above a humane pitch,
And with her virtues does my Realm enrich.
QVATORZAIN. 3. Pallas.
THe pomp of this vain world she did despise,
Weighing the slipperie state of earthly things,
Therefore above the Spheres of heaven she flies,
To sing and joy before the King of Kings:
Her virtues that did militate on earth,
Against the flesh, the devil, sin and hell,
Now triumph in the heavens, and conquer death*
And in Jove's holy monarchy do dwell.
I rue the loss of true Nobility
Whilome invested in her noble breast,
Wisdom with honor linked in amity,
Were both in her, and she in death suppressed:
How can I choose but wail for her decease,
Since by her death my kingdom does decrease.
QVATORZAIN. 4* Diana.
AY me; my vestall flame is now extinct,
My flower of Chastity does fade away
In Lethes floods true noblenes does sink,
My Empire runs to ruinous decay;
Pity, Almsdeeds and charity is fled,
Fidelity beyond the seas is gone,
True friendship now and faithful love is dead,
And Priapus usurps Cupids throne:
She that did seek my kingdom to maintain,
By sanctity, religion, faith, and zeal,
Through envy of the Destenies is slain,
Death robs th'Eschequer of my common weal,
For all those rites which I was wont to have*
Are fled to heaven or buried in her grave.
QVATORZAIN. 5. Venus.
IF that I am a star, I Will loose my light,
And fall from Heaven, upon the earth to morn,
Because her life's fair day is turnde to night,
My joy to grief, my love to hare shall turn.
If that I am a Goddess* as men say,
Whom lovers term Celestial and d^^^ine,
With human tears I Will wash my joys away,
And on the earth no more by daytime shine:
If I be beauties Sovereign, and loves Queen,
I Will put a mask of clouds before my face,
Hating to love, loving to live unseen,
I will obscure myself in some dark place:
And if I be a Planet, while I reign,
I Will frown on the earth where my delight is slain.
QVATORZAIN. 6. Thetis.
FRom th'vnknowne kingdom of the Antipodes,
And from the farth est bonds of The Ocean maine,
Attended with troops of Nereides,
And charming Sirens, that supporte my train:
Moved with the gentle murmr of the streams,
That seeme^ (...) humane miseries to weep,
I that do kiss the Suns transplendent beams,
When he in Neptunes bosom falls a sleep;
Come to this famous land in waves of woe,
Like to a Queen in mourning weeds araide,
Crowned with cares, because man's mortal foe,
The Tyrant death, his tragic part has plaide;
Sea more lamentes than all the world beside,
His true loves loss that late in England did.
QVATORZAIN. 7 Ceres.
MY wealth decaies for want of Summers heat,
Summers heat fades, because the Sun is fled,
The Sun is fled, because his grief is great,
His grief is great, because his joy is dead,
His joy is dead, since his dear lady did,
And since his lady did he ever mournde,
He ever mournde, for loss of Natures pride,
For Natures pride, is now to ashes turnde,
To ashes turnde, that was a Phoenix rare,
A Phoenix rare, of whom no other bred,
No other bred, that breeds the more my care,
The more my care, since all in her is dead:
O Heavens, why do you bring this land such dearth,
As for to take a Phoenix from the earth.
QVATORZAIN. 8. Fortuna.
I that do turn the rolling wheel of chance,
The blind light Goddess of inconstancy,
That sometime did the Roman Peers advance,
To sway the worlds imperial Monarchy:
I that do kings enthrone, annoint, and crown,
And often depose them from the Royal seat,
I that on mighty Baiazeth did frown,
And made the baseborne Tamb^^laine so great:
Lament that death has got the victory,
While I am feign to fly away for fear,
For where death raines, there ends my soueraintie,
He casts down Trophies which I did vpreare,
This Lady whom I raisde to high degree,
Did not by chance but fatal destenie*
QVATORZAIN. 9. Nemesis.
REdhote with rage whose heart with grief does bleed,
I come from Jove fell Atropos to chide,
That cut too soon this Countess vital threede,
Where with her soul and body were fast tide:
While wicked men long live in Joy and pleasure,
She lived long time in sickness and in pain,
Who still accounted virtue her chief treasure,
And loss of worldly wealth heavens richest gain:
Wherefore she fled to heaven, from whence I came,
And with revenge to scourge men's insolence,
And those same ruthlesse destenies to tame,
That by this Ladies death Jove's wrath incence,
Who let the wicked long time live in pride,
While she that best deserved, soonest did.
QVATORZAIN* 10. Bellona.
THough I am fearful Goddess of dread war,
That hate to live Idly at home in peace,
With humane cries allured I come from far,
In streams of blood to rue this dames decease,
This Lady was a Howard and did spring,
Out of the ancient Duke of Norfolkes race,
Whose offspring did subdue the Scots stout king,
And from the field rebellious foes did chase,
Her brother still restes loyal to the Crown,
And Scepter which fair Cynthia now does wield,
By Seas he has obtained his high renown,
The other by his conquest in the field,
Wherefore I vow by land and Sea to raise,
Eternal triumphs to the Howards praise.
QVATORZAIN. 11 Flora.
CRowned with wreathes of Odoriferous flowrs,
Whose sent perfumes the Empire of the Air,
Among the rest of the immortal powers,
Unto the land of Albion I repair.
Where I with garlands will her Toombe adorn,
And make death proud with ceremonious rites,
That for this Ladies sake I do not scorn,
To deck her Grave, with the earths fair flowers delights;
For since the world was sweetened by her breath,
That breathed rare virtues forth, as then alive,
I Will beautify her Sepulcher, since death
Of her sweet soul her body did deprive,
For this brave dame was a sweet springing flower,
Bedewde with heavenly grace till her last hour.
QVATORZAIN* 12. Proserpina.
FRom the black kingdom of infernal Dis,
All circumscribed with Characters of woe,
And from the dungen of the dark abyss,
Wherein the Ocean Seas of troubles flow,
Idoe ascend upon this worldly stage,
In this sad Tragedy to act a part,
Since she that was a light to that last age,
Is now confounded by deaths fatal darte;
The cruel destinies were much to blame,
To cut her three de of life ere thoroughly spunne,
Her life burnd out like to a Tapers flame,
And thus the howrglasse of my joys is run:
Wherefore the Farall sisters shall repent
Her bodies death, and fair souls banishment.
QVATORZAIN. 13. Aurora.
I now shall blush to kiss the Sunns fair face,
Or bid bon Iour unto this hemyspheare,
I rather will lament in doleful case,
The loss of her whom I did love so dear,
I am the Muses ever constant friend,
And since she was their Matrone while she lived*
I will bewail for her untimely end,
By whom the sacred Sisters were releu'd:
I muse what Muse there is that will not weep
When I shall tell this lamentable story,
That she is dead and now in dust does sleep,
Although her soul is crowned with lasting glory:
I think the world will be dissolved to tears,
When this said tale shall penetrate men's ears.
QVATORZAIN* 14. Nox.
Attyrde in black spangled with flames of fire,
Imbroidered with stars in silent night,
While Phoebus does the lower world inspire,
with his bright beams and comfort breathing spright,
I come in clouds of grief with pensive soul,
Sending forth vapors of black discontent,
To fill the concaue Circle of the Pole,
And with my tears bedeawe each continent:
Because that she that made my night seem day,
By her pure virtues ever shining lamps,
Now makes my night more black by her decay,
Wandering with Ghosts in the Elisian Camps:
Wherefore I still will were a mourning veil.
For she is dead and humane flesh is frail.
QVATORZAIN. 15. Gratiae.
ADewe fair Venus Lady of delight,
Welcome pale horror grief and discontent,
Come let us wander to the veil of night,
And for this Ladies death fighe and lament,
Our hopes late dead engender living fears,
Our griefs awake do bring our joys asleep,
Now we from Thetis streams will borow tears,
And teach the rocks by Netleys shores to weep,
Our fair complexion is with sorrow changed,
We have bin fellow Mates with beauties Queen*
But from our selves we now are so estranged,
We are but shadows of what we have been,
And thus in vain we daily do deplore,
For loss of life which we cannot restore.
QVATORZAIN* 17. Horaae.
WE that are calde Times golden winged Hours:
And are the Porters of Heavens Crystal gate*
Come from the Palace of Celestial powers,
This Countess death with pomp to celebrate;
By shutting up Heavens gate we send down rain,
Darking the triple region of the Air,
And when we list opening the door again,
Dry the moist clouds and make the weather fair,
Weep now O clouds upon the grassie earth,
With often drops fret through the hardest stones,
While we in sorrow for this Ladies death,
Fly back again to the Celestial thrones:
And locking fast the great Port of the Sky,
Send down more showers for her mortality.
QVATORZAIN* 18. Pandora.
I bring a box wherein all woes are closde,
Mingled with tears distild from sacred eyes,
And not so much as hope for me reposde
Is left behind but quite away it flies.
The graces where with all the Gods indue me,
Are gone from me and to Jove's throne resort,
The blessings which until this day pursude me,
Forsake me now and I stand all amort.
Like Niobe that ever till death still mourn'de,
For her dear childrens loss whom Phoebus slew,
And to a senseless stone at last was turnde,
That in her life did most extremely rue:
And thus transformde I will become a Toombe.
T'enclose her virtues in my dying woombe.
QVATORZAIN. 18. Pales Dea pastorum.
IF kingdoms wail shall not the Cottage weep?
If the Court grieve shall not the Country groan?
If they do morn that do strong Lions keep?
Shall not I, that keep tender sheep, bemone?
If fair Elisa monarch of this I Will,
This Ladies loss does graciously lament,
It ill becomes a country swayne to smyle,
Or me that am the Shepherds presidente:
O thou rare Queen that make the femal gender,
By much, more worthy then the Masculine,
To thee all praise and glory I surrender,
Whom I esteem as sacred and divine;
Had not thy life given shepherds sweet relief,
I should have well nigh perished with grief.
QVATORZAIN* 19. Feronia.
EVen in this sad and melancholy mood,
With Siluan Nymphs which on me daily tend
Mated with sorrow come I from the wood,
And to fair Cynthias kingdom now I wend,
Where the immortal Goddesses arrived,
At Troynouant, by which Thames waves do glide,
Where late a Lady of great honor lived,
But greater virtue, that untimely did:
Thither go I among the rest to mourn,
And offer up my tears upon her shrine,
My lofty trees I will cut down and burn,
In witness of her death for which I pyne:
And as my trees consume away with flame
So does my heart with grief, and joy with shame.
QVATORZAIN. 15. Libitina.
IN dreary accents of a doleful verse,
I Will speak her praise though I have long bin du^be,
In sable weeds i will deck her dismal hearse,
And sacrifice my tears upon her toombe;
With golden Statues shall her toombe be gilte,
Like King Mausolus stately monument,
Which his dear wife the Queen of Caria built
To be the worlds eternal wonderment,
Or else I will her senseless corpse interre,
In some fair grave like the Pyramides,
And will enbalme her body with sweet Mirrh
With Cassia, Ambergreece and Aloes
That the Air perfumed therewith shall sweetly smell,
While heavenly powers shall ring her woeful knel.
Annotations upon the Celestial Elegies of the Goddesses
BErecinthia alias Rhea Cybele Ops Vesta, Tellus, etc. as Hesiodus says was
the daughter of Coelum and Terra the wife of Saturn commonly called the mother
of the gods and goddesses of the earth; whom Poets feign to be drawn by four
Lions in a chariot with a crown of Towers on her head and a royal scepter in
her hand, she is also reputed the founder of Cities and Towers for defense.

Juno called Pronuba and of some Lucina the daughter of Saturn and Ops, wife
and sister of Jupiter, Queen of heaven, and goddess of riches, impelled with
the celestial diadem, drawn in her chariot by Peacockes, she is accounted to
predominate marriages, and the birth of children.

Pallas otherwise called Minerua as Hesiodus affirms is the daughter of
Neptune and Triton, poetically also feigned to be engendered of the brain of
Jupiter: She is the Goddess of wisdom, learning, and the liberal sciences,
She is the sister of Mars and is said to be the Goddess of wars and martial
stratagems, and for that is often called Bellona.

Cynthia called also Diana and Phoebe the daughter of Jupiter and Latona the
sister of Phoebus she is the Goddess of hunting and fishing, who addicting her
self wholly to virginity obtained of Jupiter therefore to live in the woods.
Virgil* Lib. 11. Alme tibi have nemorum cultrix Latonia virgo.

Venus termed also Cytherea poetically fained to be bred of the froth of the
Sea, excelled all other Goddesses in beauty, she is the Goddess of love,
pleasures and lascivious delights, she rides in a chariot drawn by doves,
she is the mother of Cupid and is accounted one of the seven planets

Thetis called also Amphitrite the wife of Peleus King of Thessalie, daughter
of Nereus and mother of Achilles was esteemed Goddess of the Sea: of Nereus
all the Nymphs were called Nereides.

Ceres the daughter of Saturn and Ops sister of Iu^iter and Pluto, is the
Goddess of Corn drawn in her ^hariot by dragons, crownde with she aues of
wheat ^he wandered about the world to find her daughter Proserpina whom Pluto
stole a way, she first taught ^he use of the plough and to till the land.

Aurora the morning, the daughter of Hyperion and Thia in the judgment of
Hesiodus, or as others ^ay of Titan and Terra whom for her fair vermilion
^olour Homer faineth to have fingers of damask ^oses, and to be drawn by
bright bay horses in a golden chariot, she is said by Orpheus not only to be
(...) most comforrable Lady to men, but also to beasts and plants and is a
great friend to the Muses.

Nox the night, bred of Chaos as Poets feign whom they call the most ancient
mother of all creatures, because there was no light but darkness before the
Sun and the heavens were made. And she possessed all places before the birth
of the gods, she is clothed in black raiment, with a sable veil upon her
head, transported by black horses in her eben chariot, she came from Erebus
and the infernals obscuring this Hemysphere when the Sun (...) gone to the
Antipodes.

Flora called also Chloris the wife of Zephirus is deemed the goddess of
Flowers:

Bellona the goddess of war called also Pallas* which to express both the
valor and the wisdom of the honorable race of the Howardes I have twice
expressed in several sonnets, whom Virgil names the president of war.

Armipotens belli praeses Tritonia Pallas Fortuna as some suppose was the
daughter of Oceanus, albeit Hesiodus writing of the original birth of the
Gods, makes no mention of her, yet she is vainly reckoned among the number of
the Gods as Iuuenal witnesses.

Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia, sed te
Nos facimus Fortuna deam Caeloque locamus.
She is the Goddess of chance and inconstancy she is said to be blind and
to be rouled about upon a wheale as Tibullus in 1. Elegiarum. Versatur celeri
Fors leuis orb rota.

Proserpina called also Persephone and of some Hecate is the daughter of
Jupiter and Ceres, the wife of Pluto Queen of Hell, she has sovereign power
of dead bodies.

Nemesis the daughter of Oceanus and Nox may be called the Goddess of revenge,
who was sent from Jupiter to suppress the pride and insolence of such as are
to much puffed up with arrogancy for the fruitio of worldly felicity* and
therefore Aristotle Li* de mundo, affirms Nemesis to be the divine power and
justice of God to punish malefactors for their heinous crimes, and to
distribute to every one according to his demerits.

Libitina is the Goddess of Funerals.

The Graces called Gratiae or Charites the Graces daughters of Jupiter and
Eurynome whose names are Aglaia, Euphrosyne and Thalia, they were beautiful and
the companions of Venus.

Horae the hours, daughters of Jupiter and Themis, are by Homer and other
Poets said to keep the gates of heaven, and by opening of them to make fair
weather, and by shutting them to make foul weather, they favor learning and
associate Venus and the Graces: They are imagined to have soft feet and to be
most slow of all the Goddesses, and still to work some new matter, they
moderate and divide the succession of times.

Pandora, a Lady imbellished with all fair ornaments of body and mind on
whom every one of the Gods bestowed a several gift of grace, was sent by Jove
to Prometheus with all evils enclosed, fast in a box or little cofer, which
gift being refused by Prometheus was by her brought to Epimetheus, who opening
the cover of the box, perceiving all those evils to fly out suddenly shut the
same, reserving only hope in the bottom thereof reposed which he kept fast:
which hope you must imagine now that Pandora has lost in the carriage by reason
of this most noble Countess death.

Niobe the daughter of Tantalus waxing insolent beyond measure for the beauty
and goodly proportion of her children, insomuch that she compared or rather
preferred her self in opinion of glory before Latona and her sacred offspring
was therefore by the decree of the Gods metamorphosed into a stone, and so
became her own bodies sepulcher; and her children were slain by Phoebus and
Diana with arrows as Poets feign.

Pales is the Goddess of Shepherds in honor of whose diety Shepherds did
celebrate certain games called Palilia*

Feronia the Goddess of woods or groves whose temple (as Strabo writes) was
famous in the City Soractes, and she with great devotion was there worshipped,
of whom there is no mention made touching her birth or education,
notwithstanding she is reckoned sovereign of the woods as Virgil writes.

Et viridi gaudens Feronia luco. QVATORZIAN. 1 Clio.
GReat princes acts I use to royalize,
And from the Stigian stouds their fame to save,
And in the Cristall mirror of the skies,
With wits fair Diamond I their praise ingraue*
By me Alemenus son is made divine,
And fair Calisto turned to a Bear
Now in the Starrie firmament does shine,
And with her light adornes this Hemysphere*
And I will raise to heaven this noble dame,
Above the purest Element of fire,
And so in Stars characterize her fame,
That time shall not her glories date expire,
And yet my heart in pity takes remorse,
For her dear soul and bodies late divorce.
QVATORZIAN. 2 Melpomene.
KNowing her life what shall I sound her praise?
Or musing of her death fall in a sound?
Shall I record her fame in my sweet lays?
Or by my sorrow make her death renownde?
I know not what to do, I am amazde,
I wander in a Laborinth of woes,
Her praise already through the world is blazd,
And now her death with grief I must disclose;
Wherefore I register her death with tears,
Which do turn black with sorrow in the fall,
Wringing my hands renting my golden hears,
And with these relics grace her funeral,
Exclaming thus with everlasting cries,
Virtue grows sick, shame lives, true honor dies.
QVATORZAIN. 3 Thalia.
I That in Princes Palaces was bred,
And did delight in every comicke sport,
Whose dainty feet on carpets used to tread,
And dance the measures statly in the court,
Will turn my mirthfull songs to doleful cries,
And fill with tears the Heliconian brook,
My lovely cheeks besmeard with weeping eyes,
Like fleshlesse deaths Anatomy I look,
For she that brought new revels out of France,
When she returned to her native soil,
Who sought my glory chiefly to advance,
Has now by death received a fatal foil,
Thus by her loss I am compeld to rue
That she to soon has bid the world adewe*
QVATORZAIN. 4 Euterpe.
COme sisters let us sing sad roundelaies,
And strew green Cypres boughs upon her Tomb
Crowning her image with immortal bays,
Oh sacred of spring of Latonas womb,
Play on thy seauen-strunge harp and sadly warble,
The wailefull murmur of celestial spheres,
And while thou do engraue her fame in marble,
I Will dig her grave with showers of sacred tears;
My pipe shall make the stones to weep for pit,
As great Amphions Lyre did make them dance,
To build again the ruynes of that City,
Which did maintain the Grecian puisance,
And yet not Thebes but Troynouant shall mourn
For her whose flesh to Elements did turn.
QVATORZAIN. 5 Terpsichore.
What doleful Diapason shall I make,
What mournful songs of sorrow shall I sing
What comfort in sweet Music can I take,
Since death has broke this Ladies vital string:
My sacred Lyre that did resound of yore,
Celestial harmony, like Phoebus Lute,
Such joyful accents now shall sound no more,
For inward sorrow makes our consort mute;
Since death has broke that string that did unite
In mutual love her body and her soul,
My dulcimers shall make no more delight
And I will live in everlasting dole
For how can Music solace human ears,
When strings are broke and hearts are drowned in tears
QVATORZAIN. 6. Erato.
YE that like Julius Caesar seek to measure,
The spacious clymates of the centred round,
To fish for kingdoms and to purchase treasure,
Oppose your lives to every fatal wound:
Behold even in the map of my sad face,
A true Cosmographie of humane woes,
For since foul death his Trophies hear did place,
In quiet rest I never could repose,
Unto th'Antarticke Pole what need ye sail,
At home in safety better may ye sleep,
Consider by her death your flesh is frail,
Sit down by me upon these rocks and weep,
For Albion now more sorrows does contain,
Then there is wealth in all the Ocean main.
QVATORZAIN. 7 Calliope.
Were it nor that Eliza did revive,
My drooping spirits that are like to perish,
If that worlds myrrour only she alive,
Did not with bounty still my Poems cherish,
I should go languish in some obscure cave,
Or with rude Satyrs, and wood-nymphs should dwell
Learning should lie in base Obliuions grave,
And flow no more from Aganippe well:
But since this Ladies soul is vanished,
Out of this world (her corpse to death enthrald)
She to a star is metamorphosed
And with the golden Twinns in heaven enstald
Or like the Pleiades enthroned on high
She may be termed a Phoenix in the sky.
QVATORZAIN. 8. Urania.
I Saw no fearful comet in the Sky,
Nor fiery Meteors lately did I view,
Whose dread aspect threatens mortality,
And loss of some great Princes to ensue:
Nor by Astrology did I divine,
That death so soon this Paragon should slay,
That she who did in grace and virtue shine,
Above her Peers before them should decay,
I think while all the Gods in counsel sat,
To canonize some Saint, that late did die,
Not being mindful of this Ladies state,
Whose fatal hour did then approach so nigh,
Death stole upon her with his Eben darte
And unawares did strike her to the heart.
QVATORZAIN. 9. Polyhymnia.
Since I am termed the Muses Oratrix,
My pen shall wright the Iliades of my grief,
My tearefull eyes upon her bear i will fix,
My tongue shall tell a woeful tale in brief:
My hands shall act the passions of my mind,
My ruthful looks bewray my pensive thought,
I will complain the Fates are too unkind,
From bad to worse the world still grows to naught:
Wherefore I think that Plato's wondrous year,
(When as the Orbs of Heaven shall be reuolu'd,
To their first course) approaches very near
The bands ofth' Elements shall be dissolved:
And till those days of consummation come,
Cares make me passionate and sorrows dombe.
The Authors Conclusion.
NOw Goddesses and Muses give me leave,
In this sad Tragedy to act a part,
I have more cause for her decease to grieve,
Though you more wit to show your sorrows smart:
Ye for affection do extol her praise,
And for mere pity do her death lament,
I both for love and duty strive to raise
Her fame above the starrie firmament:
And death for envy did abridge her days
T'enritch his kingdom with this virtuous dame
But I for grief that death the Tyrant plays,
Impouerisht have my wit to enrich her fame
While I perform these rites which are most fit,
Death waxes rich in spoil, I spoild of wit.
Annotations upon the Celestial Elegies of the Muses.
THE nine Muses which are the presidents of Poets and first authors of Poetry
Music and other sciences, are the daughters of Jupiter and mnemosyne alias
memoria whose names are Clio, Melpomine, Thalia, Eutepre, Terpsichore, Erato,
Calliope, Urania and Polihimnia* Clio exercises her wit and skill chiefly in
Histories and recording the acts and momuments of worthy persons, Melpomine
in Tragedies, and lamentable Elegies, Thalia in Comedies, comely gestures, and
sweet speeches* Euterpe in the pipe and such like instruments, Terpsichore in
the Citterne or Lute, Erato in Geometry, or Chosmographie, Calliope in
heroicke verses, Urania in Astrology and contemplation of the stars, and
Polihimnia in Rhetoric and Eloquence.

Divine sonnets dedicated to the said Lady not long before her decease by the
said Author.
Of Gods holy name, Jehovah, or Tetragrammaton.
THat name which Moses on his forehead bare,
I in my heart do worship and adore,
That name which Jews to name did seldom dare,
May I presume for mercy to implore?
That name which Solomon upon his breast,
In his divine Pentaculum did wear,
With great Jehovah Characters impressed,
That name I love I reverence and fear:
That name which Aron wore upon his head,
Grau'd in his holy Miter made of Gold,
That name which Angels laud and furies dread,
Whose praise no tongue can worthily unfold,
That name which flesh is to impure to name,
My sinful soul with sacred zeal inflame.
Of the Star which the Magi did worship at Christ's Nativity, and of his
death.
I blaze that star, which was no blazing star,
But the true figure of eternal life,
The prince of peace was borne then ceased war,
His birthes beginning ended mortal strife,
This glorious star did lead the aged wise
To worship th'Infants Godhead in the East,
Which came with gladsome heart and joyful eyes,
To see that Babe that made all Israel blessed:
O light of Heaven thou wast extinct on earth,
Yet to our souls Celestial life does give
Thy death our life, thy rising our new birth
Thou three days dead did make us ever live,
Yet at thy death obscured was the earth and sky,
Because he that was God, as man did die.
Fountain of grace from whom does only run,
Water of life to save our souls from death,
O savior of the world, pure virgins son,
That in red earth infused first vital breath.
Oh thou whose name was calde Emmanuel,
Joining thy Godhead with humanity,
Thou that for our sakes did descend to hell,
And over death did get the victory:
Oh woman's seed that did from God proceed,
By Prophets said to break the Serpents head,
Thou that in grace and virtue do exceed,
Content to die that thou might quicken dead,
Thou that did raise the dead men from the tomb.
Earths kingdoms pass, oh let thy kingdom come.
Ancient of days, and yet still young in years,
Oh God on earth, Oh man yet most divine,
Poor in this world, yet chief of heavenly Peers,
Whose glory in the infernal pit did shine,
Borne since old Abraham's days yet long before,
(For Abraham reioyc'd to see thy days)
He saw by faith, whom now all powers adore,
The Cerubins do daily sing thy praise,
O God of times, and yet in time a man,
Before all times thy time of being was,
And yet in time thy human birth began,
Least we should fade untimely like the grass,
Oh thou that do all times begin and end,
Grant all our works may to thy glory tend.
Of the instabilitie of Fortune and worldly prosperity.
Where lives the man that never felt a cross?
Who^ Fortunes wheel did never tumble down
Where lives the man that never suffered loss?
On whom the stars of heaven did never frown?
Where lives the man that is in all points blessed?
Wise, valiant, mighty, wealthy, fair and strong.
If such a one upon the earth does rest
His date of life Heaven does abridge ere long
Such was King Edward in his youthful prime
Who might by Phoebus Oracle be deemd
One of the wisest Princes of his time
For wit and learning excellent esteemde
But cruel death maligning his great praise
That in few years so highly did aspyre
With iron dart infringed his golden days
Whom nations far away did then admyre
Weedslong time grow, the fairest flowers do fade
The ripest wits grow rotten at the last
All these fair things which God and Nature made
In this huge Chaos, shall at length lie waste
Where is king Solomon the wisest wight
Of mortal men that lived upon the ground
Does he not wander in the shades of night,
Whose wisdom through the world was so renound?
What difference betwixt the rich and poor
Irus with Cresus boldly may compare
Both equal are when death stands at the door
That makes proudest kings like beggars bare,
Then let the wealthy men respect their end
Not counting themselves happy until death,
Since heaven to them this wealth does only lend,
Which they must pay with loss of vital breath
This made that king of Lidia to cry
When he was by king Cyrus overcome:
O Solon now thy saying true I try
No man is happy till his day of dome.
That Monarch now is dead that did possess,
The golden sands of bright Pactolus waves,
And Tamberlaine whom Fortune so did bless,
That he a Shepherd made great kings his slaves,
Dead is that mighty king of Macedon,
That wept when of more worlds he hard some talk,
Since his victorious sword as then had won,
Scarce this one world, where we like pilgrims walk
Who being wounded fell upon one knee,
Fighting against an host of barbarous foes,
Said I am mortal by these wounds I see,
For no such blood from powers Celestial flows?
In beauty Absalon did far excel,
Most part of men that sprung of human seed,
But when against his Sire he did rebel,
Then heaven did power down vengeance on his head:
The sacred scripture truly does express,
That Sampson did surpass all men in strength,
But he that did thowsands in fight distress,
Was by a woman's wiles subdued at length,
Beauty is like a fair but fading flower,
Riches are like a bubble in a stream.
Great strength is like a fortefied Tower.
Houour is like a vain but pleasing dream,
We see the fairest flowers soon fade away,
Bubbles do quickly vanish like the wind,
Strong Towers are rent, and do in time decay,
And dreams are but iliusions of the mind,
Let none puffed up with insolence deride.
My Fortunes Autumn in my prime of years,
Since many dismal chances do betide,
To royal princes and State-ruling peers,
I am content with my disaster chance,
To follow fate since princes lead the dance,
Ludit in Humanis diuina potentia rebus.
Et certam praesens vix habet hora fidem.
FUNERAL LAMENTACIONS UPON THE DEATH OF his most worthy and reverend uncle
Master MATTHEW EWENS Esquire one of her Majesty's Barons of her Highness Court
of Eschequer.

*

PERIIT ET INVENTA EST
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD BRADOCKE for I B. 1598.

Ovid. lib. 2. Fasti. Est honor, and tumulis animas placare paternas.
Paruaque in extructas munera far pyras.
Funeral lamentations upon the death M. MATTHEW EVVENS Esquire. etc.
LET Numas death be still deplorde in Rome,
Licurgus end let famous Sparta wail,
Let Athens weep on Aristides toombe,
For there religion laws and Justice fail,
But let fair Cinthias Troyueuant lament,
This Barons death whose flesh returns to dust,
Whose soul is fled above the firmament,
Who lived on earth religious, true, and just.
Now joy O heaven t'enioy the earths ornament,
Whose heavenly part to the third heaven is fled
His earthly part to earth does now relent
Both heaven and earth love him alive and dead,
His flesh to Elements resolved does dye,
His soul above the Element does fly.
QVATORZAIN. 2.
I Know not whether I should joy or weep
His loving soul does triumph in the sky,
But his dead corpsin dust a while does sleep,
Till heaven shall raise it from mortality,
He lost his old life and has gaind a new
Loosing his care he gainde a glorious crown,
The world lost him, therefore the world does rue*
He lost the world yet wins for aye renown,
I lost a friend and therefore I lament,
My friend lost me and I have lost my self
Since I for his loss live in discontent
He loves heavens joys and leaves all worldly pelf,
O England now bewail this fatal cross,
He lost this world, we gainde a world of loss.
QVATORZAIN. 3
HE that did seek the poor men's wrongs to right
He that maintained his native countries laws,
He that in truth and justice did delight
Is now consumed by deaths devouring jaws,
Was it by heavens high court of Parliament,
Decreed that his life's date so soon should end,
Oh then let us upon the earth lament
That we have lost in him a public friend
The joy of many in his grave now lies,
And he in heaven enioyes immortal bliss,
His care is vanished and in him now dies,
And lives in others that his life do miss
Thus death struck many with this fatal stroke
And keeping natures laws, our laws he broke.
QVATORZAIN. 4.
LEt not the world think I do partialize,
In that I do extol my uncles fame,
And strive his glory to immortalize
By these sad accents which my muse does frame,
But let men know that he deserves more praise,
Then my poor muse is able to bestow,
Though she does crown his death with glorious baies
And through the world the breath of fame does blow
Which breath by multiplying the sweet air
May mount the sacred Throne of heavenly powers,
And cause the winged Cherubins repair,
To mourn his death from their celestial bowres,
His virtues merit Homers golden pen
To print his praise with tears of Gods and men.
QVATORZAIN. 5
LEt all men judge how just a Judge he was,
That late was judged by heaven sacred doom,
To suffer death, that when this life should pass
He might obtain in heaven a glorious room,
For he among the blessed saints must dwell
Where Patriarchs and the Apostles sit,
Which shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel
According as to their deserts is fit
As here on earth this Judge was magnifide
Above the vulgar sort in high degree,
In heaven he shall be much more glorifide,
And shall enjoy the full felicity,
And all such Judges as here judge aright,
Shall have their place in heaven with Angels bright.
QVATORZAIN. 6
THe sacred word does say thou shall not kill
Yet Death thou here do kill a magistrate;
Do thou not then infringe Gods holy will
Nor yet the laws of Moses violate?
And whereas mighty kings establish laws
Thou by thine own law mighty Kings do slay,
And taking thus away th'efficient cause,
The Effect, which is the Law must needs decay,
Thus now thou take away a public guide,
That did maintain all equity and right
Wherefore heaven shall correct thee for thy pride
And shall subdue thy all-flesh-killing might,
And thou that do all creatures overcome,
Shall be atlast destroyed by heavens just doom.
QVATORZAIN. 7
IF that the soul (as some supposed) might go,
Out of one body to an others breast,
Would that meek spirit which from him did flow,
In every Lawyers heart were now impressed
His life's integrity and zeal was such*
He more esteemd of honesty then gold
Which many now a days do love too much
For love is often with money bought and sold,
This rightly may be termde a golden age,
With gold is fame and reputation bought
Yet Solomon that was most wise and sage,
For wisdom praide, esteeming gold as naught,
Gold unto dross and flesh to dust must turn,
For this man's loss let the Eschequer mourn,
Aurea mun^ vere sunt secula plurimus amor.
Venit horos, auro conciliatur amor*
In obitum Patrui sui colendissimi Mathei Eueni illustrissimi Baronis Scaccarij
T. R. nepotis Naeuia, sieve carmen funebre.
TRistia Melpomine lachrymarum fiumina funde,
Sit cum perpetuo iunctus amore dolor*
Ille pater patriae pollens pietate, Patronus
Pauperis, and Plebis, per mala fata perit,
Spiritus ascendit splendentis culmen Olympi,
Diuitias coeli, quas cupie bat, habet.
Non rapuit fiscus, quod non vult Christus habere.
Non plus quam licuit conciliauit opes.
Ille mihi Patruus charus, patriaeque patrique,
Ergo suus deflet funera mesta nepos.
Dectus erat, facilis natura, mente be nignus,
Moribus humanus, denique morte pius.
Lege Solon, grauitate Cato, sed Tullius ore,
Nestor consilijs, and pietate Plato.
Membra tegit tumulus, viuit post funera foelix,
Fama viget mundo, spiritus astracolit.
Purpureos spargam flores, opobalsama fundam,
Et plenis manibus lilia pulchra dabo.
His saltem exequijs and munere fungar inani,
His animam donis accumulare velim.
Non grates expecto tamen, nec proemia cure*
Non hominum lauds: hoc pietatis opus.
Cogit amor patriae patriae lugere parentem
Defunctum, tanto debitus vrget honos.
O decus, O patriae nuper lux, atque columna
Natalisque soli gloria magna vale.
O longum venerande vale, vale, inquit Euene
Qui tuus est semper fidus amansque Nepos,
Sic viuam and moriar semper tibi certus amicus,
Musaque cum fatis est moritura tuis
Iurisconsultus, naturae iure peremptus
Nunc stabit aeterni Iudicis ante Thronum
Qui viuos homines diuino iudicet ore,
Iudex istius Iudicis almus erit.
Sic pia vita fuit, nunc terque quaterque beatae,
In rutilo viuit, nobilis vmbra Polo.
FINIS.

