CERTAIN SERMONS PREACHED AND PENNED BY RICHARD ROGERS Preacher of
Weathersfield in Essex, directly tending to these three ends. First, to bring
any bad person (that has not committed the sin that is unpardonable) to true
conversion. Secondly, to stablish and settle all such as are converted, in
faith and repentance. Thirdly, to lead them forward (that are so settled) in
the Christian life, to bring forth the fruit of both. WHEREUNTO ARE ANNEXED
diverse godly and learned Sermons of another reverend and faithful servant of
God, Mr. SAMVEL WRIGHT, Bachelor of Divinity, late President of Sidney
College in Camebridge deceased, tending also to the same ends, with diverse
particular points in both, profitable and fit for these times.

1. JOHN 5.13. I write unto you that believe in the name of that Son of God,
that ye may know that ye have eternal life: and that ye may believe in the
name of that Son of God.

LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for Thomas Man 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD DENNY, Lord Baron of Waltam, etc.
IT is recorded in holy Scripture (right Honorable) that Iehoshaphat King of
Judah, 2. Chron. 17.7.
much renowned for his piety, did send out his Princes to teach in the Cities
of Judah. By which act of his, and the setting down of it by the holy Ghost,
although I go not about to confound their office and duty with the Prophets
and Levites, yet they are not on the other side, to be taken and counted as
nothing; I mean both his act, and the report of it by the holy story. For
though they did not preach to the people in the cities whither they came,
having Levites with them, to do that service, yet their countenancing,
authorizing, and backing of the Levites, who did teach the people indeed; is
not without cause said to be a preaching; seeing it made way to the people
receiving of it with much more readiness and cheerfulness, then otherwise
they would have done: yea, they were much more encouraged to the zealous
embracing and professing of it, with fruits following, and that by the
advancing and magnifying of it by such noble and worthy persons, then might
have bin looked for at their hands otherwise.

For though the word of God, and the pure doctrine taught out of it, be of
sufficient authority to draw and persuade the hearers to submit themselves to
it; yet considering the blindness, untowardness, and rebelliousnes of man's heart
against heavenly things, a number would never have set foot in the holy place
to hear, for all the report that might have come to their ears of the price
and benefit of the glad tidings preached, if they had not been encouraged and
brought on by such worthy examples.

Oh, we know what force there is in such means. In so much, as even with us,
howsoever there are of the Nobility, many who have the preaching of the Gospel
in singular account, yet the people that dwell far off from them, and be not
seated near to them, they (I say) hearken not after them, neither are any
thing moved by them. But where such are seen by the people that live by them,
to have the preachers of the word in high account for the message they bring,
and to be subject to the holy doctrine which they teach; even that is a
strong cord to draw the inferior sort to show reverence to the ordinance of
God, and to cause them to think, that if such great persons so highly esteem
of their ministry and message, that there is (doubtless) some great matter
that moves the^ to it. And though that be not all, neither is of any power to
convert the heart, (for that is the proper work of the holy Ghost) yet many
are at the first brought on to receive the preaching of the Gospel, (who after
feel the power of it also, and enjoy the benefit of it) when yet their first
beginnings therein, are chiefly occasioned by the zeal and forwardnes of such
good patterns.

And this is one cause (Right Honorable) why we Gods Ministers do much wish
and pray for the superiors and great persons, and especially those who are
noble and growing toward the highest places, that they may be sincere and
zealous for the truth, because, though they be no Preachers, as neither
Iehoshaphats Princes were; yet we know, how greatly they may set forward
preaching, and honor God in going before the people in their holy course, I
say, we pray that many of them may be such, even as we highly praise God for
those, who are such already.

And as we are glad to see them favorers and followers of that which we
preach by the authority of God, (one father of us all) so we desire (which is
the next thereto) that they would be patrons of our writings, which we set
forth with the same minds for the common edification of the Church of Christ,
that when it is seen that such as are in high place, and zealous professors of
the truth also, do make account of them; there may be far greater hope that
many others will do the same.

And therefore I humbly crave of your Honor, that I who have presumed to
dedicate these few Sermons to your Honor, may be with your good liking allowed
so to do. The which though they be things of small account, (as they are
commonly reckoned to be) yet I would not have offered them, if I had thought
they might not promise that good to the Church, which I know your Honor is
willing to further. Besides, if there be any thing in them worthy your
accepting, and reading, they are your due, by good right, and the testimony of
my thankful heart, and the best that I have to present to your Lordship; who
though you never saw my face, yet even upon report of me to your Honor, did
give me cause to have you in daily remembrance while I live. But a word is
enough of this.

To lay out the matter of the Sermons, I think it not meet to be tedious to
you about it, and the rathe for that it is in the short Epistle to the Reader
done sufficiently; further then thus, to signify, that the thing which is
chiefly aimed at in them, (among many other to good purpose) is to give help
to the Reader, as need shall require, to make his calling, and consequently his
election (as the Apostle Peter wills) sure. And thus not to be further
tedious to your Lordship, I end, praying God, that as he has honored you in
a double manner, so he would accompany your earthly honor with abundance of
such blessings as are wont to go with it, and multiply your best honor with
the variety and increase of his heavenly graces. From Weathersfield this 20.
of April 1612.

Your Honors in all humble duty to command in Christ, RICH. ROGERS.

TO ALL TRVE CHRISTIANS, AND WELWILLERS TO to the Gospel, or such as yet are
further off from the power of it, whom the Lord in time may call: Richard
Rogers wishes al good that they want to make them truly happy for ever.
CHristian and gentle Reader, I offer to thy view in this little book,
certain Sermons tending to the good of all that can find time and willingness
to read and regard them. And more particularly, at this they aim; some of
them, that they may help forward and persuade ignorant, profane bad persons,
and hypocrites, to distaste and wax weary of their evil and dangerous course.
For out of all these kinds of wicked persons does the Lord daily call home
some, effectually; where the Gospel is soundly, plainly, and powerfully
preached. And I would they should know as much as I say, to the end they may
not harden their hearts against God, (as they may possibly and easily do)
while they see many safely and happily guided in their lives, and themselves
nothing so, but may hear his voice willingly by repairing to such wholesome
Sermons, wherein the Lord shows himself willing to be reconciled unto them,
and wherein he thus speaks; O nation, not worthy to be beloved, yet for all
this, if thou will return from thine iniquity, I will receive thee graciously.

And what should make them like glad as the hearing of this? as the Gentiles
were, when they heard first, that God had granted unto them as well as to the
Jews, the glad tidings of salvation. Even this sort of people may have no
small encouragement by reading these Sermons, and especially those among the
rest, which show how they that wander out of the right way, may return, and
come home unto it again. Some of these Sermons do aim at this, to keep such
as are drawn out of their sinful course already, to the certainty of
salvation, and to keep such steadfast in their faith, hope, and repentance; and
that they may not fall from them. And other some of them, serve to help
forward all such so stablished, that they may grow in knowledge and grace, and
so bring forth fruits beseeming the Gospel. And I would they might find no
less favor and acceptance with the readers, then I am sure they found with
them who heard them preached.

I have showed what the matter is that is handled in these Sermons: now I will
show my reasons, why I have gathered not one, but sundry of the same argument
together, and set them forth so. And after, I will declare to thee, in what
order I place them in this treatise, and why.

The first reason why I set down many in one book of the same argument, and
not of diverse, is this; for that this matter and doctrine of the conversion of
a sinner, is very hard to be perceived and discerned of many hearers, and
especially: so as they may clearly see how to trace the way, and go in it.
Therefore that which could not so easily be perceived in one sermon, I have
thought good to lay forth in many, and out of diverse texts of Scriptures,
which tending all to this end, to wit, to set down the conversion of a sinner
to God, do give more light in this matter, and offer occasion of more things
about it, then one alone can do.

These therefore being read with consideration, may (through Gods blessing)
make this point clear, who, how, and when a man is converted, and make him
able to try whither he himself be so or no. And if one be well grounded in
the doctrine that teaches this, and have the use of this, he shall much the
easilier attain to further knowledge, and consequently, to the use thereof:
both which are meanly, and of few attained to, seeing so few are well settled in
the other.

The next reason of this my thus doing, is because this doctrine of the
conversion of a sinner, is but little, and too seldom taught, I mean all the
parts of it are seldom set down together; especially at one time, and in one
sermon. All which were meet to be done, and often; the weak capacity,
slipperie memory, and many other defects in the most hearers, requiring it;
and that they might see, both how far they are from conversion, while they
are in their first condition of ignorance, and unbelief; and how they are to
be brought to it, and also how contrary their hearts and lives should be to
that they were before, when they be converted These parts of it are seldom
handled altogether in preaching, though one sometime, another of them another
time be taught and delivered. But it is a long time, though the word be
diligently preached (as in few places it is) before the most part of the
hearers are able to lay one part and point of it with the other, and to make
the whole work of conversion of them all.

And to add the third reason, seeing all that the people know and practice
without conversion is nothing, I mean, either pleasing to God, or profitable
to salvation unto themselves. They may (I deny not) know many points, and
learn sundry instructions, as concerning the letter, but to know so as they
believe (without which faith it is impossible for them to please God) they
cannot without conversion; and to practice so in their lives, as that they may
be said to repent and live holily, (without which they shall perish, and never
see the Lord) that is impossible without the same conversion.

For these causes and some other, of which this is not the least, that by
experience I have seen great fruit come of this doctrine diligently and much
taught, and little fruit, where it has not been much in use; for such causes
(I say) I have of purpose set out many sermons of this argument, desiring that
the people may be made better acquainted with it, and that such Preachers as
think me worthy to be heard in this request, would frame themselves to teach
it in their own, or in other places where they come.

As for them that fear they shall glut the people with beating thus upon the
same things, as though they could preach no other, I answer, if we preach to
the end the people may practice that which we teach, and if the people also
make use of that which they learn about this matter, it shall be found so hard
and precious to know themselves converted, that they shall themselves desire
that doctrine concerning it, to be taught again and again, and namely of
faith and repentance, rather then to be weary of it; for they shall see, that
when the same thing shall be taught out of new texts, even the old matter shall
be in manner new to them.

Now it follows to show, why these texts are set down in the order in which
they are placed in the treatise. The first texts are Acts 16.24. and Matthew.
24.12.13. and the sermons on both, tend directly to show, how a sinner is
converted, except the beginning of the Sermon in the 16. of the Acts, which yet
makes a way to the doctrine of conversion in the story of the Iailer. And in
those two Sermons the reader may see the three parts of conversion. And diverse
of the other Sermons do also give good light in the same: and namely the 5. of
Deuteronomy. In the next place follows the 13. of Matthew. verse. 46. and Esaias 55.
verse. 1.2. In the former of these texts is commended to the reader what an
excellent thing this conversion and namely faith is, by a parable of the
pearl: and the latter text contains doctrine to encourage and hearten on all
to thirst after, and most earnestly to desire these graces of faith and
repentance, and other graces acco^panying them. The next in order is the 5. of
Deuteronomy. 29. which, beside that I have said of it already sets down the fruit
of conversion, which is a godly conversation, and how lively it flows and
proceeds from this conversion. The Sermons in the sixth text, to wit, in
Matthew. 11. verse. 20. tend to draw on and persuade to this conversion,
threatening woe to those that convert not. In the Sermons of the seventh text in
Acts 9. verse. 31. there are examples, not of three persons, but of three
particular Churches, who showed forth as shining lights, the fruit of
conversion in their lives, and used their liberty and time of rest free from
persecution (under which they had lived before) to the growing in grace and
knowledge with much comfort. In the last text, the 4. to the Philippians, verse.
4* the Sermons tend to show what joy the repentant life accompanied with the
fruits of amendment, does bring to all that lead it, and are converted,
notwithstanding the discouragements that are on every side against them. I have
said now what I minded to do: that which remains, is this. The Lord make that
which I set out to thee, with all other holy instruction, profitable to thee
for the making thee truly happy.

Thine in the Lord, RICHARD ROGERS.

THE SEVERAL TEXTS OF THE Sermons contained in this Book.
3 Three Sermons upon the 16. of the Acts, ver. 24. etc. 2 Two Sermons on
Matthew. 24.12.13. 2 Two Sermons on Matthew. 13.46. 2 Two on Esaias 55.1.2. 2 Two on
Deutronomie 5.29. 2 Two on Matthew. 11.20. 2 Two on Acts 9.31. 4 Four on
Philippians 4.4.
THREE SERMONS PREACHED ON ACT. 16. VERSE 25. etc.
Now at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sung Psalms unto God: and the
prisoners heard them.

And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundation of the
prison was shaken: and by and by all the doors opened, and every man's bands
were loossed.

Then the keeper of the prison waked out of his sleep, and when he saw the
prison doors open, he drew out his sword and would have killed himself,
supposing the prisoners had been fled.

But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, do thy self no harm: for we are
all here.

Then he called for a light, and leaped in, and came trembling, and fell down
before Paul and Silas,

And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and
thine household.

And they preached unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his
house.

Afterward he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes,
and was baptized with all that belonged unto him, straightway.

And when he had brought the^ into his house, he set meat before the^, and
rejoiced that he with all his household believed in God.


IN this Scripture there are two things to be considered; the one, The
unfolding of the text.
the behavior of Paul and Silas in the prison; the other the conversion of the
Iayler. Of the first, I will say no more, The parts two.
then may make way and give light to the second. The occasion hereof was this,
that Paul having cast the devil out of a maid that had been possessed thereof,
and so had thereby disabled her from bringing in gain to her masters by
divining and telling of things to come, whereby they had gotten much: they
beholding what Paul had done, and how he had sitten in their light thereby;
they forthwith like mad men, drew Paul into the market place unto the
Magistrates, accusing him that he with Silas had troubled the city.

And by means thereof, the people rose up against them, and the Governors
commanded them to be beaten with rods, which, when they had done, they cast
them into prison, commanding the Iailer to keep them surely. He cast them into
the dungeon or inward prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks. This was
the occasion of these words, as it is plainly set down by Saint Luke in the
words going before; and then he shows how Paul and Silas behaved themselves,
being thus cruelly and tumultuously handled, as grievous malefactors, when all
may see not only their innocence, but also the good, charitable and godly
work, which they did show on the maid.

It is said, that they receiving this injury at their hands patiently, and
being strangers, and so finding no help at man's hands, did show, what account
and favor they were in with God, in that he did not forsake them in their
distress; but comforted them by his Spirit in token of the goodness of their
cause, and made them able to testify the joy of their hearts by singing
Psalms of thanks to God, declaring thereby that they being innocent, though
they suffered as evil doers, yet rejoiced in the Lord, that they were counted
worthy to suffer for well doing. And this be said of Paul and Silas.

Now, to speak of the Iailer, who was one of them that had his hand among the
rest of that barbarous company, and was ready to execute the cruel
commandment of those Governors, and that also with more rigor then he needed
have done; it is very specially to be marked how God dealt with him, to make
him see his rigourous and unconscionable handling of his good servants, by
casting a fear upon him that made him desperate: and not only so, but showed
him mercy by them whom he had used cruelly, so that he was converted both from
that, and from all other his wicked ways, in so strange a manner, that it rang
all the city over, that all the rest of them that had been partakers in that
odious fact against Gods faithful servants, might be provoked by his example,
to turn from their wickedness also.

But as I said, The sfirst part: The behavior of Paul and Silas in prison:
wherein three things are to be considered.
my meaning is not to stand largely upon both these parts of the text. Noting
therefore two or three points in the first, I will lay forth the conversion of
the Iailer more particularly and fully afterward, which is the second. The
things which I have thought good to show and lay down in the first part, are
three. Paul and Silas, and the ioyfulnesse of them in their suffering for well
doing.

Concerning the first, namely, Gods dealing with his, First: that God stands
by his servants in their troubles.
we may see in this Scripture, that he does not bring his servants into the
briars, I mean great dangers, and then leave them to shift for themselves how
they can, as the manner of the devil is to do, as also his instruments do,
which learn of him. But God vpholdeth and comfort them in the midst
thereof, when a man which looks but to the outward face of things, would say,
they are desolate, they are undone and utterly forsaken. This is a point that
may be clearly seen here, as it were in a glass, for Paul and Silas were
brought into many and sore perils for doing their duty, and for casting the
devil out of the possessed maid; all the city both Governors and people were
against them, so that after scourging they were cast into prison, until
further sentence should be given upon them. They found no friends in the place:
what should I say? they might (a man would have thought) severally have cried
out, and have made that woeful complaint, which the Prophet made in the anguish
of his soul, saying: there is no grief like to my grief. Lament. 1.12.
And how far were they off in man's judgment, from that woe, which is not
every woe, Eccles. 4.10.
when it is said, woe to him that is alone.

But here we must look up higher, and lift up the eyes of our minds, and
behold whether God be absent from them also, or against them as all men were.
But we see that to be far otherwise: for we behold him so ready and present at
hand, that it might have been said by him which had a good eye, of Paul and
Silas, as Elisha said to his servant full of fear, when armies of the Aramites
were about the house to take him, 2. King. 6.16.
that they had more with them then against them. So the Lord being with Paul
and Silas, what hurt could they all do to them, who were against them? And that
was so apparent, that whereas men lying in prison are commonly filled with
deadly sorrow, and are at their wits end; these were in the midst of joy; in
so much that they expressed the same by singing a Psalm.

Act. 12.11. Dan. 6.22.
Even as he did accompany Peter with an Angel in the like condition, and was
present with Daniel in the Lions den, so he was with Paul and Silas at this
time. So that though Satan coming first as a tempter to allure to sin,
comes afterward as an accuser, Matthew. 27.
to condemn for sinning: and although the high Priests toled Judas with money
and fair allurements to betray his Master; but when he being wounded in his
conscience for his so doing, brought the money again to them, and complaining
in what distress he was; they left him in the snare, and bad him shift for
himself; yet the Lord does not so to his.

But if they suffer hardness for his sake, and at his commandment, yet that may
be verified in them, which is written by the Apostle, 2. Cor. ^.8. and 6.10.
though they be afflicted on every side, yet they are not in distress nor
forsaken; and though they sorrow in the world, yet they always rejoice to
Godward: and though they have nothing in their penury; yet they possess all
things by contentation. And even when they feel it not, by reason of their
weak faith, yet it is with them as it was with Gedeon, when great heaviness
was upon him, the Angel of God saying to him, Judge. 6.12.
God is with thee thou valiant man. This is the condition of Gods people, so
that as he showed his presence to Paul and Silas even in the deep and dark
prison, so does he to all that trust in him, in what affliction soever.

Let all such rejoice, says he in the Psalm, Psalm 5.11.
who knew it so well, yea let them triumph for ever, yea let them that love thy
name (O Lord) rejoice: for in what weak estate soever they be, Psalm 3.4.
he is their buckler to defend them from their strongest enemies, and when they
be most contemptible, yet they may be bold to believe it, and to profess their
faith and say, they are in honorable account with him. And whereas it is
demanded, why then are they so cast down in their troubles, dismayed and
uncomfortable. It is (I answer) all long of this, John 20.25.
that they fail in believing, as Thomas did, because he saw not with bodily
eyes Christ Jesus in presence; but when their faith is set on work, then
appear they more then conquerors, for by it only they prevail, according to
the Apostles words; This is the victory that overcomes the world, 1. John
5.4.
even your faith. And this of the first point, namely how God forsakes not his
in their trouble, but stands by them.

The second is, The second point. How Gods children are affected in their
troubles.
how the godly are affected in their sufferings (unless they forget
themselves, and fail through their own default) and that is as Paul and Silas
were, I mean joyful and comfortable. No otherwise need they be minded, if
they did duly consider their liberty; nay I say more, if they did well weigh
the commandment of the Lord, which is, Phil. 4.4.
that they should do so. For thus he says: rejoice in the Lord always (and
therefore in tribulation) and lest he should be thought to speak rashly, and
not well advised, he doubleth his words, saying, again I say, rejoice. Which
commandment if it were obeyed, they might find a great part of heaven* (that I
may speak to their full comfort) more then they do* here upon the earth.

But as it is truly said of Paul and Silas, that they sung for joy when their
feet were pinned in the stocks, and that also in the inward prison; and so of
David the Scripture affirms, that when he was in ieopardie of death, 1. Sam.
30.6.
he comforted himself in his God; so there is no let or cause on Gods behalf,
why it should not be so now with the rest of his dear children; he could
willingly afford it them. But as it comes to pass, that the things that are
most precious, are also rare; so in this one it is most true, that as comfort
in affliction, and specially in the greatest, is more worth and more to be
accounted of, then gold or the best earthly treasure; so is it also more hard
to be found and enjoyed.

How great was the glory of it in the Martyrs, the Adversaries themselves
being judges, and in others that in grievous pains and sickness lie
comfortable and joyful? And so should it be still, if it were more regarded
and better looked to. Why troubles are so unwelcome to us.
But in that it is not so, what other reason can be alleged of it, but this,
that the Lord using his, to a more liberal and full diet, and giving them more
variety of earthly benefits; they find such sweetness and savor in them, that
when wants come or other hardship, they are more hardly borne, and stooped to:
(even as children daintily brought up, cannot away with bare and course
commons.) Especially if this be added, that because they are not much encumbred
with afflictions, and those that they have laid on them, be not sore nor
grievous; therefore when any come upon them of any weight indeed, they cast
them off, as impatient in bearing the burden.

Psalm 73.14.
Neither let any say to me this, that the children of God are always under the
cross, neither are they long without some afflictions, Psalm 126.5.
seeing their life is compared to a sowing in tears. As our outward troubles
are many, so are our blessings also.
For notwithstanding this; many are their outward blessings also, especially
where the pure preaching of the Gospel is enjoyed: for many troubles may be
easily swallowed up, where that is, to help to digest them. And yet what poor
and weak commendation may be given of the joyful welcoming of the troubles
which are sent to such for the most part? And this to be true which I say,
those times do prove, wherein they have some load of affliction laid upon them,
for what earnest seeking to God is in them, or patience to bear them? Indeed,
if they continue, or wax more grievous, so that they can neither avoid them,
neither is there any hope of earthly help left unto them, to come out of them:
then perhaps, and not till then for the most part, when they see no other
remedy, it may be seen, that God is sought unto seriously, and then they
stir up their faith to lay hold of assistance from God with some confidence,
when all other help fails.

For example, when by some sore visitation and sickness, that is like to be
unto death, God awaketh any of his, (the disease permitting and giving liberty
to the party afflicted, for some sickness is more violent then other,) it may
be seen sometime, that he lies more like unto one that preaches, and gives
encouragement and exhortation to repentance joyfully; rather then as one ready
to die: but how rare is this to see? for in many smaller troubles, perhaps
patience will hardly be found. And whereas some of Gods corrections cause
sorrow only to the afflicted, without pain to the body, as the loss of
friends or goods; some cause sorrow that comes from pain, as sickness and
grievous diseases: it may be that the former may work some good now or then;
but for the most part, the latter (if extremity hinder not) leave the best
fruit behind them.

Howsoever it be, there is no doubt, but that this grace is too much wanting,
and the rather it is the less sought, seeing we lean too much to temporary
holds and stays, and for that our hearts run after earthly things
inordinately, as health, riches, peace, etc. though we see by long experience,
that there is no hold of them, nor any safe resting in them. And this lingering
here like Lots wife, Genesis 19.26.
must be purged out of us and chased from us, or else we shall degenerate from
the faithful in former ages, and show too truly, that we be not led with
their spirit, when we being so nestled here, can so hardly go out of our
selves, to welcome the troubles which God sends to weane us from hence, and
do not rather pray that we may rejoice under them, and be thankful in them.

The third thing in this first part of the text, is: The third point: They that
pursue Gods servants* shall have small cause of rejoicing in the end.
that evil persons shall have small cause in the end to rejoice of their hard
proceedings against the servants of God, howsoever they pursue them with great
delight; for God will surely take part with them against their enemies. As
here we see in the Iailer, whom he terrified, while Paul and Silas sung for
joy; in so much that he and other his companions, when they heard it, might see
that they had a God that could and would comfort them, when he himself their
wicked adversary thought he had laden them with anguish and sorrow; and that
this their God could astonish him with fears and desperateness, when they
whom he oppressed were merry.

How God does this in the world to come, it is clear enough by that Scripture
to the Thessalonians, where it is said; 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
That it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble his, and to them that are troubled, rest; when the Lord Jesus shall
show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire. Indeed in
this world that is not always seen, but yet God does it even here also,
while he professes, Genesis 12.3.
that he will bless them that bless his, and curse them that curse his, and
while he shows fearful judgments upon them who did sore vex his good
servants, and constrains other to cry out, and with their own mouths to
acknowledge, that he plagueth them for their sakes, whom they hated and
persecuted.

Examples.
For examples of the first kind Zidkiiah is one, the arch-prophet of Baal, who
did not only feed Ahab with lies and false messages, as from God, when he
demanded of him what the will of God was in a doubtful and weighty case; 1.
King. 22.25.
but also smote Micaiah the true Prophet of the Lord, and withstood him for
speaking the truth. For this very cause he was constrained afterward with
fear to hide him from chamber to chamber. Numb. 16.30.
Another example of the first kind is Corah with his company, for resisting
and rising against Moses the true servant of God, charging him to be an usurper
of the Priests office, and to take too much upon him, and himself to be Gods
true Priest: for the which, as Moses witnesses, he was swallowed up of the
earth with those which were of his conspiracy.

Examples of the latter sort, is Pharaoh, who after ten warnings by God in
strange punishments, for not letting the people of Israel go to serve the Lord
out of his land, but pursuing them still even into the sea, was in the midst
thereof drowned, when he was constrained to confess that the Lord took part
with Israel against him, all the Egyptians saying, We will fly from the face
of Israel, Exodus 14.25.
for the Lord sighteth for them against the Egyptians. Another example is
Judas, who betraying his Master into the hands of the high Priests for money,
was compelled to confess before them that set him on work, in a most heavy
torment of conscience, casting the money again before them, Matthew. 27.4.
I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood.

By all these it appears, that they shall have small cause to glory of their
winnings in the end, who offer hard measure to Gods people, the Lord himself
crying out thus unto them, Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no
harm. Psalm 105.15.
Neither let any object here, that they know them not to be such, for so they
will affirm in their mad mood and rail on them, who yet, when they will
speak, as they are persuaded in good aduisednesse, will say of them, as Saul
did of David, that he was more righteous then he, 1. Sam. 24.18. Dan. 6.20.
and as the King of Babylon said to Daniel, thou art the servant of the most
high God. So let faithful Christians rest in their innocence, and in the
witness of a good conscience, and let them count it banqueting cheer, to be
accompanied with that; and their greatest enemies which want it, shall often
count them blessed, and desire to taste of their dainties, howsoever they
oftentimes set themselves against them. And thus much be said of the first
part, and of the three points thereof.

The second follows, The second part of the text. The conversion of the
Jailer. Three things here to be marked.
and that is concerning the conversion of the Iailer. For the better
understanding whereof, and the use which we are to make of it, three things are
to be marked. The first, what his estate was before his conversion: the second,
the means whereby he was converted, and the third, the effects that followed
his conversion, and were proofs and fruits of the same.

His estate before he was turned to God was wicked, as all other men's is: but
more laid out in three things, by which we may the easilier judge of his whole
life besides. Paul and Silas, his desperatenes in his affliction, minding to
have killed himself, and by consequent his sensuality and drunkenness in his
prosperity while he enjoyed it.

Paul's words dissuading him from hurting himself: and thirdly, how they
wrought upon him, and that was so far, as that they turned his heart toward
them, and he sought to be comforted of them. All these did set him forward,
though afar off, to his conversion: in so much as, although they wrought it
not, yet without these he had never come to the other, which were more near
means thereof, and did effect it. The latter kind of means were also three.
First, he desired to know of them how he might be saved. Secondly Paul's
answer, that he must believe. And thirdly, his teaching him how: whereupon he
received and consented to the doctrine, so that he believed in the Lord Jesus,
and was converted.



The estate of the Iailer before his conversion.
Now, according to the parts of this story, I will proceed to speak of every
one in order. And first, to begin with the estate that he was in before his
conversion, somewhat is to be noted of it in general, and then his particular
sins are to be considered. Generally, this is to be observed, that he being
profane, Ephesians. 2 12. and 4.17.
and (as he showed himself) ignorant, and without God in the world; as Paul
speaks of all the Gentiles, I say, it is to be observed, how vile and
wretched we are before God show his work of mercy upon us: even filthy and
unclean, stinking in our sins, loathsome to God, and even to men also, who
are themselves any better guided and graced.

The which to be true, the saying of Ezechiel does most clearly show: who
brings God in to speak thus, with many other words to the like purpose, When
I passed by thee, Ezech. 16.6.
I saw thee polluted in thine own blood; in thy nativity when thou wast borne
thy navel was not cut, thou wast not washed in water to soften thee: thou wast
not salted with salt, no eye pitied thee, etc. showing hereby, that before God
wash us and give life to us, there is nothing but filthiness and death. Thus
the Scripture brandeth the woman of Samaria, John 4.18.
(though she afterward brought many to Christ) with a note of infamy, that she
had been an harlot; that she had been full of ignorance, maliciousness, a
scorner, etc. And Zacheus, Luke 19.7.8.
though his repentance was famous, had been a sore griper and deceiuer, and
Paul had been a persecuter, 1. Tim. 1.13.
a blasphemer and an oppressor.

And such a miserable person was this Iailer. For though there was no direct
occasion offered to Saint Luke to lay out his whole wicked course; yet by the
few sins that were expressly mentioned to have been in him, or by necessary
consequence, it may be easily gathered that he was such an one: which sins
seeing they were settled in him by long custom, as habites and courses of life,
they did both rule him, and also drew many like companions to them, to make him
a vassal and slave of the devil. And so it is with all, though all break not
forth into the same notorious evils.

Well might the Prophet Jeremy therefore say, Lament. 3.22.
it is the Lords mercy that we live and breath, and are not utterly consumed.
And all may wonder that he will pity us, and be patient toward us, in giving
us a time of repentance: as they that believe do when they find it so, and it
should humble the proudest, and shame and fear them that are not so; even as
it houldeth all in lowlines and abasement ever after, who have found from him a
gracious deliverance out of such intolerable bondage. And the use that should
be made of the very knowledge of this miserable condition of man, is no less
then I have set down, even as humble and thankful walking with God ought
always to accompany those who have escaped it, as I have said.

But alas, though there may be seen some such duty to be practiced of the
latter, I mean the faithful; yet no spark of shame or sorrow for so great
calamity can be perceived to be in the former, that is, the ungodly: in so much
that a man would think there were no such vengeance hanging over them as I
speak of, if he should mark the looseness, boldness and security of such;
and neither any damnation waiting them, either old or young, men or women: when
(yet) it is the senselessenes of them through unbelief, that they giving no
credit to the Scriptures, which in every place do prove it to be so;
therefore they fear nothing, no not the greatest woe, till it come upon them,
and that they feel it. This is that which we have to note of and by the estate
of the Iailer in general.

His particular sins. 1. Cruelty.
Of his particular sins, cruelty is the first, accompanied with adulation and
slavery; he being ready to put in execution that which was most unjustly
commanded him. But besides that, he did (I say, exercise cruelty upon the
servants of God, in doing more then he was enjoined. For he was bidden but to
keep them safe; which he might have done; if he had but put them in the common
prison. And yet he would not have done that, if there had been but civility,
especially any dram of compassion in him, but would have kept them sure in his
own house, they being neither murderers nor rebels, nor like to be dangerous
persons; but he most cruelly cast them into the bottom of the prison, even
into a dungeon, and yet even there made their feet fast in the stocks.

The barbarous and savage act of this Iailer is set down to withhold all that
hear of it from that sin, and to shame them that practice the same or the
like cruelty: not only for that God has threatened, Matthew. 7.1.
that with what measure men meat it shall be measured to them again, and that
judgment shall be without mercy to them that are merciless, James 2.13.
but also seeing it is unnatural to be cruel. If any receive sentence of
death for his just deserts, as Achan: or iniustly, as our Savior did, yet if
thereto should be added other vexations, as mocking, railing, Josh. 7.19.
etc. that were cruelty: therefore Joshua showed mercy on Achan, to bring him
to repentance, when he was adjudged to die; but the cruel Jews and soldiers
were accused of beastly cruelty, and that most justly: Matthew. 27. verse. 28.
etc.
when Christ being to be crucified, was also handled despitefully and mocked of
them.

Saul's cruelty to his son Jonathan, 1. Sam. 14.44.
who would have put him to death for tasting a little honey with the top of his
spear when he fainted, to revive himself; was most savage and unnatural. Not
unlike unto it is that barbarousnes and unmerciful dealing of step-mothers and
step-dames to orphans and poor succorlesse children, whom they use worse then
many a bad man will use his beast, when yet nature teaches them that they can
never show kindness and tender compassion enough to their own children. For
which cause the Jews in using correction, were stinted by the Lord, that they
should not give above forty stripes at once. Deuteronomy. 25.3.


And for the same cause, to meet with their cruelty, God commanded that an
eye should be put out in him that had done the like; and a tooth for a tooth,
to bridle them. Exodus 21.24.
And how was that servant dealt with in the Gospel, who being forgiven ten
thousand talents by his Lord, would not forgive his fellow servant an hundred
pence, but laid hands on him and throtled him, saying, pay me that thou owe?
Matthew. 18.28.
His Lord was wroth with him, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due to him.

And as all cruelty is fearful and monstrous, so that which arises from
envy and hatred, is devilish. According to that which Solomon says: Anger is
cruel, and wrath is raging; Prou. 27.4.
but who can stand before envy? But not to say that which yet might to good
purpose be said, to make this sin odious unto us, let them who have advantage
of their neighbors by forfetting their bonds into their hands, and all
superiors who may use poor strangers, fatherless ones, and poor servants at
their pleasure, and finally all, whosoever they be, beware of hard-heartednesse
and cruelty which it brings forth, especially of envy, knowing that they
have a Master and a Superior in heaven, who will recompense such brutish
barbarousnesse, and as they desire that all other should do the same to them,
let them exercise and practice mercy and compassion, kindness, gentleness,
meekness, and such like virtues.

His second sin^^ Desperateness.
The second sin apparently to be seen in the Iailer, was desperateness:
which was such, that when he arose out of his sleep by the fearful
earthquake at midnight, and saw the prison doors open, he drew out his sword
and would have killed himself, supposing the prisoners had been fled. Such a
sin is this desperateness, that when men have losses, displeasure of their
betters, or other great discommodities, or when they be but stricken with the
fear thereof, they have no stay of themselves, but without all consideration
are carried by it, as by a whirlewind, to very madness. Oh, if men be crossed,
having no grace to uphold them, they are beside themselves, and at their wits
end.] Many marvel, when the story is remembered in company, at the murmuring
of the children of Israel, Exodus 16.3.
when they had no food in the second month of their entering into the
wilderness, their store being spent that they brought with them out of Egypt.
And it must be confessed, that it was their sin, that they murmured against
God when they were in need. But alas, we who] are ready to censure them do
much worse: for we grudge when we have no want but abundance, if any thing go
against us. Indeed, while all things go with us to our hearts desire, and we
live in prosperity, we can praise God, as though we were not inferior to the
forwardest in religion: but if God lay his hand upon us, Job 1.11.
we will (as Satan says in Job) even curse him to his face. Examples want not,
even of such as are of the visible Church. Judge. 17.2.
The woman spoken of in the Judges, Micahs mother, when she had lost her money,
what was her refuge to the easing of her heart, but cursing?

2. Sam. 17.23.
When Achitophels counsel was refused of Absalom, which had bin in great
account, was he able to put up that disgrace? No, but he was so thoroughly vexed
for it, that he recovered not himself, 1. Sam. 28.7. etc.
but went and hanged himself. Saul had banished the witches out of his land,
according to the commandment of the Lord; yet when he was in a strait (for all
the commandment) he enquired for one, and asked counsel of her. But oh, that
we in this age had learned wisdom and constancy in the service of God, to be
faithful to him in our troubles, as we profess it to be our duty in peace.

But I fear we are not behind the worst of these in the committing of this
sin, but before them rather. For they murmured in great distresses; but we in
very small trials, as though we could bear nothing, neither suffer our selves
to be crossed in the smallest things: but we fly to our shelter, which is by
anger, rage, cursing* impatience or threatenings, if not by worse shifts to
avenge our selves, when we should rather be ashamed to be so disguised.
Especially considering who we are, and from whence we come; even from worse
then the dunghill, and should marvel that we be not consumed, rather then
think much to be touched, yea with the little finger, when we suffer justly
whatsoever we suffer, yea the most grievous calamities: according to the saying
of the Prophet in the Lamentations: Wherefore does the living man complain?
Lament. 3.39.
man suffers for his sin.

And this were more fit to be done of us (a wise man would think) rather then
that we should be led with such frenzy, which I say not is monstrous in them
that go for godly, but an utter shame for those that are mere natural men,
being trained up under true religion, and living in the light of the Gospel.
And they that cannot submit themselves to this instruction (which in their own
consciences they cannot but confess they ought to do) let them see their
bondage and acknowledge their sin, that so they may make way to the obtaining
of pardon and amendment.

The third sin to be noted in the Iailer, His third sin: Sensuality in
prosperity.
was the resting and pleasing of himself in his prosperity, when he enjoyed
it. For this sensuality is in carnal men, that if they may have their hearts
desire in the things that are of price in this world, they are made drunken
therewith. And therefore much more he must needs be so, who was a Pagan, and
knew nothing of heaven, to hold him within compass. And although this sin be
not expressly said to have been in him, yet by necessary consequence, it is
gathered to have been so, by a reason drawn from contraries: for whosoever is
desperate in his losses, and is brought to his wits end for the same, he
(doubtless) made his prosperity and the enjoying of his goods,

Even as the contrary is said of Job, that he lost his riches without any
great grief; therefore he enjoyed them (while he had them) without any great
love. To be sensual in prosperity, a greater sin then to be impatient in
adversity.
And this sin, to become disguised and made drunken with the commodities
which a man enjoys, is far worse then to be impatient for the loss of
them, and brings for^h many greater inconveniences. For such not only love
them, and their pleasures which they follow thereby, 2. Tim. 3.4.
more then God, which is idolatry; but also they do by means of them, more
boldly commit any sin, Prou. 18.11.
that they delight in, seeing they make their riches their strong hold. It
would not be thought to be true, but that men have bewrayed what lies hidden
in their heart, by their tongue; that many, and those of no great patrimony
neither, so as they might enjoy the estate they live in here, they would with
all their heart give over all hope or interest in heaven which might possibly
abide them.

And what place is there for instruction in such? This sin is called the
pride of life; 1. John 2.16.
namely, to glory in that which men have, and that they may hear of no
adversity, but health, wealth, ease, credit, favor with their betters, and
advancement above others, is their paradise, from the which to be plucked, is
vexation to them, and the most deadly tormenting that could befall them. And by
these three sins we may gather, what the Iailer was in the whole course of his
life, in which these three bare sway, and other sins which did accompany
them. And like to him is the condition of all other, while they be strangers
and enemies to God; and yet behold greater abomination then this; namely, that
they wax hardened in this estate, and worse and worse, rather then fit to be
called back, and to be reclaimed.

Oh therefore, what hope was there either of him, that he might be made a
Christian, or of other like unto him, to be brought back from such a disguised
estate? And therefore what a wonderful work of God is it, to convert such to
a contrary condition and course, so that neither they would, although they
might without punishment, wallow again in that mire, after they be washed;
neither can they in a long time be pacified nor quiet in themselves afterward,
to remember what manner of persons, and how vile and odious they have been. And
seeing the Lord did show such a work of mercy upon this wretched man, let us
see further into it, and by what means he brought it to pass, as shall follow
in the next Sermon.

THE SECOND SERMON CONTINVED Upon the same text.
IN the former Sermon I said before, The means of his conversion.
some of these means of his conversion were more nearly adjoined unto it, and
some were further off; I will speak of both, as occasion is offered. The first
mean a far off.
Of those which were further off, this was the first, that the Lord sent a
mighty earthquake, whereby he awaked him, and seeing the prison doors opened;
such astonishment and fear of the runming away of the prisoners took hold of
him, that he was at the point to have killed himself. Paul, to whom he was a
deadly enemy, that he might be a mean to save his life, rather then that he
should miscarie. And for the other part of the objection, whether that
desperateness of his, was a mean of his conversion, I say, it was (though a
far off) as God handled the matter.

For by this shaking and fearing him, his iollity was abated, his pride
allayed, and he was, though not tamed, yet in a good way to it, and well
prepared for it, as appears by that which follows, when this was added
thereto, that Paul had so kindly dissuaded him from hurting himself, and in so
fit a season. And as we say in the proverb, that sometime the furthest way
about is the nearest way home; so by Gods good hand it was in this; that the
trouble and vnsetling of him, that was like to have sent him to hell, the Lord
used as a mean of his conversion and salvation. There is no doubt, but that
many felt the earthquake, as well as he, and yet never were the better for it,
as he was; neither should he have been, but that the Lord intended and purposed
it.

Doctrine
And here we may learn, that God goes about to do them good who are his
utter enemies, when they little dream of any such thing; and he entendeth
their good, when they neither observe nor consider it. To speak more
particularly, in sending crosses, sickness and sundry visitations, men at the
first do in their rashness and haste, rage against God and curse him; whereby
they show, that this is all the good that they can draw out of them. But if the
Lord do intend and mean their good by sending them, he will pull down their
stomachs, and make them see themselves thereby, and how little they shall
gain by setting up their bristles against him. Yea he will make them glad of
the help and counsel of such, as they did before both scorn and abhor, 1.
Sam. 24.17.
as in the example of Saul we may see, who for all his loftiness and iollitie,
was cast down, as they who are most mean and miserable; and full glad of
David's kindness to him.

This bridling of the rage of wicked men, and breaking of their hearts by
afflictions, though it be not repentance, yet God uses them as means to bring
them thereto in time and by degrees; I speak this of such as the Lord will
honor and do good unto. And they that do well weigh it, shall see, that it may
well be so. For as they who will make crooked things straight, do bow them a
contrary way, that so they may the easilier bring them betwixt both, which is
to be straight and right: so the Lord, when he entends to make a proud man
humble and meek, he will break his heart with sorrow and affliction,
wherewith when he has been thoroughly exercised, he is the fitter to be
brought to the mean betwixt both, that is, broken-heartednes and humility.

For as a log in the deep mire, having long lien therein is so fastened to the
place, as it is impossible to remove or pluck it out, unless it be loosened
and turned into another place; but being so handled, it may with ease be taken
out: Even so, if a man set upon his dregs, I mean, being riuited into his
sins, be not loosened from them by some terror and heart-smart, though he
be brought never the nearer to repentance thereby, yet he shall (if he be such
a one as God will show mercy unto) he shall (I say) much more easily be
persuaded thereto. According to that which we say in our common speech, and
that truly, of a wicked man bent to his will and to live licentiously, that he
is never like to amend and come to good, unless the Lord awake him by some
great affliction.

This manner of Gods dealing with men, to bring them to so happy an estate by
so unlikely means, and so far off, should teach the men of this age, that
wisdom, having knowledge, which the ignorant cannot learn, that in their
troubles and astonishments, they should not think that they are punished seeing
God takes delight therein; and so wax hardened: but to know, that they not
humbling their hearts to seek the Lord by preaching, and by Gods benefits,
they have need to be awaked by his judgments, and that he does therefore
afflict them, that they may know they are far gone in their evil course,
that so they may lay surer hold of his word, and take direction and counsel
from thence, to be brought to God.

But let us see how God wrought by the second mean that was far off, and so,
how he brought him on by degrees to true conversion. The second mean: Paul's
care of his life.
This second mean was Paul's care of him in his desperate estate, to hinder and
dissuade him from offering violence to himself, and his kindness toward him,
in ouercomming evil with good. For whereas the Iaylor had showed himself
cruel toward him, Romans 12.21.
when he had given him no cause so to do, and therefore looked for no good
will at his hands (if possibly he should stand in never so great need thereof)
behold he had no greater friend then him, whom he had deserved to be his
greatest enemy: for even by him was his life preserved.

This when he weighed and considered, which he could not but see, Paul so
earnestly beseeching him to do himself no harm, who had not otherwise been
held back from killing himself, I say, when he laid these things together, he
was again amazed at this, but in another manner and better, then before. For
before, his heart was troubled desperately, thinking what loss he was like to
have; but now he was moved in a more commendable manner, to see Paul's unlooked
for kindness toward him. This began to draw his heart toward Paul; which (we
know) must needs be a great change, from that which was before.

The beauty of virtue and grace in Gods servants.
And by this we may mark the beauty of virtue and grace in Gods servants, how
greatly it moves the hearts even of wicked men. Surely, if they were careful
that their light might shine in good conversation among men, they should not a
little provoke them out of their bad course, and to be in love with a better.
I do not deny but it most moves them, when it brings any benefit to them,
as here Paul's love and care did to the Iaylor: they had double force to work
upon him. And although it help much (I grant) to the further drawing him on
toward goodness, yet that only was not to be seen in him, but that did beat
into him a persuasion, that he was a good man, and was able to do him good
also, and therefore a little after he desired to know of him how he might be
saved.

So that kindness and harmelesnes, and other fruits of love, if they were more
usually and plentifully showed forth by Christians, they would (undoubtedly)
pearce the hearts of many wicked men, and cause them to think that they are
far from the course which they should walk in. For though many scorners and
profane persons do trample goodness and good men under their feet; yet the
beauty of piety and Christianity does much move and avail with many. As we
see by Peter's words to Christian women, where he says: Let the wives be
subject to their husbands, 1. Pet. 3.1.
that even they that obey not the word, may without the word be won by the
conversation of their wives.

But especially, if Gods servants would, as opportunity is offered, show their
love in seeking to win them to God, and to help them toward eternal life;
much more should they persuade them to forsake their bad course, and to embrace
a better. As our Savior Christ talking with that woman of Samaria, brought her
to repentance. John 4.
And this be said of the second mean of the conversion of the Iaylor, though
far off: which as it was a degree before the former, so they who are moved as
he was, are sensibly set forward, as he was; though I deny not, but that
many coming thus far, and further from their evil course, may yet be far
enough off from true conversion.

But let us hear the third mean, The third mean: His cleaving to the
Apostles.
which the second now spoken of, procured and brought forth: and that is a
nearer degree to goodness, then the former. And this it is, that he conceived
so well of them, of Paul and Silas, I mean, that for all the commandment of
the Magistrate, he brought them out of the prison, and fell down before them,
in token of reverence to them, and so fell to near acquaintance with them, who
being good men, it gave hope of his further good taking by them. And here I
will stay a while to teach how we may profit by this.

To this end, this I say, The benefit of familiarity with Gods servants.
that as his near clinging and cleaving to them, was another mean to bring
him to true conversion; even so God uses the familiarity and acquaintance
that wicked men have with his servants* to this end, that they may distaste
their former course, and bring them to hear the word preached, and so in time
to be changed. Thus many become believers in Christ, by company and
acquaintance with Preachers; who being appointed by Christ to be fishers of
men, do show the love to them, Matthew. 4.19. John 21.15.
that Christ showed to themselves before, that if they be men of God indeed,
they will lay open to them their treasures, which they have gathered out of the
hoard of the Gospel, and impart the same unto them.

John 21.15.
that as they love him they should feed his lambs and his sheep; and again,
that they who turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever; they labor through love to
persuade them to give over their sinful and bad course, Psalm. 34.8.
and to taste and see how good the Lord is in his word, to such as turn to him.

And the people who converse with such, if they be appointed to salvation,
shall embrace such kindness offered unto them, and how far off soever they
have been from the assurance of it, and from true godliness, yet, by good
instruction and example, they shall most readily look after both. And thus God
wrought in the Iaylor, and thus he works in many. As examples hereof are many
in the book of the Acts of the Apostles, where Paul traveled among the
ignorant nations; so I can truly say, upon mine own remembrance almost forty
years agone, (and yet in those times the light of the Gospel shined nothing
so clearly as it has done since) that by familiar companying betwixt the
faithful Minister of God and the ignorant people, the Lord wrought wonderfully
and mightily amongst them. And I am sure the fruit of the Gospel that has
been since in those parts, (that I say no more) and that is to be seen at this
day, did flow from that wellspring, and had the beginning there. The Lord did
bless weak means, when they were used in simplicity, and that in admirable
manner, when the subtlety of the wicked was not yet at those times grown to
such an height, to dismay the people in their first beginnings. But since those
days, some of them, though seeking to grow up in further measure of knowledge
and grace, and to bring on others by their example, have met with such
discouragements, that they have not answered (I speak not of all particular
persons) as many other have done, to the hope that they gave so long before, by
many degrees.

But while I show how the Iaylor and many other have taken so great good by the
company and fellowship of Gods servants, it is not to be passed by, Many that
may enjoy this benefit, look not after it.
how little use many make of such good means now a days. Who although they
dwell near godly Preachers, yea and are ready enough in civil manner to have
their conuersing with them, yet in things pertaining to God and to eternal
life, they have no appetite to them. Which I speak to their shame, seeing so
much good might be gotten thereby. For what though they dwell near such, and
have thereby acquaintance with them, yet many further off, seeking heartily to
take good by them, are in far better case, and show themselves far wiser,
because their desire is far greater to benefit themselves by them.

For even as the corn that is kindly sown in the field, though it be held
back by unseasonable weather, is in far better case, then that which grows
on the house top, though it be forwarder in the blade, and comes sooner to
earing: Even so it is with them, wisdom is easy to find of them that seek
it diligently, though they be further off from the means, then they who may
enjoy them with more ease, when there is not an heart in them to take good by
them as they may. Thus ye see the first three means, though a far off, by
which God brought the Iaylor, and so does many other by the like, to
conversion. All which degrees tending thereto, though I grant, that many go
beyond them all, and never attain thereto; yet in those who have been further
off, if they be such as God will call, they have brought them on in such wise,
that they have set them forward to faith and repentance.

Ye have heard lastly of the means of the Iaylors conversion, which are more
remote and further off: The means of the Iaylors conversion which are more
near.
Now follow those which are more near, and did effect the same. Of the which
the first is, 1. His question about salvation.
that he questioned with them about his salvation saying; Sirs, what must I do
to be saved? And that we may know that he asked not this question, idly,
vainly, or curiously; but seriously from his heart, and being urged by
necessity, it is said, that he came trembling, and fell down before them:
and in that fear and terror he moved the question. Whereby it appeared, that
he had heard somewhat from them, that caused fear of Gods wrath, and doubting
of, and about his salvation, and thereby was brought so willingly unto them to
seek help. And this came nearer the matter, I mean his conversion, then all
that went before.

Doct.
And now for our instruction, this teaches, that when a wicked person, When a
loose person doubts that all is not well with him, he is in the way to true
conversion.
who has walked at his own liberty, ignorantly, and profanely, as the most
part do, whether he have any light and wandering thoughts about his salvation,
or no; I say, when such a one begins to tremble and fear that all will not
go well with him, but that his sins having found him out, do threaten his
damnation, and thereupon begins to make question about his salvation, what
he should do to attain to it; then he comes toward conversion and true
repentance; then there begins to be some hope of him: And although, I know
that such fearful thoughts do sometime vanish and come to nothing, and in
some they break into raging and despair, when they be not kindly and
seasonably wrought upon, yet where no such tozing and breaking of the heart is,
there (without all doubt) the party remains far off from all likelihood of
turning to God.

For notwithstanding we judge charitablie of them, who resort ordinarily and
willingly to the preaching of the Gospel; yea and conceive hope of others also
among us, though further off from goodness then they (as being mere
worldlings, ignorant, or vain persons) and we wait when God shall call such
to repentance (for he brings out of both sorts thereunto); yet till such time
that they begin to complain of their estate, and to cry out, not only
suspecting that all is not well with them, but also know it to be so, at
leastwise fear and feel it, and so ask counsel about it, there is no sound
approaching near unto God, to speak as the Scriptures do, namely, that the
whole need not the Physician, Matthew. 9.12.
and that it is the sick-hearted sinner, which seeks seriously for mercy and
forgiveness.

For as all that repair to Markets and Faires, go not to buy, (but many are
wily wanderers, who go to gaze, Genesis 34.1.
to see and to be seen, as Dinah did) but such as want provision for their
families both cheap and buy; even so, they who are pinched with seeing their
necessity and want of Gods favor, and yet are persuaded, that without it,
they cannot be saved, nor have any peace; they beside going out to hear, will
also question further about their estate, and in the heaviness of their hearts
will say to the Lords Merchants, who are furnished with all store fit for them;
Sirs, what shall we do to be saved? that so we may attain thereto.

But this is further to be marked, Unto whom such should repair.
that as the Iaylor here sought out for himself, and moved question about his
salvation, was persuaded that they were both able to tell him that which he
asked them, and was resolved, as we see by that which follows, to rest upon
and embrace their answer, as from God; so there must be in those who are
pricked in their consciences, so much wisdom, as to repair to those men and
brethren, Acts 2.37.
who can and will resolve their doubts, and they must be also ready to
receive the same from their mouths, as from the messengers of God, when it
shall in the evidence of the spirit, and the persuasion of their consciences
be delivered unto them. For the word of God being rightly applied, will work
kindly upon them, and quiet them, whereas other comforts will not fasten on
them, nor satisfy them.

But until men do begin to question about their estate, they are in no
forwardnes toward their salvation. Acts 10.33.
even as Cornelius said unto Peter (when he came to his house to tell him what
he should do,) of himself, his kinsmen and especial friends; We are now
here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of him.
And thus much of the Iaylors question, one of the nearer means of his
conversion.

The second mean: The Apostles answer.
Now follows another of them, and that is the Apostles answer, namely, that
he should believe in the Lord Jesus, and he should be saved. This therefore is
well to be considered. For this was the thing which he stood in need of, and
that, without the which he could not be saved. For he being already thoroughly
troubled in his conscience, needed not to be urged to sorrow and prick of
heart, fearing damnation already for his horrible sins; but had need of
comfort rather through the forgiveness thereof, which he could no otherwise
obtain, but by faith. And therefore they required this of him, namely, that he
should believe in the Lord Jesus for the remission of his sins, rather then
any other thing, because having this, the love of Christ which he should see
thereby toward him, would constrain him, sooner then any thing else, to set
upon, and endeavor after the doing of his will, which is repentance.

Faith is not in our power, but the free gift of God.
Neither let any here gather by this, that it was in his power to believe, faith
being the free gift of God, but it was necessary that he should know so much,
namely, that he must believe, to the end he might both be the better prepared
to ask and learn of them how he should come to obtain it, and also esteem
more highly and preciously of it, which is the next way to come by it. This
point is the more to be marked, because that which I have said of the Apostles
words to him, must without any further labor, be received and applied to all
that are in the same estate that he was in.

For (to make this former exposition of their words to serve also for doctrine)
what is needful for any which are as the Iaylor was, terrified and troubled
with the fear of hell, and stricken with the wound of conscience for their
sins; I say, what is needful to such in any sort, like unto this, that they
should know they are all washed away by the blood of Christ? which is all one
as to believe in him, that he has pardoned them. Luke 19.10.
For to such as so feel themselves lost, is the promise made, so that they
believe not before the time, but have good leave and liberty from God so to
do, neither therefore ought they to neglect or refuse so to do, while they
feel what need and desire they have of it. And this be said of the Apostles
answer, which was the second mean of the Iailers conversion, more near.

The third follows, which was their preaching of the word of God unto him,
whereby he was brought to believe, The third: Their preaching of the word of
God unto him.
and so to be converted. Here for the clearing of this point, because it is
not particularly expressed what doctrine they preached, but only in general,
the word of God, it need not trouble any, what the things were which they
taught; for seeing it is said afterward, that he believed, it is manifest, that
they preached of such points to him as might work and beget faith in him. And
seeing he was already terrified, and full of anguish for that he saw himself
in the estate of damnation, it is certain, that they told him that he was in
the way to receive mercy.

And it is also out of doubt, that they preached this, What things they taught
him out of the word.
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save such as (in the case in which he
was) were void of all other hope. And that they taught him to apply wisely and
kindly his merits, as the only remedy and medicine fit to heal his deadly and
running sore: and that they heartened and encouraged him in Christ's name, to
lay hold of the same, and to believe and to be persuaded, that he was given and
sent into the world of his Father, to save and deliver from endless thraldom
and woe, such miserable sinners; and also that they answered his objections,
namely, that he doubted he came not to save such great sinners as he was, and
such like. For this is the doctrine that he had need to be thoroughly instructed
in, and furnished with, and all to this end, that he might be bold to believe
it.

Thus they preaching unto him, and confirming in him that which he had, namely,
the desire he had in that heavy estate of his, to be saved; and helping him to
that which he had not, that is, the promise of eternal life; God so wrought in
him thereby, that he embraced it, and rested upon it by faith, so that he, even
he appeared then, to be one of them for whom Christ died, and whom he came to
save: according to that which is said by the Apostle, faith comes by hearing
of the word of God preached: Romans 10.17. verse. 10.
and again, with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and consequently
to salvation. To that doctrine they (I mean Paul and Silas) added also this,
that he which believes, 1. John 3.3.
and has the hope that makes not ashamed, purges himself also from the
sin that he finds in himself, that as he is made the adopted son of God,
so he endeavors to resemble his father in purity, of the which more shall be
said afterward by a fitter occasion. And this of their preaching.

And this which I have said of the preaching of Paul and Silas to the Iailer,
does likewise instruct us, that the same doctrine is to be preached to all such
as are in his case, and they must know it, who hear; that if at any time God
exercise them, as he did him, with a troubled conscience for their sin, and
an unfeigned desire to be saved, they may long for the same promise of life, and
as they see what need they have of it, may be ready to embrace it, and by
faith to rest upon it, that so all tears may be wiped from the cheeks of
their soul, and they may be soundly comforted, or at least stayed for the
time, as their weakness will permit.

For this is the first and especial fruit of preaching to such as groan under
the burden of their sin, and lament after God, longing for pardon: there is
nothing able to ease their consciences and to give rest to their souls,
besides this, namely, that they believe that Jesus Christ is as ready to
release them of their sins, as they be desirous of it, and that they hold
this as confidently, as they believe any article of their faith.

Even so, That he so soon believed, was more then ordinary.
it was more then common and ordinary in the most hearers, that he so soon
and easily believed in Christ, that is to say, while they preached to him. For
although faith come by hearing, yet it is not always attained at the time of
hearing, especially in such a measure that a man can affirm and profess, that
he believes, and so is able to cry Abba, Romans 8.15.
that is, to call God Father, No nor immediately after neither, for the most
part, does a broken hearted sinner receive such light to believe; but is holden
in doubting and fear, and troubled with the greatness of his sins, and with
many other objections. For though Lydia, Zaccheus, and some other, Act. 16.15.
Luke 19.8.
by Christ's and the Apostles preaching believed by and by; yet with many it was
otherwise, even a harder matter, and namely with Paul himself, who was not
comforted nor released of his sins and burden of grief by Christ at
Damascus gates, when he was cast down and terrified by him, Act. 9.8.9. etc.
but sent into the city to receive further light and satisfaction to his
heavy heart from Christ by the ministry of Ananias, a disciple in the same
city; he was his instructor, who, if Paul had not now by Christ's gracious
goodness, been converted, should have have bin his prisoner. And this I
thought good to say, which may be in stead of an answer to such as object in
these our days, that many lie in sorrow and fear many days, and some, whole
years before they believe and receive comfort, and seldom at the same time,
when they are wounded and troubled first for their sins.

I say, Why some are holden under heaviness longer then other.
God does not always keep one and the same time in raising up such as are
brought low in themselves by the sight of their sins, but sometimes does it
sooner, sometimes later, even as the seed that is sown, comes not up always
together. And some are stayed and eased of their fear and grief before other,
both because they are not fit nor able to go under it any longer, and also that
their example may encourage other not to be dismayed, and that they themselves
being set at liberty, may the sooner help their brethren out of bondage. And
some are holden under a longer time, other because they have not been touched
deeply, but only in a passion, nor in good aduisednesse, but in a rash heat
and zeal, whose hot pangs are soon cooled without any comfort, or if they
have been truly humbled, yet for example to others or some other end best
known to God. And yet this I say, for the avoiding of scruple and doubt about
this matter, He is kindly pricked, who is kindly healed.
that he is kindly pricked, who is kindly healed; namely, who is partaker of
faith unfeigned, and proves the same by a godly and repentant life after, come
it sooner or later. And this be said of the means, both further off and
nearer, by the which the Iailer was brought to believe; and of his faith it
self.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
Having spoken of the points of the division, that is of the means by which he
was brought to believe, and of his believing it self. Before I proceed to
speak of the fruits of his faith, I will note briefly such particular things
beside, as both the text offers fit occasion of, and also will illustrate the
story of his conversion more clearly, from the 28. verse to the 33.

Verse 28.
Paul seeing this miserable Iailer in this extremity, that he was at the point
to have killed himself, what does he? It is worthy our marking. He does not
suffer him to kill himself, but calls to him to spare himself. Paul might have
had a good pretense to have let him go on to lay violent hands on himself. For
God had shaken the earth, to show himself angry with the Iailer for his
cruelty against his innocent servants: and now (as it might have seemed) he
would make this man a spectacle to persecutors; and Paul, if he had been many a
man, would have said, let him kill himself, I shall the more easily escape.
But he showed that his mind was far from revenge, Romans 12.21.
and ready to requite evil with good. And therefore he calls aloud to him,
least through distance of place, or his passion, he should not have been able
to hear him.

Whereby we must learn, not only to do no hurt, Doctrine.
but to love our enemy, according to Christ's commandment, even as if he were
our friend. Therefore Moses says; Exodus 23.5.
If thine enemies ox or ass fall under the burden, thou shall help him up
again: And as the Apostle says, be not over come of evil, Romans 12.21.
but overcome evil with good.

Also Paul takes away his fear, saying, we are all here: which he did, that
the Iailer might stay himself from hurt, and be fit to attend further unto
good instruction; for in great fear a man is fit to do no good thing. Thus
graciously God does deal with us, to release us, when we are bound fast, and
when we are, as it were, running upon the swords point, and rushing to our own
destruction,

Here now the Iailer begins to stay himself, Verse 29.
but yet betwixt hope and fear, he calls for a light, to see if it were as Paul
said, and leaping in, and trembling yet with fear, and finding all things to
his desire, he falls down before Paul and Silas. The shaking of the earth and
the setting open the doors amazed him, but when he saw that none of the
prisoners were fled, this was yet more admirable unto him. And this struck
into his conscience an accusation of himself, for his hard usage of these men,
whom he saw so kind to him, and careful of his good, perceiving indeed that
the miracle was wrought for their sakes. Whereby God shows how necessary it
is for men to be cast down and abased, before they be raised up: as we see in
him, in Manasses, and in Paul at the gates of Damascus, and many other; for
great is the pride, and strong is the stoutnesse of man's heart.

Then because the place where they were, was loathsome, Verse 30.
and unfit for speech to be had in it, he brings them out, not fearing what
the Magistrate should say unto him. Which clearly shows, that many which
show cruelty against Gods innocent and faithful servants, if they did a
little better know and consider, who they are, in what account with God, and
also if they would bethink themselves how vile they themselves have been,
would become more calm and kind unto them, and be wounded for their own great
sin against them.

But he proceeds further, and desires to be instructed of them, and that in the
most weighty matters of all. As if he should have said, Sirs: I see now it is
true, which I believed not, that ye are the servants of the most high God, and
this ye have made apparent to me. For I, like a most vile beast, put you in the
dungeon, but I see, he regards you, and shakes the earth,, and works wonders
for your sakes. You have saved my life, for I was but a dead man. Now ye have
showed such care of my life, show me, I pray you, the way to eternal life.
What shall I do, etc. He thus shows himself willing to hear and learn of
them, and he acknowledges them able to satisfy him therein.

And indeed then are men in good way to true conversion, when they are thus
teachable, and when they are persuaded that such as they repair unto, for
direction and comfort, are meet to resolve them. And they who are the elect of
God, do consult and take counsel what to do, of them whom God has sent with
the word of reconciliation. These are guides sent of him to bring men into the
right way, and to guide them in it.

O the wonderful work of God! would the Iailer thus have attended to learn
of them, if God had not drawn him? would he that had so cruelly used them,
have come to be taught of them? nay, would he not have used them worse? The
Lord therefore meekeneth him, and makes him a vessel fit for grace to be
powered into. And although many that God humbles with his terrors, become not
humble indeed; yet it was otherwise with him. Observe here what a change God
can make, he that ouernight would not have heard them, How the Lord can change
a vile sinner.
though they had fallen down at his feet to entreat him, now he falls at their
feet, desiring them to teach him.

Even as the Lord promised to the Church of Philadelphia, that he would make
them that were of the synagogue of Satan, Revel. 3.9.
to come and worship at their feet. A great comfort to all faithful Ministers.
This among many other ministers comfort to all faithful Ministers of God,
for hereby he teaches them, that he can meeken the proudest, when he sees
good, and therefore they ought to rest contented in the careful discharge of
their duties. But if he do not, yet it shall be little to their rejoicing in
the end, who after all means remain hardened.

Paul ready to teach in season and out of season, Verse 31.
takes the opportunity, seeing him as the hot iron, fit to be wrought upon:
even as he did to Agrippa, and as godly Ministers ought to do. And in bidding
him believe, they preached not the Law, (as I have said before) because they
saw him humbled, but powered oil into his wounds. Faith alone saves.
A full answer to such: for Christ having life in him, it follows, that he
that has him, that is, by faith lays hold on him, 1. Ioh. 5.11.12. Romans
3.28. Galath. 2.16.
has life also. And faith alone saues, as Paul teaches in all his epistles,
and therefore is the popish doctrine false and devilish, Popish doctrine
erroneous.
teaching that we are saved by works, as causes. For then is Christ no perfect
Savior, if we help him in the satisfying for sin, and in meriting heaven. And
as for the objection out of James, James 2.24.
that we are said there to be justified by works, his meaning is, that we are
justified thereby before men, to be faithful as Paul teaches, and no
otherwise; and therefore this is a maine ground to overthrow Purgatory,
merits, Mass, etc.

And Paul laboring to make as plentiful an harvest to the Lord as he could,
puts him in mind, that not himself only, Paul covetous to win souls.
but his household also might be saved. See wherein he is covetous, even to
win souls; thus putting the Iailer in mind of his duty, that is, to have
his family instructed in the way to salvation. For masters of households are
not only to seek the way to heaven themselves, The duty of masters of families.
but they must have care of all that be under their roof. Command. 4. Thou and
thy son, Exodus 20.10.
and thy man servant, and maid shall keep holy the Sabbath; and not suffered
to run and roaue at their pleasure, no more then to toil. And so the Ministers
of God are in like manner to labor with, and draw them on, as well as the
other.

The Iailer by and by brought them to hear, Verse 32.
that they might believe and be saved: yea though it might have seemed to have
been out of season, being after midnight, which is to the just reproof both of
masters that will not bring their servants, and of servants that will not be
brought from their gaming, and worldly dealings, on the Sabbath day to be
instructed.

An excellent example of pain in teaching.
Also in Paul is set out an excellent example of pain in teaching. It was
midnight, they had not slept, they were sore and hungry; yet their calling
makes them forget all: as our Savior in the fourth of John, being weary,
hungry, and thirsty, John 4.32.34.
yet having opportunity to commune with the woman of Samaria, forgets them
all. And so ought Gods Ministers to do, when he offers opportunity, the
pain and labor to seek the salvation of men ought to seem none to them, but
pleasure.

And as he taught him, that he must believe in Christ, so he preached him out
of the word of the Lord. Romans 10.14.
For How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard, as the Apostle
says? therefore he teaches him to know Christ. For a clear and distinct
knowledge of him is necessary, before we can believe. And not only he preached
Christ, but also more generally the word of God, that is, even other things to
assure them of Christ. Gods word the foundation of faith.
And that must be the matter of our preaching, we must not build our faith on
the word of man, but of God; and great reason. For faith vpholds a great
weight; even our salvation lies upon it. Faith in Christ therefore needs a
strong foundation, and such an one is Gods word, that which is built on it, is
built on a sure rock: man's word is sandy, not able to bear up any thing.

The effects of his faith.
And thus having briefly noted (as I promised) other things in the text, I will
return to the points following in the division of the text. Therefore now
follow the effects of his faith, which also are the fruits of it. These, as
they are set down here, and such as for that time, he had opportunity to
show, by which also we may certainly gather that other fruits of faith were in
him, these (I say) may be referred to three,

Where first note this generally, Good works follow faith.
that good works follow faith, as the heat does the fire. So soon as the
thief believed, he confesses Christ, and shows other fruits of his faith,
such as in that time he could. So this man does the same by his love to Gods
servants. And he does it immediately, even the same hour of the night: as they
were ready to teach; even so was he, to minister to their necessities. But
this doctrine is manifest, look we into the particulars. Of the which I will
begin with that which most nearly concerns this matter, and that is the
sealing and confirming of his faith, The first fruit of his faith: He received
Baptism.
and the making of it sure unto him, that he believed indeed, I mean, that he
was baptized.

For what would a man in his case desire more, then to have proof and
testimony that he believed, when thereby he was partaker of Christ, and of
eternal life? And Baptism was an open badge of Christ, and of his
righteousness received by faith: even as Circumcision was unto the Fathers in
the old Testament. Romans 4.11.
could not that be deferred till day at least? for it is said, he was baptized
in the same hour of the night, after they had preached to him and his
household, which was a little after midnight.

If a man had the writing of a great inheritance passed over to him, would he
not think it long, till he had the seal? And great matters were that night
passed over by the Lord to him: even heaven, life, salvation and happiness.
These therefore he desires to have Gods seal set unto. And so as he may have
this, he cares not for his sleep, or his ease, neither fears he any trouble
that might ensue upon it. Doct.
And this teaches al such as God endueth with faith, Desire to have faith
confirmed.
when they have sought it earnestly, to seek by all means speedily to have it
confirmed unto them, and to get all possible testimonies thereof. For as
nothing in the world is so precious as it is, and therefore not with like care
to be sought: so neither is any thing with like regard to be preserved and
witnessed to them that have it.

Which I speak as well for the ignorants sake, who know not that there may
many evidences be gathered of their salvation: as to stir up those who have
better understanding, who though they know it, yet find many ways to hinder
themselves from this benefit. For it may justly be complained of, that it is
too slightly looked after, of the most part. But to set down any of them
here, I forbear, because I have done it in many other places, and some follow
immediately to be mentioned.

The second fruit of his faith: Joy.
The next fruit of faith, which also (to make good my last speech) is an
infallible token of eternal life to them that have it, is joy, for that he
believed in God. Which being rightly understood, Luke 8.13.
is no less. For although many hear, and receive the word with joy, because
they hear most precious and strange things brought to light by the preaching
of it: yet this is not the joy I speak of: but to have inward peace and joy
through believing that al sin is put away, which sometime weighed us down
for the fear of hell deserved, and sore disquieted our hearts: this joy, I
say, is a fruit of faith, and a token of salvation, as Saint Paul says, we
have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
which cannot deceive us, if we be once by faith justified.

For when we who were without hope sometime, yea in great fear that we should
never see God in his glory, shall come to have our hearts eased, Matthew. 11.28.
Hose. 14.3.
and find rest to our souls. Is it not a sure argument, that God has put away
all our iniquity, and received us graciously, no more to turn his displeasure
and angry countenance toward us? what is able to make us joyful, but that
persuasion? and yet, if that can do it; it follows also, that by such joy we
have that which causes it.

For as Solomon says, the heart knows her own heaviness, and the stranger
shall not be partaker of her joy; The difference betwixt true joy and
counterfeit.
so thereby we may gather, that as heaviness is felt, so is joy also, which no
other but he that has it, can have any part in. For the other tries it not in
the true weights of Gods word, which is proof enough, that it is frothie,
deceivable, and not sound. whereas the true believer thinks he can never
bestow too much labor to know that his comfort is wrought by God, and shed
into his heart by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.
because it is his crown and glory, and that wherein his happiness
consists; Act. 8.8.39.
as the Queens chief chamberlain, the people of Samaria when they were
converted by Philip, and the other churches of Judea, and Galile did well
testify.

Neither let this trouble any, Why Gods people want this joy.
that the godly do often want this joy, yea and have it many times drowned with
deep sorrows, caused by sin and afflictions. For they want it at no time,
Psalm. 51.12. John. 16.20.
but to the end they may return to God again by fervent prayer to recover it;
and tribulation must be admixed with it, while they live here, although it
cause sorrow, which yet dries up much sin, and without which tribulation,
they should be too high minded. 2. Cor. 12.7.
And when they have the best times of rejoicing here, they must know, that as
they are imperfect in all things, so are they also in this, God so disposing it
in his wise providence, seeing also their life is a sowing in tears, while
they live in the flesh, Psalm. 126.5.
although they endeavor as they are commanded, Philip. 4.4.
to rejoice in the Lord always. And this of the Iailers joy, being the second
fruit of his faith.

The third follows, which being his love to them, The third fruit of his
faith: his love to the Apostles.
contains in it many particulars, even such as he had opportunity to show
unto them. For they being in the inward dark dungeon, what better fruit of his
love could he show them, then to bring them out into his house? Secondly, they
being wounded and pained with whipping and scourging, what could be more
welcome to them then to have their stripes washed and bathed, especially by him
through pity and compassion, who had himself made the wounds. And thirdly,
they being also hungry (for they were long kept without meat) how could he at
that time better show his love to them, then by feeding and so refreshing them?
All these three therefore together, how great love did they testify toward
them? To the which may be added his rejoicing for the conversion of his
household.

Doct.
Cruel men coruerted be kind.
All which jointly considered do teach us, that how cruel and barbarous soever
men have been in the time of their ignorance and unbelief, to the faithful
preachers and servants of God; yet if the Lord pluck them out of them, and
give them new hearts, Esaias 11.6. etc.
he will endue them also with new qualities and behavior toward them. Is it
not a worthy thing to behold a brutish and sottish mad-braine to be thus
changed into a loving and well governed Christian? and this being wrought by
the sound preaching to him of the word of God, the Lord working in him thereby,
who can choose but commend and highly approve of such a change?

No worse fruit would the fame preaching bring forth in others, if men
worthily and highly price and reverence that grace of God in him and such
others. The like may be said of the people in the second of the Acts, Act.
2.13.37.
who railed on the Apostles, and said, they were drunk with new wine, whiles
they remained in their profane estate, but when they had heard Peter's sermon
which told them, in what a woeful and damnable condition they were, how did
they reverence them afterward, seek counsel at their hands, and walk after
their doctrine, having fellowship most sweetly and kindly with the people of
God? so that a man might have said, that the lamb and the lion did feed
together. Isai. 11.6.


And they that can find no such fruit of preaching as the Iailer and these men
did, but continue in their leaud, shameless and profane lives, and scoff at
them that do better, I bewail their miserable estate, Psa. 12.4. 2. Pe. 2.3.
their tongues are their own, and their damnation sleeps not.

Particular fruits of his love.
Now to shut up al with a few words of the particular fruits of the Iailers
faith, every one yields good instruction. Paul and Sitas into his house out
of the loathsome prison, does condemn his former act of casting them in. Which
ought to teach us, not to justify all that we do, further then Gods word will
bear us out: which I speak to the shame of them, who will have all well to be
thought of, that they have done; yea, although many things have bin done of
them very offensiuely, and though some of them might worthily make them blush
and to be ashamed. Even so, it is great credit to them, who dislike and in a
godly sort undo, I mean, repent of that, Psalm. 51.3.
which they have ungodly done.

2. Cor. 7.11.
For he put him self to reproach in washing their wounds, who sought great
credit by making them. A good fruit (doubtless) of his godly sorrow and
repentance for his cruel fact, and it is to be likewise found in other who
have truly turned from any sin, as the woman in the seventh of Luke, Luke
7.38.
who made her eyes a basen of water to wash Christ's feet, and her hair a
towell to wipe them, whereas she had before abused them both to lasciuiousnes
and wantonness. Luke 19.8.
And Zache to be revenged of himself for getting his goods unjustly, made a
fourefold restitution, and gave half of the rest to the poor, to the end he
might have little pleasure in the enjoying of them, (that I say no more) which
he had taken so great pleasure in, by his unlawful coming by them.

Matthew, Matthew. 10.41.
that he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward, then did this receiving and relieuing of them witness no
less to him, and therefore it gave testimony of the faith which he had. Such
liberality to the Saints, to give the^ not only for Christ's sake, which may be
done to the unbelieving, but because they were dear unto him, is the like
testimony to those that, according to their ability, do show it.

Which is to be marked, 1. Cor. 13.2.
because a man may give all that he has to the poor in other respects, and
yet, as Saint Paul says, if he have no love, by which faith works, it shall
profit him nothing. I heartily wish that they who believe in Christ, were more
rich in all other, and in this kind of good works also. But yet this is to be
known, that numbers of such as have given much toward the relieuing of the
needy, looking to purge away their sins by such means, and to make God
beholding to them for giving to him or the poor that which is his own, do
nothing less then merit or receive any thing at his hands for the same; they
shall (as I have said) profit them nothing. Even as they to whom he said for
the like offerings; Isai. 1.12.
who required these things at your hands? And this of the third fruit of his
faith.

Doct.
From the which, and both the other particular fruits of the same, and of his
love, this I add, that whatsoever duty of love can be performed to the
servants of God without the omitting of greater, as the works of our calling,
our health, the empairing of our outward estate, or such like, yea or these in
cases of necessity; such duties (I say) are not to be neglected. Even as the
Iailer here did, as he could, perform all these. And where that help is
ministered mutually amongst Christians, as well in the best things as in the
meaner, much outward and inward peace is there enjoyed, good example showed, as
a fruit of the Gospel, and good hope that many shall be gained and brought
thereby unto it.



The fourth fruit.
Now the last fruit of the Iailers faith, and that is touching his household,
follows, that he rejoiced that they also believed in the Lord. Therein he
declared himself to be a right kind and loving master, even as he was a sound
and good Christian: and also that he was become a faithful friend unto Christ
his master: Luke 159.10.
who so counts of all them that rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. Even
so, such masters may have good hope of their true profiting, and rejoicing,
that desire to have their household to be a little Church: and believers in
Christ, and all other may know that Christ accounts highly of these, who
rejoice for them that of great sinners are converted to God.

And thus to make an end of the whole story, as we will judge of the stature
and proportion of a Giant, by his hand or leg; so we may judge of the Iailers
whole course of life by these parts of it. That he was made a rare pattern in
faith and godliness, of a most barbarous and profane person. Now wherefore
say I this, but to the end, that many, who as yet are estranged from God and
enemies to him, even a far off, may yet at least bethink and resolve
themselves to return again unto him, and never to leave off, till they be
truly come home, and have more in them, then any reprobate that may fall away
again, can have.

TWO SERMONS UPON MATTHEW. 24.12.13. PREAched by RICHARD ROGERS.
And because iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold.

But he that endures to the end, he shall be saved.


The sum and scope of this Sermon.
AS I use and think it expedient so to do in preaching a Sermons, to acquaint
the hearers first with the things which most concern them to attend unto: so I
will first show, what matters I mean to stand upon* And as it was the usual
manner of our Savior to speak to the people of the things that concerned all
that heard him, that there might be hope that all sorts might take good
thereby: so my purpose is to do. Now therefore seeing all sorts of hearers are
either workers of iniquity, and such, as fill the world with sin; or such as
have received the love of the word into their hearts, of which sort some have
been discouraged, and have begun to faint, and to wax cold, and some hold on
their course commendablie, though these be the fewest; therefore to all these
three sorts I will direct my speech, that the first may repent betimes, and
return to the Lord; the second may rise out of their falls, and stand faster
in the good estate, wherein they had begun; and the last may hold on in their
first love and continue to the end, wherein their happiness consists.

The opening of the text.
And that I may not be thought to speak what I list, I will show how our
Savior Christ does give occasion hereof most fitly, speaking himself of all
these three sorts in the words which I have read unto you. For he foretelling
many things that should afterward come to pass, puts in this one amongst
the rest, saying: It shall be in the latter days; that people shall be given
over to sin, and even where the Gospel shall be preached, even there
iniquity shall abound in such wise, that it shall draw away many of them who
have embraced and loved the truth; so that they shall faint and fall from the
goodness that has been in them, but let them (says he) rouse up themselves
again, and return to their first love, and they who yet hold it, let them
abide still in it, for they only who continue to the end shall be saved.

And by this which he says, it may easily be gathered, Three parts thereof.
that he speaks of three sorts, as I also entend to do: and withal three
things he sets down. One, that iniquity shall abound: the second, that by
means thereof, the love of many shall wax cold: the third; that they who
wisely decline and shun both, and enter and keep on in the good way, wherein
God has set them unto the end, they shall undoubtedly be saved, and have
everlasting life.

Now to begin with the first, I will handle it thus. Three points handled in the
first part.
I will before I go further, prove the words of our Savior to be most clear
and true, that all may see into the^. Secondly, apply them in more particular
manner to all such as do cause iniquity to abound, that all who desire, may be
able to see, whether they be of the number of them, that they may thereafter
provide for themselves. And thirdly, I will show what use all such ought to
make of the doctrine which they have verified in having been helpers to
increase iniquity; and that is this; that when they see they have lived in
times past to no other end, then to help to fill the world with sin, they may
give all diligence to seek the pardon of their evil doings, and never rest
quiet until they have obtained it, and come out of them, which is the right
use of knowing it. But if they still go forward in their evil course, they may
show themselves to be, as they are, that is, contemners.

And that the world shall be full of iniquity in these latter days of ours,
it is proved by two reasons: The truth hereof proved by Scripture and
experience.
the one drawn from Scripture, the other from experience. The Spirit of God
speaks thus in the Scripture, Matthew. 24.37.
that as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the coming of the
Son of man. For as before the flood came, they did eat and drink, marry,
and give in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and knew
nothing until the flood came and took them all away, so shall it then be.
Whereby Christ shows that in the latter days, a part whereof this age is
wherein we live, the people shall be as they were in that woeful time before
the world was drowned with waters, which times were fraught with all impiety
and iniquity, with contempt of Gods word and all abomination.

2. Tim. 3.1.
Saint Paul agrees with our Savior Christ herein, and says, In the last days
(as these are wherein we live) shall come perilous times: yea and know (says
he) that it shall be so. But if ye would know how perilous, he answers;
such, as wherein men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud,
cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no lovers at
all of them that are good, traiterous, high minded, headie, lovers of pleasures
more then lovers of God. And if all these with the like do now flow, is it not
true, that iniquity abounds?

Iniquity abounds among all sorts.
But for that, let experience (from which the second reason is to be drawn)
declare, what is found in this part of the latter age in which we live, and
whether the times be so bad as it was foretold they should be. Consider it by
the ages of men, Young men.
as young or old; by the sex, as men or women; and by their estate and
condition, as the rich and the poor, the mighty and the mean. To say a
little of every one, what stoutnesse, pride, disobedience, is to be seen every
where in youths? who being but as the flower that to morrow withers, yet
lift up their crest, as though they were riuited into a long life, and had a
promise of eternity here, which if it were, yet had they but an estate in
misery. But I may not stay to make large discourses of every one.

Old men.
What ignorant senselesnes, to conceive knowledge of heavenly things is in the
aged? and as much unwillingness to learn? And what else, but frowardnes,
malice, and an insatiable desire of getting, while yet they have more then one
leg in the grave? In so much, that he who should hope of the salvation of the
most of them, must stretch out his charity beyond his warrant and ground. As
for the wealthy, Rich.
what is their occupation and practice, but to seek with might and maine to
grow more wealthy, minding that labor, as if they sought after heaven it
self? In the mean while, not regarding the multitude of those that want, to
serve the necessity of them with their superfluity; neither embracing the
Christian life ever the more for all the goods they have, but turning aside
from it rather, and as little longing after heaven it self: which kind of
life, while they so please themselves in, what wise man would judge any
otherwise of them, but that they think, they shall never die, or that they
shall come again when they be dead, to take the benefit of that which they
have.

But what say we then of the poor? Poor.
Ierem. 5.4.
The Prophet Jeremy says of them, surely they are foolish, they know not the
way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. And experience proves it to
be so. For who does not see, that the poor sort take themselves to be
privileged that they should not seek after knowledge? For these are their
speeches, Sermons are for rich folk, as though they had no account to make to
God: and therefore we see they are rude and brutish for the most part,
contemning instruction, speaking ill of the wealthier sort, shifting, stealing,
idle, further then necessity drives them to work and labor. And by this
that has been said of them, it is not hard to judge of the rest, namely how
miserable, as our Savior has here foretold, their whole course of life is.

And the like may be said of Minister and people, Ministers and people.
and of one and other. What faithfulness to God is in the most of them, who take
upon them to be guides to Gods inheritance? What love is there in them to
their flock? what diligence in preaching and private study and reading? And
for their living with the^ (if so be they do live with the^) what is their
conuersing with them, but either in hollow peace and fained love; in gaming,
and carnal merry making; or else they live among them in strangenes, hating
one another, and in suits and controversies, but what fellowship have the
people with them for their instruction, and edification; but that they fear or
flatter them for a peniworth in their tithes, and for their private commodity?

And thus by laying open the particular kinds of persons, it is too manifest,
that iniquity abounds, and that Christ's prophecy of our age is most true,
in fortelling that it should be so. What remains therefore, seeing scripture
and experience prove it to be thus, and yet that the workers of iniquity shall
be driven from Gods presence, and are accursed; what remains (I say) but
this? First, that it be proved by plain demonstration, who are they that cause
it to increase, for as much as few or none will apply this to themselves, but
will shift it off one way or other. Secondly, when it shall be seen who they
be, that they make all possible haste to repent, and seek mercy.

The second point: Application of the former to four sorts of people. The
first sort of those that multiply sin.
And to find out who they be that fill the world with iniquity, it is no hard
matter; and they may all fitly be brought to four kinds. The first are
notorious sinners, and such as cannot be hidden, as adulterers, drunkards,
idolaters, oppressors, reuengers and such like. These as they cannot be
ignorant, that their doings are odious and horrible, so they go not alone, but
have their attendants and handmaides waiting upon them; as the Apostle
describes them in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 13.13.
saying: walk not in gluttony, and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness,
in strife and envying. These therefore whosoever they be, whose sins may be
written in their foreheads with great letters, for the appearance and
certainty of them, these (I say) fill the world with sin, and cause
iniquity to abound, they cannot be excused, they have nothing to cloak them.

The second sort.
The second sort are such as are counted honest towns men, who looking after
nothing for the most part, but how they may live, are as forward in, and as fit
for one religion as another. Who partly for law sake, partly by example and
custom, seeing what others do, come to Church indeed: but for any knowledge
or goodness they get thereby, all is one whether they go or not. And if it
were no more but this, that they have neither zeal nor knowledge to worship
God by, it may easily be gathered what their lives be toward men. These,
although for want of better, they must bear office in towns; yet all disorder
is where they dwell, seeing they are as bad themselves as others, unless
(perhaps) some of them have a little more civility then the worst and rudest.

And who doubts in the mean while, but that all kind of sin swarmeth
there? as the bold profaning of the Sabbath, drunkenness, whoring, contention,
unjust dealing, scorning of those that be better then themselves, cauilling,
revenging, stoutnes to reject all good admonition, with many other of like
sort: which where they are entertained, can it be chosen, but that iniquity
should abound there? So that this second sort does also fill the world with
sin. And seeing this kind of people is so common every where, that they go
for honest men and good Christians, and they walk uncontrolled and unpunished,
and thereby are the less noted to be so evil as they are, the Lord does often
take the matter into his own hands, to detect and bewray them: So as, either
they fall to some sin, for which the Magistrate takes them in hand; such was
Achan, Ios. 7.25. Leuit. 24.10.
and he that blasphemed in Leuiticus, who both were put to death; and thrust
out from amongst their neighbors; or else God punishes their sin himself
directly, by letting them lay violent hands on themselves, as did Ahitophel.

The third sort who cause iniquity to abound, 2. Sam. 17.23. The third sort.
are the hypocrites, properly so called; who profess religion, and take the
word of God into their mouths, but they hate to be reformed; and boldly
affirm that they know God, Psalm. 50.17. 2. Tim. 3.5. Matthew. 7.21.
but in their deeds they deny him; and say, Lord Lord, but do nothing less,
then go about to fulfill the will of the Lord. These cause the holy word of God
to be ill spoken of, which they hear and talk of, more then the most of
others do. And will not stick to commit sin the more boldly, under a color
and cloak of holiness: which behavior of theirs, being a practice and common
course of living with them, so that daily much evil is wrought by them; all
that list may see, that these also as the two former sorts, (that I say no more
of them, as being so well known) do cause iniquity to abound.

The fourth sort.
The fourth sort are they, who are not properly called hypocrites with the
former, although hypocrisy bear much sway in them, but they in many things
do obey God, and the course of their lives is much more framed after Gods
word, then all the former, if they were put together: also they do more
straightly urge good order in others, as their place will give the^ leave; and
yet in some things they will not be brought within compass, but are wedded to
their will, and know that they do ill; some sin they intertaine, and take
liberty to commit, being not willing to search their hearts, nor to look into
their ways, and so they deal also about faith, they hold a confused
persuasion and hope, that they shall be saved, but they cannot be brought to
try it, and therefore they are destitute both of it and good life.

Now these also, howsoever they come nearer a godly life then any of the
former, and that by many degrees; yet because they in some things give
themselves leave to offend and dishonor God, and do not fear the Lord with
all their hearts, and in one thing as well as in another seek to please him,
therefore God abhors their sacrifice of praise and prayer, and curses the
obedience which they offer unto him. And therefore the Apostle S. James, having
to deal with such people, said unto them, whosoever shall keep the whole law,
Iam. 2.10.11.
and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that said, Thou
shall not commit adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill. Now then, though
thou do none adultery, yet if thou killest, thou art a transgressor of the
law.

And thus whiles they have all their doings reckoned against them for sins,
as it has been proved that the best of them are no better, they come within
the rank of them, who multiply iniquity, and cause sin to be increased. 1.
Kings 8.46.
yet because they would not sin, and do break out rather of infirmity,
then wilfully and wittingly to lie therein, and do endeavor in one thing as
well as another to please God, therefore they are not said to increase sin,
who do faithfully labor to suppress, and keep it down both in themselves
and others.

And such must the other four sorts be, The third point.
before the Lord will count and take them for his. Thus it is manifest, The use.
who they be that fill the world with sin, that none can be ignorant of it,
who is not wilfully blind. Now it remains what these should do, that is,
before all things that they repent and seek mercy, and hold it by faith; both
which as they have sufficient cause to look after, with all speed, (because
without the one, it is impossible to please God, that is faith, Heb. 11.6.
and without the other, I mean, repentance and amendment of life, Matthew. 3.7,
8.
the vengeance of God cannot be avoided) so they have two great encouragements
to set them forward to seek both: this being added, Two encouragements to draw
all these sorts to faith and repentance.
if they feel what need they have thereof, (as all may see they have, and
that very great) and then, if they desire earnestly to be partakers of them,
they be not far from them.

The first is, that the Lord has other sheep, The first.
which are not yet of his fold, and he counts many to be his people, who are
not yet called to know that they are his, John 10.16.
who may by the preaching of the Gospel, be added to his faithful ones. And
in hope hereof, they should give all diligence to wait upon the Lord in his
ordinance for this blessing. The second.
The second is this: that they search and try their ways, what is amiss in
them, (though they shall never find out the hundredth part of the sin that is
in them) and then consider the woe they are in thereby, which if they can be
persuaded to do, it is the most direct way to make them turn to the Lord,
both, in embracing Gods promise of mercy, which then belongs to them by Gods
free grant, and also in reforming their lives, from the which, by their sin,
they were estranged.

Both these kinds of turning to God the Prophet Joel exhorts the people
unto, saying: read your hearts (that is, Joel 2.13.
by searching into them, to see the foulnes of them) and not your garments, and
turn to the Lord your God. And Jeremy in his Lamentations does the same,
Lament. 3.40.
when he says; Search your ways, and turn again unto the Lord. And this is
the only way, for such as have brought themselves out of favor with God, and
drawn down his wrath upon themselves, (by multiplying iniquity) to recover
themselves again, that they may both break off the course of their wicked
lives, and also be healed and delivered from that vengeance of God which took
hold of them before.

A watchword to all the former sorts.
This I have thought good to say, of this first sort of people, and of the four
kinds of them, all which do fill the world with iniquity: who least they
should too slightly regard that which has been said to persuade them to faith
and repentance, I thought it not amiss, to add this one thing, as a watchword
to them all. And that is, that they take special heed, that they harden not
their hearts to abide still in that which they have ill done, neither against
the instruction that calls them back from it, neither make light of their
sins, as Esau did; Genesis 25.32.33.34.
who when he had sold his birthright (being a sign of eternal life) he made
a slight matter of it, saying, what is this birthright unto me, as if he
should have said, what good would it have done me?

But it shall be their wisdom to sift and search themselves as they have been
taught to do, rather then go further and further: seriously considering the
words of the Prophet, Ierem. 8.6.
which are these, Does a man fall and not rise again, or go out of the way and
not return? And they should say, as the Apostle said, when their master told
them, that one of them should betray him, answering severally (as fearing lest
such a mischief might light upon them) is it I master? and another, is it I?
And they should, as they which are weary of their doings, and willing to
repent, say, every one by himself, ( the men apart, Zach. 12.12.
as the Prophet Zachary speaks, and the women apart) what have I done? And
so shall they see, that God will soon turn away from his displeasure, and be
merciful to them: Osea 14.2.3.4.
According to that in Osea, where the Lord gives a most sweet and plain
direction, both to repent and obtain mercy, saying:

Verse. 1. O Israel, return to the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

2. Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips.

3. Ashur [that is, the Assirians] shall not save us, neither will we ride upon
horses, [that is, to trust in them] neither will we say any more to the work
of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy.

4. I will heal their rebellion, I will love them freely [saith the Lord] for
mine anger is turned away from them.

Herein the Lord sets down his loving kindness toward them sundry ways,
that they or any that price and highly set by it, may the easilier be persuaded
of it and believe it, and he requires of them repentance, to the end, they and
all believers may yield and perform it. And thus much be said at this time,
and of this first sort here, which our Savior speaks of, namely of those
which fill the world with sin.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE 24. OF MATthew, the 12. and 13. verses. The second
part.
THe second part of the text follows, The second part of the text.
in which is showed that by the abundance of iniquity, the love of many shall
wax cold: that is, when the simple hearted and godly minded people, who would
most willingly go on in a holy course, shall yet see the horrible abominations
in the world, on every side swarming, and those also with boldness vpholden
and defended, bearing sway and prevailing; though at first they utter dislike
them, yet being continually annoyed with them, and grieved therewith; by little
and little they are discouraged and weakened in their good course; till time
they be cooled, and fall from it, deserving thereby the sharp reproof which
was given to the Church of Ephesus, which was this; Revel. 2.4.
I have somewhat against thee, even for that thou have left thy first love.

This point laying out another sort of people to us, besides those who have
been spoken off; to the end we may see our Saviors mind the better therein,
and make our profit of it; First I will show what he means by this love, Five
things handled in this part.
when he says, the love of many shall wax cold; secondly, that it is much
decayed and waxen cold indeed, in this our age, as he foresaid it should: and
thirdly by what means and how: namely, by the abundance of iniquity, flowing
round about them. Fourthly, I will set down a remedy for such as have fallen,
how they may rise again: and add reasons to dissuade from suffering their
love to wax cold in them.

Reuelat. 2.4.
1. What our first love is.
Now this love here spoken of, is the same that Saint John calls our first
love, which is a holy and heavenly affection stirred up and wrought in our
hearts, as soon as we be persuaded of the love of God in Christ to us. And it
causes us to set our love on God more then ever we loved father, wife, or
friend, or any thing else of the greatest account and reckoning. 2. Cor. 5.14.
For this love of God constrains us so to do, and for his sake, to love our
brethren. For he that loves him that begat, 1. John 5.1.
loves him also which is begotten, also it draws us in a most fervent manner
to love the word of God, as the Psalmist says: Psalm 119.97. Romans 10.15,
Oh how love I thy word? and the true Preachers of it, for beautiful are the
feet of those, that bring glad tidings.

And what marvel? For who can sufficiently have his heart enlarged in this
manner toward God, who being by his former sinful life brought even to hell
gates, and that without hope of recovery by any way that he could see; did
when he least looked for it, and that of Gods mere love and mercy obtain
deliverance from the same, and withal saw himself adopted, and taken to be
heir of everlasting life? This unspeakable benefit as a spring sending forth,
and accompanied with many other blessings freely bestowed upon him by Christ,
what can be too dear for him, that has bestowed it? He is ready therefore
for his sake, that did all this for him, to give and consecrate himself again
to him, and to be at his command in all things. From whence it follows, that
in great zeal and feruentnes he seeks to do the will of God to the
admiration of others, even as he himself says, John.
if ye love me, ye will keep my Commandments. And this in few words, is the
love that Christ here speaks of.

Now this love is cooled, or waxes cold, 2. How this love is said to be cooled.
when this feruentnes is abated, and this exceeding love of Christ, which
before, could never be thought great enough, is now slaked, as if it were
almost put out. Which comes to pass, when it is not daily and duly
considered and remembered, prised and valued above all other things, as it is
meet it should be, and sometime also was in such account and reckoning with
us, when we first believed. And then also it is assuaged and decays, when our
love fasteneth strongly upon transitory delights, profits or preferments, and
especially, if it be linked into any of these when they shall be sinful and
unlawful. Thus I say, when God, his word, faithful Preachers, and servants of
his, with obedience to his will shall not be in the greatest price and
estimation, but thrust out by things of less and meaner value, our love is
justly said to become cold, and that reproof incurred, which our Savior here
speaks of.

And this decay of love to God and the best things, 3. By what means.
is said of our Savior here to be occasioned, as otherwise, so especially by
the multitude of great sinners, and the beholding of such wicked examples of
men, as fill the world with iniquity and offenses. For oh! when men shall be
always cloyed with the loose and professed ill behavior of such as they live
amongst, (as righteous Lot was with the filthiness of the stinking Sodomites)
it is not easily seen, what force is in it to dampe and quench goodness in
them that behold it; and that; sometime at the first: but when afterward they
shall not be able to wind out from their company, and their prouocations of
them, but that they shall be always crossing their good course, disgracing
their innocent lives, cauilling at their zeal in serving God, and bearing
down all honesty, as it were a stream, yea and more then all this, hunting,
threatening, and disquieting them, that cannot approve their bad conversation,
what straits (think we) shall they be in? yea how hardly shall they be able to
withstand their leaud examples, but rather in time be corrupted by them?

And especially, if these that thus vex them, be men of authority, and have
power to hurt them, as well as a mind to trouble the^, they shall find how true
this Scripture is, through the abundance of iniquity the love of many shall
wax cold. And if evil words alone be able to corrupt good manners how much
more wicked life also, If evil words corrupt good manners, wicked life much
more.
whereof bad talk is but limb or arm, and especially if this be in the
wealthy and great men? So that, it may be rightly said, O good company, and
holy examples, how much worth are ye? How happy are they who may enjoy you, if
they can see. It is (doubtless) a corner of heaven to be associated to such,
both in marriage and neighborhood, in comparison of the hellish companionship
of the other. And this be said briefly, of these three, what this love is that
Christ speaks of, that it is cooled, and how, namely, by much iniquity in
others.

Hebr. 3.6.
and been purged thereby from their old conversation, can they not hold their
confidence, and rejoicing of their hope unto the end, as they began?

fervently to all these mentioned, as at any time they did: neither can I
excuse the contrary. But yet we must consider, that it is very hard and
difficult so to do, and that it requires the whole heart to be taken up with
it, and possessed of it. And this is a great hinderance to it, if there were no
other but it; that such must live and have to do with the profane sort of
people, who do many ways provoke, discourage, and work upon them. Indeed it
must be granted that the evil heart is a maine hinderer from this holy course,
which I do not say, as though I would take upon me to excuse or defend them
who are waxen cold in the duties of love, for which they had sometimes been
commended; but rather to advise such as are to stir up men to continue their
first love,

For though Christ foretell here, How the Minister should deal with such as
are fallen from their first love.
that through the abundance of iniquity the love of many shall wax cold, as
thereby casting a reproach upon such as shall verify his words; yet we that are
the Lords remembrancers, and have experience of the frailty that is in our
brethren, being privy to our own; must in showing how easily they fall from
this grace or any other; by all good means labor and help them to prevent
it; or if they have already fallen, to reclaim and call them back again. But
if by none of these means we prevail with them, know they, that they shall
fall from this their love to their cost, and bear their burden whosoever they
be.

For to speak as the truth is, what can they do either more unbeseeming their
holy profession, or the Lords unspeakable kindness, then to reward him after
such a manner? And after an hearty acknowledging of Gods great love to them,
at their first tasting the sweetness of it, afterward to forget it, or
unthankfully to bring it into a common and mean account? The Hebrews who had
in like manner offended, were reproved sharply by the author of the Epistle
written to them, in this manner: Now call to remembrance the days that are
past, Hebr. 10.32.
wherein, after ye received light, ye endured a great fight in afflictions,
being made a gazing stock to them in reproaches, and were companions with such,
as were so tossed to and fro, and suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods,
knowing that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance. And will ye now
cast away your confidence, which has so great recompense of reward?

The same reproof, though not in the same particular thing, the Apostle gave
the Galathians; who, when they had received such manifest gifts of the holy
Ghost by his preaching, that they were clear patterns of excellent Christians
to many, and after that, were so bewitched by the false Apostles; that they
joined the observing of the law with faith; he spoke thus to them: Gal. 3.1.
O ye foolish Galathians* who has bewitched you, that after ye have begun in
the spirit, ye will now be made perfect by the flesh, that is, by the keeping
of the law?

4. How to remedy it. Revel. 2.4.
The redress and remedy to recover this decayed love, is that which saint John
gives to the Church of Ephesus, against the same disease, when they had left
their first love, saying: remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and
do thy first works. Wherein he teaches us, as he did that people, that this
decay in our love to Gods ministry and people, must be called to mind and
considered duly, what a great sin it is; then truly lamented, pardon craved
with the prayer of faith, and full purpose and endeavor against the same
after, and then to set afresh upon the practice of christianity again, and
never to think it well, until this remedy be used. This is to be done, when
this love is decayed, which to do, is a certain violence using against our
selves by more then an ordinary turning to God again; and a wary walking
afterward to prevent the like.

Two reasons why we must labor to prevent this sin. The first.
And he^re I think it very meet to admonish you the more earnestly to beware
of, and to prevent this sin, for two reasons, which I urge out of the text. The
one this, (the other follows afterward) seeing it shall be the case of many
to fall thus; for so our Savior foretells, saying: because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold. And if many be like to fall thus,
what are we in this age, to whom this watchword shall come, that we should
look to avoid the danger of it, unless we be daily and much occupied in
laboring and endeavoring to shun and prevent it? And for mine own part, I am
not ashamed to confess, (if any less experienced herein regard the word of
him that has trodden in this way before them) that for more then thirty
years, I have feared the loosing of this first love, by reason of the strong
prouocations thereto, that I have observed from time to time to arise one after
another: by means whereof, I have seen good cause to avoid the same with all
possible care, that so doing, I or any other in like state may much the better
finish our course with joy.

And yet this caveat I would might be well marked, A caveat.
that all zeal in our first receiving of the Gospel, and believing in Christ,
has not been to be commended, as that which may of necessity urge a Christian
to the retaining, and continuing of it afterward; as if it were a part of our
first love: when as, it is not to be denied, that there was in our first
beginning, as there is daily in those who are effectually called to believe
unto salvation, especially of the ignoranter sort, much good meaning without
knowledge, and much froth in a great deal of zeal: so that it should unwisely
be done of Preachers, and far from good discretion, to urge upon them their
former practice simply without respect had of zeal void of good ground, and
warrant of Gods word.

Examples of zeal without knowledge.


have thought, that they must often break off their necessary work to pray and
read, yea and that in the time of doing of their work, they must be praying
rather then minding of, and duly regarding the business they had in hand. Then
the which, what might be thought more savoring of ignorance and blindness?
whereas they ought to have known, and been persuaded, that God has appointed
a time to pray, and all other things to give place thereto, when opportunity
serves; but yet in time of necessary business, that the same should be
faithfully and diligently attended and followed, and the mind not to be carried
after other matters; seeing God is served therein even as he is in reading,
praying and the like.



Many such weaknesses which yet they count points of holiness, accompany the
most of Gods faithful ones of the ignoranter sort, at their first entrance into
Christ, who seeing better things are found in them, are not imputed to them by
the Lord: but yet must they not, for all that, be justified in them and borne
with, neither think, that all things wherein they have a good meaning, must be
holden for a virtue. Even as Naaman the Syrian, 2. King. 3.17.
being brought from his idolatry by the Prophet Elisha, and persuaded to
worship the true God Iehoua only, did in zeal and of a good meaning, desire of
him, that two mules load of the earth that was in the land of Israel might be
given him, whereupon he might stand to offer sacrifice, when he should come
home, as though that earth had been holier then that which was in his own
country.

Likewise Mary Magdalene and the other good women, whom Christ before his death
had most sweetly seasoned and perfumed with the odours of his heavenly
doctrine, so that they believed in him and followed him, Mark 16.1.
came of a zealous mind the third day after his burial to the sepulcher to see
him, supposing that he had been still dead, and not risen again, and brought
sweet ointments with them to anoint his body. By the which ceremony and
custom used to their dead in those days, although they did confirm their
faith in the hope of the resurrection after the manner of their Fathers, who
did so: yet who doubts, but that they were led with blind zeal therein
toward Christ, both in seeking him that lived among the dead, and also in going
about to anoint Christ's body, as if it should have putrified in the sepulcher
like other men's? By this that has been said it is manifest, that all things
that the faithful do in a good meaning, are not to be paternes for themselves
or others to follow, unless they have had good warrant for the doing of them;
and especially at their first conversion.

Thus much for the caveat or watchword before given, namely, that all zeal in
good people at the first ought not to be taken for sound and substantial: I
will now proceed. Remember therefore that I set down two reasons, why Gods
servants should take heed in a special manner, that they be not made cold in
their love, as Christ has foretold it shall be the case of many, by means of
the wickedness which they shall see in the world. One of these reasons I have
handled; and that is, seeing it shall be the case of many to do so.

The other is this, The second reason.
because they whose love waxes cold to God, to the preaching of the Gospel,
and to his people, they fall also from the duties which by that love, they
should perform: or which is all one with it, they do them to no purpose; so
that God accepts them not. According to the words of the Apostle, If I give
all my goods to the poor, 1. Cor. 13.1.2.3
and my body to be burnt, and have no love, and though I speak with the
tongues of Angels, I am as sounding brass, or a tincking cymball. So then, if
the best things which we do be sin without this love, it follows that if that
grace of love be cold and dead in us, all that we do is abhorred of God.

I have now spoken of the second sort prophes ied of, The third part of the
text.
by our Savior, Of the third sort.
whose love waxes cold by the abundance of iniquity which they see in the
world, and this I have done as briefly as I might with any edifying. I pass
to the third, namely, of those who continue unto the end in a godly life; such
he says, shall without question be saved.

Which words of Christ must wisely be considered, for he does not exclude
from eternal life all such as have left their good beginnings for a season, if
they do bethink themselves better afterward, and return again to the Lord
by true repentance; for else, none of the last mentioned sort could be saved,
neither does he exclude such, as have a long time led a wicked race, if they
find mercy in their life time at Gods hands to be converted, for if it were
so, then none of the first sort could obtain eternal life.

Who may be truly said to continue to the end.
But though he mean such as continue to the end in the good course in which
they begun long before their death, (of which there is no question): yet he
means also such, who at their death shall be found penitent, whether they
begin then, or whether long before, and revolted, or turned aside again; so as
in the truth of their hearts they return at the last. But let not this be
taken, as though* it were a small matter to do the one or the other; nay rather
they do both boldly and dangerously, which dare tempt God after such a manner;
yet if any dare adventure in that sort; it is true, that no man ought to
debar them of this liberty, that if they confess and forsake their sin,
Prou. 28.13.
they shall find mercy.

They who shall continue.
Now to come to the words, seeing they only who continue to the end, shall be
saved, and are blessed; the chief point here to be debated, is, who is he
that continues, and how he grows to it. First begin well.
The answer whereto is at hand, that they who begin well, and daily go
forward, shall continue to the end; and thereby, and no other way we come to
it, that being excepted that I said before; that they must not be denied mercy
who repent at last. Of both these therefore somewhat is requisite to be said,
which briefly shall be done. And of the first the less, seeing in showing
before in the first point how they who have caused iniquity to abound, should
repent; I have declared, that such repenting is the right way to make a good
end. Therefore this only I will say of a good beginning, that it is requisite,
that all that intend and go about it, be steadfast and stablished therein, I
mean in faith, in love, in patience, etc. not flitting and inconstant.

This Saint Peter requires, when he says, Take heed, 2. Pet. 3.17.
that ye be not led away from your steadfastness in knowledge and grace. This
requires truth, care and wisdom, therefore do the fewer attain to it, to
be builded and settled in their most holy faith, but the most professors are
off and on; cheaping, Jude 20.
but not buying: therefore in every temptation or affliction, for the most
part, they are doubting, that they have not repented aright, and that they have
no faith, neither ever had: whereas a foundation well laid, stands in storms
and tempests, and is not thrown down with wind nor weather. Matthew. 7.27.


And in speaking of this so worthy a point, I cannot but bewail, a common and
dangerous practice amongst people, and those of the better sort, that few by
all their hearings and readings are able to collect, and lay together a plain
pathway to salvation, and a direction to a godly life; but by halues, or by
shreds and pieces: for either they fail in knowledge, and so they are far
from the right way, so that if they would never so feign enjoy the benefit of
both, they know not how to go about it, or else they seek not with all their
hearts to follow that which they know, if their judgments be sound; and that
makes all that they pretend or go about, as far from a good foundation as
the former. And should men (think we) begin in faith and repentance in such a
manner? Is such a confused and raw entrance into it, like to profit it? This is
all that I will say of the first of the two things that lead to a perseuering
in a godly course to our end, and that is a right manner of beginning. For he
that has made a good entrance, is half the way to a good end, but he that
begins erroniously and amiss, shall the further he goes, the further go out
of the way: let this therefore be well regarded and looked to.

The second which being adjoined to the former, Secondly: They grow accordingly.
will most certainly bring continuance in a Christian course, is a daily
proceeding in, and according to such a good beginning as I have said to be
required, that is, to build proportionably to it, that as some true measure of
knowledge, faith, hope, patitience, the fear of God, and other grace is
attained, and stedfastnes therein; so that they be vpholden, maintained and
preserved daily, as precious things worth the cost and labor that is bestowed
upon them: I mean, that they who have believed and repented, do so still; and
endeavor above all things to hold out therein from day to day. As the Fathers
mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, were said to live by faith; that is,
Hebr. 11.
set it a work, after they believed: and they that repented at John's baptism,
Matthew. 3.8.
were exhorted by him, to bring forth the fruits of amendment afterward, that
so they might well testify, that they went on in repentance still.

And therefore must Matthew. 26.41.
watching, Luke 18.1.
praying, 1. Pet. 2.2.
hearing, and such other good means be used daily, with as good appetite as at
the first beginning, that we may grow thereby. The which course being observed,
we cannot fail, but be found of the Lord in peace, whenever he shall come
for our deliverance out of this veil of misery, Matthew.
and happy shall that servant be, whom his master, when he comes, shall find
so occupied: he shall bid him enter into his masters joy. But seeing this
advice and direction is not so soon received and used, as given; therefore
there are many startings aside, and goings out of the way, and so they leave
their first love, as I have said of the second sort, to their small comfort.

And amongst many troubles and griefs which they bring upon themselves
thereby, they complain, that they cannot have the joy that they first had at
their beginning: and what marvel? seeing they have waxed weary of that
esteeming and prising of faith and godly life, which at first was in them.
Whereas they who with the good Philippians, Philip. 1.5.
hold on their fellowship in the Gospel from the first day afterward, are
always ready to welcome death the Lords messenger. For they thus growing on
and abiding; do continue and shall be found faithful and constant at their
end, whether by natural or by violent death they be taken away, all is one,
and they perseuering so shall be saved, as Christ says here, and received
into heavenly habitations for ever.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS UPON DEVT. 5. verse. 28.29.
Then the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spoke unto me: and the
Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which
they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all that they have spoken.

Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments always; that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever.


MY purpose is (beloved) to show what the things are which I intend (God
willing) to deliver to you at this time, The scope of this Text and whole
Sermon.
to the end ye may the better hear them and not wander uncertainly, as ye
must needs do, if ye know not what is intended to be taught you. But yet so I
will do it, as I may show that the holy Ghost purposes the same also, in the
words which I shall speak of. The thing which I propound to teach, is this.
That whereas the greatest part of people among us, do think, that if they can
say Lord, Lord, they shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: Matthew. 7.21.
(as our Savior gives us to understand, whereas they think also if they can
utter good words of the Scripture and professors of the Gospel, that they
serve God as well as the best, and that God will bless them accordingly, and
their posterity; they may know that it is nothing so, for God requires
another and greater matter: and that is, that there be a true change, both of
heart and life, and a constant holding out in both, unto the end. To this
purpose, I intend to speak that which I mean to say of the words which I have
read unto you. And the same meaning had the Lord in speaking the words himself.

The occasion of these words.
For (to show the occasion that moved him to utter them, (which Moses repeated
in the words before the text) when the people of Israel had heard the Lord on
mount Sinay to deliver his law to the^ out of the midst of the fire, in
clouds and darkness, and were afraid to hear God speak unto them any further,
they desired Moses even all the chief of the tribes and elders, to go near
to the Lord, and hear all that he should say to him, and they would hear it
again at his mouth, and do it: Then the Lord heard the voice of their words,
when they spoke to Moses; and the Lord said to Moses, I have heard the words of
this people, which they have spoke unto thee: they have said well, all that
they have spoken. Oh that there were such an heart in them, that they did fear
me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might go well with them,
and their children for ever.

Thus ye see also, how the Lord in this text speaks the same of the people
to Moses, which I am to deliver unto you. This being done, I will now show in
what manner I mean to handle the text, and what order to follow therein, and
then proceed to the particulars.

The parts of the text three.
This text deuideth it self most fitly into three parts. The first is a mixed
speech which the Lord utters to Moses, commending somewhat, and disliking
somewhat of the peoples answer, in these words: This people has said well,
but their heart is not suitable unto their words. The second thing is, what the
Lord wishes to them: and that is, such an heart as might suit with their
words, from which only, and from no other heart, this fear of God and
obedience to his will, which he liked of, could come. In these words; Oh that
there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments always. The third is the fruit of such an heart and life, and
that is prosperity and welfare to them and to their children for ever.

The first part. The Lord commends the peoples words, but condemns their
heart.
Now to begin with the first, this mixed speech of the Lord (which I so call,
because it commends somewhat in the peoples answer, and disliketh somewhat
in them: it aloweth their words, but condemns their heart) this mixed speech
of the Lord (I say) teaches us clearly, that men may possibly utter good
words, and yet themselves be without grace, their words may be good but their
hearts naught: Doct.
so that while they commend religion, the preaching of the Gospel, and the
profession thereof; yet for all that, they may be unprofitable in their lives,
and not sound and upright in their hearts, without which their speech helps
them nothing. And if it be said, it is not sufficient for the proof of this
doctrine, that is here said in the text, for possibly it may be gathered
amiss, let it be proved by two or three witnesses, that there may be no
exception brought against it. As that for example in the 50. Psalm, verse 16.
where ye may find this: Unto the wicked said God, what have thou to do,
Psalm. 50.16.
to take my word in thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? What needs there
any explanation of these words? The Lord vehemently reprooueth them for
speaking of his word, as though they bare great affection to it, when in the
mean while they would not be subject to it, nor be directed by it. To the
which, that may be added, which our Savior says: This people draw near to me
with their lips, Matthew. 15.29.
but their hearts are far from me, in vain do such worship me. And the
Prophet Ezekiel agrees most fitly with them both, when he says, Ezech. 33.30.
Son of man, this people talk of thee by the walls, and doors of their
houses, and say one to another, come (I pray you) and hear what the word is
that comes from the Lord; and they hear thy words, but they will not do
them. By all which, it is manifest, that to have good words in our mouths,
without the uprightness of the heart, does not commend us to God. Good speech
commendable, yea commanded.


And yet let not this be thought of any one to be spoken by me, as though I
made light of good speech, or thought it little worth, which I acknowledge to
be an excellent gift of God, (as Paul spoke of it in the people of Corinth) and
I do bewail that the want of it is so great, in so long continuance of the
Gospel preached, yea I say more, that we are commanded of God, to take unto
us words, Hos. 14.2.
to express our requests, confession of sins, thanksgiving, and our
covenants of amendment of life, and to be examples to others in our
communication, as well as in our conversation, 1. Tim. 4.12.
and woe to them that endeavor not after it. But to rest in it, as if that were
sufficient, it is nothing; and to stay our hope upon it, as if we thought it a
testimony of our happiness, it is no better then a bruised reed. This
therefore, or any other such gifts of God are seemly ornaments, in them that
have them, for in most parts of the land, ye shall not find good words and
godly speech common: I need not say in Wales, or Ireland, but not in many
places of England, but despised rather, and laughed to scorn; and rotten and
filthy communication entertained with great applause in stead of it, but yet,
(as I have said) this alone of it self without other gifts of God, is not
current, But it must not go alone without other gifts.
nor that in which a man may have contentment.

Ierem. 17 9.
The reason is, the heart of man is deceitful, and goes not always with the
tongue, and therefore we may well when we hear the one, 2. Cor. 11.14.
doubt of the other, and yet the devil can change himself into an angel of
light, and therefore can easily persuade us, that every good word or deed
coming from us, is enough to salvation, especially men being ready to think
every little to be sufficient to serve God withal. Whereas we ought to
search diligently and try our ways, and the whole course of our hearts and
lives, and pull down the old ruins of both, and set up the contrary in
stead thereof in both, and all little enough to make a due proof unto us, that
we are partakers of the promise of eternal life: which to be necessary to
assure us of the same, and no less; that saying of the Prophet Micah does
lively show: where he brings in the wicked speaking thus, when they sought
how to be acceptable to God, that they might please him.

Micah. 6.6.
Wherewith shall we come before the Lord, and bow our selves before the high
God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings? Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my
first borne for my transgression? Even the fruit of my body, for the sin of
my soul? But the Prophet answered far otherwise then they looked for:
saying, He has showed to thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee: surely to do justice, and to love mercy, and to humble thy
self, and to walk with God.

Whereby he shows, that man cannot direct himself in the great matters of
pleasing God, and seeking his favor, but God must guide him therein, to the
end he may have peace, and consequently that good words are not sufficient to
rest in, for welfare and happiness, without better furniture of grace and
goodness. And to go a step further, if good speech, (as commendation of the
word, praising of God, and communication of his works and will) be not to be
rested in, in what case are they, who have almost no good speech, but rather
that which comes from them is profane, foolish, corrupt, and such as
ouerthwarteth and crosses goodness?

But here a question arises about the people mentioned in the text, for if
their answer were good, There is a middle sin betwixt hypocrisy and
sincerity.
why was it not allowed? meant they not as they spoke? I say, yes, but that
freed them only from hypocrisy, but was no argument of their sincerity for
there is a middle sin betwixt them both, and may be called halting or not
upright, and may clearly be discerned by that which is spoken of the
Israelites in the Psalm. Who made a covenant there with God, Psalm. 78.35.
and had not to do with men; and therefore though they brake and went from it,
they could not be charged with hypocrisy, but yet they dealt treacherously
with the Lord, in that they were not careful to keep and perform it. The
words are these in effect: When he slew them, they sought him, yea they
returned, and sought God early: but they flattered him with their mouth, and
dissembled with him in their tongue, for their heart was not upright with him,
neither were they faithful in his covenant.

Now from this that has been said in the answer to the question, a good point
is to be observed, namely, Great heed to be taken to our covenants with God.
that we take great heed when we covenant with God, about amendment either in
general, or to forsake any particular sin in our life, (though we do it in
secret, no man knowing thereof) I say great heed is to be taken, that we do
not afterward wax remiss, and cold in going about to perform the same; for
then God will count it but flattering and deceiving of him, which he will not
put up at our hands, for why? men will not bear such indignity one at
another hands. I speak this, seeing many never suspect any danger to be
coming toward them by breach of covenant to God, if they cannot be challenged
for hypocrisy before men. Which indeed, is the grosser of the two, and it is
the sin of the most, to utter great words before men of their godliness,
when yet they deny the power thereof, but yet the other is also odious to God,
when men so slightly regard the promise which they have in their good mood
made to him of obedience, as though it were not to be looked after.

Such are al they, who having in their trouble, sick bed, or at their
receiving of the Sacrament, professed seriously to turn to the Lord, Psalm.
78.57.
have yet started aside afterward like a broken bow. I have my self sometime
had good hope of people, when I visiting them in their likeliehood of death,
have heard their frank and free promise made to God, of forsaking their former
ill life. But when I have seen so slight fruit to follow in many of them,
they returning after their recovery, 2. Pet. 2.22.
to their wicked course, as the dog to his vomit, tempting God thereby in a
fearful manner, (which is Pharaos sin) my good hope has been much cooled,
and this I have learned to be so true, by long experience, that I dare not
rest upon such covenants. And yet God forbid, but that many couenanting the
same by like occasions; should look conscionably to perform their covenant
afterward, though too many fall from them, according to that which is said by
David in the Psalm: Psalm. 119.106.
I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.

The second part, and doctrine out of it.
Thus much of the mixed speech of God in the first part of the text. Now it
follows what the Lord wished to the people in the second part. And that is,
first, such an heart as they might fear him: for therefore their answer was
disliked although their words were good, because they proceeded not from such
an heart. But this speech of the Lord, in this manner uttered, raises a doubt
in the hearer, what he should mean by wishing such an heart, as though the
fear of God could not grow in any heart, and likewise come from it: and if it
be so, what heart is that he wishes unto them? To the which may be answered,
that the fear of God and obedience to his commandments do not come from
every heart, neither does such fruit grow in every garden, The fear of God
cannot dw^ll in every heart.
and it must be such an heart indeed as cannot be matched, neither has any
fellow or companion. But what manner of heart is that, you will say, you do
not understand what he means. I answer therefore further, that by such an
heart, he means in one word, an heart converted to God: more particularly, an
heart broken with sorrow for sin, Three things requisite in a heart fitted to
fear God.
and the fear of damnation, yet quieted again and eased by believing the
remission of sin, and sanctified also to newnes of life. Even such an heart
is fit to breed the fear of God, and in such an heart it can dwell, and in no
other. And that is called by our Savior a good heart, which only, Luke 6.46.
and no other can bring forth good things. For so he says, a good man out of
the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things, and contrariwise:
so that if the heart be good, that is, truly turned to God, then it is fitted
for that which God here wished to his people, that is, to fear him, and keep
his commandments, and not else.

Now for proof that it must be thus, First, that it be troubled for sin.
the scripture is clear and plentiful. As first that the heart must be
wounded for sin, and broken with sorrow and fear, till it be sick again,
is proved by the words of our Savior, where he says: The whole have no
need of the Physician but the sick. Luke 5.31. Act. 2.37.
And they in the Acts were pricked in conscience for their woeful estate,
before they came to Peter to ask how they might be healed: but then they came
to him and the other Apostles, though they had railed on them before, and said,
Men and brethren what shall we do? As if they should have said; in this our
distress and dispayring in our selves what help can ye minister unto us, or
ease unto our souls? This contrition and sorrow is one of the three things
which help to make the evil heart good. And yet this without the other two,
is nothing to this purpose, but fit only to raise up flashes and fears of
hell to the tormenting of the conscience, and the holding of it in slavery and
bondage, for which cause, it is called of the Apostle, the spirit of bondage.
Romans 8.15.
But this being rightly used, makes a most direct way to the renewing and
changing of the heart, that it may be good.

Secondly, that Faith must be adjoined.
To proceed therefore, the second thing required to make the heart good, is
faith unfeigned: that the afflicted mind may see and believe the sins of it
to be pardoned, to the easing and quieting of it, which then stands in need
of it, and most earnestly desires it, and the Lord has given a free grant of
it unto such as are thus prepared for it, by earnest desiring it; Luke 5 31.
even as in the forementioned place, the Lord says, I am a physician for the
sick, John 7.37.
and in another place, I will give the water of life unto such as thirst, which
the sick and troubled conscience hearing, counts it the happiest and
welcomest tidings that could be brought unto it, and so by due and advised
considering it, lays hold of it, though weakly and by little and little,
the Lord inabling the party; and so believes, that it is as effectually
offered to him, as to any of Gods children, that have already embraced it. And
this mightily works both to ease, and quiet, and also to quicken him who was
before so cast down and troubled.

Thirdly, that Sanctification must go with both.
And thus (to pass to the third thing requisite to the reforming and rectifying
of the heart, that the true fear of God may proceed from thence, the party
being thus persuaded of the love of God, and the free remission of sin, and
what unlooked for contentment he has thereby, breaks forth into the praise
of God with admiring his kindness, and says, what thanks shall I give unto the
Lord for his unspeakable mercy unto me? What shall I offer unto the Lord for
this his great goodness? And so, he being constrained by the love of God so
shed into his heart, is persuaded and enabled in good sort to go about the
duty which God requires, indeuoring and purposing to walk before him in
vprightnes and innocence for ever after. And this desire of his, not being
frothie and rash, stirred up of more and painful fear, as in many wicked
ones it is, but proceeding from faith (which works by love) and from the
certainty of the favor of God assured to him by the holy Ghost; is not a
sudden passion in him (which is hot and fervent for the present only) but
coming from so good a foundation and ground; sanctifies him effectually, by
working a dislike of evil, because it is evil, and an hearty and unfeigned
love of al goodness; which grace being thus wrought in him, is the third thing
required to the changing of the heart, and turning of it unto God. And this
must go with faith, as we are taught in the Epistle to the Corinthians, where
he says, 2. Cor. 7.1.
Seeing we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. With
this agrees that of Saint John, 1. John 3.3.
that if we have the hope, which is the daughter of faith, we purge our selves
from sin as it comes to our sight.

Thus I have showed what graces of God must necessarily be planted in the
heart, that it may bring forth this fruit, I mean the fear of God, and that
so it may become such an heart, as God here wishes the people, when he says,
oh that there were such an heart in them. Now that the Christian Reader may not
be deceived in judging whether he has such an heart or not, I will add some
caueats about these three properties which make the heart good, that he
examining and observing them, may see whether he have them or no.

And to begin, let him know, that about the first of them, Two caueats about
wound of conscience.
which is prick or wound of conscience and fear of Gods displeasure for the
same, I give these two caueats or watchwords.

Both are very necessary: for as we are ready to run to extremities in all
other things, rather then to keep a mean, and that which is commendable
betwixt both: so do we easily incline thereto in these. For either men are sly
and subtle to shun all sorrow and check of conscience for sin; or if they
can no longer, they are ready to despair. In the first, they may fitly be
compared to them, who are taken with sickness, and yet will bear it out too
long, as though they would drive it away by ill entertaining it, rather then to
betake themselves to their chamber, or to fall into the Physicians hands: even
so will they wind out of Gods hands (I say) rather then they will be holden
under of fear and grief. In the last they are like to a thief, who being
apprehended upon stealing some twelue-penie matter, falls to confess, that he
has stolen a horse, without any examining, and so brings him self into
peril of his life. So these men, if they once be checked in their conscience
justly, whereby they ought to accuse themselves, and bewail their sin with
hope of pardon; fall to remember many other faults, and so cast off all hope of
forgiveness, and so despair. For as men are very hardly brought to yield to
any wounding of their conscience, be it never so just: so if they must needs;
commonly they have no stay, but go too far, whereby they are constrained to
cry out they are damned, and so lie long in woe and torment, where they need
not. These two things therefore regard about the first point, namely, the
prick of conscience.

Two caueats about believing.
About the second, which is faith, these two caueats are to be marked. I came
not to call the righteous (that is, such as feel as little burden of their
sin as if they were righteous) but sinners (who feel the burden of their sin,
as a debtor does his debt) unto repentance. The second caveat is as necessary
for the afflicted conscience, who though he have right to the promise by
Christ's free grant, yet through weakness and want of experience, is holden
from believing and clasping about it, and all because he does not duly consider
his liberty, and the warrant that he has from Christ for his so doing.
Wherein although I deny not, but that Gods providence rules, yet the party
offends, for that he does not embrace that which is freely given him by God,
and by means thereof, he cannot praise and be thankful to God for it.

About the third point that is necessarily required to make the heart good,
which is sanctification, Two watchwords about sanctification.
these two watchwords are to be received.

The reason of both is manifest, as of the former: for if one sin should be
loathed, and another loved, some disliked and shamed, and other delighted in,
and embraced; what could be more ridiculous, and further off from the nature of
true repentance? For the offense to men, and the dishonor which might arise to
God thereby in some few evil actions,

Thus I have said that which I thought meet of this matter, to help him that
desires it, to attain such an heart as brings forth the fear of God; even
that which God requires. And seeing thus much is necessary, and no less, such
an heart to be in all those, who would be accepted of him, and what a rich
jewel and treasure such an heart is, and by necessary consequence, how ill it
will go with all such as be without it.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
I Showed last of all what a jewel such a good heart is, and in what woeful and
dangerous estate they are in, who are without it: but more heavy it is, that it
is not regarded; which is too common, because the most are foolish, and weigh
nothing thoroughly, if it agree not with their appetite; when yet, to speak as
the truth is, speak with the tongues of Angels, and had not this, even such an
heart as God wishes to be in them that shall please him, it were nothing; for
such a one should be but as S. Paul speaks in the like case of love, a fruit
of it, as a sounding brass, 1. Cor. 13.1.
and as a tinkling cymball.

And therefore how much is the estate of such to be bewailed, as have scarcely
any whit of all this, which I have now named, and are as far from such an
heart, as the East is from the West? And to come home to our selves; how is the
people of this age bewitched, and blindfolded, that when God has thus spoken,
that no good words nor shows of godliness shall do them good, unless they
have such an heart also, as I have described, can yet walk merry and locant
through the day, although they be destitute of it? Even as if they ailed
nothing, as though no danger were toward them, but as though they had made a
league with hell and a covenant with damnation, that they might not come near
them. If they think this will excuse them, for that they are ignorant of such
points, and know no such matter, who cannot tell them again, that it is
preached amongst them, and is as a Princes proclamation, which all must take
knowledge of? If they will fly to another shelter, that they have other
matters to look after, let them likewise take this for their answer, that
they have already their reward: let those other matters be their comfort and
stay, but from God they may look for none.

Now let us proceed with the rest of Gods words to this people. Oh that there
were such an heart that they did fear me, The end why God wishes that there
were such an heart in the people.

First, that they might fear him.


etc. Here ye may see to what end such an heart is wished, even to breed Gods
fear. For God plainly teaches, that there cannot be in any, the fear of God
without it. This let us a little consider of, particularly. We know all, with
what scorn and detestation, this speech would be rejected of those that
scarcely profess the Gospel, if the grauest Divine in the greatest aduisednes
should utter it, that the fear of God is not in them. All, even the worst are
so strongly persuaded, that they fear God. And therefore they will be ready
to say, it were pity they should live, if they did not so.

And yet behold, without such an heart, The fear of God a rare jewel.
as has been spoken of, which also is the hardest thing in the world to
attain to, without that, (I say) God himself being witness, the fear of God
is not in them, but far from them. For from whence should it come? Is it a
sudden passion of the heart that rises and falls? or that with the tide, it
ebbeth and flows? Is it not rather a sanctified affection which continues,
even as the heart is sanctified, in which it grows? And as it had need to be
choice ground, and well fitted and prepared, that precious seed and fruit
should be sown and planted in; so the heart had need to be made good ground,
in which this rare fruit, I mean, the fear of God should grow and be
nourished.

And that none may marvel, that I speak thus, let all further know, that this
fear of God, is such a gift of God, as by the which a man is preserved and
kept from evil, neither dares he that has that, come near it, therefore
when the Lord spoke of Job, and commended him for fearing God, he added this,
that he eschewed evil also. This will more lively appear by a similitude or
two, drawn from common experience, for this purpose, note what force there is
in natural fear. The blind and superstitious people in the time of Popery,
were made so afraid of spirits walking, that they durst not go through a
churchyard in the fearful time of the night: and he that carries a great sum
of money dares not pass alone by woods and mountains: so he that is well
seasoned with the fear of God, dares not drink up the draffe, and commit the
sins of the times in the which he lives, but above all things does carefully
avoid them. And he that shall live among the common sort of bad people, and
will not be like unto them, nor dares not taste of their dainties, had need to
be well armed, and to have his heart well fenced against them.

And seeing the fear of God is such a grace, and has such force in whomsoever
it dwells, I may by this as a second argument conclude, Common professors
want this fear.
that the common professors of the Gospel and such as draw near to God with
their bodies, having their hearts far from him, have not his fear in them,
seeing not only they make no question in matters they doubt of to be evil, for
they rush and break through them boldly; but also in things which are
apparently wicked, they do the same and neither blancke nor blush at it, when
they have done, whereas the fear of God brings forth most contrary effects,
as has been showed.

Secondly, that they might keep his Commandments.
Now let us hear of another fruit which comes from such an heart, and from
the fear of God also jointly together, and this is a good and godly life, and
a keeping of Gods Commandments. For so the Lord says; Oh that there were such
an heart in them, that they did fear me, and keep all my Commandments
always: which to do, what is it else, but to lead a godly and Christian life?
For as the fear of God proceeds from such an heart, as I have spoken of; so
a godly life comes from both. For they breed not dumpishnesse, deadness and
melancholy, as the wicked world imagines, but an holy care and desire to
please God in all things, neither take they away delight from a man in doing
the duties of this life, but enable and strengthen him rather to do them in
good sort.

Such a life goes with the fear of God. And though I mean as the Lord also
does, by keeping his Commandments, no perfection, but an endeavor to keep
them, 1. Chron. 28.7.
nor any other life then is accompanied with infirmities, and such an one as
without a constant watch, may break forth sometimes into dangerous offenses;
yet I mean such a life as endeavors to keep all the commandments of God (in
omitting evil and doing good) as well as any one of them, and in the same to
perfeuere and abide as well as to begin. Which grace we must know, is granted
by God to be enjoyed of such as delight in it, and have it in great price, even
in this life, whereby they may shine as lights unto others which is a rich
portion in so wicked a world as this is, and yet few hasten to be acquainted
with it.

But how safe and sweet a life it is, and how free from many great calamities
wherewith the contrary life is filled, another place fitter for it, shall
declare and testify. Only let this be granted, which cannot be denied, the
words of the text so clearly proving it, without any straining of them, This
must be in particular and constantly.
that it is no godly life, in which there is not conscience made of the
particular actions of it, neither is the fear of God there, where there is not
a faithful endeavor and laboring to keep all his Commandments constantly,
for so it is in the text, (all my Commandments, and always). But this point I
pass over more briefly, and press it not at large, seeing in other places I
handle it more fully. And thus much of the second part of the text, namely,
what God wishes unto the people, and also of the second effect of a good
heart, namely, a good life.

Now follows the third part of the text: The third part: The fruit of such an
heart and life.
in which he sets down the fruit of such an heart and life; and that is
twofold: First, to the parties themselves.
one redounding to the parties, in whom they are, the other to their posterity
and children. And the blessing annexed is one to both, that is to say,
prosperity and welfare, both temporal and eternal. For so he says, That it
might go well with them, and their children for ever. So that the Lord would
have us know, that all, in whom there is such an heart, that they do fear
God, and endeavor to keep his commandments always, shall prosper and be
well liking in that course. For by saying, it shall go well with them, his
meaning is, they shall see Gods blessing so to accompany them in that course
of life, as they shall confess it to be to their exceeding good liking, and
so, as in no other they could find the like by many degrees.

And yet this is not to be understood of outward prosperity, peace, and
welfare, in riches, honor, and such like, simply, but conditionally so far
as they be good for Gods children. Whereof the godly for the most part are
void, and this hungry scrambling world will keep them far enough off from
them: and yet this is no cause of grief to them neither, God providing better
for them, that they should be less wedded to this world. But God principally
means hereby that he will make their life pleasing and comfortable to them
with inward peace and gladness of heart, which far surmount the other, and
yet as he sees it expedient, they shall have sufficiency of the other also.

All men much desire peace even with men; they find malice and contention with
the unquietness that goes with it, to be tedious, troublesome and unwelcome to
them, and even outward peace to be embraced. And so we are willed by the author
to the Hebrews, saying, follow peace with all men, so as it go with
holiness: Heb. 12.16.
as if he should say, although it fly from you, yet let it not go, but pursue
it, till ye obtain it. For it is a singular gift of God to live without fear
by men, one man being, usually as the proverb says, a wolf, nay a devil to
another. But if men had as good insight into the worth and price of the inward
peace, namely to be without fear of Gods displeasure, and the burden thereof,
To have peace with God a singular treasure.
and what is the liberty and holy security of his beloved ones, they would
much more desire that, yea although they wanted all which a man may want having
it.

Oh! to be without fear of condemnation, the judgment day, and of the day of
death, whose sting being plucked out is not fearful to Gods people: and
contrariwise, to be in that account with the Lord, that nothing shall be
wanting which is good for them, (for so the Prophet says, Psalm. 23.1.
The Lord is my shepherd therefore shall I want nothing) we may continually
wonder, that God will be so bountiful, to love them here to their end, and
after, to receive them to glory. John 13.1. Psalm. 73.14.
And yet when I have said what I can of this matter, I must leave it raw and
imperfect, but that we may know by a little, what the whole means in some
sort.

But hear in few words what the scripture speaks to this purpose: He that
walks uprightly, Prou. 10.9. Gal. 6.16.
(says Solomon) walks boldly; therefore safely. Saint Paul speaking of the
like, says, He that walks after this rule, peace shall be upon him. S.
Peter, 1. Pet. 3.12.
The eyes of the Lord are ever over the righteous, and his ears are open to
their prayers (but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil) and who
is he that shall harm you, if ye follow that which is good? For such shall see
good days, that is, lead an happy and blessed life.

But whilst I thus speak, casting down all pomp of the world at the feet
of godliness, as it were, me thinks from hence somewhat is to be answered to
such as object thus: be easily borne, so it makes prosperity doubly
pleasant: Oh great is the gain of godliness, 1. Tim. 4.8.
which has the promises of this life and of the life to come!

The fearful. estate of such as are not at peace with God.
Therefore much to be lamented and bewailed is the estate of all such, who are
strangers to it, and much more they who shun and loath it; as they who are
spoken of in Job, Who say to the Lord depart from us, Job 21.14.15.
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? Who is the Almighty that we should
serve him, and what profit shall we have, if we should pray to him? Oh this
woeful progeny, who can sufficiently lay forth the vengeance that hangs over
it? 1. Pet. 4.18.
For if God begin judgment amongst his own, what shall the end of them be
that obey not the Gospel, as S. Peter speaks? And if the righteous be
scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

What is become of the generations of all those, who in their days went about
to iustle godliness to the walls? Who counted it foolishness; and
contrariwise, the greatest happiness to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season? As Iezabel the mistress of persecutors, and Corah with his company,
the rebel against Gods faithful Ministers, and Haman the proud, a deadly
enemy to all that worshipped God truly? Did not these with their companions,
find that they met with their match? And did they not leave sufficient
testimony behind them, that their glory was their shame, and their
happiness had been to have loved that which they loathed, and pursued in the
servants of God, I mean true godliness?

Even so the lives of those, whom they persecuted is blessed, even as their
memory also is, and so shall all they be, that follow their steps, accordingly
as the Lord says here, It shall go well with them that fear me and keep my
commandments: And so I conclude this point, maruailing at them, who think it
more then needs; to be more forward this way then others, 1. Pet. 4.4.
and therefore speak evil of us, because we walk not after the same excess
of riot that they do.

But one thing more is to be marked, that to all the prosperity which Gods
servants shall enjoy in this present life, of which I have said somewhat, this
he adds, Hap of Gods children everlasting,
that it shall also go well with them hereafter, even for ever: which saying
of his makes up to the full whatsoever might seem to be wanting. For what can
be further desired, then that after such a sweet and plentiful partaking of
Gods benefits, and that in his favor while we live here, yet that the best
should be behind, Psalm. 16.11.
namely to enjoy fullness of pleasures at Gods right hand after we go hence,
and that for ever? Yea and this in the midst of the anguish and torture of
the reprobate? For so our Savior says, when the wicked shall be at their
wits end, then look up says he to his, Luke 21.28.
and lift up your heads for your redemption draws near; meaning that the
effects thereof shall then appear. And therefore S. Peter teaches a most
singular use of this, that the Lord shall come to judgment in a fearful
manner to the wicked, but to the everlasting comfort of his elect; 2. Pet. 3.11.
agreeing with that which the Lord requires here, saying: Seeing these things
must be, what manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness.

Now it follows to show what the fruit of a godly life is to the children of
them that lead it, Secondly, to their children.
as I have done already to themselves, who are parents: for such a promise God
makes to them, and so the Lord speaks here, Parents fearing God provide well
for their children after them.
that it may go well with them, and with their children. So that Parents
fearing God, do thereby provide well for their children, as well as for
themselves, and derive Gods blessings to them abundantly: which promise is
confirmed by the Lord in the second commandment, where he says: He will
visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him, Comman. 2.
and show mercy unto the thousand generation of them that love him and keep
his commandments: Deuteronomy. 28.46.
This is also further confirmed by the contrary in Deuteronomie, where God
speaks thus to the people of Israel; Because thou did not serve the Lord
thy God with ioyfulnesse and a good heart for the abundance of all things,
therefore these curses shall be upon thee for signs and wonders (that is,
evident signs that he is offended with thee) and upon thy seeds for ever.

And if it be so, then it follows, that if we love our children, we should
endeavor above all things to lead a godly life. Which is urged by the Lord, at
men's hands in the entrance into their marriage: that couples should be espoused
to him, before they be so one to another. And it may be truly said, that they
set not by, neither care for the welfare of their children, who do not first
regard their own good and welfare of their souls, by walking obediently unto
Gods commandments themselves. And how unnatural a thing is it, that any
should be the means to bring children into the world, Wicked parents are also
unnatural toward their children.
to send them to hell? And that they should be so pitilesse, as to cast their
poor shiftles progeny upon the curse of God, more grievous then if it were
upon the swords point, and that through their sin and wickedness? For
thereby, that is by bad example giving, they make them like themselves, as much
as in them lies. For as by a godly care in themselves, and a christian
education of them, they commonly have the fruit thereof in their children,
that by the blessing of God they be religious also, so a thousand to one, if in
the profaneness of themselves, the children become faithful and good
christians; but if they do, no thank to them, they did as much as in them
lay, to make them prove otherwise.

Why good education has not always like effect.
partly lest we should ascribe the good success to our selves, and so take
the glory from him, and partly for other causes unknown to us; let us leave
Gods secrets unto himself, but there shall be always cause enough why God
does so, and to justify him, seeing few are so careful about the good
education of their children, but that they may be justly charged with default
that way.

This be said of the fruit that shall follow the godly life of parents in their
children, that they shall prosper, and it shall go well with them, as with
their parents, in respect of other, who live among them, and best of all
hereafter, when they go hence. For they shall be received with their parents
into the paradise of God, into an habitation not made with hands, but
everlasting, to the which our Lord Jesus is gone before to prepare a place for
them and all his, to the which he vouch safe to bring us, even speedely, to
whom with the father and the holy Ghost be ascribed all honor, praise and
thanks for evermore.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS UPON MATTHEW. 13. verse. 45.46.
Again the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a Merchant man, that seeks good
pearls.

Who having found a pearl of great price, went, and sold all that he had, and
bought it.


THe sum and effect of this Parable is this; that how base and vile soever
the Gospel seems in the eyes of men; yet whosoever comes to find the
worth, price, and excellency of it, will give all that he has to get it, and
will rather part with all, then he will forgo it.

What is meant by the kingdom of heaven.
For here by the kingdom of Heaven* (that I may show what is meant by it) we
are not to understand the place of the blessed mansion of the faithful after
this life, whither Christ is ascended; though the words are thus to be taken
sometimes, Mat. 8.11.
as in Matthew: I say unto you, that many shall come from the East, and from
the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven: neither is it taken for the absolute kingdom of God, whereby he
guides and governs all the world, and all his creatures, from the greatest
unto the least of them: neither lastly, is it taken for that especial rule and
regiment, which Christ as the head, has over the Church his body, which is
likewise called a kingdom after a more especial manner: but here by kingdom
we are to understand the Gospel of the kingdom, Mark. 1.14.
as it is called in Mark: Jesus went forth into Galile preaching the Gospel
of the kingdom, and in diverse other like places.

And this Gospel of the kingdom is not only in many places of this Chapter,
but most evidently, in the 21. Math. 21.
Chapter of this Evangelist, called the kingdom of God; in these words:
Therefore I say unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given
to a nation, that will bring forth the fruit thereof. The kingdom of God,
shall be taken away, Why the Gospel is called the kingdom of heaven.
that is the Gospel should be taken away from them. Now the Gospel is called
the kingdom of heaven or the kingdom of God, because it is that powerful
mean, or instrument, that God has appointed for the pulling of us forth of
the kingdom of darkness, and translating us into the kingdom of his Son, for
the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, 1. Romans 1.16.
to every one that believes.

This kingdom is also called the kingdom of heaven, to distinguish it from
all eorthly kingdoms, such as many imagine, and the Apostles long dreamed the
kingdom of Christ the Messiah, should have bin. And therefore the people were
sometime ready to have crowned him; What manner of kingdom this is.
other whiles his disciples disputing, and contending among themselves, who
should be the greatest, and made suit for the places of greatest dignity (as
the sons of Zebedeus, Matthew. 20.21.
) one to sit at his right hand, the other at his left. But this kingdom, as it
bears the name of the kingdom of heaven: for it is a spiritual, and
heavenly kingdom, not earthly and pompous in glory, to the sight and view of
the world. And therefore, our Savior being demanded in Luke by the Pharisees,
when the kingdom of God should come, he answers: Luke 17.20.
the kingdom of God comes not with outward observation, neither shall men
speak of it lo it is here, or lo it is there, for behold the kingdom of God
is within you. It is a kingdom over the inward heart and conscience; there he
has set his throne, and there he will reign even in us; and therefore the
laws of our king do not bind the outward act only, but his laws bind the
very conscience. And he searches and tries, (as himself speaks in the
Revelation,) the Reins, and the hearts, Revel. 2.23.
to give every man according to his works.

It is therefore called the kingdom of heaven; first, in (...) it is
spiritual. Secondly, this kingdom is heavenly, because it is a righteous,
joyful and peaceable kingdom.

Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God (says the Apostle to the Romans) is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. It consists
in the inward righteousness of the heart, and conscience, in the peace and
tranquillity which we have with God our king, and within our souls, and in the
joy that is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Romans 5.5.


Now this Gospel which is the powerful instrument of God for the erecting of
this his kingdom in us, and is therefore called by the name of the kingdom of
God in this place, is here commended unto us by a parable. The effect whereof,
as I said, is this, that how great a reckoning soever men make of other things,
and how small and slight account soever they make of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,

But for our more clear understanding of this Parable, we are to know, that
the Gospel or kingdom of heaven, is here compared not to the person, as the
words may perhaps seem at the first, to carry it, when it is said: the
kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant man, seeking good pearls: but to the
pearl the rich and precious pearl, which the Merchant finds.

So that the meaning of the words is all one, as if they had bin laid down in
this form and manner; The kingdom of God is like unto a most precious pearl,
The fruitful hearer of the Gospel is like unto a merchant man in three
respects.
which a merchant having found, that sought for good pearls, sold all that he
had to buy it.

According to this exposition, I will handle the parable. We are therefore to
understand, that the fruitful and kind hearer of the Gospel, is resembled
here to a merchant man: and that in three properties, though they be not all
commendable: neither therefore is the hearer a profitable hearer, till he be
commendable.

So that the best hearer in his beginning and first estate that he is in to
Godward, thereby is likened to a merchant man, and to such an one, as by the
kind of his traffic and merchandise, whereabout he is occupied, seeks
pearls.





To prosecute these three therefore in order, that ye may have the right use
of this parable, understand that the hearer is compared (to set it down
briefly) to the merchant in three things, to wit, in seeking, finding, and
buying. All men seek after pearls; such as in their opinion may make them
happy.
In seeking good pearls; in finding one of great price: in buying that, and
selling all for it. Of these in order more largely. The first property
therefore of the merchant, fitly resembles the estate and condition of all men
that are hearers: for all seek pearls, that is, they seek for that, which
may in their opinion, make them happy and blessed men, and look what they
have imagined in their own conceit, to be like to bring them to be happy, that
they labor, and by all means endeavor to obtain. In that (I say) the hearer
is like to a merchant man, that cares not to travel by wet and dry, by sea
and land; so that he may store himself with rich and precious pearls. For
there is no man, but if he look into his own heart, and diligently examine
himself, he shall find something, which above all other things for the time,
he does affect; and whereunto the sway of his desires carry him, and that
thing is the pearl of that man, and he uses all the means he can to compass
and attain it.

Thus one man studieth and bends all his pains and care, only for this, how
he may live at ease and in pleasure, and voluptuousnes. Another, he seeks
after gain and profit, and to add house to house, and land to land. A third,
he follows his ambitious humor in seeking after favor and authority, and
renown in the world. But these are all but deceitful pearls. They make a
glistering show to a man's conceit a far off, But are never satisfied.
but when he has them, and considers them aright, and as they are; then the
vanity and the baseness of them appears, and therefore they that follow
these, with tooth and nail, as they say, they are always restless, while
they think of the uncertainty and momentany state of them; and never satisfied
with any thing they have attained. Neither the voluptuous man with his
pleasure, nor the covetous man with his wealth, nor the ambitious with his
honor, nor any man with that he has never so greatly desired.

The voluptuous man.
For even the very pleasures, and joys, and delights of the voluptuous man, are
as a continual fever or ague, to vex and disquiet his mind, howsoever he make
a fair show, and seem to be merry and happy; yet he ever carries a sting in
his conscience, that inwardly pricks, and torments him in such sort, as in his
greatest mirth and iollitie he never can heartily and sou^dly rejoice. And
though the pleasures be as honey for a little time in his mouth; yet he shall
find the^, when they are sunck into his stomach, to be as bitter and as
unpleasant as gall. The like may be said of the covetous and ambitious person.

The covetous man.
First for the covetous man, suppose he has heaped up, and gathered together
his chests full of gold and treasure, at least more then ever he thought he
should, yea let him have got all the pearls and precious stones into his own
possession, that the East and West Indians can afford; what has he gathered
together, but even a heap of cares to vex and to disquiet himself withal?
for as before he got and scraped them together with great pain and toil, and
infinite dangers, which he has passed through; so now he is to take no less
care to keep them, as being many ways in continual danger of losing them.
And suppose he lose them, as he shall either in his life or at his death, then
it is an exceeding grief and heart-sore unto him, to see by experience, how
vain, flitting and uncertain things they be, that he has so excessiuely
toiled for, and kept with so great care. And hence it comes often to pass,
that he having lost that, wherein the confidence of his heart was set, he falls
into despair, whence hardly he is ever able to be recovered.

The ambitious man in like sort, The ambitious man.
he highly priceth promotion, and rising up from a meaner estate, to an higher
degree: as the mean cottager, if he could be but a yeoman; and he a man of
worship, he should be therewith content; and if the worshipful could come to be
but a Knight, and the Knight a Lord, or an Earl, then he would desire to be no
higher, he says, but would rest well satisfied: but when he has gotten his
Knighthood, Lordship, or Earldom, which were the pearls he traveled for, he
cannot yet be at rest, because he sees other in places above him; he is yet a
subject, and under a Prince, if he were a King, then he thinks he should be
full content, and aspire no further. But it is not a kingdom of a whole
country, no, nor of the whole world that is able to stay the ambitious
affection of men. Alexander the great Monarch, having in a manner conquered the
whole world, is said to have wept when he heard some dispute that there were no
more worlds.

But not to stand particularly in exemplifying this point, I will bring one,
who had his part in them al, pleasures, profits, and honor: let him tell us the
worth of them. Example of Solomon.
Solomon was such an one; he made trial of all ways, and spared no pain,
labor nor cost, to try what fruit and commodity was to be reaped of them
all. He had honor and fame, the greatest that ever any Prince had, that lived
on the earth. For pleasure he inioyed whatsoever his wisdom could devise, and
his heart desire. He had his Orchards and Gardens, planted and set with all the
most choice and excellent trees and herbs, whereof he had not only the sight
to feed and please his eye; the sent to feed his smell; and the fruit to please
his taste; but the exact knowledge of every tree and simple therein, which he
also committed after to writing; and imparted to others.

If music might delight, he had besides the solemn quier of singing men, such
a quier as no Prince in the world had unto this day; singing men, singing
women, which he had privately for his own delight: he had his possession of
servants, of Beeues, of sheep, of houses, of vineyards, of silver, of gold, of
all precious stones, and all the choice treasures of other kingdoms and
provinces, above any King that ever reigned in Jerusalem, or that we can read
of in any histories. And all these did he enjoy, with great peace and
prosperity, both at home and abroad.

So that if any man could ever be happy by following his pleasures, Solomon
was the man. He had a greater wisdom, then ever had any to invent, and
contriue and devise, and he had all means at will, to compass and effect them
all. If any man could be happy by his wealth, Solomon was the man, for he had
silver as the stones of the street, and gold for all his vessels, and the
adorning of all his buildings, and store of rich and precious stones. If honor
might make a man happy, he had more then ever any Prince in regard of the
incomparable glory and wisdom, which God gave unto him.

All these Solomon enjoyed, as much to his desire as ever any has done or
shall do. And what was the happiness that he found in them? Eccles. 1.14^
Surely, vanity, and vexation of spirit. And what then should we account of
these? Did Solomon find these to be vanity, and most vain, and empty of all
goodness, and shall we think to find something, where he could find nothing?
to find substance, where he found but shadows and vanity? and to find
happiness, and a paradise of pleasures, wherein he found nothing but trouble,
disquiet, and vexation of spirit? He tried all these, and he tried them
thoroughly, and as they say, unto the proof; and found them in experience such,
as in his Ecclesiastes he has laid them down to be, and as every one that
will be so foolish as to make trial, shall find them to be by his own
experience. Let this be instead of many examples unto us.

So that all men, we see, seek for pearls, and for good pearls, but the most
are deceived with false and counterfeit pearls, when they come to the trial,
they find them as base, and of as small value and reckoning, to rest in, as the
dirt which is under their feet; so vain and vile are all the pleasures, and
riches, and honors, and worldly things (to make a man happy) which men so
highly price in their own conceit. And this vileness and baseness, is much more
in all other pearls, that is, in all worldly things, which men here hunt and
seek after.

The use of this doctrine is, Use.
that no man please himself in the most precious things in this world, but
seek for those which may make him happy. And that these pearls are all so
mean and little worth. Our Savior Christ very evidently notes unto us, in
the words following, when he says, the merchant found one pearl of great
price.

By the which is meant the Gospel, giving us thereby to understand, that it is
a pearl of great price and value, he abaseth the other pearls, and notes
them to be of no price, nor value to rest upon. But of this afterward in the
next point: In the mean while we see (and with that I will conclude this first
point) that in this first act of the merchant, all men that are hearers in the
visible Church, agree with him: namely, that they seek for pearls, that is,
one way or other to be happy in this world. I have showed also, what use we
ought to make thereof. Now it follows that I come to the second act or
property of the merchant, and that is, The second property wherein the hearer
resembles the merchant man. Two things here to be considered. First, the thing
that be is said to find.

The Gospel in diverse respects compared diversely.


that he finds one pearl of great price.

In this property two things are to be considered. First, the thing that he is
said to find: secondly, what it means and imports, that he is said to find
it. First, the thing that he is said to find, is one pearl of great price. By
which pearl he means nothing else (as I have showed) but the Gospel, that
is to say, the glad tidings of salvation by Jesus Christ, for the kingdom of
heaven, as elsewhere, and so in this chapter, is in diverse regards compared and
resembled diversely. In regard of the manner of teaching and receiving it, and
the diverse effects it has in the hearers, it is compared to seed cast by the
hand of the sower. In regard of diverse corruptions and errors that commonly
spring up together with it, where it is taught it is compared unto a field,
wherein tares are sown and grow up among the good corn. In regard of the
small beginnings and mighty increase, it is compared to a grain of
mustardseed. In respect of the power and force it has to change and to alter
the heart, it is compared to leaven. In that God draws by it, of all sorts of
men, good and bad, one and other into the compass of the visible Church, it is
compared to a drag or draw-net, that draws as well weeds and sticks, and
other such unprofitable baggage, as it does good fish. In regard of the hidden
and secret excellency thereof, it is compared to treasure hid in a field. In
regard of the inualuable worth and excellency of it, In this place it is
compared to a pearl.
in comparison of all other things, it is here compared to a pearl of great
price. That before he compared it to treasure, it did in part set forth the
excellency of it: but this does more amplify and increase it. Treasure, we
know, consists either in silver or in gold, which are of great account: but
yet pearls pass them both far, in value and estimation; as both it is
commonly known, and if we knew it not, Solomon could teach us thus much, Prou.
3.14.15. where he says; the merchandise of wisdom is better then the merch
indize of silver, and the revenue thereof better then gold. It is more precious
then pearls, and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared with
it. First, he prefers wisdom before silver. Secondly, he prefers it
before gold, which is yet more excellent; and in the third place, as before the
most excellent, he prefers it before pearls.

The meaning of our Savior then in this parable, is to prefer the Gospel in
regard of the excellency of it, infinitely before all other things, were they
never so rich, rare, or precious. For if it be more precious then pearls, then
much more precious then gold, then silver, then any other thing of less
reckoning and account. And this is the reason, why Solomon having preferred it,
Prou. 3.14.
Prou. 3.14. before silver and gold, and pearls, he adds, that all the
things a man can desire, are not to be compared with it: as if he should say,
suppose either there be, or you can invent any thing more precious then
pearls, yet wisdom is more precious then it. And Job in the 28. of his book,
15. verse, and so-on, Job. 28.15.
because he would extol wisdom before al precious things, he repeateth a
great many of them. Gold, says he, shall not be given for it; neither shall
silver be weighed for the price thereof. It shall not be valued with the wedge
of the gold of Ophir, nor with the precious Onix, nor the Saphir; the gold, nor
the Crystal shall not be equal unto it, neither shall the exchange be for
plate of fine gold; no mention shall be made of the Coral nor of the Gabish,
for wisdom is more precious then pearls.

Now we see wherein the comparison stands, Wherein this excellency of it
consists.
let us a little consider wherein this great and inualuable excellency
consists. And that is, in that it exhibiteth Christ unto us, who were lost,
and had no way any hope of recovery out of our deadly woe, that even then he
is our deliverer, our jewel, our life, our joy, our happiness, and whatsoever
our heart can desire. All the pearls of the world do not so enrich a man,
Ephesians. 2. Philip. 2. John 4.10.
as Christ enricheth all them that by true faith lay hold upon him, for if it
do not so, he has not faith. For Christ is a shelter where we that be in
tempests and storms may shroud our selves, and be safe from the wrath and
vengeance of God that hangs over, and shall fall upon the heads of other men.
He is our atonement and propitiation for all our sins, so that we shall never
have them imputed unto us, or have any punishment inflicted which was due for
them, his death, and his bloodshed has delivered us from eternal death and
condemnation; yea Christ is our storehouse, and treasury, in whom and from
whom we have all variety of good things that may make men truly happy.

In Christ we are righteous (our own righteousness being as a filthy and
menstruous cloth) because he by imputation, does cloth and cover us, as it
were with the robe and vesture of his righteousness. From him also we receive
inward sanctification and holiness, wherein we labor to be pleasing and
acceptable to God in all things, whereas otherwise we could not have any true
evidence of this faith. From him we receive succor and comfort in all our
tribulations and wants, and joy in all our sorrow. He has all power given him
in heaven and in earth, and therefore he will supply both our outward and
inward necessities, and power upon us that store of his graces, as shall be
most for our good, and best for the bringing of us to eternal glory. But
here I will stay and go forward with the rest, in the next Sermon.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
The second point: what it is to find the pearl.
I Have showed in the former Sermon what it is, that the hearer has found, when
it is said of him, that he has found the pearl of great price. Now let us
see, what it is to find this pearl. To find the pearl of the Gospel, which
is the next thing that I propounded to speak of in this second property of
the hearer, is nothing else, but by the powerful hearing thereof, to see and
to perceive, what excellent and worthy graces, benefits and prerogatives it
conferreth unto such as feel great need thereof, and that Christ is thereby to
be made theirs, that he may be a defense and protection unto them to shelter
them from the wrath of his Father; that he may loose the bands and chains,
wherewith they are tied and fast fettered in their sins to the will of the
devil: and that he may unite them in soul, and in body, to himself and to
God. In a word, the Gospel lays out most plainly the way to eternal life.

The due and serious beholding, and consideration of these and infinite other
graces depending upon these, which God by the hand of the Gospel reaches out,
and offers unto us, is the first finding of this pearl, which many hear a
long time, and yet never see thus much, I mean the beauty of it. And so long
as men do in hearing, never see and behold this admirable and invaluable
treasure in it, they have not yet found the pearl of great price. For the
Gospel howsoever it be in the declaration of the many good things of it,
continually sounded in their ears, yet it is a mystery hid, and secret to
their understanding.

The Gospel is, to all such as yet, as the light of the sun to the man that
is stark blind. The sun, it shines upon the blind man, as it does upon the
seeing man, but the blind he has no greater benefit of the midday, then he
has of the midnight, and therefore for himself he cares not for the sun,
in respect of any light he has by it, because he is blind: So the light of
the Gospel, it shines upon the blind and upon them that see: the faithful,
and unfaithful: but here is the difference. The one has the eyes of his
understanding opened by the spirit of God, though it be but a common gift of
the spirit, and he sees the light of the Gospel, and accounts and priseth it
at a great reckoning: But the other cannot discern any whit of the excellency
of it.

The use then that we are to make of this point, is this; Use.
because we see finding goes in order, 1. Cor. 2.14. Matthew. 11.25.
before the getting and the purchasing of the jewel and pearl of the Gospel;
and that none finds it, but he to whom God by his spirit reueiles it: it is
our duty when we come to hear the Gospel of Christ preached, to lift up our
hearts with prayer to the Lord, Pray unto God that we may see the excellency of
the pearl.
that he would give us eyes to see into the riches, and excellency of it, that
thereby our heart may be inflamed, and kindled with an earnest desire and
longing after the sweetness of it. For the reason why men are so cold, and so
backward in affecting the Gospel, and why they take so small delight, and
pleasure in it, and esteem any pleasure and commodity of their own before it,
it is this, because they have not yet found either the vanity of other things,
or the excellency of the Gospel.

And if we have found that the Lord has in part opened our eyes, that we can
but dimly and darkly discern it, If we see it in part, pray that we may see it
yet more clearly.
as the man in the Gospel, that at first saw men, but he saw them as trees,
until Christ again put his hands upon his eyes; let us desire the Lord,
again, and again, to lay his hand upon the (...) minds, and understandings,
that we may clearly see the excellency of the Gospel, whereof we have as yet
but a dark, and obscure glimpse. So will it come to pass, that, that which
now we have a saint, and little desire unto, we shall daily grow more hoately
and earnestly to affect, and labor for it, which the other cannot abide.

And such as God loves; shall, though they have not sometime looked after it,
but have been worldly minded; they shall, I say, have their eyes opened to see
into the beauty, power, necessity, and comfort of this Gospel, and what
happiness it brings, by hearing it preached; which to do, is to find it:
Yea he whom God will save shall be brought to hear, if not otherwise, by
father, son, friend, neighbor, himself not intending any such thing. And
thus hearing what the treasure is, Colos. 3.
shall find that which is hid in it. And so he begins to see, consider,
weigh, resolve of the all sufficiency of that, which the Gospel has brought
to light unto him; and to wonder at the same, Psalm. 87.3. Ioh. 6.66. Psalm. 84.
Tim. 1.16.
And wondering, shall desire a part in it against all lets, and discouragements,
and searching with Solomon, and finding nothing like it! 1. King. 3.7.
Oh how shall he marvel, that he never saw so much before. And such a one
has found this pearl in the Gospel, and may be said truly to have found it:
and yet it may be, he has heard a hundred sermons before, who yet never had
his eyes opened to see that which he now does.

Thus the woman of Samaria found it, when she had heard Christ. Act. 26.
And Agryppa Acts 26. when he said to Paul, almost thou perswadest me to
become a Christian. Now when he has thus beheld the beauty of the Gospel, and
sees it to be of such value, as I have said, he is much before the first sort
of hearers, who have their felicity in this world, and yet comes much short
of, and behind the last sort following who has bought it; Sheba, I have heard
much of it, but now I see far more then I have heard. But if ye ask, 1.
King. 10.7.
is he, now that has found it, past the worst? that is to say; happy, and has
he done all that is required? I say noe, till he has bought it: but he may
fall away from his esteeming so preciously of it, and become secure again,
notwithstanding he is so well affected, even better then ^^er he was, for he is
but of the second or third sort of hearers, Mat. 13.19.
mentioned by our Savior, out of this which has bin said three things may be
noted: 3. Observation.
they be converted, that in this sort are thus revived, and thus enlightened to
see the price of it; no, though they sigh for sin or joy for the hope that the
Gospel offers, yea, though they weep at a sermon, for we must not more
flatter, then discourage men.





Therefore it follows, that the wise Merchant went by and by and sold all that
he had, and bought that precious pearl. And here I will pass to the third
point, and show how the good hearer is herein like to the merchant man, as he
has resembled him in both the former, that is, in seeking good pearls, and
finding one of great price.

Now because the excellency of this pearl does yet more appear heerby that
this hearer, does as the merchant, The third thing wherein the hearer is
compared to a merchant man.
go and sell all that he has and buyeth this pearl, I will first speak of this
last action of his, and then make use of it. It is said, he went his way and
sold all that he had, and bought that pearl. This going away first shows,
that he did not stand still to muse, doubt, and linger out the time; but as a
wise merchant, so soon as he sees a penyworth to be bought, which may enrich
him; he leaves all other things, and sets himself about that business.

The pearl being found, must be bought without delay.
And this teaches us, that we are not to linger, nor defer the time, when God
reueileth any excellent fruit, or benefit that the Gospel brings unto us;
but presently go our way, and endeavor to make it our own. But how rarely
shall we find this to be done, when for the most part every where men practice
the contrary? Many see, and will confess, that there is in the Gospel most
precious treasure and worthy to be embraced; but they think the time too soon
as yet to go about it: when they have followed their other pleasures and
delights, in their youthful days: or when they have obtained these or those
purposes of theirs, then they will entertain the Gospel, and sell their other
delights for it: even as he who would first go bury his father (which Christ
reproved) and then he would follow him. And thus it comes to pass usually with
these men, as it does with careless, and unthrifty merchants, that slack,
defer, and drive off the time of their commodity whiles it is to be had, and
repent them after, when it is too late.

So these men, they defer and delay the time, in which God sets out the
pearl of the Gospel, as it were to sale, that they may buy it at a small, and
easy reckoning, until the market of God be done, and the day of grace be
past, that they cannot then have it, would they never so gladly. For as wisdom
calls and cries unto men a long time, and cannot be entertained of them, for
their own good: So wisdom threatens; that she will refuse to hear them in
the midst of their trouble, Prou. 1.20.
and in the day wherein affliction and anguish, shall, like a whirlewind, come
upon them: Though they cry never so loud, and seek her never so earnestly,
she will not answer, nor be found of them.

Wherefore it is good for us to follow the counsel of the holy Ghost, Heb.
3.15.
while it is called to day to hear the voice of God, and to hearken to wisdom,
whiles she calls unto us; for we know not how long the day of grace will last
with us. It may be not a year, or a day, or an hour, and if that be past,
then it is too late for us to seek after it, we must have our lamps ready
burning with the five wise virgins, if we will enter in with the bridegroom,
Matthew. 25.34.
but if we linger and defer the buying of our oil till he come, we may
knock and call, but shall find no entrance nor ingresse for us, Luke 14.15.
as they in the Gospel, that were bidden to the supper, and refused, of all
other they were debarred from it. So we see then the wisdom of this merchant
commended unto us. He does not foreslacke nor foreslowe any time, but
presently goes about the purchase of this pearl. So that in earthly delights
we see we soon resolve; but twenty lets are in the way to hinder us in
heavenly.

Let us next see what course he takes to get it. By selling all and buying he
means not as the Papists teach.
He sels all that he had, and buyeth that pearl. By selling and buying here we
are to understand not such a merchandise, as Papists make that say, by their
goods and substance they think to purchase heaven to themselves. For there is
no equality between all that we have, or can have, and between the kingdom
of heaven; but in things that are bought there is some equality between the
price, and the thing that is bought. So that if they by their alms, or good
works whatsoever, be able to purchase heaven at Gods hand, it follows that
they are as profitable to God, and benefit him as much by their alms, and
other good works, as he by heaven, does benefit them.

But we know the doctrine of our Savior, when we have done all we can do,
though we give al our substance, yea and our own life for Gods glory, we must
say, and acknowledge, as the truth is, we are but unprofitable servants unto
him. Luke 17.10.
For we have done no more then duty required at our hands. Romans 6.23.
And therefore mark how the Apostle Paul calls death the wages of sin, but
life eternal, the free gift of God. For the wages, says he, of sin is
death; but life eternal is the free gift of God, in Christ Jesus our Lord. So
that death and condemnation, we may deserve, for it is the wages of sin: but
life eternal, we cannot deserve, because it is the free gift of God.

But to proceed by selling all, he means the same that he does in other
places by forsaking, and leaving all, Who may truly be said to sell al, and buy
the pearl.
and by buying the pearl and getting the right possession and assurance of it
to our selves, he means, that we should be sure of it, even as those things
which we have bought, and paid for, are our own. As for that which he says,
first he sells al, this is not meant simply, as if the possession of our
goods and the enjoying of the Gospel would not stand together, but he speaks
comparatively that rather then we will not get the Gospel, when we may have
it: we will abandon al whatsoever beside; and retain it.

Luke 14.26.
The like speech is used by our Savior. If any man come unto me, and hate not
father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and
his own life, he cannot be my disciple. The meaning of our Savior is not
simply, that a man should hate his father, his mother, and so forth, or make
away himself, which were wickedness, and impiety: But, as the Evangelist
Matthew interprets it, Mat. 20.37.
he that loves father, or mother, above me, is not worthy of me, and he that
loves son, or daughter above me, is not worthy of me.

The Gospel is not so easily come by, as men suppose.
The meaning therefore we see clearly to be this, he that gets the pearl of
the Gospel, he prizeth it far above all the things he has besides in the
world, and will rather forgo them all, then part with it. Hence we see that the
pearl of the Gospel is not so easily come by, as men suppose commonly. For it
is no easy matter, as experience may teach, when trial is made, for a man, to
abandon his pleasures, to leese his goods, to forsake his dearest, and nearest
friends, and to lay down his own life for the love of it. But the Gospel it
can be bought with no less price; if we will have it as our own jewel, we
must sell goods, sell our name, sell friends, sell liberty and life, and all we
have, and give them for it: and account that we have made a very good bargain
of it, as indeed we have.

For what comparison is to be made between the earthly riches, that here men
enjoy, and those unspeakable and inestimable treasures that Christ Jesus
brings unto us thereby? what comparison between that name we can leese here
for the Gospel, and the eternal weight, and crown of glory, that shall be set
upon our heads in heaven? what is the love and friendship of all men, to the
love and favor of God; which we gain by the Gospel? and what is the life we
can leese, to the life which we obtain in Christ? And yet if we try and
examine our selves, we shall find that we come far short of forsaking all;
when we are privy in our selves, that a little pleasure does many times stay
us from the hearing of the Gospel, and how much more then from obeying it? And
that a little expense and charge shall hinder us, or ill company shall hold
and keep us away from the benefit which we might enjoy by it.

Nay our hearts can tell us, that many times when we are present with our
bodies, where it is preached, yet we scarce will vouchsafe to lend our ears,
to harken to that which is taught unto us, but our mind is set upon other
matters, either on profit or pleasure, or else some vain, idle and wandering
conceits, or else we even shamefully give our selves to sleep. So base and
vile account and reckoning do we make of the precious and invaluable pearl of
the Gospel. As men price the Gospel, so will their zeal be to the hearing
and practicing of it.
For accordingly as men price it, so undoubtedly will their zeal be to the
hearing and practicing of it.

And therefore mark how David bewailes his absence from the house of God: he
was banished the court, and country, yet that did not so much move him, as
this, Psalm 84.1.
that he was barred and banished from the place, where he used with joy to feed
upon the comforts of the word of God, taught and preached in the assemblies of
Gods people: and this made him say with grief, that the sparrowes and the
swallow might have nearer access then he, to the place where God was served,
and his word preached. This he did, because he saw Gods word to be of more true
value then all his thousands of gold and silver, of more sound delight to his
soul, then all his other delights and pleasures in the world. It was as honey
to his taste, and as the streams of a fountain to the thirsty and dry
heart. This should we all do, and this would we do if we were wise, and did
rightly price the Gospel.

And although I have not particularly set down those things which accompany
the buying of this pearl, because the text gives no necessary occasion of
speaking of them; yet in the way of preoccupation, and answering a doubt, which
the ignoranter sort would put forth, I will say somewhat, though very briefly
of it. They ask, if as soon as a man find the pearl, he by and by that
buyeth it, come into the possession of it, and nothing else be required
thereto: I answer briefly, when a man has found it, if God give him grace, to
go further, he does thus, and goes to work after this manner.

How a man makes the pearl his own.
He earnestly wishes and desires that he had a part in it: then he sees that
his sin is in the way to hinder him, that he falls to dislike and crying
out of it: then it troubles him to think, that he is out of favor with God,
and grows utterly to dislike himself for both: and seeing himself no better
then a lost man, he hears that God will pity and show mercy to such, and
that he is then the person whom God seeks to save, and will heal him of his
sorrow: and will love him freely for ever. And that it is the Gospel which
brings tidings of this, and sundry other good things, which when he
apprehends, and sees, that he may have them all for his own proper good, and
that freely, and for nothing; God so works in him by all these, that he
applies the promises to himself, and sees that without money or recompense,
God is well pleased that he should take them for his own, and be fully
persuaded thereof, so as now he rests therein, which is the purchasing and
buying of it, that is here spoken of.

And when this is thus brought to pass, let all that know what this means,
guess how he will love the Lord for this bounty showed upon him, and how
ready he will be to be guided by him, and also what comfort it is to him. But
for conclusion of the whole, now that ye have heard, that the hearer who shall
be able to rejoice in his work at the end thereof, is fitly resembled to the
merchant man, as we have heard, first in that he seeks pearls, secondly, in
finding one of great price; and thirdly, in selling all that he has to buy it;
that is to make it his own; that he may be happy thereby, and all this is
done, when he begins to believe; let him be sure he does so, and let him get
many grounds, and evidences thereof, by the Scripture, and experience. And
above all other this invaluable treasure of the forgiveness of his sins, and
assurance of salvation, he believing the Lord, that he may be bold to lay hold
on it, as Gods will is he should.

And let him well weigh how much he is bound to him for it, and so doing, let
him live on his purchase, and take the benefit thereof, to the comfort of him
and his, no otherwise then they do, that have bought house and land. And every
day weigh the fruit of such a purchase in true and unfeigned peace and comfort,
and seeing he shall live under so kind and good a Lord, as he that is Lord of
all lords, Deuteronomy. 28.46.
let it move him to set his heart on him, and delight and endeavor to please
and obey him in all things, and let him do it also with joy.

For why? if we think, they that be in a noble man's house, faring well, may be
merry, is there any such merry-making, as in Gods house? so that the man may
be merry at his work, and the woman at hers? They that power water on the hands
of a Prince, or a King, are thought happy: but then to have the honor that is
greater then Kings? is somewhat. And by this little that has been said of, and
about the pearl, guess what the rest is, even as ye would guess of the
whole proportion of a man by seeing his foot.

TWO SERMONS UPON ISAIAH 55.1.2.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. and ye that have no
silver come, buy, and eat: come, I say, buy wine and milk without silver and
without money.

Wherefore do ye lay out silver and not for bread? and your labor without
being satisfied? hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and
let your soul delight in fatness.


The sum and scope of these words.
SEeing it helps much in preaching, to show the teachable hearer, what is
aimed at principally to be taught him, that he may the better be kept from
wandering, and bend his ears and mind to the matter, when he sees what is
intended to be delivered; I will therefore show you, what the things are which
I purpose chiefly to handle, and speak of, out of this text. And these they
are: namely, that such poor souls as the most, yea and themselves do think
to be odious to God, and contemptible in his sight, are for all that in high
account with him, and dear unto him. And these are all such as hunger and
thirst after the kingdom of heaven, and all grace to guide them safely
thither. And contrarily, that such as bless themselves, and cry peace, peace*
and all things are safe with them; and they whom the greatest part of men do
think to be happy and beloved of God, are accursed and abhorred of him. And
such are the whole and full, who feel little or nothing amiss, that does
greatly trouble them, or wound their consciences: it can in no wise go well
with these.

These things I purpose chiefly to teach; and with all such as shall be
appertaining hereunto, as the text shall give occasion. But yet you must
understand that they are the matters which the Prophet also propounds to
teach out of these words, which I have read. For otherwise, my teaching of
this, without ground and warrant from him, should be to small purpose. And that
I may show this to be his full meaning, I will first open and unfold the words
which are there set down, which being borrowed speeches, and not signifying
that which the letter and words do import, do make the matter seem more
difficult, and harder to be understood, unless they should be opened and made
plain.

We are therefore to know, that by thirsting (when he says, The opening of the
text.
if any thirst) he means fervent and earnest desiring. By bread, milk, wine
and water, Verse 1.
he means the variety and diverse kinds of all good things fit to quench the
thirst of the soul, and needful to preserve the spiritual life. By coming
and buying without money, he means a receiving freely and for nothing by
faith, such a liberal offer. Thus the sense of the words, in which any
difficulty lies, being clear, it may easily be gathered what the meaning of
the whole verse is; and that is this. That whosoever feels such need of the
food of eternal life, and of the graces of faith, hope, pardon of sin, love,
patience, or the like; if he feel such need of them, I say, that he cannot be
satisfied without them, he may (how unworthy soever he think himself
thereof;) freely, confidently and with Gods good liking, enjoy, and take his
part in them; even as he that buyeth house or land with his money, may possess
the same safely as his own. And this be said of the meaning of the first verse.

In the second, he reproves those among the people, Verse 2.
who refusing the best things offered them by God, and that freely and
willingly; yet spared neither cost nor labor for those, which were nothing
profitable: and exhorts them to turn from that error and delusion, and to
take that counsel from him, which would be soundly for their benefit and
comfort.

The parts two.
Thus much for the meaning. The parts may fitly be these two. First the large
offer which God makes by the prophet, in the first verse. Secondly, a reproof
and an exortation in the second.

First, Gods large offer, wherein three things are to be considered.
The way and preparation being thus made, let us come more particularly to the
matter it self, and consider, first, the things which are set down in the
first verse, namely, in the free offer which God makes by the Prophet; which
things are three. First, to whom he makes it; that is to them that thirst, and
to no other; for so are the words: Ho, every one that thirsts come. Secondly,
what he offers to them, even whatsoever good things will quench their
spiritual thirst, as wine, milk and water do the bodily thirst: saying come
buy wine, milk and water without money. Thirdly, upon what condition he
offers this: namely this, that they believe him upon his word, and in token
thereof, come, take and enjoy it, as their own: and this is the hardest, that
the Lord requires of them by the Prophet.

1. To whom it is made: namely, to the thirsty.
To speak of these three points as they lie in order, and to begin with the
first; we see that it is an high degree of profiting in the school of Christ,
and a token of Gods love, to thirst, and earnestly to long after heavenly
things, as grace and eternal life. For they who do so, must needs have
knowledge to discern the price and excellency of them, and also feel their
own need and necessity of them, that they do but pine, and are as it were
starued for want of them. And for all this, who are more contemptible either in
theit own eyes, or the eyes of others, then such be? And yet these are called
forth by the prophet (as we see) from amongst all other (while they with the
Publican think themselves to be a far off, and look for no such thing) to
enjoy, and be partakers of that which is the best of all other. Luke 18.13.


And after the same manner speaks the holy Ghost in other Scripture, Ioh. 7.37.
as in the Gospel by S. John: If any man thirst, let him come to me and
drink; meaning the same that the prophet here does. And our Savior in another
place, utters the same more plainly and fully, though not in the same words,
Luke 5.31.
saying: The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. And again:
Mat. 9.13.
I came not to call the righteous (who so think themselves) but the sinner to
repentance. So that to thirst for grace, is no common grace of God, and
according to the price that the holy Ghost sets it at, it aduanceth them that
have it, far above many florishers, who yet bear no small show of religion
and goodness.

And this I do advisedly and willingly teach and publish for their sakes, who
through Gods goodness have attained to this grace in some good measure, and yet
fear, that they are of all other most miserable. That they may see Gods mercy
far greater to them, then they can be persuaded, that it is. But while they
thus meanly account of their estate which is right happy: yet I know there are
other, who come far short of them, in fervent desiring of holy and heavenly
things, and have only a desire to hear preaching at some time, and (as they
say) in their good mood, and otherwise are as vain and unprofitable as
others, who yet will be ready to think themselves to be they of whom the
Prophet here speaks; as it comes to pass too commonly, that they apply
amiss comfortable Scriptures to themselves, which belong not unto them; and
they to whom they belong indeed, put them from them as fast through unbelief,
as not pertaining to them. I will therefore somewhat more fully and clearly
set down my mind agreeable to the Prophets, about this thirsting.

Therefore that men may be able to prove, Four things to be known about
thirsting.
without deceiving themselves, that they have this thirsting, which the prophet
requires, to the which so precious a promise is annexed of obtaining that
which they so desire, we must understand that four things are requisite to be
known. The first is, what are the true properties of thirsting. Secondly, the
causes why God requires it. Thirdly, how long we must thirst. Fourthly, how we
may best come to it.

1. The properties of it, which are two.
and namely these two: the one, that he which thirsts, does most heartily
desire drink, so as he cannot be quiet, but through the hope of it: Both are
most clearly to be seen in Sampsons thirst, who having slain a thousand men
of the Philistims with the Iawe boane of an ass, was sore a thirst and called
on the Lord* and said: Judge. 15.18.
Thou have given this great deliverance into the hands of thy servant, and now
shall I dye for thirst? meaning he could not bear it, nor do any thing
without drink.

Now to apply these to the spiritual thirst, he is truly said to thirst for
the pardon of his sins, for eternal life, or any grace of sanctification;
not who desires and prays for them, but yet can go his way without them, or
the certainty and assurance of them, and yet can be well contented: but he who
faints in his soul for want of them, neither can go about any thing
readily, nor in kind, without some true persuasion of inioying them. And this
is apparently to be seen in the servants of God, both in the Scriptures
mentioned, and also in our daily experience of such as we live with.

Examples out of Scripture.
For the first, look upon David's example, when he desired any grace of God, as
mercy to cover his sin, the liberty of worshipping him among Gods people, the
presence of God in comforting his soul, or knowledge of his will. How does he
witness this thirsting to have bin in him when he sought these? In the 51.
Psalm: Have mercy on me (O Lord) according to thy great mercies and the
multitude of thy compassions. In the 42. Psalm. 42.1.2.
Psalm he says: Like as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so pants
my soul after thee O God. verse. 2. My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God; when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? verse. 3.
My tears have been my meat day and night, while they daily say to me, where
is thy God? Psalm. 84.1.
In another Psalm; O Lord of hoastes, how amiable are thy dwelling places? my
soul longs yea and faints. for the courts of the Lord.

Experience.
But that I heap not up many testimonies in a matter so clear; in our own
observation either of our selves, or our brethren, what marvelous sighs and
earnest longings have we seen in Gods people, to obtain that which they
desired, as when he has begun the work of grace in them, when he has
brought them in love with the life to come, and given them eyes to see the
bondage of fear, doubting of pardon of their sins, and what a precious
treasure it is, to mortify and bring into subjection their unruly passions,
and the strength of their great offenses? what longing (I say) to be delivered
and to be set at liberty has there been seen? what sighing and unwearied
desiring of the grace which they sought, has there been in them? which
affections witnessed that there was this thirsting in them, that till they had
some word of comfort from God, (who only can do it,) they could in no wise be
satisfied. Neither was this so with them only in a mood, and for a season,
(for so a wicked man may desire heavenly things also) but this continued, till
they obtained their desire, and as they obtained one good thing, they thirsted
for another, (as I shall have occasion to show afterward) and also for a
greater measure of that grace which they had already.

And this thirsting in Gods people condemns that which goes for it in many,
A howrely and flitting desire no true thirsting.
and that howerly and flitting desire of the word, or the good things which are
in it, which falls as it rises, and vanishes as a shadow, and comes to
nothing in the end, when the fruit of it should be greatest. And yet seeing
either they cannot, or will not learn to put difference betwixt the one and
the other, that is the true thirst, and that which is deceiuable; they are far
wide, thinking that they have that kind and right thirsting after spiritual
food of the soul; when yet by this that has bin* said of this matter, it is
manifest, that they are far from it; if it were but for this cause, that they
give over seeking, before they have found the grace which they seemed to thirst
for. And this be said of the properties of thirsting, the first of the four
things which I set down. And this ought to teach us not to marvel, when we
see many to fall away from their zeal, who have seemed forward; because it was
never aright planted in them.

The second point follows, namely, Secondly, the causes why God requires
this thirsting.
the causes why God requires this thirsting to be in us, that cannot be in any
but in his servants. And the causes are specially three. The first, seeing it
must be suitable to the bodily thirst. The second, if we thirsted not we could
not have the variety of good things, which are hoarded up in the word for us to
make us happy, forasmuch as they are drawn out from thence no other way but by
thirsting after them: and by it we are made partakers of them, as the blessed
Virgin says in her song: The Lord fills the hungry with good things, Luke
1.53.
and sends the rich, or full, empty away, which is the cause why the poor
people of God do show their thirsting desire not only many other ways, but
also by this, namely, in their ordinary labor and travail to hear the word
of God preached, and that sundry miles off from their dwelling place, if they
have it not there; though it be with mocking and taunting them for it, by such
as are far from thirsting after it themselves.

Pro. 27.7.
For so Solomon says in the Proverbs: The person that is full despises an
honey comb: but unto the hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet. So that we
feeling such need of them, as that our souls should faint and be starued
without them, we see and acknowledge that, which we could not have done without
it, neither would easily believe it, namely that the Lord loves us dearly,
and that his mercy is great toward us, yea and that in things of the best
kind, which others having offered them of God as well as we, do set no store
by them: and all because they feel no want of them, but could (as they think)
be well enough without them. And thus much of the causes of thirsting.

Thirdly, how long we must thirst.
The third follows, and that is, how long we should thirst. For it seems
unreasonable to many, that we should be held always at one point: as that
either we should ever be thirsting for one grace; or if that be not required of
us, yet that we should be thirsting still after some other. To the which the
answer is, that we must always be thirsting, even so long as God has any
good grace to give, and till he be weary of bestowing upon us. Which seeing it
shall never be, while we remain here, God being a wel-spring and fountain of
all good things never drawn dry, and more ready to give, then we to ask; it
is for our singular benefit, and not a bondage, that we may be always
thirsting, for so long there is still some good coming toward us: and
otherwise we were not liable to the liberal offer which God makes here by
the Prophet, neither were we the persons to whom he speaks, in saying: Ho,
every one that thirsts, come to the waters and drink.

But yet this I say further, that in this manner we should thirst, namely, for
any grace, till we receive it, if it be here to be enjoyed; or a sure grant of
it, if we cannot partake it here, that in the life to come we shall have it:
and we are not to think that when we have obtained any gift or grace of God,
that we are commanded still to be asking of one and the same thing, which to do
were against common sense and reason; but for a greater measure of it, as
increase of faith, love and patience, when we have already received a part in
them: and for such things as we yet want, with the like appetite to desire and
thirst for them, as at the first anguish of mind and wound of conscience, we
did long for the forgiveness of our sins. And this of the time how long we
ought to thirst, which is the third point in this first part.

The fourth follows, namely, how we should come to thirsting, and how it
should be vpholden; Fourthly, how we should come to thirst.
which being such a worthy gift of God, had not need to be neglected; but as
an appetite to bodily food for the preserving of health, is by all means to be
maintained and sought. The means are neither costly, nor hard to come by, as
in bodily dainties it fares, but ready and at hand. Even to see our wants in
grace, and emptines thereof; as how weak our faith is, how faint our hope, how
cold our love, and how hardly we have proof of our patience. Also to observe
our corruptions; as touchinesse, frowardnes, unclean desires, wrath, desire of
revenge, etc. and in what bondage they hold us. If we observe these in our
selves, 1. Pet. 2.2.
they will make us desire the sincere milk of the Word to guide us aright:
also to watch and pray, sigh and groan, that we may resist the evil, and
nourish the good. For as the husbandman by toiling and sweating at hay and
harvest, provoke the bodily thirst; so we laboring with our hearts to pluck
up, and to plant, as there shall be cause, shall thirst till we obtain that
which we go about and desire.

And God who calls us to it, and promises largely to satisfy us, will not
mock us, but do as he has said, that is to say, satisfy our souls with good
things. And thus we come to thirst. But when we see our hearts thus possessed
and taken up with the fervent and constant desire of the good things which we
would have, we must also be persuaded, to labor readily and willingly, as need
shall require, whether it be by prayer, conference or the like, to obtain
them, remembering that which is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 111.2.
that wisdom (and so all the parts thereof) is to be sought out (that is, with
all diligence) of those that have pleasure therein.

But one objection here I will answer, which troubles some, and that is,
that they say: In the beginning when men turn to God first, they thirst, and
cannot be satisfied to their quiet and contentment, but they see no such thing
in them after. I answer, though all show it not after, as they did at first,
by complaining, asking questions, and lamenting their wants to other, yet they
long and thirst for that which they see needful for them, and yet wanting: but
they do not show it so much; and that is wisdom, which other unexperienced,
and more weak in knowledge and faith, cannot do, but must show their
thirsting, as I said; and it may be perceived of themselves to be so, by their
daily care and diligence to nourish the old grace they have already, and to
obtain new; and by the course of their life, it may be perceived of others,
but if they grow full, they be in ill case.

Thus the first branch of the three in this first part has bin handled,
namely, who they are whom God calls out by the Prophet, from the rest of the
people, to take part in the best tidings that ever were, or can be brought from
him: and that is, The second branch: what God offers to them that thirst.
all such as thirst. The second branch follows, and that is, what are the
good things that they shall have which thirst. The benefit which they shall
enjoy, is answerable to their thirst, even the thing which they thirst for, for
the Lords answer is, that he will quench it. If they thirst therefore for
remission of their sins, and cannot be satisfied without it, they shall partake
that. If for faith to apprehend it, and by which they may know they are
forgiven, that shall be granted them also. If for eternal life, they shall
enjoy it in due time, when they have waited a while patiently; and the same I
say of the manifold graces of the Spirit, which are here resembled by this
bodily refreshing, which quenches the thirst thereof, namely, milk, water,
and wine.

And to tarry a little in this second branch, to prove the same, as somewhat
has been said of the first, I will begin with that which worthily deserves
the first place, namely, how God promises the remitting of all sin, and
consequently salvation for ever, to all that thirst for it. The word of God is
plentiful in proving that he does so. As that of our Savior in Saint John,
where he says, If any thirst, John 7.37.
let him come to me and drink. Why then, if his thirst be for this; even this
he may take by Christ's free grant, and comfort himself therewith. In the
eleventh of Matthew he means the same in other words, where he says, Come to
me all ye that travel, Matthew. 11.28.
and be laden, and I will ease you. Now search out his meaning, how can he
ease burdened consciences, troubled for the fear of Gods wrath, which is due
thereto, but he must take away the guilt of their sin, and the punishment due
to it, by pardoning and remitting it, as if it had never been committed? And by
these means, he does ease the greatest torment that ever vexed the soul of
man. Therefore the afflicted person may be bold with reverence to take this,
and such like Scriptures to the quieting of his distressed mind, and to the
putting away of his intolerable unquietness, which before oppressed him. And
even so do the faithful servants of God declare his mind and will to people in
the like case. Act. 2.37.
As Peter in the second of the Acts, when certain men were pricked in
conscience for their sin, and came to him and the other Apostles, saying, (in
the anguish of their hearts) men and brethren, what shall we do, he answered in
effect, thus: Seek to have your sins forgiven you, and to know that it is
so, by the signs which Christ has left thereof, and ye may rest quiet. But how
could they seek that, if Christ had not given them liberty both to do so, and
also to find it?

By all which, it is clear, that our Savior has provided a most gracious
help and remedy to all afflicted consciences, and which is all one therewith,
(that I may keep in your remembrance the manner of speech set down in our
text) does promise upon his faithfulness, that he will quench this thirst of
longing for Gods favor, and the pardon of sin, in whomsoever it shall be found.







made: that it is to the greater honor of God, that he will overcome men's evil
with good; leaving to us an example therein, that we should follow and be like
to him, and that he sent his Son into the world for them that be ungodly and
unworthy. Romans 5.6.
that so large and precious a promise is made to the bare thirsting after the
love of God and eternal life, without any leaving and forsaking of sin; to
this point I require diligent observing of mine answer. I say therefore, that
all things cannot be mentioned at once in handling some points of holy
doctrine, lest we should thereby fall into confusednesse. Neither in handling
plainly this of thirsting, is it necessary to speak of the renouncing or
purposing against sin, otherwise then in the way of preoccupation, that is,
the answering of an objection, as here I do. Therefore to this part of the
objection, He that thirsts truly for salvation, abhors sin.
I answer, that he who thirsts truly for salvation, cannot do it without
the abhorring of the sin, which has been most delighted in. For while we
desire grace, we abhor sin, which is contrary to it, and this thirsting after
the water of life, shall dry up the heat of sin by little and little, no
otherwise, then the hot and scorching sun does the moist and soft puddle. I
mean so far as the similitude serves for this purpose. And therefore, let
any make this good, that he thirsts, and I will make it good by the word of
God, that his thirst shall be quenched, and his sins pardoned.

Now therefore, where are they which say, oh, Preachers urge us so hardly, that
we shall never be able to follow the doctrine they teach us, of the way to
eternal life. I say, if the way that we set down be hard, it is through the
hardness of your hearts. For otherwise, who would desire the way to be easier,
then it is here set down to be? he that thirsts after it shall have
eternal life. And yet seeing it is so easy, let all, who desire to be
partakers of life, look well and carefully to this, that they have no less to
testify it to them, then this, namely, that they have the thirst which has
been set down to be required.

And here for the more full handling of this point, The third branch: what God
requires of them whose thirst he will quench; namely, that they believe.
I will enter into the third branch of this first part, that is to say, what
God requires of them, whose thirst he will quench; and that is, that they come
to him (for it) that is, believe that he will do in deed, as he promises, even
satisfy the soul of him that thirsts, with the thing that he desires, and
therefore with remission of sin and salvation, if that be the thing he
thirsts after. This faith is that, which the Prophet requires, when he
speaks of coming, requiring it of them that they come. Even as our Savior
also in Saint John, means the same by coming to him, where he makes coming
and believing, John 9.^^
both one. He that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that believes in
me, shall never thirst: meaning, he shall never want spiritual nourishment,
namely, that which his soul longs for, who believes in him.

So that, we see it is required here; that the thirsty persons who are by the
Prophet called out from all other, to drink and to be refreshed, should
believe that God means as he speaks, and will do it indeed: which stands
with great reason, that they should do so. For although the Lord bequeath and
freely grant it unto them, yet if they weigh it not, and so give no credit to
it, how can they be the better for it? Neither need they fear, that they shall
presume and be too bold in clasping about and believing it, for while they
desire it, Romans 8.33.
and God promises to grant them their desire, who shall take it from them? No,
if God will justify, none shall be able to condemn.

Why God will have them believe.
And if ye ask, why will God have them believe it? I say, to the end they may
see the loving kindness of God toward them, who having been so low brought by
the sight of their unworthiness, that is even to hell gates, in their own
persuasion; shall the more wonder to see the height of glory, that they are by
him exalted to. And this they believing and considering, 3. Pet. 1.^
do, as Saint Peter says, Love him, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious; whereas otherwise they could do neither. And do we not see by this,
that there is great reason why God requires of all his, that they should
believe in his Son? even that they may see his loving kindness, which was
before hidden from them, and being made joyful thereby, more then they could
be brought unto by the voice of an Angel, they may love him, and be zealous in
his service, which by no other means they could be brought unto? Therefore let
them labor above all things that they may have this persuasion of Gods savor,
and let them see, that they have no less then this unfeigned faith in them,
though weak, because so great and weighty matters are thereby wrought and
vpholden in them.

But here one thing more I must add, How a man may prove that he has faith.
though afterward I shall say somewhat of it. And that is, how a man may prove
that he has this faith? seeing it is easily doubted of, and most of all by
them, who have least cause; and this proof of their faith and testimony
thereof, I think it most fit to stay them up withal, that they may not waver,
as they who have it not, shall do, and must needs, though they speak great
words about it. And I cannot brieflier nor more pithily do it, then by telling
them, that if they hold fast this precious promise of salvation by Christ, they
must know that they receive the spirit of sanctification also, which cries in
them Abba, Father, and sanctifies them, and more plainly thus; that as they
desire the forgiveness of their sins, they desire and endeavor after the
reformation of their lives, and the weaning of their hearts from evil also. And
this where it is wrought (that I say no more of it in this place) shall ever
prove, that there is this effectual faith.

This I have said of this first part, and the three branches thereof, and
namely, of this one kind of their thirsting for remission of sins, and eternal
life. For there are other thirstings, then for these, as I gave the Reader to
understand, before; whereof I will give you a taste, though more briefly in the
next Sermon, seeing I have largely handled this in the forementioned instance,
that it may give light to the Reader, that whatsoever good things he thirsts
for, he may be as sure, that he shall obtain them.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
Gods people are ever thirsting in this life.
NOw to proceed where I left, we are to know, that Gods people are never fully
satisfied, while they wander here on earth, but are ever thirsting after one
good thing or other, or some new measure of grace, whatsoever they have been
satisfied in already: for otherwise they could not be included among them, to
whom this promise is made, neither have they their part in it, when it is said;
Ho, all ye that thirst, come to the waters and drink.

From hence it is, that some having attained to true faith, yet as fervently
desire to preserve and strengthen the same, as they desired when they were
before in great fear and doubting, to have any measure at all thereof. And so
the Lord requires, that we highly esteem, desire and long after the same, and
the salvation which we wait for thereby, even as at the first acquaintance
with them, we did. In like manner, Gods faithful people knowing that he is as
a flowing fountain, rich in all good things, and never drawn dry, they
thirst still after other particular graces of the holy Ghost, when he has
satisfied them with the former. And namely, hope, love, patience, meekness,
humbleness, strength to bear afflictions, and such like. And he does no
sooner stir up in them the desire and longing after these, but he does
withal give them his word and promise, that he will bestow the same upon them,
even as he here speaks, saying, He, all ye that thirst, come to the waters
and drink. And in like manner he speaks in Hosea, Hosea 14.6.7.
when he has said, that he will forgive all their iniquity, and love them
freely, he adds, I will be as the dew to Israel, he shall grow as the lilly,
and fasten his roots as the trees of Lebanon: his branches shall spread, and
his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon. By all which
the Lord means, that when his people turning to him, and longing for his
mercy, shall obtain it to cover their sins, they shall, as the dry ground
thirsts for the dew and rain, and is satisfied therewith, so shall they (I
say) be refreshed with the dew of his grace, to grow up out of their old
sins, flourishing in his Church, as the plants; constantly settled therein, as
the trees deeply rooted, and provoking others to follow and be in love with
their example and good course, even as a sweet smell, or a beautiful creature
provoke to the liking thereof. And that which he speaks of them, he
affirms of all, which are his true Israelites and faithful people.

And hereof it is, that they enjoy and attain to many fruits of the spirit,
because they love and long much after them, and every one has the greater
measure of them, the more steadfastly that he believes, God will grant them.
And so on the contrary it is verified in others, which is written: Luke 6.28.
Woe be to them which are full, for they shall hunger; woe be to them that are
rich, for they have their consolation. For they who thirst not for heavenly
grace, to refresh them and make them well liking to God and his people, shall
turn their thirst after the pleasures of sin, and the unsavory froth of
their evil hearts, till having their fill of them, they cast up their sweet
morsels, as their bane and poison.

And this shall suffice to have said of this verse, for our instruction and
comfort. The sum whereof is, not only, that they who heartily long for the
great benefit of assurance of Gods love, shall have it, believing it, because
God has promised it to them: but even other grace also, as willingness and
fitness for the duties of their particular calling, as Solomon in the third of
the Kings, and the Publicans and soldiers in the third of Luke, obtained:
which is a singular gift of God with the former. Also they shall have patience,
yea and joy in tribulation, mercifulnes and liberality to the needy, contempt
of the world, willingness and readiness to die, and a supply of all other
wants, which all being enjoyed, as they may be here, are another manner of
portion then all abundance of corn, wine, or any other thing that is earthly,
and yet they shall to their good contentment, have their part in these also.

Verse 2.
Now follows the reprehension in the second verse. But here we must mark,
The second part of the text, containing a reproof and an exhortation.
that he reproves not them, whom he before called, in their thirsting after
heavenly things, to be satisfied therewith. For all may see there was no cause
why he should find fault with them, who did that which he required: but he
reproves them, who did not thirst nor set their delight on the best things,
telling them, that they bestowed their labor and travel upon that which could
not profit, but deceive them. For by money in this verse, he means their
precious labor and care: and by bread he means that which in the first verse
he did by wine, water and milk, that is, the substantial and true nourishing
food of the soul.

As if he should say, why are ye so unthankful, nay so wilfully foolish, that
when God has freely offered his bountiful kindness to you, to drink of the
water of life, you affect it not, but rather reject it, and in the mean while,
weary and trouble your selves about that which cannot satisfy or give you
contentment? For to speak as the truth is, men are so bewitched by the devil,
that they had rather wander up and down in by-ways and cross paths
erroniously, and to follow their own opinions in seeking eternal life, till
they be wearied; rather then to rest in the safe way which God offers them.

And when he has reproved them for this great fault, he exhorts them to be
wiser, and to hear him attentively in showing them a better way, even the
right and true way to happiness, that is, by thirsting after it, as the other
did, mentioned in the former verse; and so doing, he shows them what a
worthy fruit they should reap thereof, even all abundance of things worthy
to be desired, and rest to their souls thereby, which he means by that
allegorical speech, when he says, Eat that which is good, and let your
souls delight in fatness. Thus much for the meaning of this verse: now
briefly look we into the reproof and exhortation therein contained, and
consequently what fruit will follow, if they be both regarded.

The reproof.
In the reproof we are taught, as well as they to whom the Prophet wrote, and
the woeful experience of this age does show, that he did not only expostulate
with his own nation at that time, but that he has also justly inueighed
against all Adams posterity in what age soever. For all men naturally are
carried away with this frenzy, that in seeking of eternal life, they do all
err and are deceived, and do choose rather to follow their own fancy and
conceit, then the voice or word of God.

He speaks not to them, who being drowned in a deep forgetfulness of God
and themselves, do not almost think of the welfare and salvation of their
souls; he complains not (I say) of such; whose number yet who doubts but
that it is exceeding great, yea and that all such are further off from eternal
life, then the other? but to them he directs his words, who desire life in
some sort, and yet know no way thereto, but wander uncertainly, they know not
whether. So that here are all such condemned as seek amiss, and toil
themselves to come to happiness any other way then God teaches in his word,
and all their labors and travels that way, are called of him unprofitable and
ill bestowed cost. Whereupon we may justly complain of the woeful estate of
sundry kinds of people among us, and lay forth their misery as clearly, as if
it were seen in a glass.

And first of all, Romish teachers reproved here.
they who are teachers or be taught in the Romish synagogues, may manifestly
see, how they incur the bitter and just reproof of the Prophet, in such sort
as they shall never be able to wind themselves out of it. For to yield them
that, which truly we may; we deny not, but that there are of them which toil
and travel to go to heaven, (though this must be known also, that others of
them cover their knaueries with a color of their religion, and either know
that they are misled, or at least hold their profession for their ease and
bellies sake) even these who seek the way to heaven, which are the simplest
minded amongst all the rest of their religion, are they against whom the
Prophet enueigheth: As for the wilful and subtle among them, they are much
further off, and almost without hope. But the simpler are also deceived with a
false worship of God, and use it after the fond and superstitious conceits and
dreams of their own brain, though only of mere ignorance, of whose doings
yet, the Lord more justly complains, then he does of those to whom these
words were directed, when he says, Esaias 1.12.
who required these things at your hands?

Mat. 15.9.
For in vain do they worship him, teaching and receiving for doctrines the
traditions of men. To enter into particulars is infinite.

Carnal Gospellers.
But to pass from them, there is another kind of men, whom the Prophets
reproof does reach unto, as well as unto those. And such they are, as although
they hold the truth in judgment, and do worship God in outward manner, yet
they draw near to him with their bodies, Mat. 15.8. Mat. 7.2^.
their hearts being far from him, who say, Lord, Lord, (indeed) but yet do
not the will of the Lord, neither (being natural men) can be obedient unto it.
Romans 8.7.
With their lips they confess him, but with their deeds they deny him; and
therefore are far from the happiness which I now speak of.

Among whom this I say as of the former sort, that though some of them do
simply desire eternal life, as they seem to do, yet they prefer the
commodities and vain pleasures of this present world, and make their commings
to Church to be either but couers for their profane and loose lives, or at
least they abide in them still. And yet the forward^^ sort of them both, who
mean more simply, are justly reproved by the Prophets words here, in
complaining thus, why do you lay out your money and not for bread, your labor
and yet not to be satisfied? For even these follow not the word of God as their
guide, to bring them to that which they seek, and therefore are never like to
attain it, seeking it after their own fancy and opinion, and not thirsting
after it, as without which they cannot be satisfied.

So that as the Apostle spoke of Israel, so I may speak of these. What shall
we say, (in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 9.31.32.
says he) that Israel which followed the law of righteousness, yet could not
attain to the law of righteousness? wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the law. Even so, they who seek
salvation, and the blessedness that is laid up for Gods chosen, even that is
enough to deprive them of it, in that they seek it amiss; that is to say, not
as the word of God directs, namely, that they should thirst for it, as has
been said.

Ye have heard the reprehension; The Exhortation.
the exhortation follows, in which he labors to draw them from their own
wisdom which deceived them, to hearken to another manner of wisdom, which
was able to lead them to that which he called them to enjoy, that is, the true
happiness which he lays out under these speeches, to eat that which is
good, and delight their souls in fatness.

And here it is worthy to be marked, that when he has told them to what
their own wisdom brings them, The word of God only directs to true
happiness.
in leading them to seek salvation and happiness, and that is to nothing but
to deceive them, and to lose their labor, for which he reproved them: now he
wills them to hear him diligently, who taught them to seek the same by the
light and direction of Gods word. Whereby he clearly shows, that there is no
other way to find that which they seek. By no wisdom of man, by no learning,
much less by any other means of blind devotion and sond zeal without
knowledge. And yet as the word of God only does it, so we must further mark,
how and when it does so. That is, How and when it does it.
as he says here, when we harken diligently unto it, as declaring thereby,
that we be willing to be guided by it. For so he requires, saying; hearken
diligently unto me in that which I shall say to you from God. For as Solomon
faith of seeking wisdom, that there is a seeking of it slightly, negligently
and slothfully, by which men never find it: and there is a seeking of it, Prou.
2.3.
as silver is sought of the Merchant, that is, with all diligence, and by all
good opportunities, not resting till they find it, if it be to be had; so there
is an hearing of the word coldly without profit, and there is an hearing which
will draw and persuade him that hears, never to give over, till he has found
and bought the pearl which is hidden in the Gospel, because he knows that
it is there to be had.

This hearing the Prophet requires, and he that hears not with this mind,
nor to this end, he loses his labor, and bestows all his travel in vain.

Now in this verse we heard he reproved all the rest of them that sought for
pardon of their sins and eternal life, or other graces of the spirit amiss;
even by their own wisdom and fancy, not longing after and thirsting for it,
as Gods word teaches them to do. Therefore these he exhorts to hear him,
that they would also with the other set their hearts upon it, and thirst after
it. Even this is that which he requires their diligent attention about, that so
seeking it as their brethren did, they might with them find that which they
sought, even as they had done.

And this if they do, they shall enjoy, he tells them that good diet, yea
and banqueting cheer, which be means by the allegorical speeches which he
uses here, when he says, then they shall eat that which is good, and their
soul shall be satisfied with fatness. Whereby he means, that as a man which
is kept at a good diet with wholesome good and sauourie meats, is healthful and
well liking in body; even so shall his soul be satiate and filled withal
variety of heavenly dainties, and be made joyful and well liking thereby,
which with an appetite does seek the same.

And so all they find it, who are ever thirsting after one good thing or other:
this being added, that they believe God upon his word, and doubt not but that
it shall be so. Which I add to quicken up many of my dear brethren and
sisters heereunto. Who (I deny not) thirst fervently after sundry graces of
God, and yet for all this comfortable promise of the Lord published here by
his Prophet, do not believe the same to belong unto them, but complain with
deadly distrust, that they have no part therein. But I should now enter into
that again, which I spoke of thirsting and the satisfying of such as thirst in
the first verse, if I should proceed. From whence, that may be fetched which
here were to be uttered, seeing it has been spoken of at large already.



FINIS.
THREE SERMONS UPON MATTHEW. 11.21.
Woe be to thee Corazin: woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if the great works which
were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long
agone in sackcloth and ashes.
IF the greater that Gods works have bin among us, and benefits to us, (dearly
beloved) the more and greater fruit he looks for at our hands, as in Amos
3.3. Amos 3.3.
it is to be seen, and where he finds it not to be so, there he is most
displeased, as appears in this chapter, and particularly in this verse: it is
so much the more needful for us in this nation and the countries thereof, where
it is well known we have received much; and as well known that we have
yielded little, it is (I say) the more needful for us, to hear somewhat, and
to be put in mind of this matter. And for this cause I have chosen this
Scripture, which gives singular good occasion to us all, to consider advisedly
of the same.

To the which purpose I will first lay open the words of our Savior Christ
unto the cities here named, they being the ground of that which I mean to
deliver unto you, and then proceed in the doctrine which they fitly give
occasion of, and show the use thereof. The opening of the text.
Our Lord Jesus therefore being borne in Bethlehem, brought up in Nazareth, but
having his chief habitation and abode near to these cities, Corazin and
Bethsaida, namely in Capernaum, in which three he had preached most, and done
most of his miracles, when he saw that they were little regarded there, he was
moved in compassion of them, by reason of the danger they lay in for contempt
of so great favor as was offered to them, rather then to many other cities, to
cast in their teeth their gross and great unthankfulness. And as they had
increased their sin more then others, so to shame them for it, he aggrauated
it, by making their condition worse then their neighbor cities, upon whom he
had bestowed no such cost nor benefits; Tire and Sidon I mean, whom they
counted to be most odious, and knew them to be most dissolute, and for their
wicked lives infamous. And therefore he spoke thus unto them, Woe to thee
(Corazin); woe to thee (Bethsaida); for if the great works which have been done
in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had repented long agone in
sackcloth and ashes.

Thus much be said of Christ's words to these cities, and of the occasion
thereof: now I will lay forth the chief points of them which minister matter
of instruction unto us, The parts two.
and they are drawn from the general parts of the text, which are two: For
in Christ's words now read unto you, there are these two; the one a curse
pronounced upon them, 1. The curse pronounced upon these cities. 2. The reason
of it.
in these words, Woe to thee; the other a reason of the same, in these words,
For if the great works, etc.

Both of these afford three particular branches a piece, upon the which I
mean to stand; and they are these: In the former three, first, that many great
works had been done amongst them, which might have wrought repentance in
them: secondly, that although they had them amongst them, yet they repented
not: thirdly, therefore he pronounces the woe upon them. In the latter
general part, namely, the reason; these three are to be considered: First,
that many, if they had enjoyed them, had repented indeed: Secondly, they would
not (he says) have driven off from day to day, but would have done it long
ago: Thirdly, in a most hearty and solemn manner; that is to say, in
sackecloth and ashes.

And out of these six points in Christ's words, Three points in the first part.
arise for our use and edifying, even as many profitable instructions and
doctrines. And first, in that he says that those great works were done
amongst them, 1. The end of all miracles and preaching is the conversion of the
people.
which might have drawn them or other to amend their lives, we may gather that
the end of them, and namely of preaching, the greatest of them all, as in Ioh.
14.12. I say, we may gather from hence, that the end of them is the conversion
of the people, John 14.12.
where they are done, and the calling of them to true repentance.

Matthew. 17.11.
So the end of John Baptists preaching was, to restore all things amiss, and to
bring them to good order, Matthew. 17.11. So Philip came to Samaria, which city
had a long time been bewitched by Simon Magus the sorcerer, and preached Christ
there, to convert them from their blindness, superstition, and other
iniquities. And the Lord so wrought thereby, causing the people to give heed to
the words which Philip spoke, that the city was converted, Act. 8.6. etc.
which the holy Ghost sets down in the story by a sure token thereof, that
there was great joy amongst them, and they forsook the sorcerer, who had
deceived them.

This end should be aimed at in bearing.
All which with many other such examples do teach hearers of Sermons to aim at
this point first and chiefly, that they may be changed in their minds and
hearts from their former blind judgment, and corrupt nature, embrace Christ
for their only Savior, as being lost in themselves, and declare their love and
thankfulness for the same to him ever after, and to bring forth the fruits
thereof in a godly and Christian life: which being far otherwise in the most
hearers at this day, lays hardly to their charge, that either they know not
the end of preaching, nor ^o what end they hear, or else a worse thing,
namely, that they regard not, but set light by Gods ordinance, which he will
most certainly be revenged of, when it shall be little welcome unto them.

And to follow this point of the end of preaching, The power of the word.
that it is to turn people to God, it is not to be marvelled at, for great is
the force of it, as we see in those that were mockers and raile^^ on the
Apostles, in the second of the Acts, Act. 2.37.
who were yet converted by Peter's Sermon. And so throughout the whole book,
where Paul preached among the Gentiles through whole countries and cities, they
who had long sit it darkness, as having never heard of Christ, saw great light,
and were persuaded to believe in him, and received the word with great joy. For
the word of God is mighty in operation, Hebr. 4.12.
and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through even to the dividing
asunder of the soul and the spirit, and the joints and the marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

For although all men are borne in sin, and so they love and like well to lie
therein, Romans 8.8.
and though the natural man is not obedient to the will of God, neither can
be, James 4.4.
and being at amity with the world, is at enmity with God (in which estate
they are far from the hope of the life to come,) yet when they so hear the
Gospel that they believe, Prou. 2.10.
and when the wisdom of God once enters into their hearts and the knowledge
of his word delights their souls, it is marvelous, what a change is wrought
in them thereby. For as children while they be without discretion* are wholly
carried after childishness and babish folly, yet if they come to years of
understanding, and begin to see that they must live in the world, they let go
childishness, and wax thriftie: even so when God by the wisdom of his word,
teaches us to put away our childish folly, youthful lusts, and works of
darkness (then the which for the time we knew no better) we do with a holy
detestation come out of our filthy Sodom, even as Ephraim when she repented
of Idolatry, which she had so entirely loved, expressed it thus, saying: What
have I to do with Idols?

And how does God work this mighty change in men? Surely by persuading them
that they gain an hundred to one thereby, that I say no more, the Prophet
making good my words to the full, Psalm 84.10.
when he says, One day in thy courts (O Lord) is better then a thousand
elsewhere. And though this be not seen with bodily eye, yet it is perceived by
a far more clear and undoubted testimony then if it were seen, while it is
received by faith and believed. Oh! he that is persuaded of this, does with the
Apostles forsake all, and follow Christ in waiting, Matthew. 19.29.
till that hundred fold in Saint Matthew promised, be accomplished and enjoyed.

And what marvel that we may be thus drawn by such strong persuasions as God
uses in his Gospel every where, when we read in humane authors, that rude
and barbarous people, were brought to great matters, even civility and to good
order, De Orat. lib. 1.
by the persuasion of eloquent men. There was a time (says Tulli^) when men
wandered up and down in woods and fields without any dwelling, as the beasts
do: but by the wisdom and eloquence of some, they were persuaded to
fellowship, and were drawn to have habitation in cities and villages. And may
not the most mighty persuasions of the almighty, much more draw such as have
been blindfolded with error and delusions, from their unclean conversation to
that which is holy, and from bondage to Satan to believe in the living God?

2 Thessalonians. 2.9.10.11.12.
For they are all done by the working of Satan in all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness among them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved, Therefore God sends them strong delusions, that they should believe
lies, that all they may be damned, which believe not the truth, but have
pleasure in unrighteousness.

But to be persuaded of the truth of that which is against our nature and
liking, so that thereby we believe it, and to cast away the pleasures of sin
and ieopard our souls upon the doctrine that is taught us, this, I say, is
another matter then bare persuasion, from what ground soever it come. And this
is the heavenly work of the holy Ghost, which moving and leading us, shall well
show it self to be so indeed. This being so, we may gather necessarily hereby,
that the sound? plain, and powerful preaching of the Gospel, The sound plain
and powerful preaching of the Gospel, amost blessed gift of God.
whereby only through the work of grace we may be persuaded to turn to God
aright, is a most blessed gift of God, and therefore that it is no marvel
that he has appointed that, rather then other means to so excellent an end.

But here I must add this, because many even of the private sort of men, who
have been happily trained up under a good ministry, can discern, and do
complain, that this holy ordinance of God, (I mean the publishing of the
Gospel) is taken in hand of sundry Ministers, who are utterly unfit for it,
and the duty thereof is discharged in much irreverence, and nothing beseeming
the worthiness of it; if this be not better looked unto by such as have
authority in this behalf, I see not how it can be had in such honor as is
due unto it, neither yield the fruit that otherwise it promises. For while
some that take upon them to preach are unsound in religion; some ignorant; The
causes why preaching is in so little account.
some stuff their sermons with authorities of men, whereas it is the word of
God that has authority over men's consciences; Heb. 4.12.
some go above the peoples capacity, and reach; few preach diligently,
constantly, and carefully; that I speak not of the lose and dissolute
behavior that is not tolerable amongst their hearers; how should preaching
keep the credit that it ought to be in, and be like to draw or persuade
people to faith and repentance? Nay what greater cause is there of the general
ignorance, carelessnes, and profanes of life in the people, then these and such
like abuses seen in the Ministry?

And while they he thus far out of the way, them selves, they are yet more
bold to open their mouths against the diligenter sort, who knowing that Christ
requires it at their hands, that as they love him, they should feed his sheep
and his lambs, Ioh. 21.15.
do of conscience seek to discharge their duties, and they are therefore cried
one of as doing more then they need; And whiles this is suffered, what hope is
there that any great remorse for sin, or prick of conscience should be
wrought in the people by their standing up amongst them, or any true hope of
eternal life wrought in many? But these things being removed, and good
preaching and living in stead thereof, interteined, and practiced, such a
Ministry, as it is highly pleasing to God, and commanded by him, so it gives
good hope of gathering a plentiful people unto him. As for the profane
speeches of them which count the preaching of Christ, and suffering for his
name, to be foolishnes, let Saint Paul put them to shame if not to silence, who
has taught them if they will learn their answer from him, that they whom God
will save shall and must by this obtain it, 1. Cor. 1.21.
or else they shall never have it.

I have now spoken of the first point, that the end of this great work of
Christ namely preaching, is to convert the bearers thereof to God, now the
second in this first part, follows; The second point of the first part. Few
regard or look after the right end of preaching.
and that is this. Though that be the end of it, yet the most part commonly
regard it not, neither consider it, but go away without that blessing. Even as
our savior here charge these cities for their contempt saying: If some, yea
such as in your own judgment are profane and worldly, had seen and hard the
great works of God, that have been done among you, they had repented, but ye
have not done so unto this day. The complaint is justly made of the like
carelesnes in all ages, that when the people had the Prophets and Apostles, yea
our Savior himself, by whom they might have been made happy, and with the
eyes of faith seen the salvation offered them, Luke 19 42.
yet they sought not to know the things that concerned their peace.

Noah the preacher of righteousness was despised and laughed to scorn, when he
told them of the destroying of the whole earth by water, and yet he gave them
an example by his preparing the Arc, and so they had a double motive to
believe it; Esaias cries out when he saw the people made a mock at his
preaching, and a jest of his children, whom he begat to the Lord thereby, Esaias
22.1
saying turn away from me and let me weep bitterly, and labor not to comfort
me, because the people perish. Jeremy to whom they of Anathoth answered, preach
no more to us in the name of the Lord, for we will not hear thee, Ier.
but preach unto us pleasant things, bewailed them thus. Ier. 9.1.
Oh that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that I might weep bitterly for
the loss of this people.

John Baptist, when he saw the Pharisees come to his Baptism, (of whom Christ
said to his Disciples, Mat. 5.20.
except your righteousness exceed theirs, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven,) said to them, O ye generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7.
who has taught you to fly from the vengeance to come? Bring forth fruits of
amendment, and say not with your selves we have Abraham to our father. And how
our Savior lamented the people, as many places testify, so that one does
lively prove. Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem Jerusalem: which stonest my Prophets, and killest them whom I have
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thee together, as the hen does
her chickens, but thou would not. Behold thy dwelling shall be left to thee
desolate. And again, Luke 19.42.
O that thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace, but they are hidden from thee.

And Paul often turned from the Jews and refused to teach them, because of their
contempt: All the which, with others many like unto them do prove, even as our
Savior foretold, that it should be in these latter days as it was in the time
of Noah and Lot) that for all the cost the Lord bestows upon the people in
sending the glad tidings of salvation amongst them, Luke 17.26.28.
yet (admirable and fearful to say) few receive and embrace them, but it
comes to pass, what by men's rebelliousnes and unthankfulness, and all the
ingines and allurements that stand up in their way, that they that come
forwardest (a very few excepted) be but as Agrippa, Act. 26.28
that is, almost Christians.

One would think that when God has done more for one place and people then
for others. And that he has given to it for a long time sound and sauory
instruction, while others have wanted it, that he should look both for much
people there, and those also well seasoned, although it be not so among others:
but when they shall fail there, how just cause shall he have to expostulate
with them and to complain, as Christ does here, that they contemned and set
light by his kindness? And yet where almost shall he find it otherwise? If not
as he found it among the Jews to whom he spoke in the tenth of John verse 32.
Ioh. 10.32.
where he says, many good works have I showed you from my father* for which
of these works do ye stone me: yet at least, as is mentioned in the fifth of
Esaias verse. 4. that when after great cost bestowed upon his vineyard, he looked
that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes. So it was
with them of whom we read in the Prophet Michah who acknowledged that they owed
much to God, Micha. 6.6.
and desired much more at his hands, but what fruit did they yield him? even
wild grapes, even false and feined repentance for that which was true and
sound?

For that, they could not hitte upon, when yet, excepting that, they offered him
service with their great cost. For thus they say, as one man. Wherewith shall I
appear before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come
before him with burnt offerings, and with calves of a year old? will the Lord
be pleased with thousand of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall
I give my first borne of my body for the sin of my soul? But the Prophet
reproves them for that they took not the right way, saying. I will tell thee
(O man) what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee. Suerly to deal
justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, and to walk with thy God.

Mat. 13.21.
So in the 13. of Matthew, they who received the word readily and with joy, yet
because it was not rooted in the heart, it withered away and came to nothing.
In like manner the Church of Sardy, Apoc. 3.1.
though it heard the glad tidings that might have made it happy, could not hold
fast the things that it had received, but obtained only a name that it lived,
but was dead, And they profited not thereby, seeing they were not mixed with
faith, in them that heard them. And by these and many other such examples it is
evident, that though many have bin called by the preaching of the Gospel, yet
but few of them have given proof and testimony by their fruits of amendment,
that they were of the elect of God, and appointed before, unto salvation.

And even so it is with us at this day in many places of this land, to say
nothing of them who are slothful hearers and necligent, who declare thereby
that they find small taste by their hearing, and of such as refuse to hear;
what fruit reap even the most of the other, who repair to the word more often
and willingly? For all their shows and note that is taken of them, do they not
prove too plainly that they be but almost Christians? And though they say
they believe, yet do they not declare that they know not what faith is, or at
least, are they not far from it? And do they not,

For though they be ever cheaping (as it were) yet they buy not the precious
wares which the Lord sets out to sale amongst them, no (which makes their
fault the greater) though they might have them freely and without money. Esaias.
55.1.
And although they commend the doctrine that they hear, yet can they not be
brought to prove and try themselves, whether they be cast into the mould of it
or no, and be fashioned like unto it, that so they might find rest to their
souls indeed. But we must not rest in being almost, as Paul told Agrippa a
King, but must be so altogether, Act. 26.29.
which is another matter, then a prick of conscience, for sin, and a bare
purpose of amendment, but there must go with both, a believing in Jesus for
the remission of sin, and a walking with God, that so it may be a true
conversion to God indeed.

And this is that fruit of hearing which pleases God, and which is also the
true fruit of the ministry, and he that barketh against this course as too
strict and precise, barketh against God, who urges all that look to be saved,
unto that repentant estate, and that upon a heavy condition, saying: except ye
repent ye shall al perish. Luke 13.3.
And this be said of this second point, namely, though many have great means
to call them to repentance, yet they are never the better, for all their
warnings they cannot be brought to take heed.

The third point. They that neglect the means of salvation, shall pay dearly
for it.
The third point in this first part shows, that though so many as we have
heard of, take liberty to themselves to contemn Gods gracious offer of the
best things that can be enjoyed, by the preaching of the Gospel, or at least
neglect the same, when they might enjoy them: yet they shall do it to their
cost, and pay dearly for the same. And that the Lord Jesus proves to be true,
in saying to them that did so, even these two cities, woe be to thee Corazin, woe
be to thee Bethsaida, whereby we see, that the Lord wringeth the dregs of his
wrath upon the heads of all such: God curses them and pronounces his
vengeance to hang over them. Which John Baptist confirms when to the
Pharisees which came to hear him, but meant not to be amended by him, he said:
O ye generation of vipers, Matthew. 3.7.
who has taught you to fly from the vengeance to come? But he answered them,
that they could not avoid it, if they lay still in their sins. Even so the
Lord Jesus pronounced to the Scribes and Pharisees though they pretended great
holiness to the people, Woe be to you, Matthew. 23.27.
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are like to whited toumbes, which
appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and all
filthiness: so ye within, are full of briberie and excess. Here if any
should object, and say: God forbid that all which repent not, should be in the
same case that they were. I answer, thou say somewhat, but not all. For
indeed they were the more inexcusable, John.
because they know their masters will, and did it not; neither had any cloak
for their sin, seeing he came and spoke to them. But other that know less,
and have not had so many things against them as they, yet because they are
willingly blind, and are content to go on in their bad and unrepentant course,
they shall be beaten also, and can pretend no excuse to cover their fault.
Hebr. 12.14.
According to that in the Hebrews, without holiness ye shall not see the
Lord; and also in Luke, Luke.
to them that shall allege as much in their own defense, and for their
excuse, as the most are able, saying: We have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our street, our Savior shall answer, I tell you I
know you not, whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity,

Thus we see, both by the testimony of our Lord Jesus himself, in other places
as well as this, as also of his faithful messengers, that the hearers of the
Word who are not also doers of the same, are so far from any hope of being
justified, that they shall certainly be condemned, and are under the woe and the
curse. Now if it be so, they walk in that estate wheresoever they become; and
therefore cursed in the house, and in the field, in their pleasures taking, and
in their merry companies, so as if it please the Lord in their flourishingest
estate to take the^ away, whether in their mirth, as Agag, 1. Sam. 15.32. Numb.
16.32. and 25.8. Act. 12.23.
or in their rebellion with Corah, or in their filthiness as Zimrie and Cosby,
or in their pride as Herod, all that observe it, may see, and be able to say,
that the curse does take hold of them, and accompany them, and before it break
out so openly, the word of the Lord affirms the same, that it follows them
wheresoever they become, though secretly.

Cleanse your hands, James 4.8.
(ye sinners) and purge your hearts ye wavering minded: suffer afflictions and
sorrow ye; and weep ye; let your laughing be turned into mourning, and your
joy into heaviness.

Would not any count him twice miserable, A simile
who being led to execution, should call his companions to laughing and
drinking? So he shows his cursed estate manifestly to the world, when he
glories and walks securely under the state of condemnation. if he were
accursed; but would cause it to break forth by sickness, diseases, penury,
and other calamities, Romans 2.4.
and also for that if he should so pursue sinners, as they do give him
occasion, and provoke him to do, there should scarcely any be left to continue
the generation of mankind in Church and Commonwealth.

But concerning this I may justly complain, as the Prophet did in his time,
Esaias 53.1.
and say; Lord, who has believed our report? For (to speak as the truth is)
who believes this, or cares for it, Ephesians. 5.6.
that the wrath of God hangs over the chidren of disobedience? Few see or
believe the danger they are in.
especially, who applies it to himself? Oh the senseless blockishnesse of
man, who passes over these matters so slightly, which are most weighty. If he
be told but once of a shrewd turn that is coming toward him in his cattle
or goods, he believes, and preuenteth it with all speed possible. But an
hundred warnings of this spiritual danger, makes him nothing at all to believe
it; or if he do, he dare expostulate and dispute with God, that he is too
severe against man for so small a matter, whose boldness is to be beaten down,
as it were with mallets and hammers, that so the conscience may be bruised,
rather then the whole person be rent in pieces, Psalm 50.22.
as of a lion, while there is none to deliver him.

And because I know the fearful danger of unbelief, and that it shakes off
the wholesomest instruction, I will here stay a while, and labor to persuade
such, into whose hands this shall come, James 2.19.
to believe and tremble at least, (for so much the devils do) and then to
search better into themselves, and try what depth of evil is in them, Lament.
3.40.
and so turn again unto the Lord. To this end let them weigh duly what the
Apostle writes: Romans 2.8.9.
to them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath: tribulation and anguish,
shall be upon the soul of every one, that does evil; but to every one that
does good, shall be glory, honor and peace. If the Lord say, anguish shall be
to such, how are they blindfolded and hardened, who stand against him, and say,
it shall not be so?

Our Savior Christ says to the like purpose, John 3.18.
He that believes in him shall not be condemned, but he that believes not, is
condemned already, as if he should say, even while he lives in this estate of
unbelief, he is condemned; and when he dies in the same estate, it shall be
executed upon him.

Besides, Reasons to draw men to repentance.
there are reasons forcible enough to draw them upon their knees, and to
believe that it is no less then is told them, and preached unto them. Reuelat.
6.16.
and that the wrath of God is so heavy upon them to oppress their soul, that
they cannot cast it off. Luke 16.24.
now is their time to whom I speak, to prevent it, or else it is most like
that they shall go take part with the damned in it.

And if this curse and woe pronounced upon them, reached but to the end of this
present life, or were afterward but a losing and forgoing of the kingdom of
heaven, it were somewhat: (and yet who would let go his part in that for a
whole world) but when it accompanies damnation, and the casting of them into
utter darkness, Matthew. 22.13.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever, how terrible and
intolerable is it to think of? To see one to be but famished to death by
hanging in chains, is able to make a stony heart to quake and tremble: and
what is it then, to be tormented with pain more grievous then any death, and
yet never to be dead? Wherefore I conclude, that if such woe be pronounced by
our Savior Christ to them that profit not by his works, the greatest whereof
is the sincere preaching of the Gospel, and if it be impossible that Christ
should lie, I conclude (I say) that they in our age are in an high degree of
misery, not only which contemn this ordinance of God, but who give not all
diligence thereto, 2. Pet. 1.10.
that they may make their calling and election sure thereby.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
The first point in the second part.
NOw follows the first point in the second part, and that is, if many did
enjoy the means of their salvation, which some others do, they would
undoubtedly repent. Even as our Lord Jesus says here, If the great works
which have been done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had
repented, etc.

Here we must not make Christ's words a stumbling block, as though he meant to
set himself against his own word, which says, that no reprobates (such as
Tire and Sidon most dissolute cities were) can be converted: but we must look
to his meaning, which was this: that as many heathenish cities of the Gentiles
were converted by Paul's preaching Christ to them, as Thessalonica, Philippos,
Corinth with many other, were: so is it as likely, that these here mentioned
might have done, (which if they had done, then should they not have bin
reprobates, Matthew. 21.31.
for Christ speaks by supposition) even as he says to the like purpose in
another place, Harlots and publicans shall enter into the kingdom of God
before the chief Priests and the Elders of the people, which yet was nothing
likely in the sight of men.

So we read that they who were mockers, and railed on the Apostles, (so far
were they from sauouring their heavenly doctrine): yet when the Lord in his
mercy toward them, Act. 2.37.
caused them to attend to Peter's sermon reproouing their sin: they were so
pricked in their consciences, that they came to him and the other Apostles, for
further instruction and comfort, and obtained it. Samaria that had long been
bewitched by Simon Magus the sorcerer, Act. 8.8.
yet at the preaching of Philip (a thing very unlike to come to pass) was
converted to Christ, so as the fruit thereof appeared not to be small, namely,
that it brought great joy into the city: Luke 15.1.
so they who were notorious offenders came flocking about Christ to hear him,
when the Scribes and Pharisees not only did not so, but scorned that they
should.

And therefore it may justly be lamented, that the preaching of the Gospel is
not with credit and authority in a sound and plain manner planted in such
places, where it is wanting, and where it were like to do much good; as our
Lord Jesus bewailed it, Matthew. 9.36.
when he saw the people scattered as sheep without a shepherd and willed that
prayers should be made to the Lord of the harvest, Verse 38.
that he would scud laborers into his harvest. For it is very probable, if it
were so, that numbers would embrace it joyfully, who now for that they know not
the power and worth of it, pass by it and scorn it, as nothing or little
worth.

The Gospel with due reverence preached, returns not in vain.
that where the Gospel is with due reverence beseeming such an holy ordinance
of God, preached; it does not return in vain, but draws them which were
dispersed to one body of the Church. And (doubtless) if the Prachers
themselves be men of sincerity, love, gravity, and will put on the person of
the people to consider their ignorance, forgetfulness, looseness,
unsettledness, and other infirmities, and apply themselves unto them, as their
needs do require, and would seek to win them, rather then set up themselves;
none need to doubt, but that they should persuade many to become true
Christians, and to be tractable to good duties, when they be kindly and wisely
advised and directed.

Oh they that have not experience will hardly be persuaded, how much unfeigned
love and labor in the Minister, is like to prevail with the people to win
them from folly, vanity, ignorance, and the common sins, which through
custom and company they have been drowned in. And what marvel, when they
shall by wise and friendly dealing, be made to see how they were deceived, and
that very dangerously; whiles they following the desires of their evil hearts,
walked after the sins of the times in which they lived? and when other manner
of pleasures and delights shall be offered them, which they never had tasted of
before, I mean heavenly.

The ^^rmer doctrine exemplified (...) experience.
I may speak the more boldly, because I know I speak the truth, that almost
forty years agone, when I came young from the University, to a people blind
and far gone in the sins that were then commonly committed in the world,
sauouring no whit of piety, and I had little in me to comme^d me unto them,
my knowledge being not much, though my desire (I may say) was fervent in
seeking it, and to do them good; and my authority small, as being then under
another, which was Pastor to them, but resident in another charge hard by: even
so long ago, I say, I remember that which is not unworthy the mentioning and
speaking of in this place.

And that is, how maruellously God wrought among us: that when there was no
president nor example in the corner thereabout of diligent repairing to the
place of Gods worship on the Sabbath in the afternoon; but all disorder in
dancing, playing, haunting the Alehouse, and other like, and little power of
godliness to be seen or heard of round about; it pleased God by care and
diligence in example giving among them, and laboring in that weak manner that
I was able to teach and exhort them, with familiar conuersing with them in
private, who were more teachable then the rest, in good communication drawing
them on, that in two years space I might have persuaded them to any good thing
that I saw meet: (the body of them I mean) and a loving consent might have
bin seen among them to that which was good: neither can I say any worse of
them for the time that I could stay amongst them, which was full six years.

Which I say not for vain glory, (God is record) and well nigh forty years
is a reasonable time to despise that, and yet I would have said more, but for
avoiding the suspicion of it: but I speak this to move some of my fellow
brethren in the Ministry; such as in an honest and good heart desire to see
fruit of their labors, to think of the way of obtaining the same. And that is
(no doubt) to such as heartily seek it, How a Minister should deal with a
people to do them good.
to labor for the gift of persuading the people, and familiar applying the
Scripture to the persons particularly, in a right and wise manner, as well as
to teach them the truth generally: and to use diligence and constancy in both,
and withal to take all occasion to commune and confer of good things in
companying with them, and not to spend the little time that they are with them
in play, nor to use to talk of worldly things to them, whereto the people be
so readily carried, nor idly and vainly to keep them company, which dulleth
and makes blunt the edge of their Ministry amongst them, and raises a meaner
conceit of the persons themselves, and by consequent of their Ministry, which
had little need to be.

This manner of living amongst them, with an especial care to avoid just
suspicion of covetousness, and love of this world, and other offenses, which
are too common, is like, through Gods blessing to knit them so in firm and
true love together, that they shall call home to true repentance such as God
has in those places ordained to eternal life, and they shall by such manner
of living with them, be like with love and readiness to receive their do at
the peoples hands, about the paying and requiring of the which, the greatest
pritches are taken, and the sorest conceits arise betwixt them, which are the
beginnings and occasions of continual broiles and contentions afterward, or
at least of strangeness, or hollow and hauerly love betwixt them, whereby it
comes to pass, that preaching does little good unto them. And thus by
occasion of answering this objection, I have stayed the longer in this matter.

Now I will return to the words of our Savior again, Such as are leaud and
far gone may be reclaimed.
which I last mentioned, that if his great works, and namely preaching, ye
greatest of the^ al, had bin in some place the people there would have
repented? by this speech of his, we may observe, that such as are lewd and
far gone, may be brought home to be members of the militant Church, and
Christ looks for it that it should be so, and lays for it, by sending forth
and appointing his Ministers for that purpose. As for example, who was farther
off from hope them Mary Magdelen out of whom Christ cast seven devils? Luke 8.2.
Or who among many might have bin like to be rejected rather then Paul
himself? 1. Tim. 1.15.
who was a persecutor, an oppressor, and a blasphemer? likewise the great
sinners in the time of our Savior, who for the odious account they were in,
even with the Pharisees themselves, were abhorred of them, and commonly
reckoned with the heathens, and Publicans, And yet how did the Lord Jesus love
Mary? how did he regard Paul as he confesses himself, that for all his sins,
he obtained mercy, and was counted faithful, and put in his service? And the
great sinners acknowledging and forsaking their sins, were preferred and
justified before the Pharisees.

This gives no encouragement to the bad and wilful.
And yet this gives no encouragement to the badde and wilful, as though they
may think heaven to be atteined with ease, idleness, and security. For we
know, that no such shall enter into the kingdom of God. And yet it is not to
be denied, that the teachable hearers that begin to lend their ears to the
preaching of the Gospel, though they have bin far gone in time past, may
conceive great hope hereby of the pardon of their sins, and should not
despair. Which I think needful to say, seeing many who have long lien in a
lewd course of life, when they are advised to turn again unto the Lord, (and
they could also be content to do so) yet take deadly discouragement, saying of
themselves through ignorance and fear; It is too late for them to repent, and
that their sins are so great that they cannot be forgiven. But of this first
point in the second part this be said. The second point follows of the second
part of the text according to the division.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
HEre our Savior says, The second point in the second part.

Repentance not to be deferred.


if they of Tire and Sidon had inioyed the like means as the Cities of Corazin
and Bethsaida did, they had long ago repented: wherein he gives us to
understand, that the gift of converting to God, is so great and precious, in
respect of the want of it, in any estate of life besides, that all wise folk
would lay for it betimes even at the first hearing of the Gospel, when it is
new come amongst them; and not drive of, as too many do, till it be too late,
or at least wise till they hazard their salvation. This is that which he would
have us learn out of these words. And to say the truth, if it were a meaner
matter, then the message and glad tidings of eternal life is, if it were but
the offer of lease or fee simple of land in a good air and soil, who would
not lay for the first offer, and labor by friends and cost that none might
have the liberty of choosing or refusing before him? especially if it were a
good peny-worth. But alas, what is the greatest Manor or Lordship, if it were
a whole Country, which is yet but a corner of it, if it be compared with that
spacious kingdom of heaven, already furnished withal manner of pleasures and
delights? Or what is the sumptuous building or princeliest dwelling (which can
be but of stone and clay) in comparison of an habitation not made with hands,
but everlasting; which the Gospel offreth not as a purchase to be bought for
money, but a free gift, 2. Cor. 5.1.
and yet the greatest of all gifts, given for nothing.

And yet as if wisdom were taken away from the wise, and all understanding
from the prudent, how are the learned, noble, and mighty men of this world (to
speak of the greatest part) without judgment and light to discern the worth
and value of these things? but their eyes are dazzled with the deceitful beauty
of things present and temporal. Whereby it comes to pass; that they embrace
not the other at al (if many of them scorn them not) so far is it off, that
they be the first that receive the glad tidings of the kingdom. If news of
any great importance or weight be brought into a land, who are the first
partakers of it but they? And good reason, for they are the chief and
greatest. If any dainties be, who ask for them sooner then they, and why
should they not be for them before others, who are best able to buy them?

But oh then, the greatest dainties of all, which also never wax common nor
stale, but are still fragrant and sauoury, that they should not be asked after
nor regarded! And the news and tidings, that make the soul leap for joy, as
often as they be brought and received, Psalm. 119.54.
and are so far from cloying and being wearisome, that they be matter of song
even to Kings, yea and without them their lives are but troublesome and full of
fears; Oh that these should not most affect them, even when they are thus in
their prime, it is doublely to be lamented.

But let us weigh the words, even all sorts of us. Long ago (he says) they
would have repented. If we desire to profit aright by them, then we should
resolve with our selves, that we should not stay and linger behind, when the
Gospel comes first to be soundly preached amongst us, suffering who so
lists to go before us, in the hearty embracing of it, but as the people did
in John Baptist time, to receive it with violence, and as it were with
greedines, laboring to go before others therein; and as soon as we perceive
the benefit that is offered thereby, which is, that we may find the pearl;
then to lay to buy it forthwith, and get it as our own, that we and ours may
be ever after enriched thereby.

We should not like ill husbands forslow the time, or as careless chapmen, let
go a good peniworth, least letting pass the opportunity, we come not to the
like offer again. The Apostle wishing Timothy to preach in season and out of
season, 2. Tim. 4.2.
because in time the people will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their
ears itching, shall after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers; does
by the same reasons, advise the hearers, that they take the opportunity to
hear and embrace the truth, and sound doctrine while they may, and therefore
especially at the first. And so they shall be able afterward, when others begin
to loath it, and so fall into the dangers that the Apostle would have wise men
to prevent and avoid; they shall be able again, I affirm, to say with joy;
we have laid our foundation already, we have believed and repented (as our
Savior would have it) long ago, and we will not alter our judgment and
practice for any other.

There are three especial causes, Three causes why we should hasten our
repentance.
why all should have to repent at the first hearing, so soon as they can be
able to discern the authority and power of the word? Mat. 20.5.6.
but the Lord calls at the ninth and eleventh hour, which refuse to come at
the seventh: but who is so desperate, as to ieopard his happiness by so bold
an adventure? seeing the wicked and the deceivers wax worse and worse? 2. Tim.
3.13.
and he that is not fit to be urged to day is like to be less fit to morrow.
For who knows that he shall have mind or means, or if he have both, yet
whither he shall have opportunity by health and freedom from pain and
diseases, to use and enjoy them? And although he do, yet whether the Lord will
bless them?

In all which respects the wise man adulseth thus; Remember thy maker (O man)
in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
whiles the evil days come not, nor the years approach, in which thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them. I have (I deny not) seen the ignorant and
careless, who have not been able to discern and consider what they do, in
neglecting and refusing the benefit of the Gospel offered them, I have seen
such (I say) to have bin brought to repentance, and that God has not called
their sin to remembrance against them: though many even of them yet, have
never found it so.

Psalm. 84.11.
Seeing one day in the house of God, is better than a thousand in any estate
whatsoever out of a godly life. And thus it should be, seeing thus it might be
with a man: that so he may enjoy, even all his life long, the most sweet peace
of God which passes all understanding, (though not without tribulation in the
flesh) which no unbeliever nor impenitent person can taste of, his rejoicing
being only momentany and deceitful.

Luke 15.7.
whom our Savior affirms to rejoice thereat: and besides, the sooner we
shall be fit to teach the ways of God to sinners, Psalm. 51.14.
and help to convert the wicked unto him, when we shall our selves be able to
rejoice in our salvation, being made assured thereof by his holy spirit. And
who would lie idle from so great employment, to draw sinners unto God, Dan.
12.3.
when we read, that they who win many shall shine as the stars for ever
and over.

Cant. 1.4.
Three causes why the repentant estate is in so mean account.
as the Church complains, I am black (O ye daughters of Jerusalem,) that is,
disfigured with troubles; therefore the bad world shunneth and despises her:
For which she answers in the Prophet Micha. Rejoice not at me (O mine enemy:
for though I am fallen, yet shall I rise again, Micah. 7.8.
and I will bear my punishment because I have sinned. And yet when they, such
Despisers I mean, and their like are afflicted, and the godly in prosperity,
they think them the only happy people.

Secondly, they narrowly observe the slips and infirmities of Gods servants,
and make them odious, and are ready to take hurt by them, but the good course
of their life they regard not, neither think that they need to follow them
therein. Nay shall I say as the truth is? If the godly keep a narrow watch
over their ways, oh then they be too precise for them to keep company with,
they say: and on the otherside, if they slip offensiuely at any time, nay if
they be but reported of to have done so, be it true or false, they cry out in
another manner thus; oh, these be your professors, do you not see what fruits
they bring forth? So, they who are purposed to take no good by them, can
always lay stops in their own way, and while they be at that point, it is no
marvel though they set not much by repentance, which is that whereof Gods
people have their name that they be called repentant or godly.

The third reason why such have the godly life in no better account and
reckoning, is, for that they know little (nay they are far off from it) what
joy and comfort it brings with it, neither the sweet and holy peace which
they who live godly do enjoy. For Solomon truly sets down, that he that is
a stranger from the life of Gods people, Prou. 14.10. Reuelat. 14.3.
shall not be partaker of their joy. Neither, as S. John says, can any know,
what that song means, which makes the godly merry and joyful; but
themselves which are the Lords redeemed ones, which if they did know, they
would (as our Savior said to the woman of Samaria) first have asked it of him,
John 4.10.
as the thing that is most precious, Hebr. 11.25.
and would have preferred it before the pleasures of sin, which (yet) last
but for a season. And this be said of the second point in the second part,
namely of repenting betimes.

Now this repenting which Christ here speaks of, The last point in the
second part.
what it is, (which is the last point in this second part) this (I say) let us
examine a little, and so make an end. His words are these, they would have
repented in sackcloth and ashes. This must needs be (as we may well gather by
his own words) a matter of great importance. And that the repenting which men
commonly so call, is nothing less then that which he here means and
speaks of. For the Lord Jesus in saying, They would have repented in
sackcloth and ashes, means, that they would have done it heartily and
soundly; as these outward ceremonies did testify such a thing. And he speaks
so, because it was well known to them, to whom he spoke, that they who
repented unfeignedly in times past, showed it that way, though he did not
thereby justify all to be truly penitent, that used these ceremonies.

Repentance must be sound, not hypocritical.
Therefore according to his meaning, let us learn this: that when we make
account that we do repent, let us see that it be true and hearty, not fained
and hypocritical. And therein we must see, that we be settled and stablished,
not flitting, nor off and on, as the manner of the most is, to offer to God
such cracked half service. Now as by repentance here, he means the whole
conversion of a man, which consists in the prick of conscience, faith in
Gods promises, and care of amendment of life; so must men's repentings be, and
not be patched and pieced with shreds and rags of our own devising, but
current and approved, having all these three parts in it. For else as a ragge
it will soon wear away, whereas it is to be preserved, vpholden and
continued, and the longer we live, to be better testified that it is true and
unfeigned indeed.

And thus do and prosper: such a foundation laid, shall be fit to be builded
upon proportionablie, and when we have thus begun, in the same manner go we
forward, till we and all other that list, may see, that our repentance is that
which is not to be repented of. And for want of this, as they who did never
rightly begin, shall have nothing whereof they may rejoice, whatsoever their
shows be: so they who have begun well; yet without such a proceeding, shall
ever be ready to stagger, and to doubt whether they did ever rightly begin to
believe and repent or no, which, who does not see, what a continual
disquietnes and discomfort it breeds? whereas they who are settled and
commendablie go forward, shall hold the confidence and rejoicing of their hope
unto the end. And this of the whole.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS UPON ACTS 9.31.
Then had the Churches rest through all Judea, and Galilie, and Samaria, and
were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord and the comfort of the holy
Ghost, were multiplied.
Having in some of the former Sermons taught that Christians should pass the
whole time of their dwelling here in holy fear of offending God, and namely,
The opening of the text.
that part of their life which is passed in outward peace and prosperity,
(which blessing of God the most part do greatly abuse;) I thought it both
very pertinent, and also profitable, to show and set down some examples of
such as have done so; and examples not of one man, two or three, but of whole
particular Churches, who may be paternes of well using outward peace, and rest
from persecution, and trouble to the worlds end. Here therefore, in this text I
mean, (to lay out the meaning thereof,) you may see people of no long
continuance (for the most of them) in the profession of the Gospel, who as
they had been hardly holden under of trouble and persecution, in all the three
places of Judea, Samaria and Galily, and yet revolted not from their religion,
neither fainted in their hope; so now, when God gave them a breathing time (as
it were) of outward peace and rest from their former persecution, they
neglected not the occasion offered them, but took the opportunity to benefit
themselves in the practice of godliness, to their high commendation, and to
the example of all posterity that should come after them. For they used all
good means both in communion and meeting together publicly and privately, by
hearing the Apostles doctrine, and conference of the same, and every one by
himself in reading and prayer, to set themselves forward therein.

And by these and such like means they builded up themselves in saving and
effectual knowledge, in faith, hope, patience, love, and other graces of God,
and rested not there, but also showed the same forth in their lives before men,
with great joy of heart to themselves. Neither was this their holy and heavenly
course without fruit, for the Lord blessed it abundantly to the praise of his
name in the conversion of many. For so it is said in the text, that they were
multiplied, that is, the number of them who were believers in Christ, was
increased; the Lord adding unto them, that is, to the Church, through the good
example which they gave; many, even of the bad sort, which lived among them.
And so the word (multiplied) is to be understood, as in the original tongue
most clearly may appear; and not as it is taken in some translations, that is
to say, that they were multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost: for that
alters the sense of the place, which is this, as I have said; that the
faithful were multiplied, increased in number; other who had been unbelievers
before, being brought to the faith; and not as the translaters take it, that
the comfort of the faithful was multiplied. Thus much be said for the
coherence of this text with the former, and for the laying out of the meaning
of it.

The parts of it, two.
Now follow the parts of it, and they are generally two. The one is the setting
down of the state of these Churches, of Judea, Samaria and Galilie at that
time, namely, that they were not under persecution, as a while before they had
been; but they had rest from it. The other part is the use that was made of it
amongst them. The use of this peace or rest from persecution, was made by two
sorts of people^ the one was the faithful and believers: the other, those
which believed not. The use that the faithful made of it, was threefold; the
one, that they for their own parts grew in grace and in the gifts of God. For
it is said, they were edified, that is, builded up: if ye ask wherein? the
answer is, in faith and the fruits of it; as Jude in his Epistle wrote to the
Churches, Jude 19.
that they should be builded up in their most holy faith. The second use they
made of their peace, was, that they did show forth the same grace and faith in
their lives before men: for so it is said, they walked (through the course of
their lives) in the fear of the Lord. The third was, they did by both provide
and procure to themselves a sweet and a sound comfort in their lives, (which
few here enjoy:) for so it is said, they were comforted by the holy Ghost. The
use the bad sort and unbelievers made of it, was this, that they learned by the
examples of the other, to embrace the Gospel, and to be good in that time of
rest from persecution, and became followers of the Churches; for they would not
have been multiplied, if the other had not been added to them.

But to begin; before I speak of outward peace and rest from persecution,
first let it be marked, First, the state of the Churches. 1. Under the cross.
that those Churches were before this, under persecution: to teach us, that
although God love his people dearly, and can afford them his good benefits of
all sorts in this life, as he bestowed the best upon these; yet he sees it
good, to exercise them with sundry afflictions, as he says, whom I love, I
correct. Reuelat. 3.19.
And seeing Saint Peter says, he does not this, Hebr. 12.5 1. Pet. 1.6.
but when need is (for he does nothing needlessely, nor without cause)
therefore we must know, that it is needful, that it should be so: yea and
that also, though they be sharp and fiery. The Lord knows what is best for
every one of us. And it is meet, that we should be well persuaded hereof also;
both because we do so soon shrink back, at the very hearing, that any
crosses are coming toward us, and also for that we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven by bearing our part in them.

And for these causes, and for that they are laid on us by him who does all
things well, and for the good of his; therefore we must both stoop to them
willingly, and look up to him who has smitten us, that he may heal us. Romans
8.2^.
And the Lord shows us many other reasons, why he leaves us thus to be
subject to many tribulations, though he be not bound to show us any: even for
that we be not fit to use prosperity well a^y long time together, and therefore
that we may not be poisoned therewith, and so perish with the world thereby,
he weaneth us from the baits thereof by afflictions. The use of this is of two
sorts. John 6.33.
as Christ's doctrine teaches when he foretells that in the world we shall
have tribulation; and as Jobs example incourageth, Job.
who in the midst of his prosperity, did look for his change. take up our
cross daily, Luke 9.23.
and that with a willing and ready mind, as in Luke 9.23. we are taught* and
pray, that we may do so, to the end our joy may be all, Iam. 1.2.
as S. James promises it shall be, if we receive them in that manner. And this
for the first point.

Secondly, in prosperity.
As we have heard that these Churches had been under persecution, so yet, now it
appears that they had rest from it, at this time here mentioned. Whereby God
would have us learn, Hos. 6.2. Psalm. 30.5. Psalm. 125.3.
that he does not afflict long, but as Hosea speaks, after three days, that
is after a short time, he will return and deliver: and so though heaviness
endure for a night, yet joy shall come in the morning. For he will not suffer
the rod of the wicked, to lie always upon the lot of the righteous, lest they
should reach forth their hand to iniquity: But further he blesses them often and
sundry ways, more then is easily perceived; both that it may be seen that
godliness is not without reward, no, not in this life, and also that God can
afford good things unto his servants, though he sometime afflict them.

And to come to particulars, he gives freedom from persecution, and sends
outward peace, whereby we may live safely, 1. King. 4.25.
under our vine, and under our figtree, as it was in the days of Solomon.
Which benefit if we have so long enjoyed, and yet cannot price it in any sort,
according to the value of it, but count it common; we may ask of them who are
or have been in the heat of persecution, who can readily tell, how much this
peace and rest from persecution is worth, The benefit of prosperity and peace.
how many precious liberties it holds from us, and how many good things it
depriueth us of: All which we partake, who have freedom from that persecution,
and enjoy this outward peace which I speak of. Among the which, these are none
of the smallest, that as we enjoy our habitation peaceably thereby; so we
have the benefit of the utterance of our commodities, and the exchange of our
wares, and safe traveling from place to place; all which bring freedom from
fear, and other unquietness. And, which makes all these to be sauourie, and to
be enjoyed with more sweetness by this freedom from persecution, where we live
under a Magistrate, that is a maintainer and defender of true religion; we
enjoy also the benefit of the Gospel truly preached, which is the pearl so
highly prized by our Savior. Math. 13.45.
Whereas in domestical at home, and foreign war abroad, as also in
persecution, all these commodities are wanting. In the book of Judges we
read, that when there was no King in Israel, every man did what seemed good in
his own eyes. Judge. 17.6.
In the days of Iael the high ways were unoccupied, Judge. 5.7.
and the travelers walked in by-waies, for fear of the enemies, the towns
were not inhabited. And in the desolation of Jerusalem, as we read in the
Lamentations, she was left solitary, Judah was carried away captive: the ways
of Zion lamented, Lam. 1.1.4.
because no man came to the solemn feasts, Psalm. 42.4.
as they had been wont to come up with mirth and joy, all her persecuters took
her in the streights. By which it may be seen what a benefit, peace and
freedom from persecution is: which should cause us when we may enjoy them, to
study to do all the good that we may possibly, in them; which only is to
make the right use of them. And so did the Churches here, when they had them
but a while.

But what have we done in the golden days of our peace, for these fifty full
years inioyed? It may truly be said, it has bin worse with the most part,
then if they had bin wanting. For then should there never have such foul and
horrible sins bin committed, as through and by means of peace and
prosperity, al places well nigh have been tainted with. Besides many have never
the more peace with God, brawling and railing even betwixt man and wife: nor
with themselves, which is most devilish. What quietness have many, but when
they have what they would, and while their lusts be satisfied (which peace
forsakes them in every blast of affliction) else, they are ever unquiet, and
vexed within themselves, for every thing that goes against them. But seeing
the uses of outward peace are set down in the text, I will follow that, in the
laying out of them.

The second part. What use the godly made of their peace. 1. They were edified.
To begin with them therefore, it is said first, that they did edify and build
up themselves. In what? It must needs be, that the holy Ghost meant in such
inward grace, as enabled them to show it forth outwardly in their lives before
men, as the fear of God, knowledge, faith, hope, care to please God, and such
like; in which, it is said after, they walked amongst men. And therefore
outward duties cannot be meant thereby, seeing the performing of them was
another use of their peace, spoken of afterward severally by it self. And how
did they build up themselves thus in grace? It was by using all holy means for
that purpose, both public and private, as the hearing of the Apostles
doctrine, praying, and using other godly fellowship together. So that this is
as much as if it were said, that they used all diligence, and armed themselves
now while God gave them this little breathing from persecution; that so by
their confidence, pure heart, good conscience, love, and patience, and other
grace, they might be fit to lead a godly life in the world with ease, and
strengthen themselves against falls, and the baits of sin on every side. And
it is manifest to all of us who can judge, that by such means, and a sound
ministry, watching, praying, and the like; the Church of God can grow in
grace, and no otherwise. And that they did thus it is apparent, by that which
we read in the second of the Acts, Acts 2 43.
where it is said, that they were daily in the temple, and continued in the
Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and prayer.

And this use should all true particular Churches and people of God make of
their liberty of peace, and of living free from persecution. From the which
God has a long time freed many of his good servants in this age, howsoever
some are much and often under the cross, yea and that right heavy and sharp;
such therefore should glorify God by bringing forth fruit, not in a common
sort, yea al possible good should be done of them, and not omitted. For as for
private lets, and those which are usual; may more easily be overcome (either
inward corruptions, or outward ill examples, or other discouragements) as long
as the word of God may have free passage to be sincerely preached.

But if outward peace alone be counted so great a benefit, and such holy and
fruitful use made of it, Moses says, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
that we must serve the Lord with all ioyfulnesse and a good heart, for the
abundance of all good things. The meditations of such men's hearts should be
acceptable to God, Psalm 19.14.
and to follow the metaphor of building used here, a little; the people that
is so blessed of God, should do as builders are wont: that is, to pull down
the ruinous corners, and set up new frames in their rooms: so should Gods
servants pluck down the old ruins, and breaches of their corrupt hearts, as
anger, wrath, impatience, bitterness, and such like unclean lusts, and set up
mercy, tenderheartednesse, love, zeal, faith and such like.

Yea and more particularly, How all sorts should be occupied in the time of
their peace.
according to the diverse ages of Gods children, they should exercise
themselves: that is to say, the tender consciences and young beginners should
have their thoughts and meditations about the favor of God, desiring above all
things to be assured of it: the middle aged Christians, and such as are
somewhat stayed in faith and the fear of God, should chiefly be occupied in
striving against their lusts, and fighting with them: the ancient and
experienced, who have done both these; should much be taken up in calling to
mind, what they have heard of Gods manner of dealing in guiding his Church, and
the fruit thereof, and in declaring to other, and what they have seen and
found themselves worth the reporting, to be in the serving of God, that thereby
they may be encouraged to walk fruitfully and circumspectly still, as they did
long before, and not to be led away from their stedfastnes in their Christian
course, 2. Pet. 3.17.
by the error of the wicked, as having found that course by long proof, to
have been the most gainful of all other unto them. These uses and the like,
all sorts and ages of Gods people, ought to make of Gods blessings toward
them, and of freedom from trouble.

The right use of peace little looked after.
But do the people of this age thus? (for that were a kind use of peace, and his
other benefits, and would well become them). No, for in this land these fifty
years now fully passed, what knowledge might have been? so that one might have
been able to teach another, and there might have been that grace of the spirit,
which might have seasoned Christians hearts no less sensibly then the dew
does moisten the mountains. So that our Church might have been a pattern to
others, as the Thessalonians were examples to all that believed in Macedonia
and Achaia, 1 Thessalonians. 1.7.
and it might now have been verified, if ever in any age since the Apostles
time, that out of the bellies of believers might have flowed rivers of waters
of life; John 7.38.
whereas (except some persons here and there) there is great ignorance,
unfaithfulness, hollownesse, security, uncharitableness, maliciousness, and
what not of that kind? I speak not of the disorders of life (for they are more
fitly to be reproved in the next use, which the Churches made of their peace)
but of the gross distemperatures of the heart: for although these times of
prosperity and peace, have been the fittest seasons for men to increase in
goodness and grace; even as the harvest is to gather in the corn: yet whether
we enquire into particular Churches or persons, we shall find nothing more true
then this; that peace and plenty have poisoned (for the most part) the
enioyers of them.

Even Gods children are over taken with this sin.
But if the people of God, whom I teach now to make this use of his blessings,
were not wound in by the devils cunning sleights among the rest of the world,
it were the less marvel: but even they cannot be sholed out from them, but
have their teeth set on edge with their courses by living among them, and
beholding how they run headlong into all excess, by means of their
prosperity; so that even they forget their covenant made with God, that is,
that they should endeavor to use soberly in this present world, all their
lawful liberties, till with shame and sorrow afterward, they are feign to
return again to repentance. And thus many even of them not holding government
over their hearts, break out into offensive life, and become eye-sores to
their brethren, who will not be pent in, to keep the bounds of vnoffensiue
walking, till experience constrain them to wish they had been wiser, and
before their straying out so far, to have kept themselves well, while they were
well. And this teaches us, that Moses saw good cause to give this warning to
Gods people, when they were to go to the land flowing in abundance of Gods
blessings, out of the barren wilderness, saying, When the Lord has brought
you into that land, Deuteronomy. 6.10.
with great and goodly cities which ye builded not, and houses full of all
manner of goods, which ye filled not; and wells dug which ye dug not,
and vineyards and olive trees, which ye planted not; and when ye have eaten and
are full; beware lest you forget the Lord which brought you out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Now to make use of this in few words, Ministers faulty herein.
both we of the Ministry first, and then you the people; consider how little
the like admonition has prevailed with many of us. For to speak of our selves
first, how many, when they were scholars in the Universities, have taught
themselves and others, (as I have heard it from some of them, my self being
then a scholar in the College) that a student having a bed, a table, 2. King.
4.10.
a stool, and a candlestick to furnish his chamber, meaning necessary
implements and provision, should attend diligently to his book, and to the
duties of his calling, as having so good encouragement. And so have many done
there, very commendablie to the good example of others, and the benefit and
comfort of many; who (yet) when they have afterward been conveniently placed in
the country, with large provision, and good allowance, entering upon livings,
which they never toiled themselves, nor paid for, (I speak of such, for else
their sin is double) when (I say) they have bin thus bountifully provided
for, they have not made their study and care of preaching for the peoples
salvation, their geatest delight, (which yet if I know any thing, or if they
taught well in their Colleges) should have been: the Apostle teaching such, 1.
Tim. 4.13.
that they should attend to reading, that so they may the better attend to
exhortation and doctrine.

But they have, as commodity has come in, and waxen sweet, as fast laid aside
their duty of labor, and care taking in their Ministry, and have embraced
the world with Demas, 2. Tim. 4.10.
they soon became unfit to draw others out of the world, who lay drowned in it
themselves, but rather by their example, held them faster in it, and so have
decayed in their fervent zeal and love of preaching, and in other gifts of
God, that they rightly verified the Scripture, Luke 8.18.
which says, from him that has not, that is, who uses not well the gifts
which he has, shall be taken away, even that which he has; at least, that
which it seems he has. And this without standing long upon it, proves that
many of us Ministers, have not made this first use of our many blessings of
God, which the Churches here mentioned made of their peace and freedom from
persecution.

People also justly reproved.
Now to say somewhat of the people who fear God, what use they have made of
prosperity and the blessings of God, what great commendation think we, may be
made of it? For excepting some few, Psalm.
who may truly be called Gods remembrancers, who as Moses; stand in the gap,
to hold the wrath of God from breaking in more furiously upon us, by their
daily and fervent prayers, and care that they have, for the peace and welfare
of Sion (the number of whom God vouchsafe to multiply among us): besides those
few (I say) what great matter can be said of the rest? For even the most of
them, who have the Gospel preached among them both purely and painfully, what
hearty love have they to it? what power has it over their affections? how few
are cast into the mould of it, to be made humble, lowly, upright, innocent,
zealous, merciful, kind; and on the contrary to cast up the unsavory gorge
of their rebellious corruptions?

Oh how few of them have plied the means with such reverence and diligence,
that they may testify that they have grown in knowledge, faith and other
grace, but have rather employed themselves wholly about the flitting and
vanishing profits and pleasures of this present life, as though they had not
been borne to far more excellent ends and purposes? Oh how do many forget
themselves, when they thus lie drowned therein, till God do by some great
afflictions draw them out of them to true repentance, and thus trifle out a
deal of precious time, which should have been redeemed to far better and
more precious uses.

And thus it appears how far both Ministers and people are from making this
use that the Churches did, of their peace, although they have many other
blessings withal. And yet as little as it troubles them, it may easily be
seen what a great sin it is, as many other ways, so this one especially,
that the devil himself affirms, that it is no marvel though such fear God
more then others, who live in prosperity, and are free from sore afflictions:
for thus he says, (when God commended Job, as a man that feared God and
departed from evil Does Job fear God for naught? Have thou not been a
bulwark to him? thou have blessed the work of his hand, Job 1.9.
and his substance is increased in the land: whereby we may see, that they have
much to come against them, who in their prosperity serve not God. And this be
said of the first use of peace and freedom from persecution, and what we ought
to learn thereby.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
The second use of their peace. They walked in the fear of God.
TO proceed now, the second use which these Churches made of their peace,
follows; and it is this: that they approved themselves to men outwardly by
walking in the fear of God, as they were before commended for growing in grace
inwardly before God: they professed that they feared God, by living godly
through the whole course of their lives. The fear of God is an excellent gift
of God, and a strong bridle to hold from sin: I mean not that terrible
fear, which the spirit of bondage works, Romans 8.15.
but that child-like fear that Solomon speaks of, Prou. 28.13.
saying, Blessed is the man that fears always. This fear to prevent sin
to come, and trembling for sin past, are as the two eyelids to the eyes, to
keep away danger from the soul. Prou. 15.
And this fear is the beginning of wisdom, and the continuance of it is the
continuance of wisdom; Deuteronomy. 5.29.
and if this be wanting, all grace is wanting also.

To walk in the fear of God, what.
But to walk in this fear of God, is a further thing. For that is a showing
before men that we have it, and a reaching out of the fruit of it, and a
declaring of the beauty and excellency of it, in the sight of men. For it
must not only be in us, but professed of us, that we are not ashamed to
testify to all, that we fear to offend, how little conscience soever others
make of duty, and that we are content to hear of it, if any can convict us of
the contrary: which I say not, as though we should seek to seem better then
we are, (which hypocrisy God abhors) but yet that we should be lights unto
others, 2. Cor. 12.6. Matthew. 5.16. Act. 23.1.
as we are commanded; and as Paul professed of himself, saying, among those
who had accused him: I have in all good conscience served God until this day.

And in this fear of God Joseph declares that he walked as throughout his
life, so at those times when he had sore tentations to the contrary; one, when
his whorish mistress did so vehemently allure him to wickedness, whom he
resisted by the help hereof, saying, Genesis 39 9.
how can I do this great evil and so sin against God? The other when his
brethren after their fathers death feared that he would be revenged upon them,
to whom he answered, am not I under God? Genesis 50.19.
or do not I fear God? as if he should have said, dare I by any such doings
provoke God? So that by all this which has bin said, it may easily be
gathered, that we are not to rest contented with the well ordering of our
hearts alone, but we must also testify it, by the government of our lives.

And this is the second use that these Churches made of their peace, and rest
from persecution, which is commended by the holy Ghost to all true Christians
to follow them in, and to teach them, that when God enlarges their liberties,
and multiplieth his blessings upon them, they should not, as the men of the
world do, eat and drink, and sleep, and play, as though they should never be
called to their account for the mispending of their time, and the ill using of
his benefits: but rather they should know, first that all Gods good blessings
are talents committed to them of their heavenly father, and therefore that they
should occupy them carefully and faithfully, till he come to demand how they
have used them, and what good they have done with them. And secondly, that they
should consider, that it is the very end why God has freed them from many
great calamities, and set them at more liberty then sundry others of their
brethren, to the end that they may thus honor him with a godly and a
fruitful life, which they that want them, can hardly do. So that although he
is not a Christian, who is only one in outward show, as Paul speaks of the
Jew: Romans 2.28.
yet whatsoever inward grace men have, it must be testified by forsaking all
sin outward, and by a godly life, both in their word and deed.

This did that noble governor Joshua with high commendation regard, and this
use he made of Gods favors, that as in godly zeal and other grace inward he
excelled others, so he professed boldly, that whatsoever others did, in and
about their religion; Ios. 24.15.
he and his house would serve the Lord. And the example of David was whiles he
lived, of great force, and to this day an example worthy to be followed. Who
when he saw, 2. Sam. 7.2.
that God had given him rest from his enemies on every side, he could not tell
how he might sufficiently rest and content himself in showing himself
thankful, and therefore resolved to build an house even a temple to the
Lord, for all the people to worship him in. And al such as have duly
considered, and thoroughly weighed Gods loving, kindness to them, have ever
thought it their duty to consecrate themselves wholly both soul and body, (as
the Apostle also wishes, and earnestly exhorts, Romans 12.1.
) unto the Lord.

Which practice in men, as it is the most beautiful sight to behold, (as
Balaam was constrained to say of Gods people, how goodly are thy tents, Number.
24.9.
O Jacob, and thine habitations, O Israel, so it is blessed to themselves who
are such, and to those who wish well to them, according to another of his
prophecies, where he says, blessed is he that blesses thee and cursed is he
that curses thee.

But do we make this use of our peace and other favors of God which we enjoy?
to profess our selves such as endeavor to walk vnoffensiuely and without
reproof, in the midst of a froward generation which hates to be reformed?
And they who go indeed for believing Christians, and are so counted, do they
glory in nothing more then in glorifying God? 1 Timothy 4.12.
Then should their innocence break forth as the light, and their vprightnes
shine as the noone tide. Then should such be examples in communication and
conversation, to the shame of their enemies and accusers. As God be thanked
some do, and yet acknowledge themselves in humility to be far from that they
ought to be, that is, unprofitable servants. But howsoever they who believe in
Christ, are careful to do good works as occasion shall be offered, yet if
they should not be commended, till the ignorant and profane should do it, they
were not only like to go away with little allowance, but even with great
disgrace and reproach: seeing they count the best, the worst, and have no other
cause to speak il of them then this, that they be so unlike themselves in
evil, As S. Peter says; therefore they speak evil of such, 1. Pet. 4.4.
because they walk not after the same excess of riot, that they do. But (to
say no more of this) it may appear, that they which make right use of their
peace, and other sweet benefits, which God bestows upon them, are herein
commendable, that they not only have the fear of God in their hearts, but
they are as careful to walk in it, through the whole course of their lives.

It follows in the next words, The third use. The comfort they found, as a
fruit of the two former.
that as they walked in the fear of the Lord, so did they also In the comfort
of the holy Ghost. For so are the words to be red, as I have said before, not
as in some translation they are set down, namely thus: (And were multiplied by
the comfort of the holy Ghost) but they ought not so to be taken, neither is
this reading according to the Greek copy. Therefore to follow the first
translation, the third use that they made of their peace is set down, namely
that they passed their days, and walked through them comfortably, and in joy
and gladness of heart. And in these words note two things. The one is the use
they made of their peace, namely that they lived comfortably. The other; how or
by what means they did so: for we know that all such as live in peace, and
have rest from persecution, do not for all that, live comfortably. Two things
to be observed here.
The means whereby they obtained it was their godly life, for they building up
themselves in grace, and walking in the fear of the Lord, did thereby obtain
this also, to live comfortably.

By the first of these two, we all, The first, that they lived a comfortable
life.
who profess the fear of God, are taught to make this use of our freedom
from great affliction and trouble; to live joyfully, and to delight our selves
in the Lord, and in his al sufficiency. Which thing one would think, is more
then God would afford us. For there is no greater blessing inioyed in our
life, then to rejoice aright, and to live comfortably, we see how greedily al
earthly, delight and pleasure is laid for, and embraced: and yet it is all but
a shadow of this that I speak of, even as this holy and heavenly joy is but a
glimpse and taste of that which is eternal. And but that the Lord has given
this liberty, nay commandment, to seek this joy, we might easily be
persuaded, that it is above our reach, and not to be inioyed of us in this vale
of misery wherein we live. And yet as great a gift, and as precious as it is,
he is forced to hire us to it by promises and encouragements, Psalm. 37.4.
as in the Psalm, saying: delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee
thine hearts desire: As though he would show, that of our selves, we hasted
not after it, Phil. 4.4.
but held back from it. Also Saint Paul to the Philippians thus writes, so
that men be willing to rejoice in the Lord, and so to embrace the true joy,
they may hold it as long as they will, even always without loosing. The which
two Scriptures if they be duly considered, do show, that although the people
of this world prefer the vain pleasures of this life before the best things,
yet of Gods servants this spiritual and holy rejoicing is principally to be
regarded, and cared for. And that does so much the more commend the examples
and practice of these Churches, for yt in the time of their peace, they so
labored this point, namely, to seek for the joy which the holy Ghost
works, insomuch that their commendation is set down unto all posterity. And
to say the truth, what should more be regarded of us, then to follow their
example, and to provide, whiles we may live in outward peace in the world, that
we may be comforted in God and make our days, which otherwise are evil, to be
pleasant and sweet, by abiding in his love, which makes all things sauoury and
sweet, which we go about, or take in hand? Ioh. 15.10.12.


Men neglect the sweet liberty that God offers for that which is worse then
nothing.
And if we neglected so weighty commandments as this is, that we should rejoice
in the Lord, If (I say) we neglected this for greater and weightier causes, it
were another matter, but what is of like weight unto it? or what is to be so
much desired, as that we may live in sound comfort from day to day? whereas
yet, we who lose our part therein, (which with Gods good allowance and liking
we might enjoy,) we cast it away and reject it for moon shine in the water,
as they say, even for nothing, nay for less then nothing, even for the
pleasing of our selves in that, which is not a shadow of pleasure to him that
can judge, and thereby make our selves as ridiculous as Esau, who for his
belly, lost the greatest benefit, Genesis 25.33.34. Heb. 12.16.
and for a mess of pottage, the kingdom of heaven. For if we duly consider
it, what is it that men prefer before this precious jewel of sound joy, Heb.
11.24.
but the pleasures of sin which yet last but for a season? as whorishnes,
deceiving, and oppressing, envy, revenge, etc. which are properly so called:
the dreaming of the painted felicity of this world, and drowning themselves in
it, till they be merely besides themselves by it, though I say not for all
this, that dealings in the world, be in their own nature, evil.

A man would think, that except people were bewitched, What need we have of
spiritual comfort.
they meeting with so many calamities, as make their lives even wearisome to
the^, and bring themselves to their wits end, should seek out, if there were
not some way to abate their sorrows and vexations, and if they know how and
can find any, then to ease themselves speedily without any stay. Also, when
they see, that they walk among many poisoned allurements, which they cannot
but be snared, and deceived with; and yet sting as the serpent and Cockatrice,
when they have their fill of them, who would think, but when by experience
they had found it so, that they would be wise after, and beware of being in
like manner carried to their accustomed baits, being their bane? but being
stung, a man would think they would seek to be healed; especially knowing
that there is such a sovereign medicine, as this heavenly comfort is, that I
speak of, to heal al anoyance whatsoever, yea and is it self able to give
them contentment above all other delights.

But when they shall not have wisdom to help themselves against these two so
sore anoyances, namely; calamities, to moderate and assuage them, and vain
pleasures, to renounce them, (as this one rejoicing in God will do both,) what
wilfulnes or rather madness may it be accounted? And yet if it were the case of
professed evil men only to do thus, it might be the less marueiled at; but
when better then they, yea even such as desire to be reckoned among the best,
shall thus be besotted, and thus disguise themselves, to think, that because
they live among the^ that do so, they must needs be like unto them: how can
this be sufficiently bewailed?

Now if we have not this care and wisdom, to provide well for our selves when we
may, and to seek to serve God with joy and gladness, (without the which our
life is not so much as a shadow of a life, but the best that can be inioyed, is
but a dainty misery,) how are we like to care for others; our own especially,
to the which (yet) we are straightly bound by the commandment of God? But of
this use of their peace, namely that they atteined thereby to a sweet and
comfortable life, and how we by their example should make the like use of ours,
thus much.

The second ^how and by what means they atteined to such a comfortable life
The next point to be considered (as in the entering into this third use was
mentioned) is, how and by what means they made this use of it. For all have
not this sound comfort in their lives, who are free from persecution, and have
outward peace in the world. And how this came to pass, is showed in the text:
namely, that they builded up themselves in grace, and walked in the fear of
the Lord, and hereby were comforted by the holy Ghost, which, to set it down
more plainly, is thus much. They lived godly, and therefore they lived sweetly
and comfortably. This point though it be most clear in it self; yet the
blind multitude are of a contrary judgment, yea they fight, with tooth and
nail, (as they say) against it; upholding among them, that the pleasant life
has no greater enemy then godliness, and therefore this must be well proved.
The godly life is the only sweetlife.


To this purpose, read that saying of David to Solomon his son a little
before his death. His words are these. I go the way of all the world, 2. King.
2.2.
be strong therefore and take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk
in his ways, and keep his statutes, commandments and judgments, and his
testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in
all that thou do, and in every thing whereunto thou turnest thee, what does
he here teach to be the direct way to prosper, but the looking to the charge
which God gives, that is, to live godly? And what differs his speech from the
Lords own word in Deuetronomie? Deuteronomy. 5.28.29.
For thus he says, this people has said well all that they have said. But
oh that there were such an heart in them, that they did fear me, and keep all
my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and their children
for ever. Lo, what is men's prospering, joy, or well liking in their lives, but
that which rises from hence, that they resolve to live godly? Agreeing with
that which Paul speaks; This is our rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1.12.
even the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
pureness, we have our conversation in the world.

By all which testimonies it is clear, that the godly and Christian life is
the only sweet and comfortable life, which is worthy to be marked to the shame
of all such, as bark against the innocent and holy servants of God,

And this comfort is so much the more precious by this, that it may continue,
and cannot be taken from us; according to that which our Savior says, John
16.22.
This joy shall no man take from you. And further also, because the godless can
have no part in it, neither be partakers of it. For so says Saint John,
Reuelat. 14.3.
None knew what that song meant, but the hundred and four and forty thousand
which were redeemed from the earth. And so says Solomon: The heart knows the
bitterness of his soul, Prou. 14.10.
and the stranger shall not medale with his joy. But this be said of the third
use which the Churches made of their peace; and consequently of all the three
uses that the godly made thereof.

Now it follows, to see how even the bad sort used it. The use that the bad
made of peace.
For the holy Ghost teaching that the Churches increased and were multiplied,
shows that it was by this that they were added unto them, and brought into
the way of salvation, who were before far from it. They were converted to
God, and joined to his people.
As if he should say, even the bad, while the Churches had rest, were moved
and drawn by the examples of the godly, to follow them and to do as they did:
that is to say, they heard the word of God, and they joined themselves in
fellowship with them, and the Lord wrought thereby in such wise, that they
disclaimed their former evil course, and were converted unto him.

This is a most famous and notable example, to teach even the bad how they
should behave themselves in the days of peace, and what use God looks, that
even they should make of it. They have not liberty to live as they list, nor
to trifle out their precious time as though neither any good were to be done in
it, and as though they should give no account how they have passed it. But that
they should look upon them whom God has set as examples among them, to be
moved thereby, to be out of love with their own course, and to like the good
which they see in them, and long to have their part in it.

For to this end, does the Lord raise up many good examples in sundry places,
and gives them ofttimes peace, to the end that when they have both these, with
the pure preaching of the Gospel, they may have nothing to complain of, why
they should not embrace the Christian course, as others do. And therefore the
estate of all such is dangerous in no common sort, who never ask wherefore all
these good examples serve, but rather scorn and dislike them, or at least have
no fellowship with them.

Encouragement to the bad to return, and seek after God.
And again, if any who as yet savor not the precious Gospel, should think
that they shall never profit by it to come to faith and repentance; they are to
know, that not only they may, but also that God looks for it at their hands.
For why did God give Ahab great victories over his enemy Benhadad, but to the
end he should know the Lord to be God, and acknowledge him, believe in him,
love and fear him? And did God provoke him, an Idolater and wicked man, to
forsake his evil way, and will he reject other who would draw nigh to him if
they durst? No, God is ready to receive, yea he seeks such as fly from him,
and which wander out of the right way, yea, 2. Cor. 5.19.20.
and beseeches them to be reconciled to him; so that none shall need to fear
that God will turn from them, if their chief care be that they may turn to
him.

And seeing I have gone so far in this matter, How they should do it.
I will proceed a little further, and put on the person of such as are yet in
darkness, and would willingly see light. Such (I know) would ask, how they
may come home, and be received into the favor of God. To such I answer: they
must be moved by the reports of them who are in Christ already, and be
persuaded, what beauty is in the Gospel, how precious it is, and how many,
who have been far off, have by the power and persuasion of it, come home to
true repentance, as the Publicans and great sinners, who heard our Savior
preach to them.

Secondly, they must hear the word of God diligently, as Solomon wills; that
they who will be blessed, Prou. 8.33.
should watch daily at wisdoms gates, and give attendance at the posts of her
doors; yea and further, they must with the good people of Berea, receive the
word with all readiness. Act. 17.11.
They must also draw to good company, Act. 9.27.
as Paul cleaued to Barnabas at his conversion; and the people, both Jews and
Gentiles, who embraced the Gospel, did, wheresoever he preached. And by these
means God works so in those whom he will save, that he changes their hearts
and makes them new persons.

For though many people have sundry kinds of lets to hinder them from
believing, yet they to whom God has a favor, he will draw them by some
excellent thing that they hear, or by means of some doubt that troubles them,
of the which they desire to be resolved; that they shall not break off their
hearing, till they receive that chief and most excellent light by preaching,
which brings contentment, and resolution of that which did most trouble them,
and that is, faith unfeigned. And this is that which ought most of al to occupy
and take up the minds of unstaid persons, who have no sure hold of eternal
life: and this is the use which they ought to make of their living in peace,
and beholding the good example of those who are better then themselves: to
wait in their hearings, and long for this, namely, that they may know they
shall be saved. As for all other taking up of their thoughts and desires, the
best of them are but deceiuable, that I say nothing of further mischiefs which
they bring upon themselves.

But do the common sort of the ignorant and profane make this use of their
peaceable living among Gods servants? Indeed, God be praised, some do, for how
should the number of penitent persons otherwise grow greater daily? But for the
most part even where the Gospel is purely preached, they look after no such
thing, but as though they knew not to what end God has set godly Christians
among them, they give them leave, even they who are of the forwarder sort of
them, to walk alone, rather then to converse and have fellowship with them;
but some think, other speak evil of them; and (which is worst of all)
because they are such: which sort of people for the most part grow hardened,
and wax worse and worse: so far it is off, that they take good by them. And
this be said of this latter sort who lived among the godly, what use they made
thereof.

FINIS.
FOUR SERMONS UPON PHILIP. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, rejoice.
NOw I add this as the last text of the rest, to show you, yt they who obey
the former doctrine may be joyful persons: and therefore a seasonable time it
is now to teach such doctrine, and so to stand upon the unfolding of this
exhortation. It is a duty much iterated and stood upon by this Apostle, in
other of his Epistles; but especially in this: in every chapter whereof,
either by his own example or by special precept, he stirs up to this
rejoicing. In the first chapter verse 18. Christ was preached, and therefore he
did, and he would rejoice, chap. 2.17.18. he rejoices, and rejoices with
them, and wishes them to rejoice, and rejoice with him. In the 3.1.
Furthermore, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord; and yet here again, rejoice in
the Lord, and that with a double exhortation, again I say rejoice.

And the Apostle Saint John 1. Epistle 1.4. professes, he wrote his whole
Epistle to this end, that he might replenish and fill us with this joy; and
these things, that is, this whole Epistle, I write unto you, that your joy may
be full. And we are not to think, that these excellent Apostles would have
taken so great pain, in often exhortation to this duty, and writing so much
to this end, but that it is of especial weight and moment; and indeed such is
the necessity of it: that without it, we cannot perform any good duty well;
whether it be of our particular calling, or of our common calling, as we are
Christians: no place, no time, no duty may be without this joy, whereunto we
are in these words exhorted; as hereafter in the particular handling of them, I
shall have just occasion to show.

To come therefore more near unto the matter in hand. The occasion of this
exhortation by considering the circumstances which go before, and which follow
after, should seem to be, both to confirm and arm them the better against
the injuries of false teachers, or whatsoever trouble else: and to prepare them
to the duties whereunto he after exhorts them, of moderation, patience,
confidence, etc.

The division of the text.
In the words themselves, we are for orders sake to consider them as they lie.
First, the exhortation it self. Secondly, the iterating or doubling of it. And
the exhortation is fully laid down in these words, Rejoice in the Lord
always; redoubled in those that follow, again I say rejoice.

In the first exhortation as also in the second, (for they are both one) and
that which is not fully set down in the second, is to be supplied out of the
first. In both of the exhortations, I say, are to be observed these principal
and especial points. I say unto you, rejoice. loving and longed for brethren.
to rejoice: which is first limited by the manner, in God, that is to say,
rejoice in God: secondly, enlarged by this word always, saying, rejoice
always. Of these briefly in order.

The first point: the person that makes this exhortation.
And first for the person, he was such a one as did as well practice this duty,
as exhort these to the practice of it. In the third chapter, 17. first he
propounds his own example; I rejoice, and rejoice with you: and then in the
eighteenth verse he exhorts them to rejoice, and to rejoice with him: and by
diverse other places, both in this Epistle and others, I could easily show, and
shall have occasion to show afterward; that the Apostle was as well a forward
practitioner of this duty, as an earnest exhorter of others unto it: he himself
was filled and replenished with joy, and then he labored to fill and replenish
others with it. Hence then by the example of this our Apostle, we are taught an
excellent duty, and that is; Doct.
look what we exhort and persuade others unto, we exhort them according to
the rule of our own practice.

It is not for a drunkard so continuing, to exhort to sobriety: for a glutton
to exhort to temperance: nor for an adulterer and unclean persons, to exhort
to chastity: nor for a swearer, so continuing, to reprove swearing: nor for an
impenitent man to persuade to repentance: these exhortations, though good in
themselves, in the mouths of such men, are but parables in the mouth of
fools: that is, as Solomon compares them, Prou. 26.9. as thorns in the hands
of drunkards, they hurt both themselves and others with them. Pro. 26.9.
And therefore Psalm 50. the Lord asks of these men, Psalm. 50.16.
what they have to do to take his word, and these good exhortations in their
mouths; and hate to be reformed by them? And this Apostle in the second to
the Romans, Romans 2.
earnestly reasons against this kind of men, saying: thou that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? thou that teach a man should not
steal, stealest thou? thou that teach a man should not commit adultery,
do thou commit adultery? as if he should say, if you teach these things, you
should not practice the contrary; or if you will do the contrary, ye may not
be teachers of them: but first we must have received the grace our selves, and
then labor to communicate it to others.

I have believed, says this our Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.13. 2. Cor. 4.13.
therefore I have spoken. He taught faith unto others, but it was when faith
was first wrought in himself. And in the first chapter of the same Epistle,
God first comforted him, 2. Cor. 1.^.
that he might be able to comfort others. Remember him thirty seven years
ago, who durst not preach contrary to his own practice. In like manner our
Savior Christ said to Peter, Luke 22.32.
when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: first he must be converted
and strengthened himself, and then he must labor to convert and strengthen
others. And David in Psalm. Psa. 51.15.
51. somewhat after the midst of the Psalm, desires God to convert him and
then he would teach the ways of God unto the wicked, and sinners should be
converted unto him, this example if it were well considered and observed of al
exhorters, and teachers of others, there would be more hope that more good
should be done, then commonly is: their exhortation, would then be earnest, and
hearty, as we see this our Apostles was; he stirs them to it again and
again, and in many places, that it may work the like impression in them, that
it had in his heart.

A teacher must so always begin with himself.
Begin with thy self to say, I have repented and hate my sin, therefore I
exhort and call upon others to repent: I have left my swearing and therefore
cannot abide it. I rejoice in God, and am filled with joy, and therefore I
exhort others unto it. This then being a duty, required of all that are to
exhort, observe what special duty it lays upon the minister and public
teacher of the word of God, for he being by his place and calling, to exhort to
every good duty; and to dehort from every vice, he had need to take more
especial and extraordinary pains with his own heart, that he may himself be
wanting in nothing, but his mouth may speak from the abundance of that which
his heart has wrought in it, that there be not any vice, but his heart has
both expelled it out, and settled in it the hatred of the same: not any virtue
of faith, of repentance, of joy, but he has had them already wrought in his
heart.

Paul an Apostle that exhorts us, as an Ambassador sent from God, and
speaking from God; as the preface of the Epistle shows. Which consideration,
as it sets an edge upon the exhortation; so ought it to sharpen and whet us
on to be the more eager, to follow it. And thus much it shall suffice, to have
observed of the party, exhorting: Expressed in the repetition of the
exhortation, (I say.)

The second point the persons exhorted:
Now I come to the persons exhorted, and they are the Philippians, as I said,
faithful, and righteous, whom the Apostle in the first verse, called beloved
and longed for brethren, and so to those who are such, Psalm. 32.11.
this exhortation, in many places is expressly limited. In the 32. Psalm be
glad ye righteous and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are
upright in heart, and in Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, Psalm.
33.1. Luke 10.20.
for it becomes upright men to be thankful, here we see the wicked are shut
out, and have no part nor portion in this joy: and that is well seen, for what
joy have worldly men in God, or heavenly things, but in pleasures and profits?
But another duty belongs unto the^, which the Apostle S. Iam. 5.1.
James exhorts them unto, bidding the^ to weep and howl, though they be rich
men; if they be oppressors and wicked, and be not rich in God. And again,
chap. 4. verse. 9. Wail and sorrow ye sinners, and weep, Iam. 4.9.
let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Why
this exhortation is limited to the faithful.


The reason of the restraint and limiting of it, to the faithful is easy, and
yet very worthy to be stood upon, for as for the righteous, they have both
great cause to rejoice, and great need to be stirred up to this duty, whereas
the wicked have neither any true cause of sound joy? neither feel they any
need of it. That the faithful have need to be stirred to this duty; we cannot
be ignorant, if we consider that which the Psalmist writes; Psalm 34.19. and
the whole Scripture accords with that, Many are the troubles of the
righteous, Psalm. 34.19.
And whosoever will follow Christ, he must forsake father, mother, goods,
lands, brethren, sisters, life and al, and take up his cross daily, and follow
him, for such is the rage of Satan, and the malice of the wicked, as against
the whole Church in general, so against all the godly, that they never can
have, as it were, peaceable hours; but so soon as they have given their names
to Christ, and are entered into his school, they have one trouble and vexation
or other, to wrestle withal. They see matter of grief, sorrow within them,
without them, and round about them. Within them they have wicked rebellion of
their own hearts, to be as it were pricks and thorns in their flesh, to gall,
and vex, and disquiet them: they have Satan continually casting his deadly and
fiery darts of tentations into their souls; And all the world in a manner,
they shall see to be as it were banded and combined together against them; in
mocks, in taunts; in slanders, in whatsoever injuries, and ill turns and
mischiefs they can do unto them. Alas, any one of these were cause sufficient
to make the children of God heavy, pensive and sorrowful, for their strength
is not the strength of stones, nor their flesh of brosse, as Job speaks of
himself, Job. ^.12.
in the sixth of his book, but these pearce and wound them deeply, to their
very souls: great need therefore the faithful have, to be raised up from this
sorrow and heaviness of heart, to rejoice and be made merry in the Lord. for
should they have no joy to help to counteruaile their sorrows,

The wicked have no need to be exhorted to rejoice.
As for wicked men, they have no such burden of trouble and sorrows, to be
eased of. The devil is not grievous unto them with his tentations, be the
tentations what they will be they like them well: they entertain them: they
make much of them: they are the welcomest guests that can come unto them, for
their is no suggestion of Satan, but it is evil: there is no kind of evil,
but the heart of a wicked man, is prone unto it. If the devil provoke him to
wrath and anger, the heart is before straying after it: If to uncleanness, to
profaneness, to swearing, etc. these are all pleasing motions unto the
unregenerate person; Sin also and corruption, that dwells and reigns in
him, is not troublesome and grievous unto the wicked man. Nay he is so far
from sorrowing because of this corruption, that it is his darling and his
delight; It is as his right hand, as his use as his life and soul, so dear is
it unto him, yea rather he can endure to have his goods, his delights, yea his
very life taken away, rather then to forgo this sin and corruption of his
heart.

As for the world, they and it are in a very quiet and friendly league, for
because they are of the world, the world cannot at but love it own, Ioh. 15.19.
as our Savior teaches us (Ioh. 15.19). So that the wicked have no such
enemies, no troubles nor sorrows as the righteous have; but they live at peace
with their sin, at peace with the devil, and at peace with the world; They
have mirth enough and too much for them. They need not as they think, neither
care they for God, or any godly mirth to make them merry. No need therefore to
exhort the wicked to rejoice, Job. 22.
that are even surfetted already with joy and pleasure, but the righteous that
mourn, the righteous that be heavy; these have need to have God and his
servants to comfort and cheer them up.

Math. 5.2.12.
Blessed are ye when men revile and persecute your, and say al manner of evil
against you, for my sake, falsely. Rejoice and be glad; for great is your
reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you.
To be hated of the world, to be reviled, To be hated of the world a sign of
blessedness, and therefore a cause of rejoicing.
persecuted, slandered; mark, it is a sign yt we are blessed and therefore a
cause to make us to rejoice. Nay, we see, that all the hatred, reuiling,
persecution and slander they can raise, do help to increase our reward, and
the brightness of our glory, and the weight of our crown in heaven. Nay
hereby are we assured that we are in the straight and beaten way to heaven. For
thus, says our Savior, they hated, they reviled, they persecuted the Prophets
which were before you; as though he should say, by this you may know that you
are in the direct way to heaven. For thus have all the Prophets before you,
passed thither, and so we see since, our Savior Christ to have passed this way
into glory, and by the same to have carried to the same glory, al his Apostles,
Martyrs, and holy men that have lived and died under the Gospel. Behold then,
in a word, what joy even the hatred of the world and wicked men affords unto
us, and that is, that our heavenly reward of glory is both increased, and
confirmed and sealed unto us. And to this precept of our Savior, Iam. 1.^.
well agrees, that of the Apostle Iam. 1.2. my brethren count it all joy, when
ye fall into diverse afflictions: meaning, as I take it, of such as were
inflicted by the world, which then was most usual: we must then rejoice; and
that withal joy, in the greatest measure, we are able, because thereby, we
attain to be patient and so shall be perfect and complete men in Christ. An
example of this precept; we have both in the example of all the Apostles Act.
5. in the end, who being beaten for professing Christ, Acts. 5.41.
went away rejoicing from the counsel taking it as an honor done to them. And
so of this our Apostle (2. 2. Cor. 12.10.
Cor. 12.10.) I take pleasure (says he) in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions for Christ's sake, For when I am weak, then am I
strong. He took pleasure in these, because he found that even by them, God
ministered greater strength and comfort to him.

not flesh and blood alone and these afflictions, to wrestle against; but
against principalities and powers; against Satan the prince of the world, and
against spiritual wickednesses which are in high places. These are of great
power and of great might; and these are continually laying siege against their
souls to take them: how can they be merry that be night and day besieged thus
dangerously? especially, of legions of devils, of spiritual wickednesses, that
are diligent and watchful night and day to surprise and take their souls.
Alas, these are many and strong enemies, and we are weak and in continual
combat with them. Resist the devil says the Apostle James. James 4.7.
4.7. and he will fly from you. Resist him, though he be never so strong.
Resist him, though he have his legions of devils with him against thee, and he
shall fly from thee. Mark it: he shall fly, and that from thee. Ephesians. 6.16.
if thou will but resist him with the shield of faith, the sword of the Spirit,
etc. Here therefore we have greater cause of joy and triumph, then of sorrow.
For what cause has he but to rejoice, that may every day so easily triumph
over so great and so many enemies? that being a poor weak man, may put to
flight whole armies and legions of devils?

Miserable man (says the Apostle Paul, (Romans 7. the end) who shall deliver me
from this body of sin? Romans 7. the end.
) But yet we have also, by the mercy of God, sufficient, wherewithal to raise
us up in this sorrow: 1. John. Psalm.
for we have the Spirit of God within us, to help our infirmities: we have the
Angels of God night and day to pitch their tents about, us, to aid us against
the evil angels: we have God himself, Psalm.
who neither slumbereth nor sleeps; that watches and cares for us. Be we
never so weak, and the devil never so strong, God who is with us, will uphold
us, and no devil shall pluck us from him, or out of his hands.

If I should further enter to lay down all the causes that may and ought to
move the faithful unto joy, I should not easily find an end of so large and
long a Treatise. Causes of joy.
I will therefore, in a word only, entreat every man, who is desirous to
learn what cause he has to rejoice being a righteous man, fearful a thing
it were to fall into the hands of the living God. Hebr. 10.31.
And how terrible a thing the wrath of God is, which shall be revealed upon the
wicked and disobedient, even this shall give him great cause to rejoice, that
by the pardon of his sins he has escaped the wrath that is to come.

2. Cor. 15.
and wherein no part of misery shall remain, but all tears shall be wiped
from their eyes, and no part of blessedness shall be wanting unto them.

John 1.12.
and that he has now adopted him, and given him the title and privilege to be
called his son, and to be the heir of God, Romans 8.
and coheire with Jesus Christ: that he has given unto him, and put into his
heart his Spirit, the seal and earnest of his adoption.

John 4.10.
and God is ready to lend his ear to him, and grant his suit; that he can but
knock and God stands at the door, as it were ready to open and to welcome
him; that he cannot seek any good thing at the Lords hands, but he is ready
to minister unto him. Nay, that God not only is ready night and day, in season
and out of season to hear his moan, and to fulfill his desires; but his eyes
are ever upon him to do him good, even then when he thinks not upon it; and
that which we never minded to crave at his hands, yea, that the Lord will
vouchsafe to come to him, John 14.23. Reuelat. 3.20.
to abide with him, to sup and to dine and to converse with him, as he
promises, Ioh. 14.23. and Revel. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and
knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come unto him, to
carry him, as it were, into my heavenly closet, and impart to him of my
dainties. But here I stay for this time.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
I Will proceed where I left. The privileges of the faithful set down before
as the peace of a good conscience, cleared and cleansed by the blood of Christ,
the hope of so great glory to come, and the so blessed communion with God,
that they may talk, as it were, friendly and familiarly, and converse with him
and he with them; howsoever the men of the world imagine them all to be but
dreams and conceits; yet can they not but make the righteous man, that has
the true and lively sense and feeling of them, leap and shout for joy of heart.

I will not stand by further reasons, which are many, to enlarge the proof of
this point, that the righteous as they have need to be stirred up to joy, so
they have just cause, (notwithstanding all that may seem to make to the
contrary) to be merry and glad in heart. It is not thus with the wicked, The
wicked have no part in this joy.
for though they have peace with Satan, and peace with the corruption of their
own hearts, yet want they the pardon of their sin, and therefore are at war
and enmity with God, though they labor to forget the same; and all that
fearful wrath to come hangs over their heads, and may fall, they know not
how soon, upon them.

Secondly, they want that imputation of Christ's righteousness to cover their
shame before God: so that they cannot assure themselves, that they have any
part or portion in the glory of the sons of God, that is to be revealed.
They cannot behold God as a loving Father, as their redeemer in Christ Jesus.
They are wholly possessed with the spirit of fear and bondage, that they
cannot with boldness call upon God. They have no promise nor assurance that
God will hear them; John 9.
nay his ears are stopped that he will not hear them; his eyes are turned
from them, that he will not regard and pity their misery. He will have no
communion, no society, company, nor fellowship with them. I cease to speak
of those hellish terrors of an accusing conscience, that cannot but expel all
joy and comfort forth, so often as their sleepie conscience is awakened, and
omit many other things, which might be added to this purpose. By this little
which has bin said, the truth of this point is clear; that the righteous, and
they alone, have both need and just cause wherefore to rejoice: we will now
come briefly to some few uses of this point, and pass to the next in order.

Ministers duty.
as we have showed. It is not for the Ministers of God to comfort and cheer up
any but these. For we know the Minister is a Physician of the soul, to cure
the diseases; and a Surgeon to cure the wounds of the soul. Now it is not
for a Physician to prescribe to the whole, but to the sick; nor for the
Surgeon to plaster that which is sound, but that which is hurt and wounded.
The wicked are whole, they are not sick or wounded with sorrow.

No need therefore have they of the Surgeon, to bind up that which is
broken; neither of the Physician to restore health, when none is lost: but the
righteous man, and he that truly fears God, he is cast down with sorrow, and
has need therefore to be raised up, when he is sick of sorrow, and has need
of heavenly chearing to restore him, he is wounded in soul every day, and
therefore has need to have the oil of gladness to be powered into his wounds.



ought; that they add sorrow to their sorrow, and affliction to affliction,
what they can. This is besides all bounds of common humanity, as we know, and
sauoureth of a devilish nature, to rend and to tear the wounds that we ought
to heal and to bind up. But this do the wicked, when they seek to vex and
grieve the faithful, that be already wounded and cast down with sorrow in
their souls, yea and for that they carry corruption still about them. I say
not he is the happiest that rejoices most: for that (no doubt) many times he
may do; which is but in a very woeful case, as our Savior Christ says, woe be
to you that laugh: but he (I say) is the happiest man that has the greatest
cause of joy. He is the happiest man that has greatest cause of joy.
For this is the argument of all those blessednesses which our Savior Christ
pronounces, Matthew. 5. the poor in spirit are pronounced blessed, because they
have cause to rejoice. So they that mourn, they that be meek, etc. are
blessed, because these, though they do not rejoice, yet they have every one of
them just cause to rejoice.

But to proceed, has the faithful and righteous alone just cause of joy? Then
if thou desire soundly to rejoice, practice carefully and constantly a just
and righteous life: for without this faith and uprightness it is impossible
(though thou have made a beginning therein already) ever to find any state
that will give thee cause (all things well weighed) to take any joy in it. It
is not the throne of a Prince, nor the treasure of the earth, nor the pleasures
of the world that can afford it.

And the rather are the righteous to be moved to this duty, because they have
the Lords commandment here by the Apostle to stir themselves up unto it.
For is the Lord so careful of his, that he cannot endure to have our hearts
possessed with sorrow, but will have it to be expelled thence by his heavenly
joys; and shall we be behind in this duty? Shall he command, and shall not we
obey? shall he exhort, and shall not we attend to that which wholly tends to
our own joy and comfort? Ester. 1. King. 8.64.
If the King, or prince, command their subjects to be merry as Solomon, 1.
King. 8.64. Ester. 5.1. this alone stirs them up to mirth, though there were
noe other cause: but the kind speeches and greetings of the prince. And ought
not Gods voice much more to prevail with us to this end?

The limitation of this joy: it must in the Lord.
But I come now to the limitation first, and then in due place, to the
enlargement of this joy. It is limited first, by the manner of it, that it must
be in the Lord, and then secondly, enlarged, by the time, that it may be
always. to rejoice in the Lord, is to rejoice for that we know him to be our
God alsufficient, and Christ Jesus our Lord: also to rejoice for the Lords
cause, Ioh. 17.3.
who alone gives and ministers unto us cause of rejoicing. as 1. Sam. 21. in
the thanksgiving of Hanna. Mine heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is
exalted in the Lord: So Mary: my spirit rejoices, that is, my heart rejoices,
because of the Lord, who has given me this cause of joy: and mine horn is
exalted in the Lord, who has bin favorable, and gracious unto me.

Hereby it is distinguished from many other sorts of joys.
By this limitation then, we see the joy of the faithful; which only is true
joy, to be distinguished from other sorts of joys; which are many. For some
there are, who rejoice in themselves, and in that serving of God, that likes
them; and not in the Lord: they fast, they pray, they pay tithe of all they
have, they give alms, they abstain from injustice, extortion, etc. They are
very strict and very precise in many things; they will not marry, they will not
eat such and such meats, and at such times. These men they rejoice also, yea
and boast themselves not only, before men, but before God, as the Pharisie did
Luke 18. But their joy arises from themselves, and from their own good deeds,
and meritorious actions; as they hold them, They rejoice not in the Lord.





So many other things in themselves, are lawful, and a man may rejoice in
them. I mean recreations, and refreshings of body or mind after labor, but
to spend whole days in them is evil: also the fellowship of marriage, and the
liberty of eating and drinking, but if we do them, without thanksgiving,
without keeping a measure and moderation, and if we rejoice in any of these
actions, (though lawful of themselves) not banishing the sins that
accompany them in the world, and observe not a holy and a righteous manner in
the doing of them; neither do them by faith, all this our rejoicing is vain
and wordly, and not in the Lord: because it is not with those circumstances
observed, which he has prescribed in his word.



The Lord is bountiful enough to thee, in lawful joys vouchsafed unto thee,
to take thy part in. Learn therefore hence, Use.
Try our mirth by these notes.
to try thy mirth, for when thou art reproved for thy lewd mirth, it is no
sufficient excuse to say, we were but merry: For know, that there is a double
mirth, a holy mirth, and an ungodly mirth; a mirth in God, and a mirth in the
devil. Try therefore, and examine thy mirth: of whether sort it is. If it be
in God. in lawful things, but he cannot rejoice lawfully, but in a carnal and
fleshly manner this joy neither proceeds from God, nor tendes to God, but
rests in the matter: neither is it ruled by the direction of Gods words, but
is disorderedly carried by the sway of his profane and wicked heart.



if we sigh to be unburdened, 2. Cor. 5.1.
and long to be with Christ, which is best of all; for by our rejoicing that we
have in Christ Jesus our Lord, we die daily: Phil. 1. 1. Cor. 15.31.
And therefore by daily growing more ready to die, we do well testify the joy
that we have in him. These. 5.16.
he must know that it nothing derogateth from it, to delight in the word of
God, which David often professed, that he did, and that it was more sweet to him,
then the honey to his mouth: To rejoice in the word etc. hinders not our
rejoicing in the Lord.
for the word and the preachers that bring glad tidings out of it, are the
instruments and means whereby we delight in the Lord.

And when we are taught to rejoice in the Saints which are on the earth, and
such as excel in virtue, it hinders nothing our rejoicing in the Lord, but
furthereth it; Psa. 1 6.
seeing they are heirs of the promise of life with us, and therefore helpers
of that joy. The same I may say of rejoicing in a good conscience. For that is
a testimony of our rejoicing in the Lord. These and the like concur with our
ioying in God, and are all helpers of that joy. And so that remains still
firm, that he that will rejoice, should rejoice in the Lord.

The enlargement of this joy.
Now I come to the time when and how long this our joy is to be in God, and that
is, always: the Lord (so that we will be contented but to limit our joy within
those bounds we have seen) is liberal and bountiful for the time, he does
not stint and limit us to any set and certain time, but he will have us to
rejoice in him evermore. Herein differs the joy of the faithful from the joy
of the world, that worldly joy is never constant and perpetual, Prou. 14.13.
but even in laughing, as Solomon teaches, the heart is sorrowful, and the
end of that mirth is heaviness.

The righteous may rejoice at all times.
But the joy of the faithful flourishes at all times, and in all seasons, it
is like to the Laurel tree, that neither winter nor summer casts the leaf.
For this joy has continual means to feed it withal: neither can the
righteous man, if he consider it, ever want cause to joy and be merry in God.
We have seen the righteous man has cause to rejoice in affliction, and so
much more has he in prosperity. He has cause to rejoice when he prays,
because God is near to hear his prayer; and when he reads, because he sees
God to speak to him in his Word, and to give peace unto his conscience.

And in all things he goes about.
And so in every thing: the righteous go about, they have cause to go joyfully
about it, their calling especially be it never so base, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
yea even the poorest laboring men if they be Gods children: they are then
employed in Gods business when they are about their calling, he has set them
in: the servant, when he is about his masters business, he may rejoice in
doing it. Ephesians. 6.6.
For read (Ephesians. 6.6. you shall see that which their masters set their
servants about, is called the will of God, and that in serving their masters
with care and in a good conscience, Psalm 19.11.
they serve God and Christ. And God will give them a reward and pay them their
wages for it.

They rejoice also when they have occasion to give and distribute; for they are
assured, that what they give to the poor and needy brother, they give to
Christ, and that in feeding him, Eccles. 7.2.
they feed Christ, in clothing him, that they cloth Christ, Revel. 14.14.
yea they rejoice in death it self. For they know it is not to them as to the
wicked, the end of joy, and the beginning of sorrow. But it is the end of all
labor and sorrow, and the beginning of great and eternal joys.



The Lord loves a cheerful giver: so the Lord loves a cheerful seruer and
worshipper of him, a cheerful hearer, and cheerfulness in every good
duty. If we had more knowledge, we might better rejoice: if we pray, he
requires cheerfulness in prayer: if we be employed in our calling, he
requires that this also be performed cheerfully, and with a glad heart.

Here then comes to be reprehended, to the stake, Neither wish, Oh that this
business or that work were done. If God in thy calling appoint thee unto it,
thou must go about it cheerfully.

Hebr. 13.
Thus Ministers (Heb, 13.17.) must watch over their flocks with joy and
cheerfulnes, though the duty be very full of care; and slightly rewarded of
men. And Jacob, we read though his service was very laborious and toilsome,
which he did unto Laban, Genesis.
being pinched with the frost in the night, and the heat in the day* yet the
time of his service seemed but short unto him. One cause whereof (no doubt)
was, because he willingly took joy and delight to walk in the duties of his
calling, with painfulnesse and diligence. So should Masters rejoice in
providing for the family, and doing the duty of Masters. Servants, in
pleasing their Masters, and doing the duty of servants. O^ how happy and
joyful a sight were this, to see every man thus to travel with joy and cheer
in his calling? To joy, I say, not after a natural and carnal manner, but
with a holy and religious joy, in doing both the general duties of
Christianity, and the particular duties of his own proper and peculiar
calling. This would cause both great joy to every man in his own conscience
that thus walks, and give much encouragement to all that shall see and behold
it.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
Philip. 4.4.
NOw to go forward in the Text; the repetition which follows after, thus,
(Again I say rejoice) briefly shows us, first the earnest affection the
Apostle had to draw them to this duty, which proceeded from the abundance of
his love, whereby he thought every one of their joy to be his own, as ye may
read, 2. Cor. 2.3. He accounts both the joy and sorrow of the Corinthians to
be his, 2. Cor. 2.3.
as they took his to be theirs. Secondly, this proceeded from the reason I
touched before: because himself was filled with this joy: and it is of that
nature, that in whose heart soever it is, it cannot but dilate and communicate
it self to others. As we read of the Iailer, he rejoiced, and he could not
keep this joy to himself, but communicated it to his whole house (Act. 16.)
For it is said, he rejoiced, having believed with his whole house. So Lydias
heart being opened, Acts 16.
and dilated by the holy Ghost, and the joy of the Spirit, she made her whole
household partakers (so far as she could) of the same grace.

The end whereunto this repetition tends, is to make the exhortation more
forcible: and to imprint it the better and deeper in their hearts, minds and
memories, and to make them more careful of the practice of it. For where the
Spirit of God uses these often doubled exhortations, we must and ought to
employ our greatest care, and as it were, our double diligence to learn them.

Reasons why this precept is redoubled.
As without the which he can neither hear the Word aright, nor pray aright,
nor do any duty of his calling as he ought. And if it be asked how other do,
that have no part in this ioying in the Lord: I answer, they joy in sin. And
it would be seen, that the wicked would be utterly weary of their life, but
for their goods and delights that they have.



we need, as it were, the more pricks and spurs to quicken us on to this
duty, being of our selves so flow and dull unto it. David, though he had an
extraordinary measure and portion, for the most part of this joy was wrought
in his heart by the Spirit of God; yet he complained often of the loss and decay
and absence of these heavenly joys. Read the fourth Psalm, Psalm 4.43.
verse. 43. Why art thou cast down my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me?
Trust still in God, etc. His soul was so vexed, cast down and disquieted in
him, that he could not raise it up to any joy and comfort: so it is with the
best at sometime. Further observe, whom he here exhorts thus often to
rejoice in the Lord, and that is, the faithful, that already had this joy
begun in their hearts. These men that already do rejoice, they must rejoice,
and again rejoice in the Lord. It is not for a righteous man to begin a good
thing, but he must labor to perfect and increase it to the end of his life.

1. John 5.13.
Mark a notable place to this purpose (1. Ioh. 5.13.) These things have I
written unto you that believe in the name of the Son of God, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe in the son of God.
He writes to them that believe, that they may believe. And in the first chapter
and fourth verse, he writes these things to them that rejoiced already, 1.
John 1.3.
that their joy, which was begun, might be full. So thus our Apostle in this
place writes to them, that already rejoiced, that they rejoice in the Lord; to
them that rejoice in part and in some measure, that their joy might be full.

The Ministers duty.
Here then we see, first, what is the duty of the Minister, and that is, (that
he content not himself to have laid a good foundation of says in his people;
and of joy and hope, and such other good virtues. But he is to build them up,
that they may grow from faith to faith, from hope to hope, and from joy to joy:
even so long as these or they may grow, which is as long as men live in this
world) it is the Ministers duty to continue his exhortations unto them. It is
not for him to say as many retchlesse and godless Ministers: I have taught
them more then they have learned already; when they have learned that, I will
teach them more. No, thou must teach and exhort them the same duties again and
again, and never give over exhortations, till thou have by the mercy of God
even filled them with joy, and faith, and patience.

And with all we see the duty of the people: The duty of the people.
It is not enough for them to say; They believe already, they need not more
preaching, to exhort them to believe: and they rejoice in God already, and
therefore need not to be exhorted to this joy. But rather, it is mere and
necessary for them; to have (with the father of the possessed child (Mark.
9.24) at least) one eye upon their infidelity, as well as the other upon their
faith, and to say, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief.

Beleeuest thou? well, yet thou have remaining a great deal of unbelief.
Do thou rejoice? yet remember thou have need again, and often to be
exhorted to this duty, that thy small joy may grow in the end, to be full and
complete, that even thou may with peace resign thy soul into the hands of
God.

The text being thus unfolded, and the use of it set down; yet two things I
see of necessary use to be added, before I make an end. The first is the
answering of some objections rising from the former doctrine. The next is; that
seeing the necessity, the profit, and the difficulty of performing this duty,
is such as I have in some sort showed, I think it not amiss to spend a little
time in teaching, how a man may both procure this joy, if yet he never had it:
and keep, and increase it, if he have it, and recover it, if at any time he
have lost the sense and feeling of it.

these hinder not the truth before mentioned, that the righteous cannot rejoice.



Answer.
to believe. To whom I say, that either they labor not to preserve it so
carefully, nor their faith from which it comes, Romans 15.13.
neither prize them both, as they did when they first believed; or if they do,
then they may still rejoice as they did at the first: if otherwise, then what
marvel is it, that they cannot rejoice, as sometime they did: let them repent
their negligence and sin, and do their former works, and God will restore
their joy to them, yea, and that rather more soundly, which they were wont in
him to find.

Romans 5.5.
Pet. 1.7.
but shall return again, and as S. Peter says: it is meet if need be, that
we be in heaviness for a season, that the trial of our faith, being much more
precious then gold that perishes, may be found to our honor. And yet when God
will, he gives joy in heaviness, as to Paul and Silas who sung in the dungeon
at midnight: and more then that, as Daniel was enabled to rejoice in the Lions
den, the three children in the fiery furnace, and the Martyrs in our
remembrance, did at the stake.

the rich may not rejoice in their riches, nor the wise in their wisdom, but he
that will rejoice, let him rejoice in the Lord. For no one of those reioycings
can stand with this.

Thus much for answer to the objections, the other thing is, how this ioying
in the Lord is to be gotten, kept, and recovered being lost. which that you may
the better regard, and diligently attend unto; Know this of a suerty, that he
that is not in some measure partaker of this joy here; He that is not partaker
of this joy here, shall never partake the joys of heaven.
shall never be partaker of the joys in heaven. For as our spiritual life
whereby we live in Christ, is not begun but in this life: so certain and
doubtless it is, that this joy which is a fruit of that life, must either be
begun here, or we shall never pass into them joys in the kingdom of heaven.
Despise therefore this joy, and scorn it, as many do, who count it but a
fantasy, and withal, thou refusest the joys of heaven, whereof this joy is
but the beginning. On the contrary, procure, keep and increase this joy, and
these are a certain and sure pledge unto thee, of the joys of the life to
come. And the more thou can fill and fraught thy self with this joy, the
nearer do thou come unto the life of the Saints in heaven. For this joy here
on earth, and that in heaven, is not differing in kind. But the joy of the
faithful militant, is the same with that of the faithful triumphant. The same,
I say, for the nature and kind of the joy, though not for the degree and
perfection of it. So that as I said, the more we grow on in this joy, the
nearer we come to the blessed life of the Saints triumphant.

Let us then see by what means this joy of heaven may be here begun in us on
earth. How this joy may be begun here in this life* we must first be reconciled
to God.
And first this is a clean and an evident truth; that we can never attain to
any true and sound joy in the Lord, until we be by faith in Christ reconciled
unto him, For until then, so far ar we from taking any joy in him, that we
take the greatest pleasure in estranging and withdrawing our selves, so far as
can be, from him. As Adam before he was reconciled unto God after his fall, he
could not endure the sight and presence of God, but hid himself amongst the
trees of the garden. As well can the theife take pleasure in the presence of
the judge, that is to condemn and pronounce sentence of death upon him, as we
can rejoice in God the Judge, and the auenger of all our sins committed
against him.

Reconciliation to be proceeded in by three degrees.
Now then that we may know how this reconciliation is to be made with God,
without the which we cannot joy in him; we are in it to proceed by these three
degrees. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the
Law, to do them. And then not to bless our selves, that yet all shall be well,
nor to make a league and covenant with hell and death, which shall not be kept:
but in token we believe, our hearts must be filled with sorrow, and all our
vain reioycings are to be turned to mourning, till we melt and relent, be
abased and humbled thereby, and brought to an utter despair of all help in
our selves. John 3.14.
3.14. As the Serpent was lift up in the wilderness; so must the Son of man
be lift up: that whosoever believes, should not perish, but have eternal
life. For God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.

Which being so, how can it be that we being freed from the sting, affrighting
and thundering threatenings of the Law, and translated by this faith into ye
glorious liberty of the sons and daughters of God, but that we should be
exceedingly ravished in joy at this so unspeakable love and mercy of God unto
us? If only we were freed from the curse of the Law, which is eternal death
and torment, and had only this hatred of God turned from us, that he should no
more hate us, this were cause enough, one would think, if we did duly
consider it, of great rejoicing. But truly to believe that God should further
love us, and love us, as it were, above his own Son, that he should wound
him to spare us, and curse him to bless us; that he should kill him to quicken
us, that he should abandon and forsake him, that he might again take and
receive us; this I say, to believe, it cannot but cheer and rejoice the
saddest heart, and heauiest soul that ever was. It is said in the Acts, Act.
2.42.
All that believed continued in the Apostles doctrine, and ate their meat with
gladness and singlenes of heart. This faith made them all, though they were in a
most dangerous estate, in regard of the world, and the enemies they had in it,
to rejoice and be merry in the Lord; notwithstanding all the snares and
dangers, that infested them on every side. And the Apostle Peter writing to
all the dispersed believers of the Jews in many countries, in his 1. Epistle,
1.8. says, Ye believing in him, that is in Christ, though you see him not, you
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Though Christ were absent in body,
yet this faith of theirs in him, made them all to rejoice, with unspeakable and
glorious joy, as the people of Samaria did after they believed in Christ. Thus
then we see briefly what is the only way to attain, and come unto this joy
here in this exhortation of the Apostle commended unto us. But I have both in
a direction, and in Sermons handled this at large, and will say no more of it.

Let us now see when we have it, How to keep and increase this joy.

The first mean.


how we may both keep and increase this joy in our hearts. And this is to be
done by many means. The first and the most principal is, by the reverent,
heedfull and attentive hearing of the word of God. For that, as it has bin the
principal mean of God to beget faith, and to breed and begin this joy in
thine heart: so is it the chief and sovereign mean, whereby God will both
continue and increase this joy in thee: for he has given this charge to his
servants; whom he trusts with his word, to reveal and to discover daily in
the preaching of the Word, more plainly unto us the riches of his grace in the
Gospel. Now it cannot be but the more clear fight we come to have of the
mercy of God in Christ, the more our hearts must needs take joy and pleasure
in it. Secondly, by the preaching of the Word, we have not only the eye of our
understanding cleared, and the mists and vailes of our ignorance remedied, but
our affections are also whetted on to a greater delight and joy in the
goodness of God already known unto us. Our memories also are continually
renewed and refreshed, when we hear the same or the like doctrine, promises and
exhortations iterated and repeated unto us. Would we therefore ever have our joy
to continue fresh and flourishing, then let us never be weary of hearing the
word of God taught and preached unto us: this was the seed of our joy, and this
is that which feeds it, causes it to continue, grow and flourish, and without
which, it cannot but wither, decay, and die in us.

The second.
But besides the preaching of the Word, the Supper of the Lord is very
effectual to this purpose. For hereby these mercies, the cause of all our joy,
are brought, not only to our minds and memories, which is done by the
preaching of the Word; but nearer yet, even to our view, and touch and taste,
that we may after a sort even feel them with our hands, and see them with our
eyes, and taste them with our mouths.

The third.
To this seal of the Word, we should add the daily and continual reading of
the Word and Scriptures of God. For what are the Scriptures, but as one well
terms them; the letter of the Creator to the creature, the letter of God unto
man? If we be delighted in reading over many times, the kind letter of some
special friend, unto us; we cannot but much more joy in reading so kind and
loving writings of God unto us. But the word of God is more fitly, as I take
it, in the Scripture called the will and testament of God. For herein the Lord
has set down what inheritances, what bequeathes and legacies, he has willed
and bequeathed unto us. Can we read these continually, carefully and
attentively, and not be moved to joy? No, it is impossible. For it is not in
this Testament of God, as it is commonly in the wills of men. There, though
there be many and great things bequeathed; yet in a few readings over, a man
may come to sound the bottom of them. But the will of God contains an
endless and bottomless sea of riches, that a man can never sound the depth,
nor reach the bottom of it.

Practice therefore this duty of reading: oh! how glad would many great Kings
and holy Prophets have been, to have had these holy books of Scripture to
read, which we have now, and could not? To have had (I say) those books which
we now have, and are contented to let them lie by us the whole day, or week,
and never look into them. They rejoiced to read continually the dark and
obscure promises of the books of Moses and the Prophets: but we scarce
vouchsafe to read the clear and manifest declaration of the glorious Gospel
of Christ; as it is by the Evangelists and Apostles written and recorded unto
us. Their care in this, and our carelessness in reading the Scriptures, is one
cause why they in those dark and mistie times, rejoiced by faith to see the
day ^f Christ to come, and we scarce rejoice to behold the (...) christ past,
and recorded unto us. Ye are therefore all (...) be exhorted, that are
desirous of this happiness and joy, whereunto you are by the Apostle exhorted,
if ye can read; that ye take even every day, if it may be, some little time,
some quarter of an hour at least, to read something in the Scripture or some
godly books, which may make you the more joyful and merry in God, all the day
and night after. If ye cannot read, nor cannot get convenient means to learn;
yet be careful that your children or servants may, that at the least you may
hear them read.

Men's excuses answered.


All the days of his life, that he may learn to fear God, and to keep the
words of the law, and not (...) from the commandments to the right hand, nor
to the (...) may prolong his days. This duty that is there laid upon (...)
King, lies upon every Christian, he is to read the word of God, that he may
observe it, and it may be well unto him Ioh. 5.39. Christ speaks it to all
the Jews. Search the Scriptures, which they must do by the continual reading
of them. And every where, our Savior Christ alleges to the^ the reading of
the word, saying, Have you not read what David did? and, what the Scripture
says, the stone that the builders refused, Acts. 4.11.
is made the head of the corner. He that reads let him consider, And Revel.
3. Blessed is he that reads, and hears the words of this book. And without
this reading often of the word, it is impossible, to resist readily the
tentations of Satan. For the devil will bring such color of Scripture, for
his tentations, as we cannot resist, if we have not by diligent reading, the
Scripture ready at hand, and upon our fingers ends, that we may answer with
our Savior out of the Scripture, It is written, and, again it is written: and
so against every tentation.



But yet also to thy reading, A fourth mean
holy meditation and conference of the word of God is to be joined. For examine
and thou shall find them that have attained to the highest degree of joy in
the word, to have been continual meditators and conferrers of it; and by
meditation and conference to have nourished and fostered this their joy. David
that was a man even filled with this heavenly joy in the word, and therefore
cries out, Psalm. 119.13. part, How sweet is thy law unto my mouth? yea
sweeter then honey unto my mouth. This David, I say, was a man of daily and
continual study and meditation in the word: verse. 1. he says, Thy word it is
my meditation continually. And in the sixth part, I will talk of thy
testimonies before Kings* and will not be ashamed. The presence of Kings and
great Princes should not abash him; but even before them, he would confer and
talk of the word of God. Read an excellent place to this purpose containing
both an exhortation and a promise. Josh. 1.8. The Lord commands Joshua that
he let not the book of God go out of his mouth. It must not go out of his
mouth, that is, he must be talking, speaking, and conferring of it.

Secondly, he must meditate therein day and night, that he may observe and do,
according to all the law of Moses, that so he might prosper whither soever he
went. So that, would thou prosper and rejoice in whatsoever thou go
about? the way is to meditate, talk, and confer of the word of God. And in
the first Psalm, they that meditate in the law of God day and night, are
pronounced blessed. For whatsoever they do, shall prosper. Which prosperity
has always joy as an attendant upon it. But as all meditation of the word is
a mean, in some sort, to continue and increase our joy in God: so especially
meditating and conferring of the most gracious and comfortable promises of the
Gospel. The meditation and conference of these are as it were bellows, to
blow and kindle the sp^^^es of our joy, which are in our souls.

So then, we see the hearing of the word preached, and the reading of the word
written, and the meditation and conference of both, and especially of the
comfortable promises of the Gospel, are singular means to continue, and to
increase our joy in the Lord. The fifth mean. Practice.
But withal, let us remember to join to these the practice of the word, thus
heard and read, and meditated and conferred on. In that place I quoted, Josh.
1.8. The law must be in his mouth; he must speak of it, and he must meditate
in it. But to what end? to rest there? No: but that he may observe, and do
according to all the law of Moses, etc. and then he should prosper. For this is
a most certain truth, that without the practice of the word, neither hearing,
neither reading, neither conferring, neither meditating, can cause or continue
any sound joy in the heart. Read 2. Ecclesiastes: Surely, says the Preacher,
to a man that is good in his sight, Eccles. 2.
God gives wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he gives
pain, etc. God gives joy (says the Preacher) to him that is good in his
fight. Read again Ioh. 15.10. If you keep my commandments you shall abide
in my love, as I have kept the commandments of my father, and abide in his
love. And then immediately he adds in the next verse: These things have I
spoken unto you, that my joy may abide in you, and that your joy may be full.
Our Savior gives charge to his Disciples, to keep and to practice his
commandments, that his joy may abide, and that it may grow to be full in them.
Many places might easily be alleged to this purpose. Proverbs 29.6. In the
transgression of an evil man is his snare, but the righteous does sing and
rejoice. The wicked man by his transgression insnareth and intangleth himself
in sorrow: but the righteous that directs his way by the word, he shall be
merry, and sing for joy. The scripture in sundry places beats upon this
point: and therefore I will not stand so upon it. Do we therefore desire to
lead and live a joyful life? Let us become good men by the practice of Gods
word. Otherwise let us not look to have our joy continue. But rather let us
look for sorrow, yea for sorrow upon sorrow. As it is written, Psalm. 32.10.
Many sorrows shall come to the wicked man.

To these means that I have spoken of, may be added, Psalm 32.10.
some, that are touched by this our Apostle, 1. These. 5.17.18. The sixth mean.
Prayer.
etc. For having exhorted them in the 16. verse to rejoice always. In the words
following, he shows by what means they may continue this their joy. And that
is, first by continual prayer. For we have the promise of Christ, that
whatsoever we ask of God, according to his will, in the name of Christ it shall
be given unto us. Now this we know, and are well assured of, that it is
according to the will of God, that we should rejoice, so that if we pray for it
earnestly, and continually, he will be most willing and ready to grant our
petition. Seek therefore the continuance and increase of this joy at Gods hand,
and thou shall find it, knock for it by prayer, at the door of Gods mercy,
and he will give it unto thee. But alas, this duty of prayer for joy is
carelessly, for the most part, neglected. Men presume, as it should seem, they
can keep it well enough, though they never sue and seek to God for it, the
fountain and author of it. If they that have continued a long time in Christ's
school, should try, and examine how small proceedings they have made in this
Christian duty, and search to find out the cause of their so little profiting,
they shall find by trial, one maine cause to have bin, the neglect of prayer
for so excellent a grace as this is.

The seventh: Thanksgiving.
Next unto prayer, the Apostle, in the place before named, adds thanksgiving:
For though we crave and beg never so much, this joy at Gods hands; yet if he
send us joy according to our desire; and we be not mindful to return thanks
unto him, he will withhold and withdraw his hand from giving it to us. God
indeed has bound himself to give grace, and to give joy unto them that ask
it; but yet so, that they be thankful after: without which thankfulness for
benefits received, they, that come to God, plainly declare that they pray not
as they ought. For when we pray for joy, or pray for any grace, we are not
simply to rest in the desire it self: but our desire must aim at a further
end; and that is, that we receiving these, may praise and bless God for them.
Mark the Prophet David in the sixth Psalm, in the thirtieth Psalm, and in
diverse others: he desires that the Lord would give him life: but he asks not
life simply, that he might live; but because the dead cannot praise God, here
as the living do. And therefore desires life, that living he might praise
God: After the same manner, is framed also the prayer of Hezechiah Esaias. 38. So
therefore we are to pray for life, that living we may praise God: and pray for
joy, that rejoicing we may praise him. we are not to ask life simply to live,
but that living we may praise God, neither are we to ask joy simply for it
self; but, that rejoicing in God and in his goodness, we might have cause, and
be the fitter to bless God for it. And thus if we come to God for supply of
new joy with thanks, for the former obtained, God is ready, and willing to
hear us, But seeing I cannot go through all the means of preserving our joy,
at this time, I will here stay for this time.

THE FOVRTH SERMON UPON THE SAME TEXT.
NOw to proceed where I left, The eighth: Not to quench the spirit.
the next duty prescribed by the Apostle for the continuance and increase of
our joy, is, That we quench not the Spirit. Where, by the spirit, I take to be
meant, the good motions of the Spirit of God in our hearts. For when these good
motions, caused in us by the spirit, are cherished; the spirit of God is
cherished: and being cheared so, he cheareth and fills our hearts with joy,
and annointeth us with the oil of gladness. On the contrary: quench these good
motions, and thou quenchest the spirit of God, which should cause this joy in
thine heart. Therefore, comes there at any time, any good motions into thine
heart? be careful, by all means possible, to entertain them, to cherish and
to make much of them. So shall thou make glad the good spirit of God, and he
shall give peace, and joy to thy soul. But is this commonly practiced? Nothing
less. For as it was said of the Israelites, forty years long, they grieved
the Spirit of God: so may it be said of the most among us, our whole life has
bin, a continual grieuing, and provoking the good spirit of God. For which of
us can excuse our selves, but that we have had diverse good motions, sometimes
from others, sometimes from our selves; and yet we have resisted them.
Sometimes we have bin moved to hear the word of God; yet either for some vain
pleasure, or small profit, we have neglected it. Many times we have had a
motion to leave swearing, cursing, lying, and some especial sins we have bin
given unto; yet have we not cherished these motions: nay we have banished them
away, and shut; as it were, the doors of our hearts against them. No marvel
therefore, the spirit of God affordes unto us so scanty measure of heavenly
joy, when we thus daily and continually grieve him; when as fast as he kindles
any grace, or good thing in us, we are ready to quench it, and as it were to
cast water upon it.

Quench evil motions.
But yet if thou will keep thy joy, remember and be careful to quench another
spirit, that is, all the motions and suggestio^s that he seeks to put into
thy mind. For as the Spirit of God is the Spirit of joy,; and being cheared by
thee, will cheer thy heart in God: So Satan is a spirit of heaviness, and a
spirit of despair; entertain him and follow his motions; and thou fallest
into the way of despair and heaviness: resist him and his suggestions, and
thou shall both cheer the Spirit of God, and free thy self from all that
sorrow and heaviness, that the devil seeks to bring into thy soul,

Our joy in the best things must be predominant.
Again, that thou may keep thy joy in God: remember it is not sufficient
for thee to keep some kind of joy and delight in good things: but thy joy in
these things, must be a predominant, Herod, he had some kind of joy in hearing
John Baptists preaching, whereupon also he did many good things, but because
his joy was not predominant, but the joy of pleasures did exceed it, which he
took in his incestuous adultery, therefore he lost even that joy he had. And
this experience teaches us, that the setting of our joy upon one thing,
remoueth it from other things: he that has his chief delight taken up in his
profit, is the less set upon pastimes: and he that is chiefly set upon one
pleasure, is less bent unto another. But this must needs fall out rather, that
in the settling our minds upon earthly pleasures, we shall withdraw them from
heavenly ioies. For there is a far greater odds and co^trariety between
earthly pleasures and heavenly joys, then is between one earthly pleasure and
another. The rule therefore is, that we use a temperancie and a moderation in
the lawful pleasures of this life, and so rejoice, as the Apostle teaches us,
1. Cor. 7.30. as if we rejoiced not. And this rule we must remember, is to be
kept even in lawful pleasures, and such as we have good ground and warrant to
use from the word of God. For as for pleasure in sin, be it in any time, in
any place or company, with what circumstance soever, it hinders and quenches
our rejoicing in God.

But you will ask me, How this may be attained.
how you may come to have a predominant joy in the best duties,: for it is not
an easy matter to alter our affections, set upon these inferior delights. I
answer, we shall come to a predominancie of delight in good things, if we be
ever diligent in accustoming and exercising our selves in them. Accustom thy
self to earnest prayer, and thou shall delight in nothing more then in calling
upon God: exercise thy self in repentance and mortification of sin, and this
shall become every day more easy and less grievous, yea and in the end
delightsome unto thee. On the contrary, do thou find thy heart taken up
with over great delight in the things of the earth? The daily and diligent
exercise of holy and heavenly duties will slake, and quench thy joy in them.

And again, as by the practice of them, thou have taken that delight thou have
in them; so if thou shall disuse, and vnaccustome thy self from them, both
from the practicing of them, the speaking of them with pleasure, and the musing
and thinking upon them: thou shall lessen and diminish thy joy in them. For
this experience can teach us, good precept given by a Heathen Philosopher,
which may well beseem a Christian to learn: that a man should make choice of
the best life, and custom would make it easy and pleasant unto him. We must
not first look for joy, and then to practice good duties; but we must labor
and sweat with exercising and accustoming our selves thereto, and afterward we
shall find true joy, from the continual practice of them. Practice sobriety,
patience and mildness, and a delight in them will follow of it own accord.

Intermission of good duties dangerous.
Hence then we see, it is very dangerous in regard of the loss of our joy, to
omit for a time, and to make intermission of good duties: as also to give leave
for a time to our selves, to the practice of ought that has been, and is like
to be a hinderance to the progress and proceeding of our Christian joy. For
omit a good duty this day, and think it is not long to the next, it shall be
done as well then; thou shall find less disposition in thy self unto it; and
less delight in the doing of it, by that intermission of thine. And again,
give thy self liberty, but at one time, to practice that thou should not,
and think thou will not be so far carried with thy delight another time;
that one action of thine shall make thy delight stronger,

Again, because they intermit it still, and defer, from this day to the
next, the practice of it. Or if they have grown to some less delight, or some
dislike of something that were to be left; yet by this taking of liberty now
to do it, and then upon another occasion to do it, the delight returns as
great as ever it was. If me^ have come to take pleasure in the Sabbaths of God,
in ye hearing of his Word, in prayer, in reading, conference and other holy
duties upon that day; this delight many times grows cold in them, because
they think, yet they may take liberty, and dispense with themselves for a
day, when either their profit calls them away to worldly affairs, or some
ill custom to vanity and pastimes, draws them away. For this aba^doning thy
joy, which thou might take in the holy duties of the Sabbath but for one
day, will make thee the more unfit to take any joy in them for many days
after. This keeping of one Sabbath to the devil,

The last means which I will note, whereby we may both keep, and increase our
joy, is, that whenever the Lord shall call us out to troubles and crosses, The
last mean. To submit our selves to the Lord in our troubles.
that we submit our selves willingly and patiently to go thorough them. For
this is a certain and a sure position always in Gods children, that sorrows
and troubles sent unto them of God, are a direct way whereby the Lord intends
to bring them unto greater joy; and the greater, and more continued troubles
the Lord brings upon them, to the greater joy does he carry them, if they
willingly, and patiently pass through them. Read, 2. Cor. 1.5. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us; So our consolation abounds, through
Christ. Mark, As the sufferings abound, so the consolation and joy likewise
does abound. And this is suitable, and well agreeing to all the actions of God,
for the most part. For when he means to exalt thee highest, then he first
humbles thee by afflictions, and casts thee down lowest. None was ever so
low abased, and so deeply cast down as was our Savior. Therefore also, as
it is said. Phil. 2.9. God highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth; and things under the earth. The like we see in
David, when God meant to exalt him to the kingdom, he led him thither, through
many troubles and afflictions. The Israelites God led them into a land flowing
with milk and honey; but he led them through barren, and a terrible, and
fearful wilderness. Joseph was exalted to be next the King in Egypt, but he was
carried thorough pits, and prisons and bondage, unto it.

On the contrary, mark the dealing of God with the wicked: he spares them
here, because he means to punish them in hell. He feeds them in fat and good
pastures, because he means to kill and to slaughter them after. Does God
therefore call thee to trouble, this is the way he has prepared to bring thee
to joy, if thou will follow it. Read an excellent place to this purpose. Acts
20.22. And now behold, says the Apostle Paul to the elders of Ephesus, I go
bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what shall befall me there, save
that the holy Ghost in every city witnesses, that bonds and afflictions abide
for me. Mark now his resolution, but I pass not at all, (says he) neither
is my life dear unto my self, that I may fulfill my course with joy. He saw
many dangers, and many troubles before him: but yet he would not avoid them,
for in so doing he should have bereaved himself of former joy, and deprived
himself of much comfort, that by these he assured himself of. I speak not
this, that I would have men to rush themselves into needles dangers. No, if God
give means to avoid them lawfully, and with a good conscience; it is
presumption in us, and a tempting of God, to cast our selves into them. But
when we know, and are assured we are called unto them by God, Paul was, (for he
went up to Jerusalem bound in the spirit) Then we may and ought, willingly to
undergo them. And when we are thus called, it is easily known. For if
trouble, be before us, and no means with safety of a good conscience to avoid
them, then God calls us. And we if we will with Paul finish our course with
joy we may not go about to avoid them. Heb. 12.11. Thus then we see, how this
blessed joy is to be gotten, and also how it is to be maintained, and increased
in us.

Of the recovery of joy.
In the last place, we are to see, how it is to be recovered, when we have lost
the sense and feeling of it in our hearts. In this case, the remedy is to be
prescribed, according to the occasion thereof, that is the loosing of it. For
sometime it is taken away by God, to try our patient and constant minds.
Sometimes again, either by some great sin committed against God; or by
continual neglect of the means, whereby we should continue it. In the former
kind there is required of us, both a more diligent and careful continuance in
all good duties and exercises of Christianity; and a patient attending and
waiting for the restoring of this continual joy* Psalm 5.8. For God does not
take away the sense of our joy, to bereave us clean of it; but to keep and
exercise our patience, and stir up our faith, and to make us to long and
desire after it, thus he took from Job the feeling of his joy, and troubled
him with fears and terrors: but it was to no ill end, neither that he took
away al he had. For when he had tried him, he restored double to him again.
And no doubt, but he gave him also a double portion of joy, for that he had
taken from him.

Here it may be demanded, how we may know, when the loss of our joy, is by the
former occasion of Gods tentation, I answer sift and try thy heart narrowly
whether some special sin, or some want of practice of good duties has not
caused this loss of thine. If thou examine diligently, and find thy
conscience before God to excuse thee, thou may then take it, as a fatherly
trial and tentation, sent from God to try thy patience with. Yet this know
withal, though thou can find nothing in thy self, yet Gods eyes are
sharper sighted then thine are; and he can see just cause in thee to punish
thee, for that thou think thy self the clearest in. The first mean to
recover our joy being lost.
And therefore even in this case thou must humble thy self, as Job did before
God; and then God will restore thee thy joy with advantage, as he did unto Job
whatsoever he had taken from him* but especially this humiliation is to be put
in practice, when by trial we find, either some grievous sins, or our
continual negligence, to have bereaved us of the treasure of our joy. For
without this humbling our selves before God, and hearty confession of our sin,
it is impossible, ever to recover it again.

Look into the example of the Prophet David, he had committed adultery with
Batsheba; and murder upon Vriah, and this lost his joy, as we read Psalm.
51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. What did David first? read
Psalm. 32.3. He hold his tongue at ye first. But what came of it? came his joy
again? No: his very bones consumed with grief, and he rored all the day long,
Gods hand was heavy upon him day and night; his moisture turned into the
drought of summer. In the next place therefore, he be thought himself to
acknowledge his sin, and to confess his wickedness, against himself, and
then he found comfort. God removed from him his heavy hand; the bone which God
had broken in him, then rejoiced, and God forgave him the punishment of his
sin.

The second mean.
But often, yet, it falls out that some men, for want of a sufficient
understanding of the word of God, and their own case, cannot by this mean
receive any comfort. For these men therefore, it is a good course to restore
either unto the minister, if he be a man of knowledge and learning in the word
of God, and of conscience and fidelity, accordingly: or else to some other of
trust and experience in the word of God; And reveal, and discover unto them,
what it is that makes them either, troubled in mind, or dead and blockish,
for want of spiritual joy and comfortt. For not only we are like to have the
help, and benefit of their counsel, for our particular case; but even the very
discovery of the cause of this our deadnes, and help how to remedy it, is a
means oftentimes to begin again the sense and feeling of our joy.

To these means, if they alone will not serve, it were good to add fasting
and prayer. The third mean.
For these are of that power, that they are able, being rightly used, to cast
out the devil himself, out of those, in whom he has taken corporal
possession. As our Savior teaches. Mat. 17.21. And much more no doubt, will
it be able to expel that heaviness and deadnes of spirit, that possesses us.
And to raise us up again to the sense of our former joy, But here it will be
good, especially to have regard of that which I spoke of before, to observe
most dilligently every good motion of the spirit of God; and to give them the
best, and the kindest entertainment we can. For as we commonly leese our joy,
by resisting the good motions of the spirit of joy and comfort; so by a hearty
and kind entertaining of them, one time or other thy joy is likest to return
unto thee again.

But to draw to a conclusion of all, we have seen how earnest the Lord is by
the Apostle, to call and exhort us to this duty of rejoicing in the Lord: we
have also seen, by what means we may attain to this joy, if we yet have it
not, and how many and special means God has given us, to keep and to
increase it when we have it, and to recover it, if we have lost the sense and
feeling of it. What then is our duty, but that we try and examine our own
hearts, to find whether ever we felt in our hearts any true rejoicing in God,
and in good things, and if we never knew, what it meant, let us learn, (in
that sort that I have showed) to get it: and so after; to keep it.

And especially by weaning our selves, for the love of this joy, from other
delights, pleasures, and profits, wherein we have bin taken up: and willingly
undergoing troubles, and crosses, (when God has called us unto them,) for the
same, and so to keep it. If our joy be lost, never rest til we find it again.
And if we have by careless negligence suffered the devil, to bereave us of
this so rich and precious a jewel of our joy; yet let us by all means
possible, labor incessantly, day and night, to renew and recover that we have
lost: and let us never give any rest unto God, nor unto our own hearts, until
we feel the heavenly sparkles of our former joy again kindled in us. And when
it has pleased God, again to restore it to us, let us beware greatly of a
second relapse. It is very easy without dilligent care taking to be lost, Let
none take thy crown from thee.
and many enemies lie in wait, to take it from us. But it is not so easy to
be found again, when it is lost. The thief is not so chary to keep thy gold
from thee, when he has stolen it, as the devil is to keep away, and to hide
thy joy from thee, that thou might never find it again.

Now though I have already used some reasons to persuade us to be careful of
this duty, yet considering our dulnes and untowardness unto it; Motives to joy
in God.
it shall not be unfit to add for a final conclusion, a few motives to make
us the better to remember, and to put in practice these means, whereof you
have now heard. And to omit to speak of that which before I touched, that al
other joy, besides this, vanishes away, and nothing in the end remains, but
sorrow and vexation of Spirit. As Solomon has left his own experience to
teach us. And that this joy is of it self, the most complete, and absolute
joy that can be possessed,

Delight thy self (says the Psalmist) in the Lord, and he shall give thee
thine hearts desire. There is no man but would be glad to have his desire
satisfied. Lo then the way: Delight thy self in God, be careful to keep
this blessed joy; and God, who cannot lie, has promised to give thee
whatsoever thy heart can desire: so ready is the Lord to fulfill the desire of
them, that rejoice and delight themselves in him. It was a great favor of the
Lord unto Solomon, 1. King. 3. to ask him what he should give him, and he
would be ready to give it; yet God made him promise but for one request: what
a favor of God is this then unto thee, that there shall be no good thing thy
tongue can ask, Psalm. 84.13.14.
or thy heart desire, but the Lord will give it to thee, so be it, thou delight
thy self in him? But consider, for thy further care yet of this duty, that
this promise implies also a threatening in it. And that is, if thou refusest to
delight in God, and wilt take thy pleasure and delight in vanity, in sin, in
the breach of the Sabbath, and of other duties; God will deny thee every desire
of thy heart. In that which thou desire joy in, God will send thee sorrow: in
that thou desire a blessing in, God will blow upon it with his curse.

The not regarding this duty, A note of an Hypocrite not to joy in God.
is a plain and evident token of an hypocrite, whom God hates, For read Job.
27.10. The hypocrite, (says Job) will he set his delight in the almighty?
will he call upon God at all times? making both these alike to be notes and
brandes of a dissembling hypocrite, that he will not at all times call upon
God: neither will set his constant and continual delight, in God. A fearful
thing we know it is, to be an hypocrite, whose portion is hell fire. Mat.
24.51. Matthew. 24.51.
it is said, the Lord of the evil servant shall cut him off, and shall give
him his portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
If thou will have no part nor portion in this lot of hypocrites, be no
hypocrite: delight in the Lord, which hypocrites do not, neither can do; and
so thou shall avoid it. On the contrary, this holy joy, is a note of a man
renewed and regenerated by the Spirit of God. Read Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the
spirit, is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, Galath. 5.22.
goodness, faith, meeknes, temperancy. And against these is no law: They that
find this joy in their hearts, from the Spirit of God. There is no law, or
curse of God to seize upon them. For they are guided, by the Spirit of God.

FINIS.

