THE DOCTRINE OF FAITH,

Wherein are practically handled ten principal points, which explain the
Nature and Use of it.

By JOHN ROGERS, Preacher of Gods Word at Dedham in Essex.

ESA. 7. 9. If you will not believe, surely you shall not be established.
LONDON, Printed for N. N. and William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the entering into Po^es-head-Alley out of Lumbar-street. 1627.

To the Right Worshipful Mistress HELEN BACON of Shribland-hall, to the Lady
MILDMAY, wife to Sir HENRY MILDMAY of Graces, and to Mistress GVRDON, wife to
Master BRAMPTON GVRDON of Assington: the Author prays all increase of Faith,
many good days here, and eternal life in the kingdom of heaven.
Right Worshipful, when I thought (according to the custom) of putting forth
this little poor Treatise in the name of some virtuous and worthy person,
straitway you three abovenamed came into my mind, and I knew not how to sever
you, nor which I could leave out, therefore made bold rather to Dedicate it to
you all together, for these reasons: First, God has nearly joined you all
together by many bonds, both Civil and Religious, both of Nature and Grace,
and has given you to be all of one mind in the Lord. I have also had
exceeding great experience of your love both to me and to my ministry, and am
much bound unto you all. I thought it therefore meet to render this as a small
token and testimony of my unfeigned love and true thankfulness to your Worships
all. And though never a one of you but deserve to bear the Name alone of a
far better work than this, yet seeing as this is my first fruits in this
kind, so I know not, but its most like to be the last, therefore I have been
thus bold to join you all together, humbly craving your acceptance of this
poor mite. And thus desiring to you all, a principal portion of blessing of
this and all other holy helps that it pleases God to bring to your hands, to
further you well to his heavenly kingdom, I humbly take my leave of your
Worships, resting ever.

Your Worships in any service that I am able. I. R.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, these things that thou find in this little Treatise of
Faith, were the sum of sundry Sermons preached in my ordinary weeke-day
Lecture, seven or eight years ago, which I wrote brokenly and briefly for my
own memory, leaving out many things that in the Uses and Applications of the
points were delivered in preaching, which should set an edge upon the doctrines
delivered. I was requested by some of the Auditors, when I had finished them in
preaching, that they might have them still at hand for help of their memories,
and furthering of their profiting thereby: But I thought it a good mercy of God
to me, that I might do his Church some little service by preaching (wherein it
has pleased his Majesty to give me some success and blessing, which is all I
have to rejoice of in this world) and as for printing, the knowledge of my own
unfitness, and my want of leisure made me to refuse that motion, and never to
give my mind to that work. But now of late a special godly friend by much
importunity drew my Notes from me, and has gotten them written out (which I
never could or would do) whose Copy when I had perused, I found things so
shortly and imperfectly set down, as I much desired it might have been
suppressed still, but his strong persuasions that it might be of good use to
the poor people of God, in time overcame me: though thou shall find it far
otherwise than I would have had it if I had had leisure to have revised it, or
then if I ^ad yielded to the first motion it ^ight have been, for then when
things were fresh in mind, I could with little more pains have set them down
more fully and perfectly than now I can, or could if I had ^eysure by many
degrees; neither could I possibly in cold blood, and so long after, call to
mind or write those stirring passages that God brings to hand in the heat of
preaching. Well, craving pardon for all defects, I commit it to thy hand as it
is, humbly begging the Lords blessing and good hand to go withal. If any by
the Excellency, Necessity and Rareness of this grace of Faith shall be
provoked to labor to be possessed of it, that are as yet without it, and those
that have it to nourish it, that it may increase to the best degrees, and to
live by it to the glory of God, their increase of comfort here, and salvation
hereafter; I shall have attained my end, be heartily glad, and give God
thanks. If any reap any fruit hereby (as if they read it advisedly,
teachably, and with seeking God, I hope they shall) give God the praise, and
pray for the Author, and for this crazed and last part of his life.

But let me advertise thee of one thing, good Christian Reader, that howsoever
thou shall often find in this Treatise, Faith spoken of (...) of a particular
persuasion of a man's heart, that Christ Jesus is his, and that he shall be
saved by him, that yet it is not meant, that that is the first act of Faith,
which is rather an accepting of Christ, a leaning upon him, and a laying hold
on him offered by God; And then after by a second act of Faith by finding a
true and unfamed change of heart and life wrought in him, he is then and
thereby persuaded that he is one of those that Christ dyed for. Therefore this
I take to be a good description of Faith; That it is the mighty work of the
holy Ghost, whereby a sinner humbled by the Law, and quite driven out of
himself, by or upon the gracious and sweet voice of the Gospel, and the free
and unpartiall offer of mercy from God in Christ, comes in time to cast
himself upon Christ, and trust to him as the Allsufficient and only ^^^anes of
his salvation, and (...) willing to be subject to (...) his days. And to say
that Faith is a particular Application of Christ to a man's own soul, is a
true and safe definition thereof: for there be that do truly believe in
Christ, and that to salvation, if they should then dye, that yet are not come
to be persuaded that Christ is theirs; which comes after, either by the
testimony of Gods Spirit, or the witness of their own spirit, from the truth
of their Sanctification.

Having advertised thee of this, I commend thee to God, and to the word of his
grace which is able to build thee up further, and give the^ inheritance with
them that be sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus.

The weakest and most unworthy of the true servants of Jesus Christ, I. R.

SEeing a lively and justifying Faith is above all other graces most excellent,
profitable and necessary, as being that alone instrument whereby we apply unto
our selves Christ Jesus and all his benefits for our justification and
salvation: And seeing withal it is of such difficulty to be obtained (for it
is as easy to fulfill the Law as to believe the Gospel) and a thing wherein
men may and do so soon and often deceive themselves, and so dangerous and
deadly if they be deceived: therefore I purpose by the assstance of Gods grace
and holy Spirit, to handle this doctrine of Faith at large. And for our more
orderly and distinct proceeding herein, I will principally insist upon these
points and heads which follow:

1. What Faith is.

2. The Author or chief efficient, and by what means it is wrought in us.

3. The degrees of it.

4. The excellency of it.

5. The difficulty of it.

6. The necessity of it.

7. The perpetuity of it, and that true faith cannot be wholly lost.

8. The signs and fruits whereby it may be known.

9. The lets and impediments of it, which make it to be of such rareness.

10. The contraries of it.

And the Lord erable me so sufficiently to handle these things as they be in
themselves profitable and necessary.

First I will show what faith is. 1. Faith what. 1.
This is needful to be well cleared and handled as the ground of all the
other points that follow. To which end I will first distinguish it from those
things that are called faith in Scripture, and be not the faith I am about,
and from false and unsufficient faiths, and so show what it is not first, and
then what it is.

1. It is not our believing any man's word, or promise to us, or man's writing,
which is a faith and confidence in him; As if a great man should promise to
free a poor man out of prison, by paying his debt, he believing it, it
comforts him much: But the faith we are about to speak of, respects God
only, and his Word, and not man's words or writings, nor humane things.

2. It is not fidelity and faith fullness in keeping our promises, which is
called faith on Gods part, as Romans 3. 3. so on ours, Gal. 5. and among the
fruits of the Spirit, faith or fidelity is reckoned one, so Mat. 23. 23.

3. It is not the doctrine of the Gospel, which yet is called Faith Acts 6. 7.
Gal. 1. 23. and often in the epistle to Timothy.

4. It is not a particular faith of the lawfulness of this or that to be done,
as in things indifferent, of our liberty purchased by Christ from the bondage
of the ceremonial Law, which in Paul's time some stronger Christians believed,
and therefore did eat any thing without making conscience, and which yet the
weaker did not, but made conscience still of them: and now this is a faith to
believe their liberty spoken of, Romans 14. have thou faith? which is not to be
understood either of a general faith, believing the whole word of God, nor of
justifying faith, but of that particular liberty, and therefore he bids them
that have it, to keep it to themselves, at least for a while, and not by words
or deeds to show it forth to the hurt of their weak brethren. Now the other
faith it is not meet we keep it to ourselves, but we must confess with our
mouths, and be ready ever to give account, and also must show forth the fruits
of it to the example of others.

It is not historical faith, History. 1
which is a believing, not of the stories of the Bible only to be true, but a
believing of the whole word of God, the articles of the faith; but believed
only in a historical manner generally, not applied particularly to himself.

To know the word of God more or less of it, yea the whole Scripture, and to
give assent that it is true, and go no further, is historical faith, and may
be in reprobates both within the Church, as also in such as be without the
Church; as Turks believe that there is a God, that Christ was borne (...) the
Virgin Mary, the resurrection of the dead, etc. yea, the Devils have it, James
2. 19. And therefore such a faith is unable to save. But true faith is this,
and more, it adds particular application of it to his own self. Every true
believer has historical faith, but historical only is not true faith,
therefore let none content themselves herewith, for howsoever they may think
themselves some body if they can tell the stories of the Bible and can
discourse, and because they verily believe all things to be most certain, yet
they do no more than some Atheists, no more than the devils, and therefore it
is poor to brag thereof.

It is not Temporary faith, Tempor. 2.
of which much in the Scripture is spoken Mat. 13. parable of the sower, the
thorny ground Luke 8. Ioh. 2. Many believe, but our Savior would not commit
himself unto them, and Simon Magus believed. This has more than the former,
Differences between true says and temporary vid. Down^^^ combat between the
flesh and the spirit, p. 266.
adding to knowledge and assent, a profession of the Word: yet living still in
their sins, and carnal estate, it is not sufficient for salvation.

Some Temporaries go further than some, diverse degrees; some besides
profession are moved at the Word, affected with some kinds of grief at such
doctrines as serve to move grief, and joy in that that moves joy, hear the
Word with joy, yea also reform many things, cut away outward evils, take up
many good duties public, yea and private. As some of the Israelites by
murmuring were cut off a little after they came out of Egypt, some went on
further and then cut off, some further, and there fell, some even within eleven
days journey, and never yet came to Canaan; so here Thus far went Pharaoh,
Iehus, Ahab, Ananias and Saphira, Judas, Nicholas the Deacon, Demas, Alexander;
notable. Temporaries, and yet but Temporaries, seeing afterward they fell
away. For men may have great knowledge, assent, profession, yea excellent
gifts, and shows of every grace, (and go a great way to the deceiving of
themselves and many others) and yet for want of particular apprehension of
Christ, they are not planted into him, have no sap of grace and sanctification;
and therefore cannot continue but wither away in time, like seed in stony
ground, hasty indeed at first but not durable, as corn on the house top. This
being built on a sandy foundation, as the countenance of men in authority,
profit, pleasure, credit, novelty, when any of these fail, or some strong
temptation comes, they break off and fall away, or if none such come, they
may continue so to their end, and perish, though most be discovered, at least
vehemently suspected of those that have understanding of the way of salvation.

This temporary faith is called faith abusively because it is like to Faith, as
the div^ll was called Samuel that was raised up like Sam.
Though the world, first and last takes them for right honest men, and good
Christians as can be, and though they themselves would desire to be no
better, yet the servants of God suspect many of these by their coldness,
standing ever at a stay, taking liberty in some things, especially if it be a
little point, lothnesse to be examined, their whole estate never troubled with
doubting, etc.

True faith goes further than this, for the believer particularly applies
Christ to himself truly, and so lives by him a true sanctified life: this
temporary falls short; therefore let us beware, and not trust to it, the rather
because most of the people of England be deceived herewith, and go no further.
Yea most of the people be of the worse Temporaries, only believing the word
of God to be true, and professing it because law enjoynes them so to do; but
see how most live after their own lusts, and therefore have no true faith
which purifieth the heart. And this would soon be seen if any alteration of
religion should come, flying as sheep from before a dog: so most of these
would turn from the Gospel, to the Mass, as they did in Queen Maryes time.

There be many of the better sort of temporaries among us, Of this vid. Dikes
deceitfulness of man's heart cap. 4. 5. 6.
some that go further than some, and yet but hypocrites, and will fall short
of heaven.

Therefore let us take heed that we content not our selves securely as many do
Oh extreme folly of many that are but mere Temporaries, yea and none of the
best of them neither, by many degrees, and yet think themselves well and in a
very good case, which yet are far short of many hypocrites which be now in
hell: yea, they are farther short of that was in them when they lived here than
they be now of the best Christians, and yet think well of themselves. How
many that never confessed their sins as Pharaoh, and entreated Moses to pray
for them in all their life, never humbled as Pharaoh, but remain obstinate and
wilful, never hung the head in their lives, but go on boldly and madly, that
never had such good motions and speeches as Balaam, never a heavenly or good
savourie thought, but horribly profane or muckish, never as Iehu zealous for
God, but as cold as a stone, no heart for God, or to hinder any sin, nay the
contrary, to set up evil: many never did as Herod reverence Gods Ministers,
hear them gladly, reform many things, nor as (...) and Saphira, but rather
poll from the Church, as (...), that have not only no such gifts but nothing
so unblamable a life, and yet think they shall be saved: if they which went
so far beyond you, be yet goue to destruction, do you think you shall do
well? o^ (...) folly and madness!

Never then be quiet till you ^eeven with, nay have out-stript any Temporary
in the world, though not in gifts, yet in truth and honesty of heart, in
particular applying Christ, and living ^y him in soundness in all things.

Many a man loses a great ^eale of labor, and his soul ^oo, for want of a
little more ^dded; a small thing parts God and them: many a time they ^ose
Heaven for one lust, as Iu^as. God has set down that ^e will not abate a
hairs bread^li ^f his price, and they think ^hey offer fair, and will go no
^urther, if this will do it they will go on in their bargain, ^lse not: if
you will be content with that they have done, so, if not, they will not
unsettle and ^isquiet themselves now after so ^ong time of profession; that
they have been moved at a Sermon forty years ago, have been well thought of
always, and now to begin again, they will never yield to it.

Like one that should come to a Merchants celler to buy wine^ he tastes and
likes very well, commends them for very good, cheapens, comes near the price,
the Merchant will not abate, he will not rise, so he goes away without. Thus
is it with the Temporary, though he offer saire, yet he will not come up to
the Lords price. O be not so unwise, lose not all this labor you have taken,
in hearing, reading, praying, professing; and it may be have been called
Puritanes, and been hated for your well-doing, and yet lose your soul for a
little more: therefore as our Savior said to the yongue man that boasted he
had done all these, yet one thing is lacking, so say I to this man.

It is not Faith of miracles, Faith of miracles.
which is when a man has some particular word or revelation from God, that he
will use him to the working some extraordinary things, as, casting out of
devils, healing diseases, removing mountains, or some revelation of some
thing to come, whereby he is able certainly to foretell it, as Balaam. This
Faith has its doubtings, which were reproved in Moses and Aaron, Number. 20. 12.
in the Disciples, Matthew. 17. 20. in Peter, Matthew. 14. This is common to
reprobates: Judas had it; by this devils were cast out, Mat. 7. 22. This may
be severed from love, so cannot true Faith. When he says, 1. Cor. 13. 2. if I
had all Faith, he means not every kind of Faith, but all of that kind. The
greatest degree of this Faith may be without love: many had true Faith and this
too, as the Apostles; some this and no true Faith, as Judas. Many had then,
much more now, some true Faith th^^ yet have not the other; for it i^ now out
of date, lasting only for the beginnings of the Gospel, for confirmation
thereof but this true justifying Faith i^ now, and shall be in the Church of
God to the end (...) the world.

So the passive Faith of miracles is not to salvation when ^ man was persuaded
that such as were called of God thereto could and would heal them and that by
a word, Acts 14. 8. 9. If a man had either of both he would think himself
like Simon Magus, some great man but he might perish for all this. The poorest
true believer is far greater than he, Luke 20. 20. that removes the devil out
of his bodily possession, this out of his spiritual; and consequently, that
from the bodily, this from the spiritual death; that cures, bodily blindness,
lamenesse, this cures the spiritual; that removes mountains, this ^emoves
sin from the soul which sticks nearest.

But true Faith contains in (...) more than all that is in these. True Faith.
(...) has indeed some things co^^on with them, which I will first speak of,
and then of that wherein it goes beyond them.

First, in true Faith there is a knowledge of Gods Word required: secondly, an
assent, etc. For knowledge this is the ground of Faith; no Faith without
knowledge, Romans 20. how can they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
Faith comes by hearing, and that of the Word preached. Again, That we
believe with the heart we must confess with the mouth, and how can we
confess that we know not? therefore Faith is the gift of God, whereby a man
is particularly persuaded of his own salvation by Jesus Christ, a gift of God,
not of men: for the^ all should have it, and that they have not, 2 These. 3. 2.
It is no^ got by books, as arts and sciences, no man can work it i^ himself
or any other, parent i^ his child, husband in his wife etc. We see by
experience how long many live under the Word, and yet have no Faith. Use. Let
them be thankful highly to God that have it, let the other seek it of him: but
many are like those, Ioh. 6. 52. that understood not our Savior Christ, and
yet would not ask him, so now there be many who as they cannot work Faith in
themselves, so will not beg it of God neither.

It is true, we cannot know the things that we believe to the furthest end
and perfectly, as the creation of the world of nothing, our Savior Christ's
Incarnation, the Resurrection of the dead: but know them as ^^ey be revealed,
we must.

There must be a convenient ^easure of knowledge of the ^rounds of Religion,
before ^aith can be.

1. This condemns the Church of Rome which keeps people in blindness, Use.
and teach^th them to believe as the Church believes, though they know not what
it is.

2. All ignorant people among our selves, who partly for want of catechizing,
partly for want of care in themselves to mark publicly, or to help
themselves in private with such helps as God has given them, do remain so
earthly, careless, and notorious ignorants, as it may therefore be concluded
that they be a generation that have no Faith.

This will witness heavily against them, seeing there is now means of
knowledge to all that will take any pain. Oh therefore stir up yo^ selves to
get knowledge, (...) quest your Ministers to ca^ chife, and read catechism^
your selves.

A convenient knowledge the principles of Religion necessary to be had. Though
may be a man know not eve^^ particular of his misery, (...) how he came into
it, and (...) fall of Adam, yet a knowledge of his misery by sin, and
punishment deserved is necessary so of Christ, that there is no salvation but
by him, and by (...) death, though not knowledge particular of Christ's nature
and offices. And so in the other principles.

2. In true Faith is an asse^^ to the truth of Gods Word, and that not wavering
(...) firm, not because we see how or can render or see reasons (...) the
truth of the things, but because God has spoken them, (...). Pet. 1. 16. he
knew the ^^ngs he taught concerning ^^rist were no fables. So Paul (...) so
resolved of the truth of ^^at he believed and taught, as (...) durst pronounce
him accur^^ that taught the contrary, (...) was ready to lay down his (...)
for it, as the Martyrs.

And here by the way understand what is the Object of ^aith, Object of Faith.
Faith builds not it self, as Popery tells, upon unwritten verities.
viz. Gods Word, not ^^ans word, or conceit, or any ^^ch thing. I believe such
a ^^ing as that I shall be saved, because God has spoken it, not because I
think so, or because (...) find it so written in the Apo^rypha or some man's
writing. (...) believe like a fool, except I can bring Gods Word for that I
believe; for that is the only foundation and ground of true Faith, because God
has spoken it, that is well: for then we may believe it, and otherwise we
believe like children; many believe and cannot (...) why; A groundless faith.

Secondly, the whole word (...) God is the object of faith law, gospel,
commandment prohibitions, promises, threat so that I must believe all, and not
as some, that believe (...) promises, but not the threat^ Yet the most proper
object (...) faith is the Gospel, and Christ therein exhibited, and life and
salvation promised by him: the promise of life first, and the^ all other
inferior promises of preservation, provision, of perseverance, audience. It is
the believing the promise of salvation by Christ that saves us, not the
believing of any part of Gods word; therefore they that believe the mainefully
(as they say) and yet have no faith in the inferior promises, but run to
unlawful shifts, or be utterly dismayed in any trouble, they deceive
themselves: if the ^reater, then much more the ^^sse, Romans 8. 32. Some cannot
be confident of outward things, and those inferior pro^iscs, except it be
from belee^ing the maine promise, etc.

Next to the assent in true ^aith, follows that wherein (...) outstrips the
other two false ^aiths, viz. a particular application of the word of God,
especially the promises, even the promise of life and salvation ^y Jesus Christ
to a man's own self; for as hypocrites believe the threatenings in general,
but not to themselves; so the promises, etc.

It is therefore a particular persuasion of my heart, Faith what.
that Christ Jesus is mine, and that I shall have life and salvation by his
means; that whatsoever Christ did for the redemption of mankind, he did it
for me, etc.

A persuasion, not a concei^^ an opinion, or blind and (...) certain
conjecture, but it is persuasion of the heart. And here by the way understand
th^^ seat of true faith, Seat of faith.
to be th^^ whole soul of man, not in th^^ head only, or heart only
knowledge and assent in th^^ head; the particular apprehension and application
of it (...) ones self, and the confiden^^ and comfort growing thereon is in
the heart; so that faith (...) begun in the head, but not perfected till it
come in the hea^^ Act. 8. toward the end; if th^^ believe with all thine
heart. Act. 16. God opened Lydia's heart: and Romans 10. with the heart a man
believes to righteousness.

Faith is a persuasion, as Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded; and (...) therefore
called knowledge, (...) show the certainty. By his knowledge shall my righteous
serv^^^ justify many, Esa. 53. 11. This (...) life eternal that they might
know thee, John 17. 3. Ioh, I know that my Redeemer lives. 2 Cor. 1. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Hence also it is, that it is called Heb. 11. 1. A demonstration,
from the word of God of such things as be above belief: and an evidence of
things not seen, making things absent to the believers to be present, as
resurrection to eternal life. It is also called an assurance Heb. 10. 22. draw
near in assurance, and Romans 4. Abraham was fully assured. Though every faith
be not a full assurance or persuasion, yet every true faith has assurance and
certainty in it, and tends hereto more and more: for the weakest desire to be
assured, yea, that faith that is weakest has certainty in it, being built on
certain grounds, upon the word of God and promise, or on the witness of the
Spirit.

As a man in a dungeon sees light at a little crevis, as certainly as he that
is abroad, though not so much; And a purblinde man sees the Sun as certainly
though not so clearly as the quickest sighted. A shaking palsy hand shakes in
the reaching out to take the gift, but it holds it surely; so true faith is
opposed and assailed with doubtings, but they be not of the nature of faith,
but of our own corruption, and the unregenerate part, as faith is of the part
regenarate. When they look upon themselves, they doubt and fear; when upon
Gods unspeakable goodness and infallible truth, then they are bold in
believing: so that a weak believer doubts between whiles, not of Gods word,
or whether Christ be a sufficient Savior, or whether or no God will perform
his promise to humble and contrite hearted sinners that seek and cry unto him
for grace and mercy, etc. but whether he be such an one or no, which he shall
know more certainly in time, etc.

It is a particular persuasion, My Lord, my God, says Thomas, and Job, My
Redeemer lives, and Gal. 2. 20 and Mary, My Savior. According to that of the
Prophet Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his own faith. This is set out by
diverse phrases of Scripture, John 1. 12. Belief is called the receiving of
Christ as the hand a gift, and eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood,
John 6. putting on Christ, Romans 13. Which is an appropriating that part of the
meat to a man's self which is prepared. And as he seeing, liking, and
commending the meat nourishes not, if it be not eaten, so not the knowing of
Christ, assenting to the truth of the promise, and of Christ the Savior,
except (...) apply him to me.

And this is signified by the particular setting down the articles of our
Faith, which are not well believed when in general, but when every of them is
particularly applied to my self; for what availes to believe that God is a
Father, if I believe him not to be mine? and Christ a perfect Savior who dyed
for man's sins, rose again for his righteousness, except I believe he did
these for me? and so in the rest; That there is a holy Catholic Church,
except I be a member of it; forgiveness of sins, resurrection to eternal
life, except I believe they belong to me.

This is confirmed by the Lords ordinance of the Sacrament wherein he applies
Christ to us in particular, and wills us to appropriate him to our selves. In
the Lords Supper God gives Christ under the outward signs of Bread and Wine;
as if he should say, As verilyas I give thee this, so verily I give thee my Son
and all his benefits. Now as every one particularly takes the bread and wine,
eating and drinking the same, so are men thereby taught to reach out the hand
of Faith to take Christ home to them.

This serves for examination, Use.
that every man may try whether he have this particular assurance yea or no: if
he have, and that well grounded, and so have a true faith, herein he may be
comforted.

As for those that are not particularly persuaded, they receive no fruit or
benefit by Gods holy ordinances. Some because profanely they never regarded
any such thing, but have spent their time about other matters, esteeming this
as a matter needless, or to be had at pleasure; and therefore have never
thought of it: therefore cause have they to be ashamed and awakened.

Others have it not, because they have sought it most lazily, who now and then
have been touched with some little sight of sin and danger, and by the
provokings of the Gospel have been moved sometimes, but as soon goes out
again, and other things put it by, and so seeking coldly and by fits have got
nothing.

If these had a lash or two more of the Law (as they must ere they will mend
their pace) it might do well. But do men trifle about the weightiest matters,
and think they will come alone or at leisure? Oh let such remember that the
sloathfull hand makes poor.

Others have it not, because they never seek it, as supposing that it cannot
be found, because they think none can know so much of Gods mind, and that
they be proud that say so. These like Ratts bewray themselves by their own
noise, that they be no believers; for Faith is a particular persuasion: and
because they are not assured, they would that no body else should.

Neither indeed can I tell how they should, seeing they never had their proud
stomachs pulled down, to deny and go out of themselves with heavy hearts
for sin, to seek mercy, nor have their proud hearts stooped to Christ's yoke
and government. But such must come to another pass ere they come by any
assurance.

What if they have none? yet others who being meekned and humbled, do seek
mercy with broken hearts, and are willing to stoop in all things, these may
and shall get assurance, when such carnal worldlings shall be cast out. They
think it impossible, but the impossibility lies in their proud stomachs, if
they would but come down as they ought, they should find it possible, and
should obtain it.

Others are persuaded, yea and fully too, that they shall be saved, but if you
ask them how they came by it, they cannot tell. Such think that it is
sufficient to have goods, though they cannot tell how they came by them.

Nor can they prove it, or have any ground from Gods Word, and yet they are so
verily persuaded; but why? they say they are not book-learned, but all the
town cannot beat them from it. But do you believe, and cannot prove it? Some
will say, because God is merciful. So God is just, and will be glorified in
the condemnation of all ignorant and careless persons. Some because they have
not been so bad as many others, but careful to pay every man his own, and to
do no body wrong. A woeful reason and rotten ground; if it had been quite
contrary it had been much better to be liked of, seeing now they think to be
beholding to themselves for Heaven; and publicans and sinners shall go to
Heaven before such proud Pharisees. Some by their good repenting, never having
Christ in their eye. Some more cunning, say they are sure to be saved, and that
by Christ, and that he dyed for them, but what promise in all the Gospel do
they prove it from, or ground upon, they cannot tell.

But it may be they will say, Christ dyed for sinners: but I am a sinner say
they, therefore he dyed for me.

But Christ came not to dye for all sinners; but for the humble, broken in
heart, penitent, which these are very far from.

But some I know, yea diverse in this company I am persuaded, have attained this
true and particular assurance, and are able to prove how they came by it, and
by the fruits of it can approve it. Let these be thankful for that they have,
and for all the means whereby they came to it: and knowing themselves to have
such a lively Faith as is necessary to salvation, let this provoke them to
labor after the increase of it by a constant use of all good means, and godly
watchfulness, and good conversation.

And for those that yet have not this persuasion, but seek it, as the one
needful thing, let them not be dismayed, seeing they are not wholly without
it, but let them continue, and labor, and in time they shall see more.

2. Next this confuteth the tormenting doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
teaches that particular persuasion and assurance of Gods love is heretical
pride and damnable presumption, and that men may hope well but go no further,
and so hope, as yet they must still be in doubt and fear, which they count to
be a virtue in our Faith to be mixed therewith, which is a gross thing, seeing
they are of the flesh, and the unregenerate part, and we are bidden to
believe, and not only to hope well.

They finding people in trouble of mind, do hold them in doubting, and by
their doctrine leave them in desperation, because they teach them not to look
for salvation by the free mercy of God, and the merits of Jesus. Christ, but
partly at least by their own works; therefore they tell them they must go
thus far a pilgrimage, and offer to this and that Saint, lay out thus much
for Indulgences, repair such a Church, give thus much to such a Cloyster^; and
doing thus they may be in good hope: and for the more furety they must give
money to the Priests to say Masses and Dirges for them, that if their souls
happen to go to Purgatory, they may be soon delivered. And hereof it comes
to pass, that they seeing their sins many, and deserving certain damnation,
and their works imperfect, are ever afraid they have not done enough, and so
fall to despair, the proper fruit of this doctrine.

But why do they thus teach? only for their own gain, to fill their coffers,
like unconscionable Chir^^gions, that set forward a wound to day, and back
tomorrow, and lay poisoned things to it, making it a grievons sore, to pick
out the more money, whereas they could have healed it quickly, but then they
should have had ^ut little money.

And as some Lawyer that sets forward a man's cause in Law, but after lets the
Adversary have a vantage, that it may be the more difficult and longer-lasting
suite, and also make the Clyent double the ^ees, and yet it may be lost at
last; so these, if they would apply the right plaster at first, should deal
well: but then the cure would be too soon wrought, and their kingdom would
come down, as Gardner said: If you open that door to the common people, then
all is gone. By this craft they have their living, as Demetri^s said, Acts. 19.

But let us thank God that we are not under this woeful bondage, in which
men are continued long in doubting, and at last brought to utter despair. And
let us whilst the light of the Gospel lasts, labor after the assurance of
our salvation; seeing if it be diligently ^ought after, it may assuredly be
attained, as appears by these reasons following:

1. God bids us make it sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10. also. 2. Cor. 13. 5 and therefore
it may be done.

2. If a man may know that he believes, then may he be sure of his
salvation; but a man may know that, 1. Ioh. 2. 3. For though some think they
have it that have it not, yet this hinders not but that a true believer may
know. And as one dreaming that he is rich and is not, hinders not but that he
that is rich may know he is so: so is it in this case.

3. If a man may know that he is sanctified, then he may know he shall be
saved, Romans 8. but this a man may know; for though we cannot perfectly know
our hearts, yet we may, so far as we may by the Word of God discern enough to
assure us of our sanctification.

4. Also the Spirit of God witnesses to our spirits that we are the Lords;
that is, the Spirit of truth, that knows all things, the deep things of God,
is of the privy Council, and of whose testimony no doubt is to be made.

5. Also if we may have peace toward God, yea peace passing all understanding,
yea joy and that unspeakeable and glorious, and be filled with joy and peace in
believing, as Romans 15. then we may be assured of our salvation: for can blind
hope breed these? no, but true assurance.

6. If we have entrance with confidence into Gods presence, as Ephesians. 3. 12.
then we may be assured. But the former is true, and therefore the latter.

But the Papists object,

Ob. 1. It is presumption. Ans. Yea, if we looked for salvation by any thing in
our selves, but seeing we are assured of it only for Gods free mercy, and
Christ's merits, wholly denying our selves, it is no pride; the rather, because
God requires it of us: and therefore it is rather pride in them, under a color
of humility, to disobey Gods Commandments.

Ob. 2. No man's name is in the Scripture. Ans. But there is better; for there
is the believers nature.

Ob. 3. But the promises are set down generally or indefinitely, not
particularly to me. Ans. We may by a true and sound reasoning make it good to
our selves, as in other things. Every man is a reasonable creature. Assumption.
But I am a man; therefore the conclusion follows necessarily.

Thus we do from the general propositions of the Law, infer particular
conclusions. For how know you you have deserved hell? The Scripture says,
cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Book,
etc. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. But I have broken the Law; therefore thus you conclude,
though your name be not there: so may and ought we do from the Gospel. Who so
believes shall be saved: but I believe, therefore I shall be saved.

So the weary, and laden, lost, hungring, and such like, shall have mercy. But
I am so, therefore etc. This is more certain than if my name were in the Bible.

Ob. 4. We are bidden to work out our salvation in fear and trembling. Ans.
Not a slavish kind of fear; for we must serve him without fear all the days
of our life, Luke 2. but a religious fear of offending, which stands very well
with assurance.

Ob. 5. How can we be sure of our salvation, when we know not whether we
shall hold out to the end? such and such have fallen, Saul, Solomon, Judas,
Demas, David, Peter. This shall be answered toward the latter end of this
tractate, where I prove the Perpetuity of Faith.

It remains therefore, for all has been said to the contrary, that we may be
particularly assured of our salvation, and that this is true Faith. And
therefore let us labor for this above all things, and not be deceived about it.

Thirdly this serves to teach and move alland every of us to labor for this
faith, Use 3.
and particular assurance; without which there is no joy: and to give no rest
to God or our selves till we have it. Seek it, and seek it earnestly, as
becomes such a jewel.

Oh the folly and madness of most people that can make a life without this,
but not worthy to be called a life: In death you would be assured; but you
should seek it now, or else never look for it then, etc. My hearts desire is,
that if it were Gods will you might all prove believers; I should be glad, but
you should have the benefit. Some fruit I thank God I find in this kind now
and then, but oh that the rest would come in, etc. without this no comfort in
life or death, no heart to any good duty, no part in Christ.

The second point propounded is concerning the author and chief efficient of
Faith, 2. Author and by what means.
and the means whereby he works it in us. For the worker of Faith, it is
God and none other: first it is not Nature, for then all should have it, but 2
These. 3. All men have not Faith.

And though many say they have ever believed, and it was borne with them, yet
they deceive themselves, and have no true faith in them at all. Such faith
indeed as they have, may be, and was borne with them that is, a blind
presumptuons conceit without ground.

It is not natures. Mat. 16. 17. flesh and blood have not revealed these things
to thee, but our Father which is in heaven.

We have it not from our parents John 1. 13.

It is not only not in our corrupt nature, but it was not in the pure nature
of Adam, who believed in God, but not in Jesus Christ. For it came in since the
fall that we have need of a Redeemer; and to be saved by an other bodies
sufferings and obedience is a supernatural thing, and hard to believe. To the
Grecians and wise men of the world it is foolishness. 1 Cor. 1. 23.

Nay we are nothing apt to it, nor able to think a good thought; our heart is
so bound up in unbelief, and we locked in the chains of it, that except God
open the door of the heart as he did Lydia's, to see and feel our sins, and
the wrath of God due thereby, we despair, and fly from God as Judas, yea every
step to Faith is out of our power and reach.

Not man nor Angel can work it with all the wisdom they have. It is the
work and gift of God; of Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Of the Father, John 6.
44. of the Son Heb. 12. 2. of the holy Ghost 2 Cor. 4. 13. Phil. 1. 29. it is
given unto you freely, not only (...) believe on him, but also to fuff^^^ for
his sake, John 1. 13. Act. 16 God opened Lydia's heart^ yea, and that of his
mighty power, as it is, 2 These. 1. 11. S^ Ephesians. 1. 18. 19. mention is made for
the working of Faith, of the mighty power of God.

So is he the increaser and perfecter of it: Lord increase our faith, said the
Disciples And Christ is called the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. and Phil.
1. I am persuaded that (...) that has begun this good work (...) you will
finish it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Again, by Faith we are delivered from death, which who can do but God that
raiset the dead? 2. We are pulled thereby out of the hands of strong
adversaries, as Sin, Devil and Death, which no power but Gods can do. 3. By
it we are advanced into a better (...) than that (...) Adam; and can we do
this for our selves?

Let this instruct and lead us to humility and thankfulness* if we have
faith, Use.
to acknowledge it the whole and free work of God in us, without any aptness
in us: we are like the sick man, Iohn^^, unable to put in our selves when the
water is stirred

And to be thankful to God, giving all glory to him, that passing by so many
others as good as we, has yet been pleased to show us mercy, that had no
ability or preparation in us thereto, but all opposition, as much as they that
be furthest off. We might have sitten like stocks, not moved at all by any
thing, as most do, or when we had had the sight and burden of our sins
might have despaired as some do.

They that never knew what sin meant they can easily believe, but they that
have felt the burden of sin find it hard, all such may thank God they
despaired not.

We should also make high account of it both for the gift and for the giver: a
great King gave it us, therefore nourish and use it so well that he may give
us more.

Secondly, it serves to confute the common opinion of the easiness of Faith,
that either they have ever believed, or can believe when they list.

Men can neither work it in themselves, nor yet will beg it of God, that can;
if the blind men in the Gospel had done so, they might have dyed blind; so
these.

If we have it not, then let us labor with God in humility for it in the use
of the means, and not trust to our selves, as most do, that go on without
it, yea, knowing they have it not, yet they go on, as it were in their power
at their own pleasure, or as though it would fall into their mouths alone: as
they John 6. that neither understood our Savior Christ's speech, nor would ask
him who would have taught them; whose example let us shun, and beg it of
God with all earnestness as a thing so necessary.

Ob. But what shall my prayer do good till I have faith?

Ans. Do thy duty as thou can, which is a thing required, and though thou
can not do it well, yet see if God will be wanting to such desires: as our
Savior Christ says, whatsoever ye pray for shall be granted, yea if you
ask the holy Ghost: now one cannot pray well but by the holy Ghost.

The causes that move God to work Faith in any, Causes.
is first his free election; 2. The next the merit of our Savior Christ. First
his election, therefore Act. 13. 48. so many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed: and hereof it is called faith of Gods Elect. So our Savior says
Ioh. 6. 37. All that my Father has given me shall come to me.

God works Faith in all his Elect in due time, that live to years of
understanding: for Infants, he saves them by a way no less wonderful than
unknown to us, by applying Christ to them by his Spirit.

But all that be of years he works faith in them at one time or other.

It is not (as some imagine) that children have faith wrought in them at their
Baptism, but afterward.

We have a mark of our election when we come to believe, Use. 1.
and not before: they therefore that have it, let them rejoyee in it; they that
have it not, let them never be quiet, seeing tillthen, if they have lived
under the means, they carry the mark of a reprobate.

2. We must ascribe nothing to our selves for our faith, but to Gods free
mercy, and Christ's merit, and be thankful to God in Christ Jesus for it.

The means whereby God works it, Means.
is, The ministry of his Word, Romans 10. 17. the which is therefore called the
arm of God, and the power of God to salvation, Romans 1. 16. the word of Faith:
see it in Act. 2. 37. Lydia, Acts 16. 1 Cor. 14.

Even the ministry of the Word by mortal man, not by Angels, Act. 8. an
Angel sends Philip to the Eunuch, so bids Cornelius send for Peter, Act. 10.

It was our request that it should be so, Exodus 19. so God granted it, and
promised to raise up a Prophet like Moses, that is, Jesus Christ, like us in
all things execept sin, and both before and after him a succession of
Prophets, Ephesians. 4. 11.

And this he will have done by plain preaching in the evidence of the Spirit,
and power of God, the plain delivery of the Word without the painted eloquence
of men's wisdom, high and stately phrase of speech. And as he would not give
David the victory in Saul's armor, so he will not let his ministers prevail
with carnal weapons. He would have Christ crucified to be preached in a
crucified phrase.

And therefore though this seem a homely and plain way for effecting such a
thing, yet seeing God has sanctified it to this end, it shall prevail; as the
compassing and blowing of the trumpets of Rams horns to pull down the walls of
Iercho.

This serves to rebuke those that either simply or under any color abase this
ordinance, Use.
or equal any other to it in this respect, much more if they prefer any other
thing before it: whom the King will honor (as in the story of Mordecay's
advancement) every man honors too; so should it be, whom or what God honors
that should we.

Some make reading equal, and call that preaching. It is true, it is a kind
of preaching, taking the Word in a large sense, as they that being healed,
published abroad what Christ had done for them: but to equal with the ministry
of the Word, either public reading or private, is to abuse Gods ordinance. It
is not that which God has used or does use to the working, of Faith. And we
see by experience what fruit comes of bare reading without preaching. The
Eunuch read the Scripture himself, but was never the nearer, till Philip
preached Jesus to him out of it, Act. 8.35. So after the Lecture of the Law and
Prophets, the people, say, If you have any word of exhortation to the people
say on, Acts 13. 15. so our Savior Christ, Luke 4. 17. read a text, and then
preached out of it.

Secondly, it reproves those that under a color of magnifying prayer, would
cry down the credit of preaching, as if they might not stand together. Yes,
and be both of credit and good use; and who makes more conscience of prayer,
than they that are most painful in preaching?

But what prayer do they thus call for, when they say less preaching and more
praying? not that most lively and forcible prayer which is conceived by the
help of Gods Spirit, which many are more enemies to, than to preaching, and
disgracefully abuse Gods holy ordinance, and the gift of prayer, by calling
prayer conceived extrumpery.

True it is that there is a place for set forms of prayer in the Church, and
of an ancient and profitable use it is in the Church of God: but by this either
to disgrace conceived prayer, or to use so much set prayer as should justle out
the preaching of the Word, none of sound judgment and good conscience will
approve.

This also teaches us reverently to attend on it as Gods ordinance, for
working of Faith, and to meet the Lord where he has appointed. If ever we
shall have Faith it shall be by this means; attend at wisdoms gates, and
watch at the posts.

And therefore that we neither tarry at home reading, when we should be hearing
the Word preached; nor that we have oxen and farms when we be called to the
Word, and much less at the alehouse; nor shift off and say, Oh if we might
hear an Angel from heaven, or see such miracles as in former times, we would
have believed; but this plain preaching by men that we know whence they are,
is poor: as the I fraelites did by Manna. Oh falsehood of man's heart; but if
they take no good by this, then neither if one should rise from the dead, Luke
16. Gods ordinance carries force.

3. Let us examine our selves whether it has been a word of Faith to us or no,
else we have heard to small use. If it should rain, and the Sun shine on others
ground, and make it fruitful, and not at all upon ours, we would think it a
heavy punishment, much more in this. If yea, then it has obtained the right
end in us; let us thank God, and attend it still for increase.

Again, if the Word be the means of working Faith in us, then the Ministers
of God are instruments in this businesse^ which is a great honor tou^^ and
should make us very careful. And this also should cause the people to
reverence Gods servants upon whom is the holy anointing, and that who so
preaches the Word soundly and sincerely, they should give them double honor,
and labor to make use of their ministry; and to attend upon it when they take
pains, though all things be not to their mind, 1. These. 5. 13.

Now yet we must know it is not the outward ministry of the Word only, The
Spirit.
that is able to work Faith, but with the inward working of the Spirit, and it
is that makes every part of the Word effectual. It is neither the Ministers
gifts, nor the peoples aptness, wit or good nature, but the work of Gods
Spirit, Acts 11. The hand of the Lord was with them: so that, what is Paul, and
what is Apollo? They may plant and water, but it is God that gives the
increase. God, and not Paul opened Lydia's heart. True it is the Minister may
help or hinder, by the matter or manner of his preaching, and his life. If he
preaches such matter as is fittest to work Faith, if in a zealous and good
manner, and live godly, this man is most like to prevail, rather than such as
shall teach truths, but not so proper, or shall preach coldly or girdingly at
the better sort, or flatteringly, or live dissolutely. And this should teach us
not to trust to Ministers gifts, or our own wit, but to crave the assistance
of Gods Spirit, every time we go to the Word. The contrary is the cause of
little profiting. Pray him to bless the doctrine of the Law to humble and
throw you down, and the doctrine of the Gospel to comfort again in due time,
and to make every point to be effectual; without which the Word shall be a
sound in the ear, but vanish away without any impression.

As the Anabaptists do foolishly on the one side, boasting of great matters of
Faith wrought by the Spirit without the Word: for, for the Ministry of the
Word they care not, but have all by revelations; whereas God works both
according to his Word, and by his Word, and not usually without it, therefore
they are vain delusions. So most among us content our selves with the Word,
and never regard to crave and look for the inward working of the Spirit.

Ob. But why do you will us to pray to God for his Spirit to work with his
Word? Is our prayer like to prevail? you have taught us that without. Faith
there is no pleasing of God, and that prayer is abominable till we be believers.

Ans. True, I grant, one without Faith cannot do a thing in the right manner
pleasing to God, yet it is a thing that God requires to attend his Word, and to
pray that his Spirit may make it effectual; which if we do not we sin
double, both by abiding in unbelief, and disobeying Gods commandment too.

True also it is, that God is not bound therefore to hear this prayer, and
work grace in this party, because he once made us all happy; yet it is very
likely that God will hear it: he can pardon and pass by the faults of the
duty, and bless the duty, who uses to turn all to the good of those he
means good unto. He may hear his prayer at least as he hears the yongue
Ravens that cry, Job 39. So that the party reasons thus with himself, or may,
when he is tempted not to hear or pray for a blessing, because it is in
vain, and it is sin: If I do not hear and pray, I am sure I sin, and so
must needs perish, but in seeking I know not what God may do for me. As the
Lepers, 2. King. 7. that sat without the gate of Samaria ready to starve; If
we stay here we die, if we go into the city (say they) there is nothing but
famine; but if we go to the camp of the Aramites they can but kill us, and
we cannot tell whether they will or no. It may be we may find some
victualts, or they may spare us, we may speed better than we look for: so
here.

Finally, let them know, that whilst God works in them earnest desires to
pray and to be heard, he does also at the same time work in them the first
degrees of true Faith, and so accepts of and hears their prayers according
to his gracious promise, although they know not that Faith is already begun in
them; for this is one fruit of Faith, to pray fervently with an earnest desire
to have our suits granted.

Now then let us consider more patticularly, what part of the Word of God
serves to work Faith. And that is both Law and Gospel, and the joint
ministry of them both; the one preparing, the other effecting it by degrees.

Ob. I do not think but God works his Faith at once, where it is without
such steps: And besides I observe how God works diversely in many, some after
one fashion, some another.

Ans. None can prove or show president, that faith was wrought in an instant at
first, without any preparation going before: nor can it be conceived how a man
should believe in Christ for salvation, that felt not before himself in a
miserable state. But as the needle goes before to pierce the cloth, and makes
way for the thread to sew it: so is it in this case.

I grant the Lord who is the most free Agent, takes liberty, and works as it
pleases him, and there is odds and difference for time, measure, and such
things, but for the general always the same; by humbling first, then
comforting, and that by degrees: I speak ordinarily.

Therefore seeing by observation his dealing with most, we may well say, that
thus he does and will ordinarily work with those that he means effectually to
call and work Faith in. Though it may be the parties may not perceive every
step by which they are brought along, yet it is so usually. True it is that God
humbles some more, some less, and so gives more and speedier comfort to some
than to others: some extraordinarily humbled, and yet but weakly comforted;
and contrariwise, some meanly humbled, and yet extraordinarily comforted. But
this is not usual.

Some get up sooner a great deal, and with small means and helps; some with
many more helps, yet much ado to get comfort, or to be upheld.

Yet this hinders not but it is true, that God usually keeps an order, and
according to the measure of the one is the other which he does. And so we may
propound it not to bind the Lord, but our selves, to expect ordinarily from
him.

Therefore we Ministers must not separate the things God has joined, Use.
but preach both Law and Gospel.

Yea magnify the great wisdom and mercy of God that has left to his Church
such a ministry of both together, without which there could be no sound work
of grace wrought in any.

If the Law only be preached, its the way to terrify, torture, and drive to
despair; if the Gospel only, to make folks licentious Christians, and to
look for salvation by Christ ere ever they know what need they have of him:
and so to be Christians by halves, and at pleasure, and to break off when they
list, and at last to be never the near. If the Law teach men, they must avoid
this sin and do that duty, which is the second use of the Law that pertaines
indeed to the regenerate, concealing the first use of the Law: men will be
doing as they can, and think they do very well, and yet de ceive themselves;
therefore the Gospel comes and tells them, without Faith it is impossible to
please God, and so outs their comb again: and so both together do wondrous
well, and make a sound Christian where they have their working.

Yea and that in order. The Law first humbles, then the Gospel comforts; the
Law tells us what to do, the Gospel that we must do it in faith, or else it is
^n vain.

In the next place consider how the Law and the Gospel do work, first upon
the head, then upon the heart: first enlighning the mind, next working upon
the will and affections; as, The Law, with the inward working of the Spirit
(without which no good is to be looked for) makes a man see his misery.
Secondly, by the same Spirit it humbles a man's heart, in the sight and sense of
it: So, the Gospel inlighteneth the mind with knowledge of the way of
redemption: Secondly, it works upon the heart to affect, seek, prise it, and
at last to apprehend and believe it: the latter is the more difficult work of
the two, the heart being more out of frame than the understanding.

But let us more distinctly consider of the several workings of Law and
Gospel, The Law his work.
to, and in the working of Faith: first the Law, and it has three works, 1.
It enlighteneth the sinner. 2. It convinces him. 3. Raises up terror in him*
But of this (in a word) be sure, that the Law works no grace, but only
prepares for it. A man may have all that the Law can work, and yet be a
reprobate; and yet the workings of the Law could not be wanting: it is a
killing letter, the ministration of death and of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 1. 9.

The Law enlighteneth a miserable sinner, in whom God has a meaning to work
Faith; with a clear and particular sight of his misery, and woeful state he
stands in by sin, and makes him distinctly to see these things: 1. His sin
(being at first created happy) that he has woefully fallen from it, and lost
it, and wickedly rebelled against so good a God. Next, it tells him of his
original sin, whereby as with a plague of leprosy his whole nature, soul and
body, and every faculty of them is tainted and poisoned.

Then the woeful state of the body, every member being become a weapon of
unrighteousness, and sin, as the throat an open sepulcher, the mouth full
of deceit, and so in the rest, Romans 3. 13. 14. lame to any good, as in the
particulars.

Not only thus, but that as he never did, so can never do ought but sin,
his corrupt nature poisoning every action, even the best that he does, so as he
is not able to think a good thought. But then it tells him the other part of
his misery, which is that that troubles him else he would not be stirred at
all for his sins though never so many; but the punishment is that that must
trouble him, not his sin, as yet he is not come to that. For punishment, the
Law tells him he is cursed, that is, subject to all evil here and hereafter,
and that the wages of sin is death the first and the second, and forerunners
of them both.

But all the punishment of this life, though cursed at home, abroad, sitting,
walking, in himself, in his mind, body, goods, name, though these be much,
yet alas this is a heaven in comparison of the hellish torments which he must
indu^^ everlastingly in the world to come.

Next, the Law shows that this party has no way to help himself out of
this misery by any thing he can do, but does daily increase it.

2. The Law also by the working of the Spirit does convince the party that that
is particularly true of him which before he used to post over his head as
pertaining to others not to him; but now God makes him take this to himself,
and to apply and appropriate it as if the Minister spoke to him alone by name;
and to think the Minister knows all his heart, looks on him, and speaks
directly to him, though it may be the Minister knew him not, or not his case,
but God makes him so to think.

3. Next, the Law raises terror upon these two; and puts this sinner out of
his old secure peaceable course of impenitencie, that he went on in. Whether
the profane that went on boldly in his sin, or the civil man trusting in
his own righteousness; the law drives him out of those conceits, and
terrifieth him with fear, finding himself in a most woeful state, both by his
innumerable sins, and the infinite punishments due thereby, and finding the
keeping of the Law impossible, and the suffering the punishment deserved
intolerable; and so this works fear, and makes him as one shot into the flesh
with a cross or bearded arrow, which he cannot shake out, nor abide the smart,
but stamps as one stung with an Adder, that cannot stand his ground, but is
wholly possessed with f^are.

He finds his sin as his irrecoverable debt, his conscience as an
unpartiall accuser and cruel laylor, himself a prisoner, and a prison to
himself, Death a Sergeant to arrest him, God a terrible Judge, the Law an
Advocate to plead for God against him, the Devil his executioner, Hell the
place of his torment, where he is to endure endless, easelesse, and
remediless woe.

Now this cannot but terrify, though some more, some less, as we shall hear
hereafter.

And here by the way observe a difference between natural terror and this
legal terror: That arises of some natural cause, or the work of the
Devil; and some are so feared, that they dare not be alone, think they see
ugly sights, Natural ter^ or.
and night and day cannot sleep. Now this has no disposition to do any good,
but to drive men from God rather; and such either by wrestling outgrow it, or
by shifting place, or going to a Physician, or which is worse, to a Wizzard.

Indeed so God of his grace may work, as he may fall into the hands of some
wise and godly experienced man, that may seek to turn the stream, and by
laying open his spiritual misery to drown the former, and so it may come to
legal terror, and be an occasion of good; though this is rare.

But legal terror is upon the ground of the apprehension of their sin and
punishment, and is usually made by God an occasion of much good.

Now though this legal terror be often an occasion of good, yet it is not so
necessarily, nor ever, but an hypocrite and reprobate may have it, yea a man
may have it and be a devil, and many ways miscarry; as, he may despair as
Judas, or wear it away as Cain by building Cities, inventing Music, and such
conceits, still the unquietness of his conscience: and (as many among us) by
drinking, gaming, merriments, or much employment in the world, that he may not
hear the inward din and noise within. As it was when they offered their
children to Molech in a brazen vessel hollow, with fire under, they had some
playing with Tabrets, to drown the noise of the childrens cry: so here.

And some again finding themselves over-burthened by the instigation of the
devil, that is ever at hand in such times, do throw it off, and fall to their
profane course of all dissoluteness, and think, they were best take their
pleasures while they may, seeing they must be damned, and as good be damned for
somewhat as for nothing, or a little. Indeed if there were any hope, it were
another matter, but seeing there is not, they will take their fill And thus
though they have not committed the unpardonable sin, yet they cutting off
themselves thus desperately, are in as bad a case. And all this comes on them
as a punishment of their former presumption, whereby through the devils
persuasion they thought God all of mercy, and that they could have him at an
hours warning at any time, and could please him with a call, and cold, Lord
have mercy. And now they are as far on the other side ready to deny Gods
mercy and power to save them, as they did his justice before.

So that we see that legal terror is but a common gift. All come not to it,
but are shut up in hardness of heart: and though a man may have it and be
lost, yet it is that that all come not to. Sundry never came so far, were
never enlightened, or not convinced; or if both, yet not terrified. What, not
though they are convinced of all this woe to belong to them? No truly, such is
the impenitrable hardness of the heart of man more than an Adamant.

Tell a man, all he has is cast away by sea or fire, and his children slain,
it terrifieth and amazeth him; but tell him of worse things, he is not moved.

Tell a man he is condemned to die, it makes him (I mean a guilty person) at
his wits end, nay appalls him, and makes him quake, but tell him he is
condemned to eternal death, he is not affected with it.

If you lay a load on a man too heavy for him, presently he sinkes under it,
but yet he can stand up under the burden of hearing the everlasting wrath of
God for his infinite sins.

Nay, brute beasts be terrified by them that be too strong for them: when the
Lion rores, the beasts tremble; if a great Mastiffe come running at a little
dog, he falls down, and turns him on his back, and holds up his feet.

Yea the insensible creatures, the trees, plants, that hold their color,
vigor, leaves and fruit while the season is pleasant, yet when cold frosts and
nipping winds come they yield, hang head, and as it were confess they be
overcome: only miserable hard souled man is insensible as a stone at
whatsoever God can say or do. If the Lord should smite a man in all the parts
of his body, strip him as he did Job of all the comforts of this life at once,
and make him as he made him, Job 33. yea pull his skin over his ears, and then
preach the Law as terribly as he did with thunder, lightning, earthquakes, as
on Mount Sinai, he might well roar and bellow for pain, and vexation, and
curse God to his face, as the devil said of Job, and blaspheme as those,
Revel. 16. for the plagues; but yet except the Lord show them the cause why,
and the end he aims at, he would be never more moved for sin and
punishment than the very stone Men can hear the terrors of the Law, and yet
they shall be unto them but as the sound of many waters, and as an imperfect
sound. How long were the Israelites hammered by troubles for their idolatry,
ere they would yield? So most among us, like Jonah fall fast asleep under the
hatches, when the Mariners are aloft at their wits end crying. So many when
others are crying out, and wringing their hands, and tearing their hair, they
are jolly and lusty, that have as much cause; yea wonder, nay stand and deride
such as milke-sops, and fools to make such a stir. Oh woeful heart of man!

Though the Lord be proclaiming de solation and destruction by his Law, yet
they care not, nor are moved, but say as they, Deuteronomy. 29. I shall do well,
though I walk in the stubbornness of mine own heart. Thus men harden their
hearts like brasse-against all that can be said.

Well, though some be never terrified at all, but remain insensible blocks; and
others terrified, and yet miscarry, as we have heard, diverse ways, yet he in
whom God will work Faith, shall safely fail between these two rocks of
insensible blockishnesse, and desperate madness or dissoluteness: and he
shall be terrified, and yet God will keep him secretly, that he shall neither
despair, or do himself hurt, which he shall be persuaded to be the worst
way that can be taken and abhor it, or at least shall be preserved from it;
nor shall return to his old course again: and God will make him distaste the
temptation also. So he shall be humbled, and yet take no hurt, but it shall in
time turn to his great good.

Now yet further understand that all taste not of the terrors of the Law alike:
some are terrified suddenly, and violently it rusheth upon them; some more
leysurely and for a long time, which may be as much as that former, though it
do not so seem; as a little brook soon runs over upon a little dash of
rain, and makes a land-floud, when yet there is more water in a great river,
though it keeps within the banks.

Some have lived in ignorance and a dissolute life without the means; these be
often at the hearing of the Law exceedingly smitten, and not having knowledge of
the Gospel to look to, are more sorely and longer terrified. Some others have
been brought up under means, and have had knowledge, and have bin brought up
innocently from gross evils, and used to prayer and good exercises, and lived
with them that loved good Preachers, these are often more insensibly wrought upon
by the Law, because both Law and Gospel wrought together at leisure, and being
smitten they could look to the promise, and somewhat help themselves. These
also are sooner taken down than the former, in whom sin is deeply rooted.
As some Hankes which be taken after they have flowne, and have caught the prey
for themselves, these cost a wonderful toil to bring them to be tame, and
handsome, haggard things: some others taken out of the nest, which howsoever
they have a wild nature, yet being taken in time, so yongue, are easilier
brought to hand.

Yet further know, some which be innocent and free from gross sins as any,
and of good knowledge, yet have been wonderfully tormented, and long held
under, when many of bad life have got comfort in far less time, and with
less terror by much; either because they be of a more fearful nature, or
else have much melancholy joined withal; God so disposing it, we see so it
is: which may be to show us that the least sin whatsoever, seen in the
kind with the desert of it, is enough to cast us down.

Some deeply weigh the misery they are in, and are troubled at it, yet so as
they can keep it in, and bear it till God send comfort which they seek in
the means.

Some are so wonderfully terrified as they quake and tremble, fall from meat,
cannot sleep, look pale, have bellies like barrells, roll and tumble, and
have great trouble in the body thereby, thinking that all creatures witness
against them; if they see the fire, it puts them strongly in mind of hell
fire, and therefore cannot abide to see it, if great wind, they fear it will
blow down the house on them, and send them to hell: if thunder and lightening,
they quake, and fear, and cannot be pacified.

Some dare not eat for fear of being choakt, or because they be unworthy, and
shall but increase their condemnation; care not how they go in apparel but
for very shame; think the Devil is ready to carry them away if they be in
the dark; think he pulled them by the coat, fear to die, lest they go
speedily to hell: think they feel a fire within them. Thus some by melancholy
and the temptation of Satan, have been in a woeful case long, and yet do
well at last.

Some go longer under their burden, because they keep it to themselves for
shame or bashfulnesse, till their back is ready to burst with keeping the
devils counsel. Some others break their mind to some wise and faithful
friend, and so get out sooner by much. Now further, know that God in this work
of terror, raises it upon sight of some one or few sins most heinous either
in nature and quality, or else by some circumstances aggravated: this more
lies upon their conscience, and torments them rather than all their sins.

As you shall see if a man go over the whole Law, he will be more stricken at
the denunciation of Gods judgments against some one sin, than against all
the breaches of the whole Law together. As Act. 2. Peter laid to their charge,
and they were terrified for crucifying Christ: they had committed many other,
but this was in their eye. As if a Master will convince his servant; he will
not bring a number of smaller accusations against him, which might make him
find out excuses and shifts, but some one foul thing that he cannot deny,
thus to make him hang his head: so God lays to their charge some special
foul sin, that they may be convinced, and yet but one, or few.

And this the Lord does of purpose that the party should not be swallowed up;
for if he should see all his sins as ugly as he sees some one, he were not
able to bear it: therefore God tempering mercy with justice does thus; for
aiming not at the parties hurt but good, God lets him see but some so as he may
bear it.

Now let us see some reasons why the Lord thus terrifieth them whom he will
bring to comfort and faith.

1. First, Reasons of this terror.
that he might boar through by his Spirit an ear into our heart to receive
instruction, without which we should be as unfit to receive any, as the
Merchants wax to receive any impression of the seal till it be melted. God
speaks once or twice and man hears not, till he bring him to that pass that
is spoken of Job 33. For till then, tell this sinner that he must lay away his
lusts, his old delights, and sweet sins, and take up a course of godly life;
and you may as good think to have a wild haggard Hawk to fly and kill the
Partridge, and come to your hand again: or a Colt of four or five years old,
fat, and never handled, to draw quietly in the furrow, or a wild Bull, or the
Unicorn of which God speaks in Job. He will scarce give you the hearing of
any such thing, or if he do, he will do as he list for all that; he snuffes
like the wild Ass, Ier. 2. none will trouble themselves about her, but take
her in her mouth: so God takes this Ass in his mouth, when he is well laden
with the heavy hand of God upon him; else you were as good speak to the walls
as to him. But when the party is thus tamed and taken down, then there is some
speaking to him, as Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to do? when he was
smitten down; so the Iaylor, a desperate wretch and cruel person, yet taken
down by the earthquake, and Paul and Silas his preaching; oh then what shall
I do to be saved? so they, Act. 2. 37. whereas if you had spoken unto them
before in their jollity and pomp, and when they were at ease, and had what
they would at will, you might as soon have caught a Hare with a Tabor as
prevailed with them.

And herein the Lord tempers his dealing diversely according to peoples
dispositions; for as some children will need more stripes than some, and the
wise parents deal accordingly, so some by one Sermon of the Law thundered out,
or some small affliction, are so pulled down as they cry out they be damned,
they be utterly undone, none so vile as they, no mercy for them, and can
hardly be kept from sinking. Some others be not so much cast down at three
hundred Sermons. And why? some will shift from the hand of God; and hearing the
Word, and being terrified, they will come no more there a good while, and
others will wrestle with the terrors and bear them out, and resist them, and
will not yield nor blancke for them, lest they should seem to lose the credit
of the field. Well, these must have the more hammering when they thus resist,
and if God have no favor toward them, it shall be sufficient, he will give
them over and say, you shall never be so well offered again, or else he will
fasten more judgments on them to their destruction, as Ier. 28. 17.

But if God have a favor toward them, and purpose their good, then all their
striving shall do them no good, no kicking against the prick, God will lay on
more load, terror upon terror, trouble upon trouble, till he have bound him
hand and foot and made him tame: he will make him yield ere he have done with
him. And if he put the Lord to all this business, and himself to so much
trouble, he may thank himself, he might have spared some of it, if he had
been handsommer and more tractable; God would have spared himself some of
this labor, and him some of this trouble, if that which he would have done
could have been done without it. And yet herein God is very merciful to this
party in laying all this load on him, seeing there is no remedy, rather than
that he should remain insensible, seeing so he should have gone sleeping to
destruction.

2. Secondly, the Lord thus terrifieth us to make us truly thankful to him
for our deliverance, without which terror the proud lordly heart of man would
never be; but either set light by Christ, or never give God that thanks that
he deserved for such a mercy. But when we are brought to hells mouth, and have
no hope of deliverance, but fear of certain damnation, if then the Lord,
beyond, yea contrary to expectation does show mercy and release; oh this makes
us thankful, and to tell what God has done for us, and to say, this is worthy
to be written with a pen of iron, in the table of our heart never to be
forgotten.

So that God by this terror does but make matter for a song of thankesgiving
against the time when this poor creature shall be able to endite it, which
shall be afterward.

Now as men live to bestow their favors on them that be in great need or in
a straight, because they will ever remember it, as a poor man redeemed out of
prison for debt: and as a hungry man will be thankful for meat; the sick for
a Physician, (For what cares a full stomach for a honey comb, whereas to the
hungry every bitter thing is sweet:) so is it in this case between God and us.

And thus howsoever we would think no good, could come out of such a
confusion and woeful terror in the sinners heart, (as indeed no more there
would, but rather it would drive men to despair, or to fly against God, if God
himself were not the worker in it) yet he that brought light out of
darkness, brings order out of confusion, and good out of evil by this,

And thus God deals roughly first with those with whom after he will deal
mildely and mercifully, as Elisha. 2 Reg. 6. did bid them handle the noble man
roughly at the door, yet after told him of plenty, so at the door and
entrance God deals harshly, but afterward mildely. And as Joseph at first
handled his brothers roughly, called them Spies, put one in prison, though of
no ill mind, but afterward wept over them, feasted them, yea, and sent
Chariots for them, and kept them and theirs all their days; so deals the Lord
at first with those whom yet afterward he weeps over, and feasts here with
comfort, and hereafter in his heavenly kingdom.

And as Eliah was prepared by a whirle-winde and earthquake to hear a still
voice, so we by the terrible voice of the Law, to hear the sweet voice of the
Gospel. Use. 1.


The first use of this is to move and persuade us Ministers that we preach the
Law to the people, Of the many good uses and reasons why the Law must be
preached.
open the ten Commandments, show people their misery, then Gods judgments
against sin and sinners, to humble them and prepare them for God. Not that
we ought to preach that only, for so does none of any understanding, but that
we preach not the Gospel, alone which is no less absurd; to heal where was
no wound, and comfort them that be too proud and jolly already. This is to sow
pillows and to cry peace, peace, when there is no peace, and to daube with
untempered mortar. We must not affect a bare title to be ministers of the
Gospel only; though indeed we be so called from the more excellent part of our
ministry, but we must so preach the Gospel as that we do not in the mean
while leave out the Law. For the Law though it work no grace, yet it makes way
for it, as the needle sowes not the cloth but makes way for the thread.

As the time of the old Testament were the days of the Law, yet the Gospel
was taught then; for in all the sacrifices was Law and Gospel, so now in the
days of the Gospel must the Law be preached, though not as the principal.

Else we shall never make sound and true Christians, but carnal and loose
Gospellers. The Gospel preached without the Law, is cause of so many wanton
professors that talk of Christ and the Gospel, but live as they list. Let
none fear it will drive the people to despair; seeing there is no such
mooving in these days, but rather the people be like the Smithes dog, who can
lie under the hammers noise, and the sparks flying, and yet fast asleep.
Besides, God usually brings it to good: and if any should miscarry, it is but
such as would have perished though there had been some other course taken in
preaching to them. And let none speak against them preaching of the Law, for
it is the (...) some way that God himself; and his servants in all ages have
taken: he did reprove, convince, and curse Adam and Eve, and after he
preached; The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; Genesis 3. 15.
So in their sacrifices. As God prepared Eliah by the whirle-winde and
earthquake to ^eave the soft voice, and Job, 4. 14. And all the servants of God
had visions terrible to abase them ere he told them his mind. And if the
servants of God had need that such a course should be taken with them, then
what need had they, that were never ^umbled?

So John Baptist dealt with his hearers; and our Savior Christ says he came
to seek and to save the lost* Peter, Act. 2. 37. first preached the Law, and
after the Gospel. So Paul and Silas, Act. 16. The contrary is the way to make
people curse us hereafter, though it please them for the present; As if one
should heal a sore on the top and not corrasive it to draw and care out the
inward core, it would within a while break out again with far greater
danger: so shall we find it in this case.

To the people the use is, Use. 2.
that they examine whether ever they felt the terrors of the Law, of which we
have spoken, as we see they must that come to faith. And here be three sorts
of persons to be spoken to. First, such as never knew what any such work
meant. Secondly, such as have been under terror, but have outgrowne it.
Thirdly, such as yet lie under it. I must speak to all these.

I ask the most, did you ever feel your selves in a fearful estate, and
were you ever disquieted and terrified about the same? Alas, the most part will
say, they know no such matter, nor what it means, nay, some think they would
be loath to be in any such case, as they have seen some to be.

Well, what is the reason thou never were troubled at thy estate? Is it because
thou were never enlightened to know the particulars, Such as were never
terrified.
and depth of thy misery? It may be; For some are ignorant indeed, and know it
not, or only a little in general, that they be sinners; but of the depth,
and particulars of their woeful estate they are not advised. Well, if it be
for want of being enlightened, then know it now, and the Lord enlighten thee.
And to this end inform thy self of the depth of misery, in which all mankind
lie by nature, till by grace they be recovered out of it.

Or is it because thou went not convinced, that it is thy state, but have
known it only in general, and so posted it over to others; and have either
not thought it true of thee, or never weighed it with thy self? If thou have
not been convinced, then now be, and the Lord convince thee. To which end I
speak to every one, rich, poor, man, woman, yongue, old; if thou be one of
the sons of Adam, thou art in this woeful state, and it is as true of thee,
as of any other in the world.

Or have thou been enlightened and convinced, and yet do not fear? have thou
been stricken down about it, and yet art not, humbled? thou have an obstinate,
hard, and senseless heart indeed. Will not the hearing of all this sin, and
of all these plagues, and of the eternal wrath of the infinite God; will not,
I say, all this terrify thee? If one should tell thee all thou have is burnt,
and thy children killed, this would amaze thee, and take up thy thoughts; or
that thou art condemned to die: and will not this that thou art thus and thus
guilty, and in danger of all the curses in the book of the Law; and that if
thou should die to night thou should first to hell for ever: will not
this terrify thee? The brute creatures will condemn thee; for if they see
themselves overmatcht they fall down and fear: if the Lion roares the beasts
tremble; but if the glorious God of the whole world roar, wilt not thou a
poor mortal creature, a worm, be afraid?

Heathen Felix shall rise up in judgment against thee, who trembled at the
preaching of Paul.

Yea wicked reprobate Judas shall; nay the Devils themselves: for they tremble.

God will put terror into thine insensible conscience ere he have done with
thee; or else if the terrors of the Law cannot waken thee, the torments of
hell shall.

O fearful case, that the Law being so preached as it is (and yet oh that it
were more plainly and zealously preached than it is) that so few are moved at
it! Alas no; people are jolly, lusty, and stout, they do not mean to blanke
nor yield, but harden their hearts and go on boldly and lustily, as if they
had no cause to hang the head.

Well, the Lord will pull down your proud looks if you belong to him, and
make your hearts heavier, or else you shall never have part in his comforts.

Is there not cause enough to make thy stout heart to yield? think of thy
sins, of that thou deserves hereby, think of hell torments; the eternity of
them; that there be sundry in hell not half so great sinners as thou, and
that if thou should die to night thou should go thither also.

And pray God that he that made thy heart would work upon it, and shake it;
and that by his Law, as upon them, Act. 2. 37. and throw thee down as he did
Paul, Act. 9.

Yet I will give thee leave thus to do, beg of God that he would so show
thee thy sins and punishment, not as he could, but as thou may be able to
bear.

Next there are some will say, they have felt terror of their estate, but they
have outgrown it, Such as havs outgrowne it.
it is past: Yea? What have you done with it? have you broke prison, or did God
let you out? If you have broke prison, you must even in again; and that worse
than before* but if God have let you out, well and good; but how prove you
that? This you may know by considering the manner how God brings his from
terror to comfort in the person of this party or kind of parties that we are
now in hand with; even good Christians, who have had their terror turned into
comfort, which they would not part with for the world. Why if it be thus that
you have got out, God forbid that I or any living should dare to speak against
it. It is of God, and no marvel; for he aimed at no other at first: his
meaning was not when he cast thee down at first to destroy thee, but to make
thee fit to seek comfort, and then to bestow it upon thee: therefore this is
no new thing, for he does thus by all his.

And if this be your case, it ought to stir you up to great thankfulness for
this wonderful mercy of God: for he has done much to guide you safely to this
pass through so many dangers: for you might have been left in senseless
blockishnesse and perished, and you have escaped that. In thy terror thou
might have fallen to despair, or to drive it away untimely, and so have
perished: thou have escaped that too. Yea, when thou came to seek help, thou
might have sought and lost; but God has blessed thee through all these, and
brought thee to peace, blessed be the Lord, seeing many have perished in the
way to this, that thou art come to.

No doubt in thy first beginning to believe and after thy obtaining, thou
thoughtst thou could not be thankful enough to God, and now beware thou be
not careless, forgetful, or fall from thy first love: hold on in a course of
thankfulness and holy obedience, that thou may still enjoy thy comfort.
Also be careful to help others by the same comforts that thou have felt.

Ob. Yet sometimes I fear I got comfort too soon, and was not humbled
sufficiently.

Ans. If thou had load enough to weary thee out of thy self, and not to
leave till thou soughtest and foundst Christ, it was sufficient, thank God
that thou were not pressed as God could have pressed thee.

Now for the others that have broke prison; some have got out of their terror
by striving against it, as, either they have drunk it away, or played it away:
and if this be your case, then the more fool you, thou have provided very ill
for thy self. Do thou think these terrors will be consumed so, or will
be answered so? Is the debt ever the more paid, for making the Bayliffe
drunken? The Creditor will set on thee again. Or it may be thou will never
again come to the like offer; God was beginning to come near thee, and thou
were somewhat beginning to come toward the way to Heaven: oh if thou had
followed it, and struck while the iron was hot, who knows what it might have
come to? but thou have quenched it, and so thou will be harder to work upon
than ever before.

All the counsel I can give thee, is to call after these terrors which thou
have sought to drive away, and call aloud ere they be gone past call; and call
quickly ere thy heart be hardened quite, and then it will cost double labor.
And pray God to work them upon thy heart again.

Others have outgrowne them, by snatching hold of the promise of mercy and
salvation ere it belonged to them, thinking themselves good Christians, because
they had felt some terrors: but alas, herein quite deceived; for then Judas was
a good Christian, and the Devils themselves. No, the promise of salvation is
not straight belonging to one terrified in conscience, but to one that is not
only terrified for his punishment, but is contrite hearted for sin, which is
the work of the Gospel.

There he many steps between terror wrought by the Law, and believing
pardon of sins. It is too long a study at once, as will appear in handling
the Gospels working.

These terrors if they had continued till they had been turned to forrow and
compunction of heart for sin, it had been well.

These must either come back again, or else trust to a false persuasion and
perish: they must learn to step one step after another according to Gods word.

Yet it may be thou shall find it harder the second time than before, as they
that break prison are laid in surer next time.

The third sort are they which are still under the Iron harrow.

To these I say, Such as are still under terror and the spirit of bondage.
let them know, this is somewhat, and in preparation to more; bless the fire
that melted thee, and kiss the scourge that humbled thee; thou might have
been left a block: Know this is the Lords discipline and course he takes
with his.

And let not these be weary of the yoke of God and the Law, and make overmuch
haste out of this state, for so may they undo themselves: for, as some
withstanding their terror have withstood their salvation; so some have by
hastening out made waste of all, and being impatient of being in this case, and
overwilling to catch hold of the Promise straight, have proved but loose,
unsound, and unsavory Christians in time, which if they had tarried the Lords
leisure in it, might have come to sound and true comfort, which would have
continued all their days.

As some youths impatient of service will not serve out their time, but buy out
two or three, or four years of their time, and so coming to themselves, and
setting up ere they have stayednesse or skill, they soon waste away their
stock, and then are feign seven years after to come and be a servant with
their old Master or some other, which if they had served out their time, might
have bin free men long ago, and lived in as good sort as their Masters; So
these must after long deceiving themselves, either come back again under the
bondage of the Law, and begin again, or else after their unsound and unsavory
course ended, must perish, who might have been free men, and had much true
comfort long ago, and been able to comfort others, if they had not been too
hasty. Or as an impatient patient, gets the Surgeon to pull out the tent
and corrasive, or pulls it off himself as soon as it begins to smart a
little, and so thinks it is searched enough, and now lays on healing
plasters. But afterward this breaks out again worse then ever; whereas if
the corrasive had been let lie on till it had eaten out the corruption indeed,
then it might have been whole long ago.

Let these therefore attend on the ministry of the Word still, till they have
learned from thence what Gods meanings are toward them, who will give them
such counsel, as (if they will be ruled by it) shall bring all to good end in
due time.

You have heard of the working of the Law in one that should become a believer:
The Gospells working.
but the Law works no such thing; when it has slain a man, there it leaves
him without any hope or help in himself or any other.

But now then the Gospel comes, and is glad tidings of salvation, and speaks
better things, and by little and little works faith in him that sometimes was
far off from any such thing.

First, the Gospel proclaims a remedy, and tells the world* and this
terrified sinner, that there is yet help to be had for miserable sinners,
whereby they may be saved from all their woe, and may become the children of
God, and be heirs of heaven, viz. that God has given his Son Jesus Christ
to the world, who being eternal God become also man, and in both natures has
wrought a most perfect satisfaction for us, satisfying all our debt, and
pacifying Gods wrath by his sufferings in soul and body, and by his perfect
obedience has purchased us eternal life. And that there is none excluded from
their part in this, but they that exclude themselves. And that God is gracious
and merciful, not desiring the death of a sinner, but willing to have mercy
upon him; so that if he be not more willing to perish than God is to save him,
he may do well.

Now, the Gospel revealing this, by the help of the spirit the party is
enlightened to understand this, which is not yet known of everybody.

Secondly, by the same spirit he is made able to believe that there is such a
remedy indeed, I mean in general, but whether he shall have any part in it,
is counsel yet to him, and far off, so that this party is neither ignorant
of the remedy, nor yet doubtful, but knows and believes it. These be the
works of the Gospel, and that every one that believes shall have part in this
remedy, yea, and that if he could believe, he should have his part also in it.

Thirdly, the Gospel thus making us to know and believe the remedy, works
further: Oh it stays him from sinking under his burden, from despair, and
keeps his head above water. And this is as far as it is believed; for alas
some are very hardly staid with this: for what is an uncertain and absent
benefit able to do in a certain and present misery, or to stay one? but some
it does thus stay from utter despair, though as yet they remain in a heavy
state. If one stung with a serpent, swelling and in grievous pain, should hear
that there is one forty or fifty miles off that had an oil that had cured some
in such case, so that if one should find him at home, and can get some of it,
he might do well again. This stays him a little, but alas his tormenting pain
continues. And so it is in this case.

4. The next work of the Gospel is contrition and brokennesse of heart in
this sinner, which is a gracious work of Gods Spirit in a man, whereby he
hearing of the mercy of God and his gracious disposition, and that there may be
mercy for him, this breaks his heart, and turns legal terror for the
punishment, to godly grief for sin it self, for offending God, and
dishonouring him that has been so good to him, to spare him all this while,
and not cut him off, and that he understands he is of such a gracious
disposition. Oh vile wretch that I am says he! against whom have I offended?
not against a Tyrant, but against a most gracious God, that preserved and
maintained me, fed and clothed me, when I did nothing but rebel against him
and play the bedlam, who might have damned me thus many years ago, and yet
spared me, and now puts thee in some hope that I may find mercy at his hand:
Oh woeful caitiffe that I have been and am! so long and often to have
offended so good a God.

Now, that we be not deceived and think we have contrite hearts, and have
not, here I will set out the notes of it, by putting a difference between it
and some things like unto it.

First, between natural sorrow and this contrition; nature grieves for
losses, sicknesses, Diff. between it and not. sorrow.
death of near friends: this breaks much both body and mind, and makes
folks look old; and we say, such an one breaks apace, or is much broken, it
is seen in his face: for what is natural sorrow but a fleeing from s^mething
that is hurtful to us, and when we cannot flee from it, then lying under, it?
But there is great difference between it and contrition, and godly grief:
natural sorrow comes upon worldly causes, contrition is for sin, and wrought by
the Word of God.

Natural sorrow is momentary; for though a man be grieved for his broken arm
or leg, or this or that loss of goods, of child, or wife, yet in time this
grief wears away, when God has recompensed our loss some other way.

But contrition and sorrow for sin is perpetual, and lasts ever: though he get
comfort, yet he is broken in heart for his sins all his life long, and broken
from his sins for ever; for he will never turn to them more.

And this may stay some that have feared their own soundness, because when
they have lost wife, husband, child, they have grieved exceedingly; it has
broken their heart, caused plentiful tears, yea such heaviness as could not
be comforted; and kept within doors: But never could find such broken hearts
for their sins, nor weep so bitterly in remembrance of them.

This may be in a true child of God: for the grief for worldly losses came
suddenly, and was for a time great, but in time it wears away and is
forgotten, when God has healed him again: But the grief for your sins
continues still, does it not? you grieve no more now for the pain or loss
you had twenty years ago; that is gone, but you grieve still for the sins
you committed so long ago. Well then this may be, and is far greater. That
was like a land flood, a sudden running over of a small brook, but the water
in a great River that keeps within its banks is more than that.

Again, Between it and legal terror.
there is this difference between legal terror and this contrition, seeing
that is for punishment most what, this chiefly for sin; that wrought by the
Law and legal comminations, this by the Gospel and hearing of Gods mercy:
that terrifieth and amazeth a man as a blow on the head with a leaver, and
smites him down, leaving him without any feeling at all, or if there be any,
it moves him to fly from God as from a terrible Judge. But this is a smarty
grief of heart for offending God, which troubles him more than the fear of
hell ever did, and so vexes him, that if there were no hell to punish him he
would thus grieve.

Legal terror leaves the heart as whole as it was, and still hardened. True
it is that it stops the working of pride, and holds down the acts of it for a
time and damps it, but the habit and disposition thereof is the same that
before* As (...) one should with a bar of Iron burst into three or four
pieces a stone, or brass mortar, yet for all that it remains as hard as
before; but a soft fire melts it, and makes it fit to be cast into a mould. So
though Felix trembled, yet the continued as covetous still as he was before,
and expected a bribe, which because he failed of, he left Paul bound. Ahab
though so stuck down and humble (...) yet after he continued as vile, Acts
24. 26. 27.
and imprisoned Michaiah; 1 King 22 27.
so Judas after his terror yet added murder to murder; and they Number. 14. 1.
2. 3. 4.

But contrition mollifieth the hardness, and breaks in pieces the wholenesse
of the heart; as we may see in the examples of contrite ones who never
committed the like, sins (...). So David never numbered the people more.

Furthermore, there is difference between it and the counterfeit contrition of
an hypocrite, Between it and counterfeit contrition.
which is a light grief, and flitting sorrow of unsound professors, who wring
the hands, shed a few tears, or make some complaints of themselves for their
sins, but it is quickly over; like a morning dew that soon is lickt up when
the Sun arises; or like a bull-rush that bows while the wind blows it,
but when the blast is over, it returns to its former straightness.

But Contrition is a searching, pricking, and stinging sorrow, which abides
also till God does remove and turn it into quietness; yea, and sometimes also
after. Many have had good pangs after the Word preached, which if they had
lasted, might have been the hope and beginning of true contrition indeed.

Therefore we may see that this is a gracious and divine work in the heart of
a man sarre exceeding any of these three.

Yea an excellent gift it is that humbles a sinner truly and kindly, and so
breeding humility, makes him capable of all the graces of God: Psalm. 25. 9.
for the humble he will teach his ways.

It makes the heart soft and tender, that the sins may come up by the roots,
yea teacheable, and apt to have any good thing planted in it, and soft to
receive the impression of the Lord in it.

Yet here for all this we must understand, It is not repentance
that this contrition is not repentance, but differs much from it: For contriis
a preparative act sitting a man to Faith; repentance is a grace consequent and
follows after faith: contrition is an ungrounded good inclination, purpose,
desire, that would do much, viz. turn from all sin for ever, and do all
the contrary good: but alas, it is not able to perform it, in respect it
cannot in it self, nor in Christ; for he is not yet in Christ till faith be
formed in him.

But repentance is a grounded grace, whereby a man by faith being planted into
Christ, has from him wherewithal to carry him out to turn from all sin,
and take up the contrary good. They therefore that confound contrition and
repentance (as some do, and they no Papists) run into two absurdities: First,
that repentance goes before faith: Secondly, that a man may do some good
thing, and pleasing to God before faith.

Ob. Is not a contrite and broken heart, acceptable to God and pleasing?

Ans. True, as it is the gift and work of his Spirit it is, but in the
beginning it is not as it comes from us: neither can the sinner know that this
his contrition pleases God, because he knows not himself to have faith.
True, it is somewhat hard to say the very time when faith is wrought; but till
it be, nothing does simply please God. To make this plain, understand that
there be three kinds of the gifts of God.

Some common to elect and reprobate, as knowledge in Scripture, prophecy,
tongues, miracles.

Some special, belonging to the elect only, as faith by which we are
justified, a renewed heart, a good conscience, the fear of God.

Some middle ones wrought in the heart of those that yet be not actually the
Children of God, yet certainly shall be, and which whosoever have wrought in
them, shall surely have faith, and cannot go long without it. Such are, this
contrition, and such dispositions as be in men before faith, which yet are
wrought by the Gospel. These are better than common gifts, yet not actually
graces, and yet gracious inclinations to faith, which are in those that are to
be justified, and which (if we speak properly) cannot be wrought in any that
shall perish.

To proceed further in showing the working of this contrition: The working of
the companions of contrition.
when the Gospel speaks so graciously of the Lord, and his readiness to
forgive wretched sinners never so many or so great offenses, yet the sinner
terrified by the Law cannot believe and apply it. Oh no, says he, no such
thing for me, I have been thus and thus vile, and have thus and thus
dishonored God, when he waited my conversion and good: I ran from him and
played my parts, I despised the Ministers, and all good people, etc. Well, yet
says the Gospel, the Lord may have mercy upon thee, so as thou do humble
thy self: What, to me? no such matter. Yes, even to thee. Oh then you have
given him his load, he seeks to get alone, that he might weep his belly
full; he cannot contain then: but as the gracious eye of our Savior Christ
upon Peter melted him into tears, so is his heart melted and resolved into
tears of repentance. Never did Benhadad and his servants hearing that the
Kings of Israel were merciful Kings, humble themselves more with ropes about
their necks in sackcloth, than this man will to God.

Oh he cries out, Against whom have I sinned? against a Tyrant? no, but
against a most gracious God, that is so merciful as could not be put out of his
gracious course, by all my wickedness; and yet gives me some hope of mercy.
Oh vile wretch, villain that I am to offend so gracious a God.

If I had done thus much against a man, or the tithe I have done against him,
he would have pursued me to the uttermost long ere now, and hunted me out of
the country; it should have been to hot for me: but the Lord has spared me
all this while. Oh this cuts his soul more than the feeling of hell for the
time.

This also so changes his mind, that whereas before he could go bolt upright
for all his sins, now they crush him to the ground: before sin was as
sweet as honey, now more bitter than gall or wormwood: before he could go
under all his sins, and never shrink, now one lies heavy upon his
conscience: before the doctrine of repentance he loathed it, and fled from it
as from a mad dog, serpent, or an arrow shot, because it shot at his lusts
and lewd companionship, or against sins which he loved as his life; now who
that could come and tell him how he might be quite rid of his sins, and be
never more troubled with them or have to do with them, were one of a thousand
a most welcome man: so that now his daintiest meat is his bane, and
contrariwise this bitterness and grief of heart makes him fetch up all his
sweet morsells.

This breeds an utter and deep dislike of all his former courses. He cannot
abide to think of them; yet cannot forget them: they are ever before him, but
so as he is broken from them for ever, turning to them no more: oh it has
stung him so as he can never have pleasure to do any more that he has done;
as David had small joy ever to number the people more, for which his heart
smote him.

Yea it makes him angry with himself and vex, as David, that he had done so
exceeding foolishly, and that he was a foolish ignorant beast.

Yea to confess his sins, and shame himself. No body shall need to tell
him what to say, for his heart is full, and he will power out all to God, and
say more against himself than any body else can.

Yea he will aggravate his sins by the patience of God: Oh they be so much
the vilder; because God has had so much patience toward me: oh I was
unworthy that he should ever thus bear with me. Also by the means he has
had: If I had not had the means of grace, it would not grieve me so much, but
I that have lived so long under such means and made no use of them, oh woeful
wretch.

It will cause him to humble himself before God, and throw away all conceit or
trust of any thing in himself, of knowledge, wit, learning, worldly wisdom,
civility, and righteousness of his own. Oh these he stood not a little upon,
and thought himself no mean one, but now he accounts all dung, abhorres
himself in dust and ashes; as Paul that counted his privileges that he was a
Jew, a Pharisee, learned in the Law, zealous, strict; oh these made him proud
and to lift his head full highly, but when God humbled him, he then accounted
all dogs meat and dung, and sought for all good out of himself in Christ.

Lastly, to this contrite person is given softness and tenderness of heart,
whereby he is fitted and prepared to receive further instruction from the Lord;
for as yet he has his burden on his shoulder, and knows not what God will do
with him; but go back again he never will, but will wait upon God for his
direction, what he would have him do.

He cries out therefore and complains, I am laden, who shall ease me?
undone, who shall help me? to bear it he feels intolerable, to escape it in
himself impossible, only some little faint hope keeps him from despairing.

Now we must take notice of the necessity of this contrition in every kind of
sinner that shall ever come to good: Necessity of contrition.
for the profane person that has boldly and without all fear ^one on, he
must be crushed in heart for sin, ere ever he shall have mercy at Gods hand,
or any promise belong to him.

So the civil man and carnal Gospeller, and hypocritical professors, that
think themselves in happy case, that they please God highly with that they
do, yea, that they deserve not only health, wealth, and outward blessings,
but even salvation at last at Gods hand for their good service they have done.
But they must come to loathe and abhore these, and will. When God works this
contrition, then they shall see what base and poor stusse it was, they have so
highly thought of, seeing now they shall discern that God makes base reckoning
of it, and holds it as abomination; for when they served God, it was only in
ceremony and show, without any substance or looking to their hearts to do it
in any carfulness of heart for the manner.

Yet how hard a thing it is to bring the heart of man to break for and from
his sins! oh it is God only can do it, Difficulty.
men had rather part with any thing, nay, all they have, nay lose their very
lives than their lusts: oh the rebellious heart of man, that has had too long
acquaintance with sin to be broken from it shortly, and is too deeply
rivetted in evil, that he should easily be pulled from it.

Now the consideration hereof should forcibly move us to be highly thankful to
God, Use. 1.
who as he has provided a blessed remedy, so has proclaimed it by his Gospel
to the sons of men, which is a special privilege that they have not always
enjoyed.

Secondly, Use 2.
let us examine whether the Gospel has enlightened us, and whether we know
and then believe the remedy, and Gods merciful nature.

Next, did you ever feel the Gospel breaking your heart, and the loving
kindness of God melting you thus and thus, as has been taught?

Alas, most must say they know not what any such thing means: alas we have
few broken hearts for sin; and yet there was never more cause, never more
means also, and yet alas even the Gospel is daily preached, but few are
melted herewith.

Most will not part from their corruptions, but had as liefe you should pull
their hearts from them, as their lusts* they know not how to live; it were no
life if they were barred of them; many know not how they should spend their
time if they were left. It may be at last they wish they were undone again in
respect of the punishment they see to come for them; but that is no contrition.
Well, as loath as you are to come to it, your heart must be broken ere God will
have any mercy for you.

Others will go with you in many things, show liking to the Word, love to the
Ministers, be moved at the Word, desire after mercy and salvation, yea mend
many things amiss, and do many duties, and yet for a contrite heart, you must
pardon them for that. If you urge it, either you shall hear no more of them,
as John Baptist did not of Herod, and Christ of many of his Disciples, or else
they will be borne with for that, they will coast over another way, and meet
you anon, but over this steep hill, and cragged rock, yet shall not lead them.

Nay many think themselves believers and in great good case, that yet never
came where contrition of heart grew: but their profession, religion and faith
is but vain, and will perish with them, if they trust to it; like Laodicea men
would be saved and be believers, but they will go to heaven whole without
blemish. But know that thy heart is not ^it for God till it be broken; and as
our Savior Christ was no sacrifice for our sins till his soul was broken
for our sins, so shall we never have part in this sacrifice, till our hearts
be broken for sin.

Oh this makes our preaching so unprofitable, religion so costly a service, and
faith so rare, because few are ever thus broken. Oh we may tear our throats,
and wear our tongues to the stumps, ere we can persuade a sinner to see the
odious heinousness of his sin, and danger of it, and bring him to a
detestation of it.

And why is this? because few believe and deeply consider either of their own
misery or of Gods gracious disposition and readiness to show mercy; which if
they did, it could not but break their hearts. Let us therefore be persuaded
to this duty, unto which we may be best enabled by the deep weighing of both
these together, and praying God to work us to it. But oh the vile heart of
man, sin must have sorrow; if not here, then hereafter: If men feel not the
terrors of the Law here, but be lusty, and spend their days in carnal
delights, time will come that God will awaken their consciences, and their
terrors (may be in this life) if not, yet hereafter they will prove
untolerable.

Now I would here further persuade those that be contrite hearted, first to be
thankful to God that has brought them to this pass: the promise of God
belongs to such, therefore be of good comfort; and though thou be not yet
able to apprehend it, yet if thou could it is thy due, with Gods good leave.
Christ came to ease the weary, find the lost, heal the sick, bind up the
broken, and therefore he will have mercy on thee. Which that thou may the
better believe, remember the example of the Publican, Prodigal, David, those
Act. 2. 39. who were all in the like case.

And let this also be added, that seeing God has brought thee thus far, he
means not to leave thee now, but will have mercy on thee. And his end in
casting thee down was not to destroy but to save thee:he has delivered thee
from insensible blockishnesse and hardness of heart, and in thy terror has
kept thee also, and has not suffered thee to bewail thy sin slightly, but
truly, earnestly, deeply and constantly: he would never have done all this for
thee, if he had not meant to bring thee further, he would have left thee ere
this. Judge. 13. 23.
As therefore Manaohs wife said to him, If the Lord were pleased to kill us he
would not have showed us these things: so I say to thee, If the Lord would have
cast thee off, he would not have used so many means to draw thee unto him.

Now I should proceed to some other steps toward faith wrought by the Gospel
between this contrition and faith, Answer to the contrites objections.
save that there is yet somewhat more to be said to this contrite-hearted
person, who has his burden upon his shoulders, and is not yet persuaded that
any part in the remedy does belong to him.

Why, has he not right in the promise? yes there is nothing on Gods part why
he may not apprehend and apply it; God gives him good leave, and the promises
are made to such. And though a man dares not apply the promise to one only
terrified by the Law, yet to one truly thus humbled by the Gospel, and
contrite-hearted, we dare do no other: yet this party is not able to
apprehend it, there is much both within and without him to the contrary.

1. The devil is a great enemy to it, who envies that he is come thus far,
knowing now he shall lose him; and therefore he will prolong the work all that
he can, and hinde^ the proceeding of it. He known that believing is, the
mother both of comfort and obedience; therefore he opposes it all he can.

2. Himself has much against it: he (it may be) with his grief has
forgotten that God has made promise of mercy to the penitent, or if he
remember it, yet he will call into question, whether he be such an one or no;
yea or if he be and cannot deny it, yet he is not able to apply it to himself
through weakness. Like a sick man that knows he has right to his meat, but
is so weaker, that he is not able to reach for it and put it to his mouth.

If a man had nothing to do for him but teach him that he knows not, or bring
to his remembrance that he had forgotten, or make him know that he is such an
one that the Promise belongs to, it were but an easy task. But here is the
difficulty, to make him believe that notwithstanding any thing that can be
said of Satan or his own corruption, that he is the child of God, and the
promise of mercy and salvation belongs to him. This party has many objections
against it, some of which I will recite, and answer them, and so proceed.

Ob. When the promise of pardon is offered to this party, Alas, to me, says
he? no such matter, that were marvel: oh no I am vile, and see nothing but
wretchedness and misery, as being at the very pits brinke. They that can
believe it, let them, they be happy men, for my part I am far off, I dare
not. A likely matter, that from such low abasement I should be advanced to such
honor, from hell to heaven.

Answ. And why not you as well as others that have been as far off as you?
and have been long held off, yet have got comfort at last, and so shall you.
God has not excluded you, therefore shut not out your self. What if sorrow
and comfort be contraries? yet sorrow tends to comfort; and what if he
therefore cast thee down that he might raise thee up, and would never have
brought thee thus far, if he had not purposed good to thee?

2. Ob. Alas what likelihood is there that God should receive and accept me
when men reject me? my superiors they contemn me, my friends that have loved
me and have been glad of my company, even they look aloof and care not for
me.

Ans. What of this? God sees not as men see for they see carnally. They of the
world love and like their own* and God likes his own. The world^ rejecting
thee is no argument God will do so, but the contrary rather, as we see in the
example of the blind man; John 9. When thou were whole, and tall, and goodly
like Eliah thon likedst thy self, and the world liked thee, but now thou art
broken, and lame, as it were, they make no more account of thee than of an old
rent garment. But God never liked thee till how thou; (...) a whole heart God
care not for, Psalm. 51. 17.
but a broken heart is a sacrifice acceptable to him. For (...) king is his
(...) and he likes it will. Thy heart never sent out good favor till much; as
Mary's ointment; while it was in: the box, but when it was broken the smell
went all over the (...). And as spices whole and not (...) smell not, (...), so
is it with thee in this case. Therefore be of good comfort, thou shall get
asnow favor with God as thou shall lose with the world. As long as God takes
pleasure in thee, no matter who dislikes. Besides, thou art in better liking
with the Angels and the Church of God, who thought of thee as of a profane or
civil man, but now as of one that is in the fitting for God, and to make a
believer.

Ob. 3. Me thinks I would sometimes begin to believe, and be of good hope,
but then my unworthiness pulls me back, as a grimme Sergeant should pull back
a poor Suitor that were putting up his peti^^ on to a great man. I can do
nothing worthy Gods acceptance: if I could do thus or thus, there were some
hope.

Ans. What has God been doing all this while but to pull down thy proud
stomach, and yet do thou talk of worthineffe? When thou were a Pharisee thou
thoughtst thy self worthy, but thou should not, now that thou art a
Publicane.

Thou art unworthy; it is true, if not, what need had of Gods mercy? or what
glory should God have of giving one for another? giving something to one that
were worthy to attain it. thou speak as though thou would not be
beholding to God, but he will accept thee though unworthy, that he may bind
thee to him for ever. Count not God, as a man to whom nothing bring, nothing
have: God is about to make thee worthy, and they worthiness stands in his free
favor: The feeling of thy unworthiness makes thee worthy, that is, fit for
God to show mercy to thee, seeing, besides thy sin that makes thee unworthy,
thou have a sense of it, and a heart broken for it, and having these, God will
not reject thee because of thy unworthiness. Thou were never worthy nor fit
till now; when thou were in better case in thine own feeling, God cared less
for thee, and thou were further off. What talkst thou of worthiness, when the
Angels be not clear in his sight, nor the Saints worthy in themselves? Know
that God respects (in showing thee mercy) his goodness and mercy, and not thy
goodness; that he does, is free. Again, have others that have found mercy
had it for their worthiness? or could they see cause in themselves, why they
should find mercy rather than others? And as for thy doings, thou must have
that power from God after thy believing, therefore believe first.

Ob: 4. Oh but my sins be so many and so great.

Ans. That is not the matter that will stand between God and thee, so long as
thy heart is broken for them; so long as God is the Physician, no matter what
be the disease: his mercy is above all thy sins. Christ's merits is not a
weak plaster that can heal a green cut, but not an old sore: so to conceive
of it were to disgrace the blood of Christ; the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
us from all sins, Psalm. 51. 7. God is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. abundant in
goodness, Exodus 34. has a multitude of mercies, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 108. 4.
though our sins reach up to heaven, Gods mercy reaches above the heavens. God
forgives iniquity, transgression, and sin, Exodus 34. yea rebellion, Hos. 14.
5. Thou art not worse than Ma^asses, than they, Act. 2. that crucified Christ,
than Paul that persecuted the Church of God; and Mary Magdalen. These have
found mercy; therefore thou also following their example may be assured of
it. If a man having many debtors should proclaim to them all (some owing more,
some less) that let all of them come to him, and confess the debt, and he
will forgive them great and small: will any man doubt, because his debt is
great that it shall not be forgiven, especially if he see greater sums remitted?

Ob. 5. Yea but I have been a mocker at goodness, a scoffer at the dear
children of God, hated the Ministers, given to all vileness.

Ans. True, this is vile; for we see the Ismaelites cast out for mocking, and
the children torn by the Bears. But yet no matter what thou have been, seeing
now it shall be enquired what thou art, and would be hereafter. As long as
God has given thee another heart, that that is past shall be forgotten: as
thou remembrest them God forgets them.

Ob. 6. Yea but there be few that shall have part in this remedy, and it is so
great, that I fear it is too great for me.

Ans. If the Lord will give thee it, who shall hinder thee? Great gifts become
great Princes: consider what gifts Princes give, five hundred pounds a year or
a thousand pounds, make Noblemen of Gentlemen, Favorites Marquesses. The
greater it is, the more cause have thou to be thankful, both here and in
heaven. And for the fewness, if it please the Lord to work that in thee that
he works in few, and to bestow that mercy on thee that he gives to few; if, I
say, he will be thus gracious, the more cause have thou to admire his mercy.

Ob. 7. Oh but I have not been humbled enough; the promise is made to the
contrite; If I had bin so humbled as some, then I could believe.

Ans. Beware thou become not a Papist in thinking to merit mercy by thy
contrition: oh it is not thy contrition, if it had been a hundred times more,
could merit pardon of the least of thy sins. If the lord Jesus had not
suffered infinite sorrow and grief in soul and body for them, it is not all
our grieving could satisfy Gods justice for the least of our sins; no not
though we should weep out our eyes, and mourn to death. Therefore though God
has appointed all to whom he will show mercy to be contrite hearted; yet not
to come to mercy thereby as by a meritorious means, but as by a convenient and
meet disposition to prepare us to seek and receive mercy with thankfulness.

This is but a trick of Satan, who before contrition held thee from sorrow,
and would have made thee think any too much, and more than needs; but now he
knows that thou have sufficient in respect of Gods gracious acceptance, he
would persuade thee it is never enough, because he would sink thee if it were
possible. Though he see thee stand trembling with thy load on thy shoulders,
yet he would persuade thee that thou feel no burden.

That contrition is enough that God will accept and put an end to, and that
which drives us so to seek Christ, as we cannot be satisfied without him.

If it please God to grant thee mercy and comfort with more ease, and more
speed than some others, be thankful for it, and add not load to thy
burden. The Lord knows what is fit for every one; thou may soon have more
than thou can bear: God keeps not a measure to all in this thing.

Ob. 8. But all the promises are made to believers, and none others, and I have
no faith.

Ans. Though faith be not yet found in thee, nor thou able to apprehend
Christ, yet thou art not far from it: therefore seeing the promise belongs to
thee, why do thou not strive now to lay hold on it? Thou have great need of
a Physician, and Christ he has comfort for such: thou must have help or else
art undone, and Christ is very willing to help such, and such only; why then
do thou not catch hold of him, reach out thy hand of faith and touch him,
that virtue may go out of him to heal thee? If thou can not run to him,
then go, if not go, creep; but be sure to lay hold on him and touch him, as
the woman with the issue of blood, whom our Savior Christ reproved not for so
doing, but commended her highly: and so would he thee if thou would follow
her example and believe in him. We must not think it plaseth God that we
should stand straining of courtesy, but that we believe God on his word, that
we may have hearts and mouths to praise him, and to set about the work of a
godly life.

Thus the contrites doubts being answered, and by Gods goodness somewhat
removed, he grows somewhat on further, and hearing the Lords large and loving
offer, and without exception, and considering his need of it, and the truth of
God that promises it, yea and to him; this breeds in him a further thing, that
is, a desire after his part in this mercy, which has sundry comp^nions with
it, which are like the hiding of the pearl by the wise Merchant when he had
found it.

For between contrition and faith are diverse steps. The Lord could dispatch
it at once, seeing the contrite person has right to the promise, and God
means at last to do him good, save only that God sees it not so good for
him, but is long preparing him for so great a work. And seeing it is for the
best, God does him no wrong, especially seeing he is upheld by hope of
obtaining in the end, which keeps him from: discouragement. As between the
finding of the pearl and buying it, are hiding it, departing which joy,
selling all: now then is the pearl found, when promise is made to the humble
and contrite, of pardon in Christ, and salvation: after which follows a desire
with care and joy, and then hungring and thirsting for it, and selling all for
it; and then buying it, which is believing, when he apprehends the promise, and
applies it to himself. Now for desire: Oh he sees the excellency of mercy,
his need, Gods offer, and that he is in good sadness; oh he has an earnest
desire in his heart; Oh that it might be, oh the Lord grant it to me.

Ob. But what, is this party come no further than to desire all this while? I
thought he had come to faith by this time: you talked of desire before, that
finding himself in a miserable case, desired to be out of it.

Ans. There is great difference between that desire and this; that was
ungrounded, and only feeling himself in ill case, he desired to be out of it,
but this is a grounded desire, upon the promise that God makes to him of mercy
whereupon he builds: Lord thou have promised mercy to them that labor and are
heavy laden if they come to thee; Mat. 11. 28
Lord I come to thee, therefore have mercy on me.

As if a rich man having many debtors unable to pay him, one of them feeling
himself so, desires he had his debt forgiven him, though he have no hope of
it; but afterward the rich man sends him word, if he will come to him, and
confess the debt, and ask to have it forgiven, he will: now he desires it
after another fashion with a more lively desire. Yea, this party begins to lay
some hold on the promise, which puts some life and warmth into him, whereas
when the minister before spoke of the promises, it was music to a sad heart,
but now he desires, and is glad to hear the promises applied to him: whereas
before he sought for judgments, now he turns the Book for comforts and
promises.

Now to this desire is added request; Request
for he cannot keep in his desire in his heart, but it must out, and so he
falls to pour out his heart to God, to lay out his bitter complaint,
confessing and crying for pardon, leaning upon the promise as upon his staff,
which before he could not fasten upon.

For God will inure him betimes to that order he must take after with him,
viz. to offer up his own request, and petition, not giving unto him till he be
able to ask it: therefore the spirit helps his infirmity, and teaches him
how to pray, and what to ask, sending up sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed.

Thus did the Publican, Luke 18. 13.
Oh Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. So the Prodigal, Luke 15. 19
Make me as one of thy hired servants. So Manasses prayed to God, and God heard
him.

Which confession and prayer though an hypocrite may make, yet not from a
broken heart. It is true, Pharaoh and Judas confessed, but not in a sound and
right manner.

To this is joined care; Care.
not a hopeless fear that God will not be merciful, but a scrupulous
solicitude, lest he should miss of his desire. He casts that peril that
never shall be nor can be (for God will show him mercy) and yet he has this
thought: But what if I should miss? which serves only to add to his
industry, and increase the bent of his endeavors.

As no, man has any great matter in hand, though he be very far from it, but
will have a thought, What if he should be prevented? to whet on his desire, and
stir up his endeavors that he may neglect no means.

The next is hope, viz. that he shall obtain, Hope.
and that only because God has spoken it: and though he have not the
strength to hold; it fast, yet he hopes he shall, which does greatly animate
him.

This hope, though it be not the hope that is the daughter of faith, that
makes not ashamed, which is as steadfast as faith it self, Romans 5. 5.
and is the anchor of the foul, yet it is far differing from the blind
groundless hope of the world.

The next is joy, proceeding from this hope that he shall obtain, and that he
is so near it; as it is said of the Merchant when he had hid the pearl, that
he departed with joy, as being glad that he was so near a good bargain,
though yet he had not bought it. Which joy, though it be not so great as that
that comes after faith which is unspeakeable, yet it is far beyond the joy of
hypocrites, wch^ is upon no, or false grounds; as that of Agag, 1. Sam. 15. his
false joy of safety; and of worldlings in their corn and wine, or profane
ones in their beastly lusts, whose joy shall be turned into wailing and
gnashing of teeth. This joy refreshes greatly as the little Jonathan honey that
(...) did eats and what if he had eaten his fill? so what shall be to this
party after believing?

And it is not to be thought strange he should have any joy before believing;
oh yes, finding himself so near a good turn, it glads his heart. As the
poor blind man, Mar. 10. 50. that our Savior Christ called to him, he threw
away his cloak, and arose hastily: so Zacheus, Luke 19. came down hastily and
received Christ joyfully, ere ever he had received any good from him, though
it may be he had some hope he should, if he were at his house once.

And all these together are answerable to the hiding of the pearl, and going
away rejoicing; for what was that but a casting and musing in the mind, and
having diverse conceits about it; as thus, What success had I that ever I
should find such a pearl (...) thousand finds any? what an opportunity have
I now of enriching my self for ever? what a fool should I be if I should
neglect it? were I ever like to come to the like offer again? oh what need
have I of it? what shall become of me without it? and so does he that has
found the spiritual pearl.

Next follows hungring Thirsting.
and thirsting for mercy and Christ, all one with that of selling all to buy
the pearl.

But because the holy Ghost uses both phrases, I will speak of both. The
desire of him that shall have mercy is compared to hunger sometimes, most often
to thirst; not only for some resemblance between them, but to show that it is
not a desire fit to obtain Christ and his blood, except it be like thirst.

Hunger is a want of hot and dry, thirst a want of cold and moist, both
grievous, but thirst the more sore by much. If hot and dry be wanting, yet if
the other be supplied, nature is long supplied and upheld: not contrariwise.
Thirst is of all sensual appetites the strongest, most impatient of being
unsatisfied, and impotent of being without that it desires.

1. He show some resemblances between the natural and spiritual thirst:
Thirst is an emptiness of cold and moist, and a great pain arising from the
same by the sucking and drawing of the veins in the stomach, for some cool
moisture to nourish the lower parts, when there is none, and so it pincheth the
reins together, and causes great pain: So in the spiritual thirst there is
a great emptiness of all health, hope, and happiness in himself, and so a
great pain of soul for want thereof.

2. The thirsty has a great desire; an earnest, not faint or cold desire after
drink, Psalm. 42.
as the Heart for the rivers, or the dry chapt gaping earth for rain, yea and
that without delay, thinking every day a year, and an hour to be a whole
day.

So the spiritual thirster for the blood of Christ, does not coldly and ^^^ily
wish for it, but importunately desires it, yea cannot be content to say,
hereafter and one day I hope I shall, and that is as good, in sickness, at my
death. Oh no, give me drink else I die: oh I faint for want of it.

3. This makes him set a high price upon the thing he wants, without which he
sees he perishes. I would give twenty pound, a hundred pound for drink
enough to satisfy me, to save my life. And so also it is in the spiritual
thirst.

4. And this makes him take any pains to compass it; whence is our proverb,
hunger breaks through stone walk. Oh it will adventure it self, take any
pains. As one that eagerly seeks to kill one that would else kill him; so he
that spiritually thirsts will run, ^ide, early, late, hear, read, pray,
confer, and do them again and again to get faith, and to compass his
desire. And whereas before he would not stir out of door, now he cares not
what pains he takes to have his desire satisfied.

5. The thirsty in his extremity thinks with himself of his folly when he had
his fill, how little he regarded it, and was not thankful in that he had at his
list to drink and satisfy himself; that he threw away often that he would be
full glad of now, yea it may be abused it to drunkenness, and now he accuses
himself of his former folly: So the spiritual thirster thinks with vexation
to himself, How often have I heard of the sweet promises of the Gospel, and
never regarded them? take them who would, I prized them not, they were as water
spilt for me: heaven was offered, take it who would, and the merits of Christ;
I had other matters in hand: But now the least promise would glad my heart. I
was a full man that cared not for a hony-combe, now if I had the least of Gods
sweet promises, the crummes under the table the droppings of the honey, it
would much refresh me.

6. He then comes to pity them that endure thirst, the poor which he heard
complaining sometimes, but never pitied, because he never felt what it was: Oh
beast, says he, that I was, I never regarded the state of the poor when I
he^d them complain, now I seek what it is. Oh what a goodly matter it is to
have ones fill at their need at any time* (...) is greet pity the poor (...)
better regarded. If ever I get w^ter to save my life, I will pity: the poor
hungry souls more than ever I (...).

So the spiritual (...) out, that he hearing some complain, and wring their
hands, and take great pains in hearing the Word, pitied them not, but thought
them fools, and idle, in that they must needs speak with the Minister. I
thought ill of them for it, and counted it needless; but now I know what it
is, I feel it my self; I hope if ever I be thoroughly satisfied, I shall be
more pitiful and charitable in censuring others.

7. If a man thirst, when he thinks of all else he has, he takes no pleasure
in them: what will his wealth, gold, house, land, do him good if he perish
for thirst? nay it rather increases his grief, to think he must go from all
for want of drink. Bring him gay clothes, sweet smells, music: Away with
all, give me drink to quench my thirst. As Sampson had no joy of his great
victory of the 1000. Philistines, because he feared he should die for thirst,
Judge. 15. 18. So he that spiritually thirsts, priseth Christ above all; so
that if you lay all the honors, profits, pleasures in one scale, and Christ in
the other, he counts all dung in comparison of him. And he that is the greatest
person, if he come to this hunger, he takes no pleasure in all he has,
without, or in comparison of this.

8. If any man should in this case come to him, and bring him drink or water
(as to a man chased over a dry desert in parching weather) would he strain
courtesy, and say he is loath to be beholding, and he never deserved it of
him? oh no, but he gladly and thankefully receives it, and eagerly falls to it.

So if any come to him in this case, and comfortably apply the promise of
Christ and salvation to him, and be an instrument of comfort to him, oh he
remembers that day for ever, and counts that party one of a thousand, loves him
ever after, and gladly embraces this gracious offer when he tendreth it unto
him. And if God will vouchsafe to bestow this mercy on him, oh he thinks
himself bound to serve him on hands and knees all days of his life; oh that
were to be written in his heart with a pen of iron.

Selling all, Selling all.
is when a man to obtain Christ and a part in his death and obedience, for
salvation, is content to part with any thing that should stand in his way to
hinder him from it.

What must the sinner sell? all that he has? what is that? his goods, lands,
children? No, these be, none of his own, God has but lent him these to use;
and some that would have Christ, and shall, have no goods to sell. What then is
our own? our sins, and nothing else: these therefore we must sell. Tush,
what should you name them? they be not worth the selling to purchase Christ,
seeing they are but base things. True, they be such things as one would think
should not be named with Christ, or that we should make any account of them;
but such is our wretchedness, and sin is so sweet, and sticks so close,
as, though they be naught worth, yet we prefer them above any thing, and
love them as, yea before our lives: many a man loses his life for his lusts.
Therefore when a man comes to this pass, with indignation to be willing to part
with his sins, to have no more to do with them (as he must that will have
part in Christ, he cannot have Christ; and keep any one of his sins) this is
a great matter, and that party shall have the pearl.

And thus God brings along the man, Buying.
and when he is at this pass God seals it up to him, and enables him to
believe, and says, Seeing thou will have no nay, be it unto thee according to
thy desire: and God seals him up by the spirit of promise, as surely as any
writing is made sure by sealing of it: then he believes the word of God, and
rests, and casts himself upon it. And thus he finds himself discharged of all
woe, made partaker of all good, at peace in himself, and fitted, and in tune
to do God some service.

This is to some sooner, to some later, according to the helps and means they
have, and wise handling they meet withal, and as God gives power.

Some in the time of hearing of the Word, open themselves, and apprehend the
promise; some after, when they are casting over that they have heard, and
musing, and trying themselves thereby, get comfort and lay hold.

Some after humble and earnest prayer, some at the Sacrament. And then is he
planted into Christ, and a happy man thence forward that ever he was borne.

It is hard to say at what instant faith is wrought, whether not till a man
feels that he apprehends the promises, or even in his earnest desires,
hungring and thirsting; for even these are pronounced blessed.

Some having got hold, hold it faster than some by much, yet none but with
doubtings sometimes; yet some are much privileged this way, especially they
that came hardliest by it.

Some ever and anon, let it go, and are full of doubtings, and to seek of
that sometimes they had; some upon one occasion some upon another, some upon no
occasion: But even God that gave them power to believe, withdrawing his hand
but a little, they are much troubled, that hereby they may know whence their
strength is.

And this may teach us Ministers to show the people the doctrine of Faith
distinctly, Use 1.
and particularly the working of it, and by what steps God brings men to it,
that they may try themselves, and not be deceived; without which they that
have gone thus along, yet may still hang in doubt whether they have faith or no,

And many think they have it, when they never came near it, taking such long
strides as deceive themselves.

2. This may move also the people to try themselves. They that have attained
faith, and assurance, and comfort, and came by it thus, and by these steps, let
them enjoy it and be thankful: no man dares speak against it; nor let them
call it into question, or be made to doubt. Many are still questioning of
their beginnings, and though they came to faith and comfort by these steps, yet
are still fearing that they have not begun in truth, or that they are not in
the right way, or took comfort ere it belonged to them. True, it is good to
be very careful in laying the foundation of our house, but if we be ever
pulling up after it is laid, we shall never finish the building.

3. They that now be in this case, and on the anvill (as it were) in framing to
make believers of them, may also make good use of that which has been said.
Did thou ever find this earnest desire? did thon pour out thy humble and
earnest requests to God for mercy, ease and pardon? have thou felt this care,
this hope? and have thou felt this joy, even because thou foundest thy self
not far from enjoying so unspeakable a benefit? have thou felt such a
hungring and thirst after the blood of Christ, as thou could not be quiet
without it; nothing else would satisfy? have thou highly prized it, and do
thou find thy self willing, as thou would have any mercy, to part with all
thy sins, even those that have been the most profitable, and pleasing ones;
that were sometimes to thee as near as thy skin, as dear as thy life, so as
thou could uot bring thy heart to think of leaving of them, but thoughtst
thou could not live without them? have thou now finally made them away?

Be of good comfort, Christ is thine, and the promise belongs to thee, and God
can no more deny thee thy part in mercy and salvation, than he can lie,
repent, or deny himself: and has he not promised from time to time eternal
life to such? Revel. 21. and 22. yea makes proclamation Isai. ah 55. 1. the
price is no money, but a thirsting soul, and Ioh. 7. 39. and 4. 14. to the
woman of Samaria.

Wherein is great difference between the natural and spiritual thirst; for in
the natural a man may thirst, and yet be far from drink, or any thing to
cool or refresh him: his thirst prepares him for drink, but prepares no
drink for him. But in this its far otherwise; for as the spiritual thirst
prepares a man for drink, so i^ prepares drink for the man: Mat. 5. 5.
for God has promised to satisfy every such one.

So that a man may say of this man and his thirst, as Christ of Lazarus, This
thirst is not unto death; John 11.
for thou can not but have the well of water of life: for God has provided
it for such, yea for all such and none other.

In the other thirst, it is easy to be a thirst, nay impossible in parching
heat and labor but to be so, but the difficulty is to get water, which is
furthest off many times when it is most needed. In the spiritual the
difficulty is to get a thirst; for if that be, the worst is over: for then the
water of life is at hand, and cannot be wanting.

Nay it is said he that drinks of this water by faith, shall never thirst
more. Ioh. 4. 14.
In the natural, he that has his thirst slaked at one time, may yet at
another time thirst, and dye therewith. Not so in the spiritual; he shall
never thirst more. i.e. deadly: for though he shall desire more grace, more
assurance of Christ and salvation, yet he shall at first drink such a draught
of Christ, as he shall never be quite dry more. And though he may sometimes
lose some of his feeling, or all, for a time, yet he shall not deadly thirst,
for it shall spring up in him again in time.

Yea he shall have out of his belley even rivers of water of life, flowing out
to everlasting life. He shall have comfort to himself, and be able to help,
cool, and refresh others. As many a one sometimes unable to lay hold of any
comfort themselves, after are able to comfort others graciously.

Be therefore of good comfort: It is thine, it is done in heaven that thou
would have: It only wants to be done in thy conscience, which shall be sure
ere long; strive against any doubting, and apprehend. Gods call is for thee,
therefore come: he bids thee believe, therefore do so. Though comfort be a
cordial locked up with the Lord, yet the thirster has unlocked it by his
thirst, and set open the vessel; and though other water may be far from the
thirsty, this is no further off than God, who is ever near to those that call
upon him faithfully.

But how few come to this state of thirsting! As there are few contrite, as I
said before, so few come to these steps; most people are full, some with their
lusts and sins: they satisfy and please them so well, as they desire nothing
else: they feel no need of Christ, they have no leisure to attend him; he
does but trouble them: what is this but to prefer Barrabas before Christ, as
Esau preferred pottage to the birthright?

They are full of draffe and hogs meat, but empty of any good nourishment. If
these lusts and they might ever abide together, then it were the less to be
wondered at, but in the midst of all their lusts comes the vengeance of God
upon them, and marres all the play: as we see in Balthashar. But when God
shall by death or judgment call them to account, what then? But that is not
thought of, its too sad a thought. Then as they have been full of sin, they
must also now be filled with the wrath of God.

Some are so full of their wealth, honor, and businesses, and some of worldly
dealings, that these take them up sufficiently. Alas poor vanities poor
Gadarens!

Some full of their civil righteousness, others of their knowledge, gifts,
and profession. These are puffed up with wind, but it contents them: they be
full, and feel no want of Christ.

God must, and will empty your stomach, and bring you to another pass ere
ever you find any mercy at his hand: you must be purged of this stuff. God
will make you as empty and lanke as a glove ere ever you have any part of his
mercy or Christ. Many would have Christ, but they desire coldly, lazily: now
and then they bestow a few cold wishes, and prayers, or sighs for him; but
they can stay their stomachs well enough without him: what may they think of
themselves, when some others cry out, and wring their hands, weep for one drop
of the blood of Christ, and they greater sinners than these, and yet are not
one whit moved? Being asked if they be persuaded of the love of God, and the
forgiveness of their sins: No truly (say they) but I would I were. If you
wanted but a point to your hose, would you wish you had one, and not endeavor
to get it? Wishers and woulders go without. I hope I shall one day (say they)
ere I die. So they have it in their sickness, and at their death, they can now
spare it. These be too indifferent to obtain: then they would have some of
other folks oil, but oh they must be more earnest and present suitors if they
will speed.

And think we God will give men such a jewel in death, that cared little for
it in life? No; it may be then they would full feign. Now give me that same,
Lord, that thou offeredst me a great while ago. No, it had been good taking a
good bargain when it was offered. If a man should bring to one of you a
hundred pound, and you were shoveling up dirt, or playing at cards, and should
pray him not to trouble you, and bid him come again afterward, would not any
say he were worthy to miss it at his need? If one having a pardon offered
him, and should make light of it, and should on the ladder desire it, might he
not well go without it?

Has God nothing to do with his mercy (think you) and Christ's blood, but to
cast it away on those that can scarce think they need it, or will scarce
thank him for it? No, Gods mercies go not a begging yet, God can find such
to bestow them on, as will thank him heartily, and embrace them joyfully.

Now we his Ministers, his Almoners to distribute his comforts, even as many
as be in the Scripture, dare not lavish them out, and promise them to such
lazy indifferents as these: But if we see any ready to faint for want, saying,
Give me drink or else I die, then we reach the cup of consolation to him, and
bid him drink of it; neither dare we to give it to any other.

God will not pour the oil of Grace or precious comfort into a vessel full
of cracks, that will let it leake out again. Get therefore a thirsty soul,
see thy voidenesse of all good in thy self, and that without Christ there is
nothing to be expected but perishing.

Take the load of thy sins on thy shoulders, and this will so weary thee, as
it will bring thee to a thirst.

How few ever come to sell all for Christ? No, but somewhat they will part
with, but not with some by any means. So Ananias and Saphira were content to
forgo two parts: and those hypocrites, Micaiah 6. would part with a thousand
of Rams, etc. but not with their sins. Thou art a higler, a benchwhistler, a
base chapman that stand halfe-penying with God, and shall never come to be
the owner of this treasure. How many be like him, that comes and tastes, and
likes the Merchants wine, commends it, cheapens, asks the price, offers
somewhat toward it, but not to the worth? The Merchant will abate nothing, and
tells him it is a very good pennyworth: the other will give no more, and so
they part. The Merchant has his wine still, but the other goes away empty,
and after (may be) comes again, and it is gone: another came and swept it away.

How near come some that yet shall never have heaven? they lose heaven for
some one lust; if they could but yield up that one thing that was wanting, it
might have been a bargain. Oh folly! oh madness to be bewailed! play not the
fool; away with that other lust too: it is an unspeakable rich bargain. Oh
shall I part with my deceit in my shop, my lust, my pleasure, this way and
that? alas, spare me in this one thing. What talkst thou of pleasure, lay away
thy sin, that brings sinful and deadly stinging pleasure, that will end in
eternal pain; and take up Christ that will bring thee true and sound
pleasure, that shall begin here, and never end, but be full and perfect
hereafter for ever in heaven.

God open peoples eyes. A body would think there should be no great ado to
persuade men to such a reasonable, nay to such a gainefull bargain: but such
is man's woeful blindness, and inability to see or to judge what is best, as
he chooses most preposterously to his own destruction.

And thus much of the causes and means of Faith, and how it is wrought in us.

Having spoken of the author and means of Faith, Degrees of Faith.
it follows that we now speak of the degrees of it. All attain not to a
like measure, neither is any great measure attained unto at once, but in time
and by degrees. There is a strong Faith and a weak: see Romans 4. 18. etc. where
the Apostle shows what had been a weak Faith, or what it had been for
Abraham to have consulted with flesh and blood, with sense and reason, and so
to have doubted of the promise of God, which he did not, but was contrariwise
strengthened in faith, etc.

A little Faith and a great Faith are both mentioned in Scriptures: of a great
Faith we have an example in the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 10. I have not found so
great Faith, no not in Israel. and Matthew. 15. in the woman of Cana, that did
abide so many repulses, and yet hung still on Christ, O woman great is tby
Faith, etc. Of small Faith we have an example in the Disciples, Matthew. 16. 8. O
ye of little Faith: So, Matthew. 8. 26. all the Disciples are for their little
Faith reproved: and Peter alone, Matthew. 14. 31. Some Faith is so weak that it
is called unbeleefe, as Mark. 9. I believe; Lord help my unbeleefe, etc. So
when the Disciples asked our Savior why they could not heal the lunaticke
child, he answers them, because of your unbeleefe, Matthew. 17. 20. For if
you had Faith as a grain of mustard seed, etc. So that besides believers and
unbeleevers, such as have no Faith, which be many: some that have no show of
it; some that have a bold presumptuous conceit, some a temporary Faith, which
are sometimes bold, and lifted up, sometimes as quite to seek again, and all
because they have no good foundation, and indeed have no true Faith. There are
also degrees between true believers, even as God pleases to bestow on some
more on some less, Ephesians. 4. 7. 1. Cor. 2. 11. Romans 1 2. 3. even as God has
imploiment for them, or as they have means, or as they be careful in the use
of them. As therefore God deals in the bodily stature, making some high some
low, etc. as in the temporal goods, some are rich, some poor, some from poor
become rich, some continue ever poor, some of rich become poor etc. And as in
the family of yonguer folks there be children of all sorts, some can work,
one rock the cradle, another in the cradle etc. So it is in the Church of God.

First then I will speak of a weak Faith, 1. Weak Faith.
and then of a strong. A weak Faith is either when a man or woman is of small
knowledge in the Scriptures and principles of Religion, or weak in
apprehension of the promises of God concerning forgiveness of sins and
salvation by Christ, having attained some persuasion, and sometimes a little
confidence in it, and yet again doubtful, and to seek, and full of fears
lest it be not so, and that they never begun well. Or when a man is cast
back again, and becomes doubtful sometimes of perseverance, when
considering what enemies there be, and how weak he is, and what oppositions
he may meet with.

Sometimes fearing he shall never get strength against some of his
corruptions, and that therefore his Faith will fail him at the last, and he
shall mar all: sometimes when he gets a little ground, he is of good hope;
sometimes again in his dumps and deep fears.

So sometimes Christians are weak in the other inferior promises, Note Mat.
4. and Mat. 26 at the voice of the mai^e.
and grow soon discouraged by little things; and as the Disciples, Matthew. 8.
If they be in any trouble, they are ready to faint, or think it over long, to
be freed. If help come not by and by, then they are discouraged, and are ready
to help themselves by unlawful means, as Asa, 2. Cro. 16. or else they are
full of cares for the world, fearing they shall want ere they die, and
therefore grow too careful, though God has made promises to the contrary.

Examples of weak faith there are many in the Scripture: as in the Disciples
Matthew 26. 28. who all fled from their Master, and could not believe his
Resurrection, when Mary told them.

Many there were in the times of persecution, that hid themselves, or fled;
some taken that recanted, though soon after getting more strength, they again
put forth themselves, and suffered courageously; some never had strength, which
yet no doubt had some measure of Grace.

Many in our own times, yea too many, are weak in faith, some ever and anon in
their dumpes and fears after some comfort received: and so in other things.

Quest. But how can you tell that this is true faith at all, that is so full of
doubtings, etc?

Ans. Yes very well, by this, that the comfort and assurance they sometimes
have, they have got it the right way, and came to it by the steps whereby it
pleases God to bring men to faith by.

2. The spirit of God, which cannot deceive them, witnesses to their spirit.

3. These signs show it, seeing they constantly and earnestly still seek the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the favor of God; they grieve at their unbelief,
mourn for it, and strive against it.

They hunger after the Word, they love the Saints of God dearly; they are very
fearful to offend God, and desire to live an unblameable life, etc.

2. Quest, How chances it then seeing their faith is true that it is so weak?

Ans. Alas there is small need to ask this; for it is easy to have weak
faith, but hard to have it strong.

1. Some are but novices newly converted, these being infants must needs be
weak, and have many turne-againes and fears. And if it be so, its the better
sign; for who can look it should be otherwise? do any think a newborn
child, or of a quarter old, should go alone? Christ would have no burdens
laid on his yongue disciples, nor strong new wine put into old vessels.

2. Some have small knowledge, and therefore their faith must needs be small,
and they held down with many a temptation: as the Disciples that fled from
their Master, because they knew little to stay them.

3. Some are not able to discern of the comforts offered them, and have no
power to apprehend the promise; which is no wonder, for it is not a small thing
so to do, as Samuel at first discerned not Gods voice.

4. Some want means: some that attain the public, yet neglect the private
helps of secret prayer, reading and meditation, and so are weak.

5. Some are so close that they keep all to themselves, and open not their
doubts to some godly Minister or experienced Christian, and so they must needs
be weak the longer. Some think they were never humbled enough.

6. Some think they see and find more corruption in themselves, than can be
in one that is a believer and the child of God: though herein they are
deceived; for the sight of it, with hatred and resistance, rather proves their
faith.

7. Some also walk not so carefully, but are carried too much after the world:
or fall into this or that sin, and make not have out of it again by
repentance, and so weaken themselves.

Yet we are to know, that this weak faith, is true faith; as 1 Timothy 1. Faith
unfamed, and like precious faith, they had with other the worthy Saints of God.
As precious, though not so great; the same holy Ghost the author; the same
Gospel the instrument, etc.

Little faith is true faith, as well as great, a little man is a man as well as
a great man, a little water is as truly water as the Ocean Sea, etc.

The Disciples had true Faith, and yet very weak; weak in knowledge: though
they believed, Matthew. 16. that he was the Messiah, that should save the world,
yet how, they could not tell: they were ignorant of his death; for when he told
them of his sufferings, Matthew. 20. and Mark 9 34. and Luke 9. 43. yet it is
said they understood not that word, and Peter took his Master aside and
counseled him not to go to Jerusalem to dye, Mat. 16.
etc.

They were ignorant also of his resurrection; for when Mary told them of it
they believed it not.

Of his ascension, John 13 and chapt. 14 when he spoke of a little tarrying
with them, and then of his going away, they understood it not, they knew not
whither he went, they said, and knew not the way. Now how weak was this their
knowledge to be ignorant of such maine Articles?

Also they were ignorant of Christ's Kingdom, dreaming of an earthly kingdom,
and desired to sit at his right and left hand, etc. Yea and in this ignorance
they continued even after his Resurrection, as Act. 1. Yea and as they were
weak in knowledge, so also in believing; and therefore fled all from Christ.
But weak Faith may prove strong in time: the learned Clerk was in his horn
book, the greatest Giant was in swaddling clouts, the tallest Oak was a twigge,
and Faith grows from a grain of Mustard seed to a tall tree: As from a
child to a man, so corn grows from a weak blade to a stalk, and ear, and
ripe corn therein, etc.

The Disciples, Nicodemus
so weak before, afterward when the holy Ghost was sent upon them, they were
exceeding strong, and feared not the faces of the Tyrants. Peter that feared at
a damsels voice, after feared not the whole Council, Acts. 4. and when God
shall please to enlarge them as he does some by degrees in their health; some
in sickness, and some in death, they are as strangely enlarged in their Faith
as in their length.

If it never prove great, yet weak Faith shall save; for it interests us to
Christ, and makes him and all his benefits ours: for its not the strength of
Faith that saves, but the truth of our Faith; nor weakness of Faith that
condemns, but the want of Faith: for the least Faith lays hold on Christ,
and so will save us. Neither are we saved by the worth or quantity of our
Faith: but by Christ, which is laid hold on by a weak Faith as well as a
strong. As a weak hand that can put meat into the mouth, shall feed and
nourish the body as well as if it were a strong hand, seeing the body is not
nourisht by the strength of the hand, but by the goodness of the meat. As a
weak Palsy hand takes a gift of a Prince, as well, though not so strongly as
another; so a weak believer shall lay hold of enough to serve his turn. A
child in the arms can take a piece of gold in the hand; a weak and little
eye can see the whole body of the Sun, as well as a great and strong, etc.

And so weak Faith shall save as well as a stronger. As it was in the
beholding of the brazen Serpent, whosoever could look up to it was cured: all
looked not with eyes of equal strength; some were purblinde, some bleare-eyed,
some weak and dim with age, some with pain, yet whosoever looked, though
weakly, was healed: so John 3. 16. it is not said, who so believes strongly,
but, Whosoever believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life, John 1.
12.

And the weakest Faith shall never fail or be taken away: God will not reject
it. The devil shall never overcome it, nor did we ever read that any were
rejected for their weak Faith.

Yet this must be understood with good caution, lest any should hence grow
careless, and say, Why then a little Faith is as good as a great: what need
so much pains? Oh no, though none are rejected for little Faith, yet some are
reproved for it: Oh faithless generation, how long shall I, etc.? O ye of
little Faith.

It is a blemish to have small Faith, especially after long time or much
means. And though a weak Faith shall get to heaven, yet with wonderful
difficulty, especially if God send great trials and changes, from health to
great sickness, sore pain, long diseases, from wealth to poverty; or if there
be changes in the Church or Commonwealth.

As if two were to go a mile up hill, one very able bodied, good lungs and
pectoralls; the other weak and troubled with the green sickness, stopped in
the liver and spleen, or having ill lungs and in a consumption: one goes up
stoutly and not much blows, but holds out strongly; the other ere he have
gone a quarter the way, pants as if heart would burst, looks pale as if he
would fall down; goes a while and sits down, fears he shall never get up,
then creepes on hands and knees, then begins again a little, then down
again; at last it may be with great ado he gets up, but not without much
doubt and difficulty.

And as if two Ships sail together, the one strong and all tackling sound and
good, the other weak and full of holes, both may get to the haven, but one
goes singing and confidently, the other with much fear of every wave that
beats against it, etc. And when it leaketh, they are feign to pumpe out the
water, and are afraid lest it should sink, etc.

Therefore it is no wisdom, for any to content themselves with a weak faith:
who would be weak that might be strong, poor that might be rich? For he
that has but weak faith, shall want the comforts that a strong faith has,
and be ready to be carried away with every wind of Doctrine. He shall be
unsettled and set back by every temptation, and be very unmeet to resist great
ones. He will be ready to faint in every cross; unfit to do any great
service, or to suffer any great matter: be ever afraid of Death, backward to
his duty, have no boldness to come into Gods presence. Finally, none that have
weak faith can be content with that measure, if it be true; seeing it is a
note of all true graces, that they are still growing, from a grain of mustard
seed to a great tree; from a child to a man. And therefore they can have no
assurance that their faith is true, if being small they are content with that
measure, and neglect the means of their spiritual growth.

But the Lord of his great goodness has provided ways and means to be used,
whereby we may grow from weak faith to strong, from a seed to a tall tree,
from a Babe to a tall man, etc.

The use hereof is first for those that have but a small and weak faith, and
yet may discern by the notes and signs of it, that they have a true faith;
let them not be discouraged, but be thankful to God highly for any, seeing
most part have none at all: and so might thou with them have perished.
Again, consider that thy little faith is better than the great brags of
Hypocrites and vaineglorious Pharisees.

Yea, thy little faith is better than all the world; more precious than gold
that perishes, though tried never so much and often in the fire: and therefore
be thankful for it.

Neither let the Devil make thee believe that it is but a false or a
temporary faith, and that because thou have so many doubts, therefore thou
shall altogether fail at last: no, the Scriptures tell us as well of the weak
faith of the Disciples, Thomas, Peter, and Nicodemus, as of the strong faith of
Abraham, Job, Paul, and Daniel, and the three Children. This thy weak faith,
makes Christ thine, and shall save thee. All the gates of hell cannot prevail
against it.

Again, this thy weak faith may prove a strong and tall faith; especially if
thou be but a beginner. Then be not discouraged, seeing every thing must
have a beginning: thou may come to help and strengthen others in time. And
though thou should die by and by, yet it should bring thee to Heaven.

Yet let none content themselves with a weak faith, but having time and
means, strive for a greater; else we can have no assurance that we have any
true faith. For, who having a goodly living and but weak assurance of it,
desires not that he had better Deeds, and old Evidences, and more writings to
hold by against all cavillers? So who tastes of a very good sweet thing, but
desires more of it? And so it is with them that have the first beginnings of
spiritual graces.

Who would live, always in a poor condition, if he could help it? and to
have but from hand to mouth, from one day to another, and scant that; and nor
rather have of his own for all turns in health and sickness, yea and to
help others that need, etc?

Who would be continually in fear, ready to be unsettled upon every
occasion? unfit to do God any great service? or be ever unfit to do any good?
or ever afraid of Death? What a poor life is this?

Alas, if great and strong temptations come, thou must endure long pains and
sore. If persecution come, what shall a weak faith do then? Alas he that
has but a groat in his purse, canspend no more. We provide not only for fair
weather, but for foul, Boots and Cloak, and Hood; yea, carry these with us,
when it may be we have no need of them at our going forth, but we know not
what may fall out, ere we come home again. It may be fair a few miles, and a
clear sky without rain: but after there may come foul weather.

What should the Martyrs have done, if they had been at this wavering stay?
Yea how uncomfortably do we walk daily, by reason of this weakness of faith
through our continual doubts and fears? besides that, our faith is made the
less fruitful. And though the devil cannot wholly quench the least measure
of true Faith, yet he may so choke it with the ashes of his temptations, that
it shall neither show light nor heat, etc. Let us therefore diligently use the
means of strengthening our Faith; as the Ministry of the Word, which is
excellent above other means: for as it was ordained of God to beget Faith, so
to nourish it, 1. Pet. 2. 1. Ephesians. 4. 11. and to edify the body of Christ:
therefore the Apostles returned back by the Churches wch^ they had planted, to
settle and confirm the peoples hearts in the Faith. By hearing the promises of
the Gospel laid open again and again, yea and offered and thrust upon us
still, we are not only kept in remembrance of them, but are excited to
believe them, and are much strengthened thereby.

Also thereby hear we more of the nature of God, his mercy, truth,
unchangeablenes: also or diverse examples of Gods mercy on others, and of their
Faith, etc. So also reading the Scriptures by our selves is a good help: Ioh.
5. Search them and meditate on the promises contained in them, and this will
be a good means, as David says, to confirm us; Thy promise, says he, has
quickened me, Psalm. 119.
etc. But our care must be that we read with consideration and application.
Here I may add this point, what is the smalest measure of Faith that can be,
to wit, when a man not being able to apply the promises to himself, and to
say, I am persuaded my sins be forgiven, yet out of a troubled heart does
unfainedly desire the favor of God above all the world. To this thirsting,
what promises be made? Matthew. 5. 6. John 7. 37. It is accepted with God for
Faith, etc. and does justify the sinner, seeing it is a weak kind of
apprehension. But that we do not mistake our selves, we are to know that it
is not every kind of desire, but that which desires the favor and love of
God more than heaven and salvation. We see it in David Psalm. 4 6. 7. and Psalm.
31. 16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: Thy favor is better than
life, Psalm. 63. 2. It is a vehement desire, that cannot be satisfied without
the thing desired: as a woman longing, Psalm. 119. 20. 40. as the Heart brayeth
after the rivers of water, Psalm. 42. 1. 3. It is not by fits, but constant till
it obtains: as the hungry man till he get meat. 4. It is joined with a
desire to obey God, and has good affections, desiring to come under Gods
government, as well as to be ^ardoned: whereas the hypocrites desire is cold
and slight, by fits and flashes, and severed from the use of the means whereby
it might be satisfied.

The Sacraments likewise are good helps: As first the Sacrament of Baptism
may strengthen our Faith, seeing in it remission of our sins is not only
signified, but also sealed unto us. Neither is water more effectual for the
washing away of the filth of the body, than the blood of Christ thereby
signified to cleanse our souls from the guilt and punishment of all our sins.

Secondly the Supper of the Lord is of like efficacy to strengthen our Faith,
wherein God has put his Seal to his Word, that by two immutable things,
wherein its impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation,
Heb. 6. 19. Herein God not only paints out unto us Christ Jesus; so that as
the Apostle says, we may see him as it were crucified before our eyes, Gal.
3. 1. but also afresh exhibites and gives him to us, and that every one
particularly; yea and not darkely, but in a very familiar manner, under
ordinary signs subject to all our senses, whereby he would put us out of
doubt, that as verily as the Minister gives unto us the outward signs, so
verily God gives unto us his Son Christ with all his benefits. So that
except we be worse than Thomas, we must then believe, and be made stronger.

So that God deals with us as mothers who nurse their yongue children; they
lap them up warm, and give them both breasts, and so they grow up: so is it
between God and us.

Another principal means of Faith is earnest and devout Prayer, whereby in
secret we beg it of God: for though it is not the first means of getting
Faith, (for we cannot pray in Faith, till we have Faith) yet our Savior
Christ has taught us, by praying for Peter that his Faith should not fail,
how we should get our Faith increased and established. So the man, Mark 9. 24.
Lord help my unbeleefe* and the Disciples, Lord increase our Faith. If we
ask the holy Ghost, it shall be given us, Luke 11. 13. and how much more the
graces and gifts of the holy Spirit? John 16. 23.

Fourthly, often medi^ate of the unchangeablenesse of God in his promises in
themselves, to others, and to our selves, and the experiences that we have had
of Gods goodness to us, and of the truth of our hearts to him.

Fifthly, society and conference with our fellow-brethren; especially some
experienced Christian or faithful Minister, and revealing unto them our
doubts, is a notable means. For they may much confirm us by their counsels
and consolations fetched out of the Word, and by their own experience laid
before us; for it availes much to our comfort to hear that others have been
in our case, and yet now strong in Faith. As its in bodily ailes, so in the
spiritual, and Job 4. 3. 4. Romans 14. 1. Oh there may be much good gotten this
way, and especially by visiting the sick, and beholding the faith and zealous
resolution of any in trouble, pains, death, imprisonment, etc.

Sixthly, fruitfulness in good works is a notable means to strengthen Faith,
when we be plentiful in well doing, ready to every good word and work in our
general and particular calling, to God, to men, etc. For as the Sun heates a
wall, and being heat, it beats, back, and increases the heat of the
Sunbeames; so Faith brings forth good works, and good works increase Faith: for
they be strong arguments to us of the truth and soundness of our Faith; and
therefore the Apostle exhorts unto them, 1. Cor. 15. Wherefore be steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord. This being added as
a means to make us steadfast. A barren life can never have a steadfast Faith:
Also walk close with God, as constantly in one thing as in another, not taking
liberty to break off our Christian course and communion with God when we list:
but we must hold fast, awaking with God, walking, with him all day, locking to
our hearts and ways at home, abroad, alone, in company, in prosperity, in
adversity, and so when we lie down at night making even reckonings. And if
we fail in any thing, we must humble our selves, and crave pardon, and never
cease till we be reconciled.

On the other side, if we can walk carelessly, and diverse days or weeks want
our communion with God, our faith will be weak; but constant walking with God
breeds strong faith. And therefore we are to be exhorted to the use of these
means. And the lazinessc of many Christians is justly to be rebuked, who are
content with a weak faith long together, and that when they enjoy the means
of getting more.

If they can but prove they have any faith at all, they much wrong themselves,
in not looking for increase.

Oh how ill do these provide for themselves! If God should lay greater trials
on them than they be fit to bear, and they be at their wits ends, it were
just; seeing he need not to fit their trialls to the strength they have, but to
that which they might have had.

But if we have used all means carefully, then let us content our selves with
that portion which God will give us, and assure our selves, that he will never
try us beyond that he will enable us to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

Strong faith, Strong Faith.
is when a man is full of knowledge of the Scriptures, and so able to resist
and meet with temptation laid against him; and withal is strong in
apprehension of the love of God, and his promises: so that having got hold, he
will not be beat off, nor let go, but holds firm and fast; so as you may as
well wring a club out of a Giants hand: as it is said of Romanus, none could
wring the staff of faith out of his hand. So Revel. 2. 13. the Angel of the
Church of Pergamus could not be drawn to deny the faith, though he dwelled
where Satan's throne was.

Yea, he that is strong in faith, so believes the promise of salvation, as he
is fully persuaded of it, and that Christ loved him, and gave himself for him;
that there is no condemnation to him: yea with Paul, that neither life nor
death, Angels nor principalities: and Romans 8. 38. 39. He believes also the
other promises firmly of protection and defense, though much be objected
against it, as David, that God was his shield, rock, strong tower; and though
an Host pitched against him, Psalm. 27. 1. yet because God had promised that he
should be King after Saul, he believed none could prevail against him. So
likewise he says, Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: and Psalm. 2. 1. he shows that which
also himself believed, that all the oppositions of men were but in vain
against him.

So when all goes against him, (...) he believes God cannot forsake his. And so
Job, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him. Job 13. 15. Thus Asa, 2
Chro. 14. though there were so great odds against him, yet he believed; and
so also Iehoshaphat. So that God will defend his, as we see in the example of
Daniel, and the three Children, who believed even above belief, and so were
delivered.

Thus Mordecay, Ester 4. 14. believed strongly, that though the likeliest
means should fail, yet God would raise up deliverance to his people (to whom
he had made covenant) some other way.

The Martyrs likewise had this strong faith, as she that said, If you take
away my meat, Elizabeth Young.
God will take away my hunger.

So the two yongue Davyes that answered their father, If God send us no meat,
he will send us no hunger.

And others that forsook all, and said with Paul, Act, 20. 24. Neither count I
my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course with joy.

Such a faith was in Doctor Taylour that said, he mised but two styles before
be should he at his fathers house: also, We shall have a sharp breakefast,
but a joyful dinner, etc.

This strong faith is not gotten at once, Not gotten at once.
nor at first; but as the bodily stature is by insensible degrees, so and much
more is the spiritual growth of faith, not run up at once in a night, as
Ionahs gourd, but by degrees, and after good time and continuance in the use of
the means after frequent witnessings of Gods spirit. After many experiences of
the truth of our own hearts to God in hatred of all wickedness, resisting
profitable and pleasing sins, doing painful duties constantly, and such as
we have had no thank for our labor in doing of them; these prove to our
selves, that we are the Lords: After many bickerments and combats, and after
many experiences of the love of God to us, of his presence with us, hearing our
prayers, defending and delivering us, etc.

This strong faith is not of a novice, but of a valiant Champion. Experience
breeds hope that makes not ashamed: as David by experience of killing a Bear
and a Lion grew resolute, he should kill Goliath; and Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who
has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust
he will yet deliver us.

A Soldier at first is fearful; but after upon experience of many victories
and escapes he grows courageous. So we.

And God sees not fit to give a yongue beginner a full assurance; for it would
be to him as a great sail to a little vessel, to pull him under water: his
corruption would take occasion hereby of hurt; and therefore he brings men to
it as they be able to bear it.

Now that we may the better discern it, I will here set down some notes of a
strong faith: and first, Notes.
he has peace, yea an habituate peace with God, peace that passes
understanding, and joy of the holy Ghost; and this the Apostle prays for,
Romans 15. 13. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. So
that fullness of faith breeds fuln^^^ of peace and joy, and also boldness to
come into Gods presence, Ephe. 3. 12. He^r. 10. 22. (...) us draw near in
assurance of (...), etc. It makes us to cry Ab^^ Father It breeds love, yea
great love to God, for faith work; by love, Gal. 5. 6. So the Apostle, The
love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Yea the top of love, that is,
zeal for the glory of God.

Another sign is fruitfulness in good works and well doing; and constant
close walking with God.

Strong faith is not carried away; though never so many and so great ones teach
contrary, or labor to remove the believer, yet he is settled, stablished, and
rooted in the knowledge and love of the truth: he is not to choose his
Religion; no, he has gone to work upon better grounds than so.

He contemns the temptation of multitudes, customs, examples, and let never
so many be of another mind or course, they move not him: though they wonder
at him like an owl, he can pity them upon good ground, and in Faith. When
some bait at him, some persuade and pity him, and wish his eyes were opened,
and, we wish you good, yet is not he unsettled: As we see in Elias, who stood
firm though there were four hundred false Prophets against him and the people.

So amongst the holy Martyrs, some poor women have stood out against all the
Doctors that opposed them. They are not shaken by the Apostasy of such as have
been great Professors or Preachers, 1. John 2. 19. For none are fallen but the
child of perdition. Therefore they are not unsettled, though many fall away,
yea Professors or Teachers.

A strong Faith despises the offers of profits, pleasures, honors, to
forsake his Religion; he will not be enticed and tolld away like a dog with a
crust, he has assurance of other manner of things already, which he will not
lose for all the world: as we see in Moses, who refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter: and as for reproaches, troubles, persecution, he
cares not for them; if they come and threaten prison, fire, faggot, this
stirs not him, he is resolved, and is as Mount Sion that cannot be moved, but
stands fast for ever, Heb. 12. 2.
Psalm. 125. 1. He endures the cross and despises the shame, and says with
Paul, Act. 20. 24*
my life is not dear to me: And I am not only ready to be bound, but to die at
Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act, 21. 13. He sticks to the Word,
and builds not on man; therefore though others fall away, yet he stands fast.
As the woman that being told her fellow prisoner was altered and of another
mind: If she be, says she, I built my Faith not on her, or any other, but
upon Gods Word, and that is not altered I am sure.

If he have a promise from God, though all seem to be against it, yet he
relies upon it: though it be delayed, yet he waits, and says, though It
tarry, wait, and it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3. He fears
not troubles, but knows all comes through his fathers hand, and that man and
devil cannot do what they would: and therefore he goes on comfortably to
day, to morrow, and to the end. In his worldly dealings, which are of most
weight, he uses the means and depends upon God for success. If he be in
trouble, he hastens not out by unlawful means; as David would not kill Saul
to shorten his troubles, nor hasten the Kingdom to himself.

If he have small or no means, yet having Gods Word for him, he is not
discouraged, as Asa, Jonathan, and his armor bearer, and Joshua compassing
Jericho; his heart is fixed, he believes in the Lord, he will not fear; and
if heaven and earth should go together, yet (as David) he would say, Psalm.
27. 3. The Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear? etc. And Simeons
nunc dimittis, and Stephens prayer, Act. 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit.
He can think of death without any prevailing fear, and of the grave, saying
with Paul, I desire to be dissolved, Philip. 1. 23. He looks beyond the grave
to a joyful resurrection.

So he can think of the day of judgment, and say, Welcome Lord Jesus: and
though it be the terror, or may be of the world; yea and weak Christians
shake at it, yet he fears it not, but can think of it with joy.

This is a most excellent thing: Any Faith is a jewel unvaluable, but a strong
Faith carries a man through the world like a Conqueror, as our Savior Christ
says. Mark. 9. 23. All things are possible to him that believes. What a
blessed thing it is for a man to live in such a continued constant peace with
God, boldness in his presence and inward joy! Its a corner of heaven to be
zealous for God in a man's place, to be fruitful and abundant in good works,
able and ready to comfort many and support the weak, to live without a slavish
fear of God or his judgments, to stand immovable when others be shaken, to be
without fear of death or judgment, and to be eased in all ones matters,
living by Faith; when means be used, then to be quiet.

The strong believer is as Sampson; he breaks all bands of temptation, as
straw, lays heaps upon heaps: he is like one of David's Worthies, like David
himself, that having got experience fears nothing; he walks up and down
the world like a Giant, higher by head and shoulders than most men, with a
strong shield in his hand that the devil himself cannot pierce, but it
quenches his fiery darts, and also gets victory against the world by his
Faith, breaks through an host, and leaps over a wall, breaks a bow of
steel. It is as far better than a weak Faith, as a rich man's case, that
has for all needs; for diet: as if his mind stands not to one thing, he has
another: so in his beer, or if need be can call for a cup of wine; so for his
apparel, as the weather is: he has in time of sickness wherewith to send
for a Physician; he has for all needs, he can give to one and lend to
another. If he list not to go afoote, he can take his horse. And great odds
there is between such a state, and of a poor man that has for mere
necessity, from hand to mouth, and that very barely; and alas, wanting many
things, would be glad to have those things which would relieve his necessity.
Or such a difference there is between them, as is between the case of a hearty
strong man that can go, ride, work, travel, and is hearty without complaint,
and another that cannot go two or three miles, but is so faint and
distempered, that he is the worse after it a good while; or a woman that
cannot put out her self for faintness, or if she do a little, it is with
much trouble, and has many ailes and complaints.

The Use is, Use 1.
that every man try whether he have this strong Faith; and the rather, because
there be some that think they have it, who are but like rogues, that have a
counterfeit pass, made by themselves or some other in an alehouse, or under a
hedge.

There be some that having stepped out of a lewd and bad course, and being stung
a little with the terrors of the Law, presently have fallen to lay hold of the
promise, and so all at once have been so fully assured, as they have had no
doubts. They imagine that they are able to deal with any body, and think
themselves fit and able to control and censure any.

These make more have than good speed, they fly ere they have wings, and are
like a swaggering fellow with Beer in his crown, who it may be, as soon as
he is out of his Inn, falls a galloping, and leaves other men behind, but ere
he has rid seven or eight mile, his horse is tired, and those whom he had
outstript, overtake him, and get to their Inn in peace and good time, when as
he is abroad in the highway.

The Bird that ventures out of the neast ere she has wings, the Kite or
Buzzard catches her; so the devil desires no better booty, than such a proud
overhasty person: for as we have seen by experience, they not knowing
themselves, nor the corruptions of their own hearts, nor having had experience
of Satan's temptations, he pulls them either into some odd opinion, or else
into some foul sin, as to uncleanness, covetousness, or such like.
Howsoever, some of those, as I have noted, have by their sin been humbled,
and begun better, and so in time have come to somewhat, when they had paid full
dearly for their have.

Some never came to good, but as their Gourd sprung in a night, so it perished
and withered in another.

Is it not monstrous for a novice, a yongue child newborn to be a man? saw
you ever a child borne with a beard, or all his teeth? yet this is the like
case.

If a child newborn should scramble out of the Midwifes hand, and run
about the chamber, would it not scare all the company? So is it with these that
will make such great haste.

These be like some proud yongue man, that has bought out some of his years,
impatient of service, and will set up, and have a shop as good as his Masters,
(the first day) who has been a shopkeeper these twenty years, and not
having stock, takes it up of trust, or borrowes upon usurie, and within a few
years he is blown up for debt.

Another that served out his time, and knew what belonged to it, he sets up
with a little of his own, with one or two of the commodities that belong to
his trade, and waits upon God, and gets up by little and little, and his shop
mends every year.

Some other ignorant and carnal people will say, they are fully persuaded of
their salvation; oh, no man can make them blanke: but try these by the notes
before spoken of, and there is no such love to God, zeal to his glory,
fruitfulness in good life, no such comfortrablenesse in affliction; but though
they be very bold and full of comfort in prosperity, yet they are soon nipt in
the head in affliction: like a base swaggerer that makes a stir in an
Alehouse with great words, as if he were some Champion, and being sent to
wars, or dealt with by a man indeed, his heart fails him; so these when they
are put to the trial their hearts fail, and when death and danger appears,
they are afraid to die. And such again as were never seen to give any such
regard to the Word, or any careful attendance on it, or the Sacrament, or any
good company; their strong faith, is but strong presumption, it will not abide
the touchstone.

If any have this strong faith indeed, let them enjoy it, they have that that
few have: and let them nourish it by the means, by fruitfulness in well
doing, and keep close to God, and get more to it; for the time may come, that
all may be little enough. David as much as he had, yet had none to spare: and
if Job had had a little more faith and patience then he had, it would have done
no hurt.

Now the means whereby we may increase from a weak to a strong faith, are,
first, with all diligence and care to attend on the means, public and
private, as hearing the Word, prayer, receiving the Sacrament, reading,
meditation and holy conferences.

Secondly, the often experience of Gods love shining in all his benefits:
which being carefully observed, will assure us firmly of the continuance of
it, seeing he is immutable and unchangeable in his goodness.

Thirdly, we must daily approve our love toward God by our obedience, both
active and passive, being ready to do and suffer any thing for his sake. For
our love toward him will assure us of his love toward us, seeing it is an
inseparable fruit, and effect of it.

Fourthly, we must carefully maintain our communion with God, and walk close
with him, carrying our selves holily and righteously, as in his sight and
presence. And if through frailty we step away, we must recover our selves
speedily, and rise out of our sin by unfeigned repentance, and so renew our
covenant with God, by renewing our faith in his gracious promises. Fifthly, we
must often and seriously meditate on Gods saving attributes, as his goodness,
mercy, omnipotency, and truth in his promises, and on the all-sufficiencie of
Christ's merits and obedience, which are the foundations upon which our faith is
built, and will never fail us, though we fail in many things on our part.
Lastly, we must be fruitful in well-doing, and in the practice of all
Christian duties toward God, our neighbors, and our selves; for a barren life
and a strong faith cannot stand together.

Now let such of us as be without it stir up our selves to use these means
whereby we may attain unto it, by considering the excellency of it, and what
need we may have of it, and labor to come to it, especially seeing God gives
us means of much faith.

Let us strive to attain unto the best measure, and to exceed our selves. This
strong faith is so excellent and needful a thing, that the Apostle prays for
it, for the Ephesians, and commends it in the Thessalonians that their faith
did grow daily, and exhorts the Colossians unto it, Chap. 2. 7. Again,
consider that hereby we shall give and bring much glory to God, many ways, as
might be showed: and that we shall provide wonderfully well for our selves,
and shall do much good many ways to others. This world is opposite against
goodness, therefore if we will hold on zealously, we must get strong faith.
Besides, we know not what we may meet with. Folks provide not for the present
or forepart of their journey only, but for time to come, and therefore they
wear Boots, and carry a Cloak, and Hood, when they have no present need of
them, not knowing what weather may come.

In the next place let us consider, So Faith perfect.
that though there be a strong faith, yet there is none perfect and without
temptation, but with some doubtings. They that have the strongest faith, may be
assailed sometimes, though usually they quell them; and sometimes they may
somewhat disquiet and hurt them, and yet afterward turn to their good. The
healthful man, may yet be shaken with two or three fits of an Ague, that may
make him take to his cap; and doubting is not mixed with his faith, although it
opposes it.

For Faith is of the spirit, and the regenerate part, doubting is of the flesh,
and part unregenerate, and they continually fight the one against the other.
And the devil also will watch his time to oppose it. Neither can there be any
perfect faith, because we know but in part, and therefore believe but in part,
Cor, 13. 12. Some remnant of corruption and of unbeleefe will remain, in some
more, in some less. and though usually faith get the mastery of doubting, yet
sometimes the devil or our unbeleefe will watch a time to do us a scare. The
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, Galat. 5.
17.

Though Abraham were the father of believers, yet by persuasion of Sarah he
took Hagar, etc. Rebeccah believed Jacob should have the blessing, and God
would have it so; yet seeing Esau so near it, her Faith failed, and she help
it forwards with a lie.

David likewise who so strongly believed, as appears in the Psalms, and by
his resolusion not to meddle with Saul, yet 1. Sam. 2 7. 1. his Faith fails,
so that he said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul,
though he had Gods promise to the contrary: and said in his haste all men are
liars, Psalm. 116. 11.

Oh, great difficulties or long delays, be often the foiles of Faith, and
will try a strong Faith. Jobs Faith failed him when he cursed his day: Moses
his Faith quailed at the Rock: Eliah would be dead, that famous believer, who
had raised the dead and shut up heaven: Asa, whose faith was great, 2. Chron.
14. yet chapt. 16. his faith failed foully.

Martha believed that if Christ had been there, Lazarus had not dyed, yea and
that he should rise again at the last day; yet when our Savior Christ went to
the Sepulcher, and bid put away the stone, as going to raise him, Ioh. 11.
Oh Master (says she) he stinketh: as though he had not been as able to raise
him from the dead, as to preserve him from death whilst he was living.

Sometimes God will leave his to a temptation, to show them what they be in
themselves: and therefore judge not any rashly in whom we have or may see some
weakness: they may be excellent believers, and shall recover themselves
again. If thou see any in time of persecution recant, yet judge them not, tarry
but a while, and ye shall see one come within a few days and renounce his
recantation, and burn that hand first that wrote it; another going into the
Church, and casting down the host, and cutting off the Priests hand in revenge
of himself for recanting.

Let therefore those that have such a faith, Use.
as they have no doubting, nor never had, (which is the case of diverse) know,
that they never believed that never doubted. A man were as good say, he were
perfect and without any remnant of corruption. When many of Gods faithful
servants with much labor and many fears, have got a poor faith, have they
got a perfect one they know not how? no, such a faith is too cheap to be good.

2. Again if we have held the assurance of Gods love firmly a good while, yet
if after it come to be set upon with doubting, marvel not, nor be
discouraged. Nay if you resist and ovecome, it is a good sign of a strong
faith; for he is not known to be a strong man that was never set upon, but he
that has had strong adversaries, and yet got the day.

3. Moreover, never make account that the Bridegroom shall ever be with us, but
that a time will come when he shall be taken from us. Therefore as the
Mariner in a calm looks and prepares for a storm, so let us use like wisdom
in this case: our faith shall then appear when it is so tried.

4. Finally, do not rashly judge of such from whom thou hear some impatient
speeches, while they were minding their pain; or some doubtful speech, as,
Do you think God will hear me? that I am his? that I shall hold out to the
end? For did not David use some such weakness? judge them by their usual
speeches and behavior, and think if thou were in his or her clothes, that
thou should show much more. Many have stood strong in some temptation, and
after have showed weakness in far less. We must not think hardly of any of
Gods servants, Ministers, or Christians, that show at a time some weakness:
judge them not, they will judge themselves fast enough.

On the other side, if any now after much heaviness and long and earnest
seeking, have got fast hold, and are now full of comfort, yet do not promise
you shall ever hold it thus, or ever be at the top, or that it will ever be
full sea. Say not as David, I shall never be moved, Psalm. 30. 6. lest if
doubtings come again, we call all into question. No by no means, if you
doubt of Gods favor, say that you never made any other account, and make use
of your former comforts, and hold by them. Resist and you shall overcome, and
know that ever and anon such things will be: yea you may be set upon on the
death bed, as diverse have had combats; sometimes after the Word or deep
meditation of Gods mercies, or after the Sacrament; how strong and confident
do you feel your selves? Oh how you could do any thing for God, even go
through the fire, yet it may not always be thus.

Nay lastly, take notice of a worse point yet, Strong faith may be weakened.
to wit, that a strong faith may not only have some doubtings, but may be
shrewdly oppresled, yea much diminished, at least in respect of the acts and
operations of it. He that had a strong faith, may come to have but a weak
faith, and so he may die (in his own sense, at least in outward appearance) in
a far worse case than he was sometimes in his life: or so he may handle the
matter, as he may recover himself again, as David and Peter did, whose faith
suffered shrewd Eclypses, yet got up again in time. But Asa, I am persuaded in
his latter days, was in worse case much, than formerly he had been in. We
see the first part of his reign much commended, the latter much worse: and
much unbeleefe he showed, as 2. Chro. 16. in hiring the King of Aram, trusting
in Physicians, and putting the Prophet into prison. This is a pitiful thing,
like a Crab to go backward. Some of weak have become strong, but of strong to
become weak is a heavy case; as for a man from wealth to fall to a poor
condition. For as one that has been rich can worse endure poverty than they
that never knew other; so he that has been wont to have peace with God, joy
and life to good duties, can hardly bear the want of them.

Now the causes hereof may be, Causes or means.
either want of the means which are taken from him, or he gone from them; no
profitable or usual Ministry of the Word; the Sucraments but once or twice a
year administered and received, no good company: shut up a strong man, and dye^
him thus, and his strength will soon abate.

2. A second cause is falling into some foul sin, and not hasting out of it,
but lying in it, as David, 2. Sam. 12. or a frequent giving way to ones
corruptions, not lamenting, repenting, or reforming them. As fruitfulness in
good works strengthens faith; so barrennes weakens it.

3. A third cause is presumptuously to get out of trouble by unlawful means,
weakens the faith shrewdly, especially not hasting out of it by through
repentance.

4. A fourth cause is love of the world, and multitude of dealings: many that
at thirty, and a while after were in good case, after fall to great dealings,
have many farms, or have the world coming in in abundance, and so do woefully
abate and fail: I have heard of many in their yonguer days, that have seemed
very zealous and full of grace, who have shrewdly abated in their later times.

Now the signs of it, Signs.
are sleepiness of heart, no life in Christian duties, some times use of the
means, but with no zeal. How did David do duties all that three quarters
after his fearful falls? much like the poor Christian who gave thanks, when
he went to eat of his stolen mutton.

Another sign is the staying of the sensible work of Gods Spirit.

Likewise a continual discontent, unquietness of mind and conscience; no
mind to the company of the people of God;

Fear of death, the which is a fearful estate, whilst the poor Christian
lives in it, howsoever God of his free mercy, at last recovereth him out of it.

What then, Use.
is there no help or remedy for this? God forbid we should say so. That God
that pardoned at first, can and will have mercy upon him again, though he have
played the prodigal: for the love of a father reaches far. But yet it will
cost him the setting on. As if a father set up his son the second time, it it
will be with some checkes, and upon his humble suite, and it may be he must
bring some of his kindred to plead and entreat for him: So is it with the
poor Christian in this case.

They then that have suffered this loss, had need make a gathering, and get
many good Ministers and Christians to contribute their prayers and counsels to
help them up again.

For it is possible to be recovered (as we see in the example of David) though
with much ado, as appears Psalm. 51. therefore be careful to see continually
what has cast you behind hand: Daily judge your selves for your sins, till
you feel your heart relent and wax tender in some sort: get under the
dropping of a profitable and settled ministry.

Use the help of the Lords Supper: and if ordinary means prevail not, add
thereunto extraordinary; shake off too much dealings, and the delight of the
world. And when thou art once recovered, walk more watchfully and warily ever
after.

Some have thus recovered themselves; some that in their time were excellent,
have proved very obscure, and much ado they have had to crawle to heaven, that
if they had been taken away twelve or sixteen years before, would have gone
with full sail. And this may be a cause why God therefore takes away so many,
when they be at the best.

Secondly, let them not that yet hold their own, be high minded, but walk in
fear. Beware of these things before spoken of; else you may fall from you
excellency.

Cling to God, be constant in the means, that so you may never know what
belongs to this woeful state: for as some die in it with little comfort, and
have much ado to be comforted on their deathbeds, so some have recovered,
but it has cost them dear first.

And thus having spoken of the nature and degrees of Faith, I will in the next
place speak of the properties of it. And first I will show the excellency of
Faith. And this might be showed first by the Author of it, in that it is not
the work of Nature, or of our selves, nor yet of man or Angel, but of God
only. But of this I have already spoken.

Secondly, it might be showed by the difficulty of obtaining it but of this I
shall have occasion to speak hereafter. And also by the rareness of it, in
that few ever have been true believers, Esa. 53. 1. And when the Son of man
shall come, shall be find faith upon the earth? Luke 18. 8.

But I will not insist upon any of these, but rather show it by other
arguments. And first by that honor which God has put upon it. Secondly, by
the unspeakable benefits which by it are derived unto us. Thirdly, by this that
it brings much honor to God, and is also very profitable unto others, etc.

First, God has highly honored it, in that he has made it the only
instrument of our salvation, there being no other condition of the Covenant of
Grace, but believing, Ioh. 3. 16. Marc. 16. 16. etc. And whereas there are many
other excellent graces, yet none of them are appointed to apply Christ, and to
be the instrument of our salvation, but faith only. And whereas the greatest
venture in the world, is the coming of our souls safely unto heaven, of this,
faith assures us, and that upon good, yea the best security, namely the Word
and faithfulness of God.

Secondly, it is that whereby Christ Jesus and all his benefits are made ours;
whereof it is said Romans 5. 1. We are justified by faith, viz. Christ's
righteousness made ours by faith. As our sins were made his by imputation; and
he bare the burden of them, so his sufferings and obedience are made ours, and
we justified thereby, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith. As without faith
we have nothing to do with Christ, so by this he and all his benefits are
verily and truly made ours: and is not this an excellent thing that intitles
us and puts us into possession of Christ Jesus and all his benefits? It is more
than if we had been a kin to Christ, had had him in our arms, lived in his
company, than if we had heard him daily, had eat and drunk with him; nay than
to have been his mother, sister, or brother, Mat. 12. 48. 49.

By faith our persons are made pleasing to God, and our works acceptable: for
while we be in our own filthiness, God cannot abide us, and our best works
are abominable.

It is said that God had respect to Abel and to his work, and that by faith he
offered a better and more acceptable sacrifice than Cain: his might be as good
for the outside, but Abells was accepted, because it was done in faith by a
believer, the imperfections thereof being taken away in Christ.

4. By it we are united to Christ, and made one with him, flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone, Ephesians. 5. 30. lively members of that body whereof he is
head: and so as we have thereby right to his benefits; so we draw sap and
virtue from him, to dye to sin and live to righteousness, without which
faith and union we be dead in trespasses, and can do nothing. An impe not
grafted into a stock, but lying by, withers, and never bears fruit, but is
for the fire: so are we without Christ: and as a wooden leg receives no
sense or motion from the head; it is but tied on with points, so we without
faith; and is not this an excellent thing that makes man a member of Christ?

5. It is the root of all other graces. Hence comes peace: for being assured
of Gods love unspeakeable, and our pardon and salvation, it banisheth fear and
terror, and peace comes in stead of it, Romans 5. 1. yea and joy, as Romans 5. 2.
yea Romans 15. 13. The God of hope fill you with joy and peace in believing, yea
as Phil. 4. 7. peace that passes understanding, and 1. Pet. 1. 8. joy that is
unspeakeable and glorious. That as it is unspeakeable terror to be under our
sins and the wrath of God; so unspeakeable joy to be reconciled unto him: so
it breeds boldness in Gods presence, Ephesians. 3. 12. and is not this a goodly
matter? yea and that at the day of judgment, when the proudest and boldest
sinners shall with hills to fall on them, Apoc. 6. 16. as in this Epistle, cap.
2. 28. yea it will cause greater boldness than was in Hester to Ahashuerosh.
It will bring Christ into our arms, so as we may say with Simeon, Lord, now
let thou thy serva^t depart in peace, etc. And as Ioseph's brethren came to
him with confidence when Benjamin was with them: so we to God when we bring
Christ with us. Hence comes love to God, as it must needs: the love of Christ
constraines, 2. Cor. 5. and 1. Pet. 1. 8. Whom though ye see not, yet ye love
him: and he shows the reason, because ye believe in him. So Luke 7. 47. the
woman that knew that many sins were forgiven her, she could not tell how to
love enough: and David, Psalm. 103. 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, who
forgiveth thee all thine iniquitles: and Psalm. 116. 11. also, What shall I give
unto the Lord for all his benefit: toward me? So also it will work in us
love to our brethren for his cause, Gal. 5. 6. faith works by love: which is
ready to show it self upon all occasions, according to the measure of our
faith; to their souls, and bodies, forgiving wrongs, yea forgiving till
seventy times seven times, Luke 17. 4. which made the Apostles to pray for it,
Lord increase our faith, ver. 5. It breeds thankfulness: and hence also
comes patience, an excellent grace, when faith tells us that it is of our
merciful father that we be afflicted for our good, and that he will lay no
more on us than he will enable us to bear, 1. Cor. 10. 13. and that the end
shall be happy. These things keep us from murmuring, and from using unlawful
means, or sinking under our troubles. Some have spoken of a stone, that being
cast into the sea in the greatest storm and rage, would calm it presently;
but to be sure, faith calmes the heart where storms and temptations have
been greatest. It is the loadstone that looks ever to Christ, as that does
toward the North; and as that draws iron to it, so does faith join our
hearts to Christ. It is like the flower of the Suune, which turns ever toward
Christ, as that does toward the Sun: yea, what should I name particulars?
for hence comes all obedience. Heb. 11. 7. By faith Noah obeyed in making the
Arc, which was a difficult thing; so Abraham forsook his country, and offered
his son.

It purges the heart, and chaseth away the love of all evil, and brings in
the love of all Gods commandments, and breeds obedience to any thing that God
shall require, Psalm 119. 8.

It makes us not only willing to obey God in doing, but even in suffering; to
count house, land, wife, children, liberty, to be nothing for the love of God,
but to stick to Christ though we lose all these.

To confess with boldness the Name of the Lord Jesus, and his truth, though
with never such peril.

It caused the mother to send away her child that morning, to another nurse,
when she was to go to execution; and another to stand by, and see her child
grievously tortured, saying, I never held child better bestowed, and thanking
God that ever she bare him: And to forsake them cheerfully, as did D. Tailor
and Cutbert Simson, who seeing his wife and children in the way as he was
going to the stake, and feeling some yearning of bowels, rebuked himself,
saying, Ah flesh, would thou hinder me in my journey? well, go to, thou
shall not prevail.

It made the Martyrs endure torments, and to neglect father, mother, wife,
child, to follow Christ. See Heb. 10. toward the end, and Heb. 11. toward the
end. It made Moses forsake Pharaohs Court, and to choose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, Heb.
11. 25. It made many kiss the stake, clap hands in the fire, and to thank God
that they were worthy to suffer for his name; saying, that though they had a
sharp breakfast, yet they should have a joyful dinner.

6. It is that that makes the Word, Sacraments, and our prayers profitable to
us. The Word when it is believed, and particularly applied to our selves, then
it profits us; as contrarily, Heb. 4. 2. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper
does us no good without this; but only offers shells and outward signs to our
condemnation, not discerning the Lords body; so guilty of the Lords body, and
to eat our condemnation, and so it becomes to us like the cursed and bitter
water. Faith is the eye, hand, mouth of the soul, and therefore without that,
the Sacrament cannot profit. So our prayers made in faith prevail much, Iam.
5. 16. but nothing without it. Iam. 1. 6. 7.

7. It is a notable means to further us in our journey toward heaven, to
keep us safe from the mighty adversary of our souls and salvation; A shield
to quench his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary the devil
as a roaring Lion goes about, whom resist. steadfast in the faith. And this
might be showed by instancing in sundry of the temptations of the devil, which
faith quenches, and like a shield keeps them from piercing the heart.

It is the victory that overcomes the world. 1. the manifold ill examples of
the multitude, which like a raging stream bears down all before it; but they
that are grounded fast in the faith are not moved by them.

The alluring and sweet baits of the deceitful enchanting world, which are
most strong and dangerous: therefore whereas Heb 11. 37. it is set down, that
they were tempted; among other sore temptations, that is named for one.

Thus the Martyrs were tempted after this manner by the world. Play a wife man's
part, save your self: if you will return to the Church and abjure, you shall
have this and that promotion, etc.

More by the enchantments of this strumpet have been beguiled, than by the
threats: Faith scorns that any base transitory profit or pleasure should draw
his heart, that believes, from God, or from a good conscience, or to sell his
peace and hope of heaven.

So it overcomes the frowns, threats, and uttermost wrongs that it can do,
despising the cross, and enduring the shame; contemning any temporary
affliction in respect of the love of God, and Christ Jesus, or hazzarding his
part in the eternal happiness. Thus the Martyrs (as Romanus among the rest)
overcame their adversaries, and made them weary, when as they could not tell
what to say. If a man had enough of this, he might go thorough whatsoever.
The only conqueror indeed is the believer, to whom nothing can come too
difficult, to do, to suffer, yea that would pose all the world to do. So it
fenceth us against the temptations of sin, that arise from our own corrupt
nature: Shall I do thus and thus, and sin against my God and merciful
Father? It draws virtue from Christ to mortify sin: It challenges the
promise that says, sin shall not have dominion over your mortal body that
you should obey it is the lusts thereof, Romans 6. 12. It gives much glory to
God, by believing things because he has said them, to reason incredible, in
nature impossible, puts to his seal that God is true. It gets upon the head of
reason, when it is at the farthest, and sees quite beyond it, and claps the
hands, saying, It is so, it is so.

In Natures school we conceive first, then believe; but in Gods, we believe
first, and then conceive: conceive what we can, and what we cannot, believe
and admire.

Thus we believe the Creation of the world of nothing, which most Philosophers
gainsay, affirming, that of nothing nothing can be made.

So when we be wrapped in troubles, and compassed about, and see no way out, yet
to believe I shall have a good end; as Abraham for offering his Son: yet God
had said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. So Joshua, and the people for the
falling of the walls of Jericho; and Heb. I1. 1. It is the substance of things
hoped for, i. e. gives a being (to us) unto things that as yet (in themselves)
have no being; and the evidence of things not seen, that is, a clear
demonstration of things that be not seen. Thus we believe the resurrection of
our bodies, and eternal life after this.

Hereby now we believe the ruin of Rome, though she seem to prevail, and
get the upper hand.

Hereby we hang upon God, when we see no likely hood or way of help or
deliverance; so as we can say, I will trust in him, though he kill me, Job 13.
15. and in long delays, yet faith holds.

9. Faith is exceeding profitable through all our course, and in prosperity
many ways, but especially it is our odd friend in adversity. Another Simon
to bear our cross. Oh it does us Knights service; then it holds us up by the
chin, that we sink not, as else we must: so that our head is above water,
though all the body be under. I should have fainted, except I had believed, to
see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13.

This we may see in Jacob; for what had become of him when he heard of Esau's
coming against him with four hundred men, but for his faith? It is true that
God had made him a promise; but he had the comfort of it, because he believed
it.

So Nehemiah, when he looked so pale, yet finding a promise and believing it,
he staid himself upon it, Neh. 2. 2.

So many amongst our selves in diverse afflictions should sink, were it not for
the faith of Gods promise; much more the Martyrs in their intolerable
sufferings.

Our Savior Christ was upheld by my God, my God, or else he had been gone.

10. And in the end of our life it is even as a chariot to carry up our souls
to heaven, John 3. 16. That as many as believe in him shall not perish, but
have everlasting life. As Enoch and Elias were translated (though not bodily as
they) yet our faith translates our souls up to God, 1. Pet. 1. 9. receiving
the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.

Now is not this an excellent grace that never fails us till it has brought
us to God, and makes death, which is the terror of the world, to be a welcome
messenger?

11. Yet further the names given it in Scripture, and from the Scripture show
so much: For it is called Justifying Faith, Romans 5. 1. because it justifies us,
which other faiths do not.

Saving Faith, as Ephesians. 2, 8. by Faith ye are saved: for some faiths be not
saving.

Lively Faith, in opposition to the dead faith of hypocrites, that draws no
life from Christ, nor shows forth any life in godly fruits of good works.

It is called Faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1. 1. a rare jewel bestowed on none
but Gods dear ones, such as he ordained to salvation before the world; not
such faith as reprobates may have.

Precious Faith, 2. Pet. 1. 1. of wondrous worth and value: no copper faith,
but more precious than gold, yea than fine gold, 1. Pet. 1. 7. Yea, as Prove.
31. 10. a virtuous woman is said to be far above the pearls, who is so
commended for her faith which made her virtuous: and the wisdom so commended
in the proverbs which proceeds from, and is joined with true faith, is not
only better than silver, and much fine gold, but whatsoever else it can be
compared unto.

Most holy Faith, Jude ver. 20. because it is a gift of Gods most holy Spirit,
and brings forth holy life, which it draws from our most holy head
Christ-Iesus.

12. It gets us a good reputation in the Church of, God, Heb. 11. 2. It sets us
on to do such works of piety to God, and charity to men, as do procure us as
good a report, as valiant men had a great name by their exploits.

13. It obtaines us many a temporary blessing and deliverance: as to Asa and
Iehosaphat* great victories, by their faithful depending upon God.

It is not only profitable to our selves, but to others also: i. e. to our
children. Even a professor of faith benefits his children, interesting them
unto Baptism and the privileges of the Church. But true faith greatly availes
the children of such parents, both because God has made promise to be the God
of such and also of their seed, besides their many faithful prayers.

2. Yea to strangers, both for their souls and bodies, Iam. 5. 14. send for
the elders, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, i. e. heal him, and
restore him to health; yea if heo have committed sins they shall be forgiven.
Yea to the very wicked it may obtain temporal blessings, as Moses his prayer
obtained for Pharaoh, and for the murmuring Israelites, and Eliah for Ahab in
procuring rain.

In all these respects, who can but say that faith is an excellent grace? come
gaze and look upon it, that you may admire and fall in love withal, as men do
at the goodly house or sumptuous palace of some great man, or Prince, and such
things.

No merchandise to be compared hereto; he that has it has God for his
Father, Christ his Savior, the holy Ghost his Comforter, the Angels to guard
him, creatures on the earth, the world it self, yea all things present and to
come are his, and he Christ's.

Compare it with other things that be excellent, and see it excelling them:
what shall I compare it with, wealth, honor, authory, great birth? base things
in comparison, not worthy to be named with things that be truly excellent.

What then? knowledge of things humane and divine, especially great
understanding in the Scriptures is excellent, yet the devil has this, and the
meanest believer has a better gift.

The gift of prophecy is an excellent gift, to open the Scripture, discourse of
points of Religion and Faith, yea, and apply the same to the peoples use; a
very profitable gift, seeing it may convert many and build up more, yet this a
reprobate may have.

The faith of miracles is an excellent gift, and to cast out devils: he that
had these would with Simon Magus be thought some great man, and such gifts were
worthy great reverence, yet these a reprobate might have, Matthew. 7. 22. Many
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name,
and in thy Name have cast out devils? etc. Yea, among other true and saving
graces faith obtains the chiefety, as humility, love, patience, sobriety, which
though they be excellent gifts, yet they apprehend not Christ; they breed not
faith* but faith is the mother of them.

We may therefore say of faith, as Solomon of the virtuous woman, Many
daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all, Prove. 31 29. Her
price is above the pearls; for this is a most precious jewel, and pearl
invaluable.

And as infidelity is the most odious vice, the breeder and mother of all
sin, and does most dishonor God, so is faith the contrary. Unbelief denies
God the glory of his power, as if he were not able to fulfill the promise of
his truth, or as if he were unfaithful; and makes a man flee from God, as
Adam, and finally, makes Christ's coming into the world of no use.

Here see and know who be the excellent ones in the world; oh true believers,
Psalm. 16. 3. They are called the excellent. Pro. 12. 26. The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor, that is, who is not righteous: faith makes a man
righteous, both by making Christ's righteousness ours by imputation, and
secondly by drawing sanctifying grace from Christ.

He that is not thus righteous by faith, we say of him as of Ruben, he is
not excellent. Whatsoever wealth, honor thou have, whosoever thou art, thou
art not excellent; nay whatsoever knowledge, gifts, profession thou have,
without true faith, thou art not excellent, but a painted sheath, a gorgeous
sepulcher: thou have no part in Christ's death, neither is thy person or work
pleasing to God, nor have thou right to any good thing.

But the true believer is excellent, as having attained to a rare jewel, and
an invaluable pearl: as may appear if you look over the benefits of true
faith before mentioned: yea though thou be poor and despised in the world, yet
art thou happy. Be thankful to God, and whatsoever pains thou have taken to
get faith, yet be glad, seeing thou have a rich pennyworth.

Wonder that man having stripped himself of all his robes of his creation,
should yet be restored to any such glory yet once again, and that God should
ever bestow this on thee which is to so few given. Use all means to nourish
this as thy jewel, as the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, good company, care to
keep a good conscience: in all things walk worthy of so excellent a gift,
stain it not by any sin willingly committed.

And do thou know that have it not, that thou can never be excellent, till
thou do enjoy it. But alas what toyling is there for bafe things, when the
most excellent things indeed are left unregarded?

God open men's eyes, that they may see and seek after the things that are
truly excellent.

And thus having showed the excellency of faith, I am now in the next place to
speak of the difficulty of it, 5. Difficulty of Faith.
and then of the lets and impediments from whence this difficulty arises. For
as Faith is excellent, so (according to the nature of excellent things) it is
not easy but hard to be obtained. It is indeed easy for one to say, he has
faith; but to have a true and lively faith indeed, is a matter hardly
achieved. So Iam. 2. 14. What does it profit my brethren, though a man say he
has faith, etc? It is easy to say, I believe and hope to be saved by Jesus
Christ, but to believe indeed is very hard, that is, to believe upon good
ground and warrant. For Faith is built upon the Word and promise of God, or
else it is no true faith: and thus to believe upon the warrant of the Word is
not so easy a thing.

For this is not only not in our own power, but neither man nor Angel can
work it, only it is of the operation of God.

Oh, Faith is a thing most excellent, as making Christ ours and us the children
of God, and as being the shield which quenches the fiery darts of the devil,
our victory whereby we overcome the world, and that hand which purifieth the
heart in the precious laver of Christ's blood. And therefore it is another
manner of matter, than for a man to say, I hope to be saved by Christ; seeing
many of these, have no hearts purified nor lives reformed.

That is wrought by the ministry of the Word, sanctified by God for that end;
but to work a blind hope, any means might bring men to that, or to say, I
know I am a sinner, and hope to be saved by Jesus Christ.

Again, the way to heaven is straight, and few find it; and this faith is the
way to heaven. Few attain to Faith, Isa. 53. 1. Who has believes our report?
and, When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? Luke
18. 8.

It is indeed easy to presume; for that is of the flesh, and the devil helps
it forward: but hard to believe.

To make this plain to every man: you shall see that every step to faith is
hard. Go over the way that God brings one to faith, even the work that the
Law must do is hard. For knowledge, first, even that is hard, in respect of
our blind and dull understanding; and especially our carelessness, in not
giving our mind to get it, but have so many other things in our head;
therefore few get any competency of knowledge, but are grossly ignorant.

Much more is the particular knowledge of every man's own sins, wretchedness,
corruptions, easy? Oh no, there is too much self-love in us for this, the
proud heart of man cannot listen to it.

Then for a man to be convinced in conscience, that he is the man that is so
miserable and undone, to confess it true of himself without any longer
posting it off to others.

Next, to be stricken with terror upon this sight of our misery; Oh this is
rare and hard to come to. Oh no, people can hear the Law, and their misery,
and the judgments of God denounced against their sins, and yet not blanke at
all. No, they have armor of proof to bear off that; hearts harder than
flint, as impenitrable as a wall of brass; oh no, their stout stomach will
not come down. Nay, though God add crosses, yet it stirs us up to rage,
impatience, rebellion, rather than casts us down. The Law alone, ^oh it is but
words, thunder without lightning, and when deeds come too, yet never the nearer
most what.

Ministers fear to preach the Law for terrifying men, and driving them to
despair, but they need not in respect of that great security that reigns in
them. And yet if a man were come to this, were it not a great piece of work? a
Judas, a devil goes as far, yet these think they go far enough. And if
they be thus terrified, yet how few never go further, ^ut outgrow it again,
wrestle with it, or impatiently fall to their own course? And if a ^an go no
further than the ^awes working* he had as good ever have come to any thing ^t
all, for he shall perish: and ^^ough the hard-hearted one ^^all speed no
better at last than ^^e, yet he is quiet in the mean ^^me.

Then come to the Gospells working. Is it easy for a man pressed under the
terrors of the Law to be so much as kept from sinking, or taking any other bad
course, by hearing general, that there is a help and remedy for sinners, but
whether it be for him or no, he is uncertain?

Then again for contrition: Is it a small thing to break the heart of a man
for, or from his sin? Oh it is an invincible piece of work; a man will part
with goods, children of his body, or any thing rather than from his lusts, or
be brought to a deep dislike of his courses, and vexation with himself for
them, to clear the Lord, and condemn himself, to become teachable and
gentle, a scholar willing to be ruled by God i^ whatsoever course he shall
prescribe him.

And then for him still to attend on the ministry of the Word, that he may
see what God will do for him in time; Is this easy? And as he is scarce able
to advise himself, so the devil makes him believe if he should tell others,
he should discredit himself.

Then when this poor man is wrestling and winding out of his bands, feign he
would proceed to confess his sin, and cry to God for pardon (as he sees
need enough) and encouragement from God, so to do, and thus to unload
himself: but then the devil blindes his eyes, hardens his heart, and stops
his mouth that he cannot utter his complaint to God as he desires, in any
sort; but when he would, the devil brings confusion into his soul, that he
cannot tell almost how to go about it. Indeed he does it, but so awkely and
coldly, as he is vexed with himself; and thinks, If I could mourn, and
power out my heart to God, I would not doubt of mercy; but I am locked up, I
cannot do it. And at this pass the devil holds many a poor soul a good
while without comfort: and though God does accept the will for the deed, yet
he himself is not so satisfied.

Then when he finds that God means as verily to show him mercy, as he
feels himself to stand in need of it, yet do you think it is easy for him
to come to a thirsty soul after it? True, he sees cause enough to thirst,
finding himself quite empty, and sees that if he have not mercy he must
perish. It does his heart good to hear of the promise, which is made to the
thirsty, because they shall be filled, and they only. But now he cannot find
such a thirst as he desires, but a fullness; he knows if he could thirst he
should be satisfied, but he cannot find it: Oh, says he, thirst requires
sense, yea it is the sharpest sense and desire; which I cannot find. Now
though God will accept his desire, and give him both thirst and water of life
too in time, yet in the mean while he is without it.

Then come to the last point before believing: Is it easy to come to sell all,
to deny our selves, and take up our cross daily that we may follow Christ? oh
these beloved sins that he has committed spiritu all fornication so long and
so often with, now to part with them all for ever, is a matter of great
difficulty. Is is true, for any good there is in them he might, but to our
nature this is a hard work.

Then when he comes to buy the pearl, to go through and strike up the
bargain, to apprehend the promise, and apply it to himself; does not many a
one stand straining courtesy, and is full of fear, as thinking that it is not
true to him, or that it is too good a bargain, seeing others carry away the
pearl, but he holds it in his hand, but dares not put it up as his own? so
that if God should not hearten and strengthen him, he would go near to lose
it now when he is come to the upshot. Well, at last he fastens on it. But
when he has done so, can he hold it fast this week and next month? in a
while is he not in his dumpts, doubting again and full of fears?

Well, when he has attained faith to believe the maine promise, even of pardon
and salvation, yet there be many other subordinate promises, as of
perseverance, of sufficient grace to carry him through all difficulties and
temptations, and is it easy to believe these? has not the poor child of God
some toil with this, when he believes his salvation, and yet sometimes fears
he shall never hold out to the end? especially if long or sore pains, or
persecution, and the fire should come, notwithstanding that God has promised
as well these as pardon and salvation.

And some inferior promises also of outward things are hardly believed: as,
not failing of any needful thing, that God will lay no more upon us than he
will make us able to bear. Is it easy to believe these? and are not even
believers oftentimes at their wits ends, and ready to faint in temptation of
poverty, danger, and such like? I speak not of living by faith, and having
this at all turns through our course, which is a high point, (and of which it
may be I shall say somewhat ere I part with this point of faith) but even to
believe things, and that we shall be in all estates upheld by God, at the
first especially, is a hard thing.

Then by this I hope you all see, that faith is no easy matter; for if every
step to it be difficult, then the whole is not easy. Oh no, some cannot
believe, Ioh. 5. 44. some will not believe, cap. 5. 40. but few do believe to
be sure, as appears too plainly.

If so, T^^ use hereof respe^^^ng Gods ministers.
then for us Ministers; our duty is to travel much in this point, and to
bring people to it, and to think that it is not enough to glance at it, or now
and then to speak somewhat of it, but we must dwell upon it, and think it as
wel-spent time, and that it is as needful a part of our labor as any other,
and none like it, as without which indeed all is nothing, and that withal it
is very hard.

And that we think not that every one that can say the Creed, ten
Commandments, and Lords Prayer, and can say he is a sinner, and can speak of
Christ, is straight a believer, and fit to come to the Lords Supper; or some
that be fair conditioned and better than most others, or then they have been,
straight that they be believers, when as any of any true insight can see no
likelihood of faith in them. It is good to hope the best, and to give
encouragement to small things; but we must tell them, somewhat is yet wanting to
make them true believers, else this makes people careless. O lament the carnal
security of men in these days, who make wide doors to bring them to heaven.

This also confutes that erroneous and blind conceit of the vulgar sort, The
use respecting the people.
that it is an easy thing to believe, as appears too plainly by their words
and courses. For first for themselves; they thank God they be fully persuaded
they shall be saved, and have no doubt of it: But how came you by it? Nay that
they cannot tell. But this is suspicious to have goods in our house, and not to
know how we came by them. They that have true faith, know how they came by it
ere they had it. How long have you had this persuasion? Ever. That is enough to
prove it naught; for faith is not bred with us, and he that is a believer can
remember the time he was no believer. And what pains have you taken for it,
what has it cost you? they can say nothing to that: It is therefore too cheap
to be good, and of the right stamp.

I thought you that said it was so easy were furthest off from it.

To presume is easy indeed, but not to believe: ask the belever, he thinks
it the hardest thing in the world, he could better do this and that, than he
can believe. No, no, though they that never knew what the burden of sin meant,
and so not the worth of Gods mercy, make a slight matter of believing, and can
do it without any doubting, yet they that have had their eyes opened, and
hearts humbled, cannot so easily shake it off, it is too great a matter.

Also for others, they show that they think it easy, and they wonder at them
that be troubled, and have doubts: and coming to any such in sickness, they
rate them, and bid them, Believe fool; can not believe? thou art a fool
indeed. But yet the servants of God that go about it in good earnest, ^^de it
a hard piece of work; and indeed how long is it ere many can fasten on it?
Therefore let those that came by it at ease suspect themselves: though some
child comes into the world with less pain to the mother than others, yet
none without some.

Also hereby it appears they think it easy, because many put it off till the
last, and think to have it at their command. No friend, the time of sickness
and the deathbed, is a time to use and spend faith in, not to get it; neither
think thou to get it then that have it not now.

3. But as for thee who have attained grace to believe, do thou thank God
highly that has brought thee through such a difficult piece of work: thy
father and thy mother, all the Ministers in the Country, and all the Angels
in heaven could not have done it for thee, therefore be thankful.

Thou have been brought through many difficulties, thou have sailed by many a
sand where others have sunk themselves, and between many a rock where others
have split themselves and been cast away, as between senseless blockishnesse
and despair; and when thou came to be contrite, remember that it went not
over too soon, till it had made thee thirst and sell all. And many miscarry at
these plots.

And know, as it was difficult to get faith (and thank God for it) so now
whatsoever pains thou take for it, thou will not part with it again for any
thing: Wilt? No.

So know also, that thou shall find difficulty to keep and ^ourish it.

4. Let none count of it as a thing got with a w^t finger* and at their
pleasure, and therefore put it off till death, or seek it lazily: but, as for
a matter of great difficulty, lay for it betimes. If a malefactor lay not for a
pardon till he be on the ladder, he may be hanged ere that come; so many are
dead ere they get faith, they went about it so late and so lazily: then they
would have oil, but while they are seeking it, the Bridegroom comes, and they
are shut out, as it is with many that know they must have faith, and have gone
about it, but too late.

Let us then be content to take pains about it, and that in time, and though
we obtain it not by and by, yet follow it, and think no pains too great for
it; be not content to take only one step, and so think to have faith by and
by, but let us wait our time for it, one thing after mother, as others have
done.

The next point after the difficulty of faith, Rareness of Faith, and fewness
of Believers.
is to speak of the fewness of believers, and then as a reason of it, come to
the lets. Not only as Paul says, all men have not faith, but few ever have
had, or have it. When the old world was drowned, and only Noah and his family
preserved, how few were the number of true believers? When the Church was in a
family, as of Abraham, Isaac there were Ismaels and Esau's. In the Prophets
days, how few? Esa. 53. 1. When our Savior Christ came, how few believed on
earth? he came among his own, and his own received him not, and both Jews
and Gentiles conspire to put him to death.

And even amongst us, take ignorant, profane, civil worldlings, and
hypocrites out of towns, and how many will be left.

At this hour there is little faith, most have no means of faith, most of
those that live under the means get no faith: there were three bad grounds and
but one good. Few find the narrow way. There are many called, few chosen; so
when Christ shall come, shall he find faith upon earth? Luke 18 8

Quest. But how can we tell that there be few Believers?

Answ. The gross ignorance so common in most parts of the Land, does plainly
show it; for without knowledge no faith, seeing it is the first thing in faith.

2. So much wickedness of life against the first and second table, as we
should soon see, if we should go over the Commandments, and most be tainted
with foul sins: they that be not, yet live in some sins (as civil
persons and hypocrites) though not so gross: as unfaithfulness: And the
hatred of the children of God, which being so common, prove certainly that
there is no faith; for faith purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9* 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
faith is not idle not barren, but fruitful, casting out all known sin, and
loving the contrary.

And therefore let every body look about them, Use.
and fear themselves, except they can prove it well.

Now the cause why so few attain to faith, is because there are many lets and
impediments which hinder them from it. But of these I will speak hereafter,
when I come to handle the ninth point (which I propounded) in its due place.

But howsoever it be a matter of great difficulty to attain unto a lively
faith, yet we are to know that it is most necessary for all that will be
saved; and therefore in the sixth place I will show the necessity of it. And
first, it is so necessary, that without it we can have no comfort in this life,
nor salvation hereafter; no life of grace here, nor of glory in heaven, Ioh 3
16. Mark. 16. 16. Act. 16. 31.

We can have no right to Christ's death, but remain in our own filthiness.
It is faith only that makes Christ ours by Gods appointment; no right to his
obedience, but lie under our sins and guilt, liable to the curse of God, and
to bear our own burden.

Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. seeing there can be
no person nor work pleasing till we have true faith. We can have no
spiritual life without it, but we remain stark dead in our sins, not able to
move a finger in any good action nor to think a good thought: for without me
you can do nothing. John 15. 5. neither can we draw any virtue or spiritual
life, but from Christ by faith; and by it we being knit to so loving a head,
and the fountain of life, we are made alive to God, Ephesians. 2. 1.

We can have no peace, much less joy without it. There may indeed be a false
peace, and men are ready to cry peace, peace, but it will end in war: men
(either never feeling the burden of sin, or imagining themselves in a good
case when they be far from it) may have, as many have, a false deceitful
peace, but no sound one. Its but a mad laughter and carnal joy.

There is without it no boldness in the presence of God, to call him father,
or to ask any thing of him, much less boldness to commend our selves to him
in death, or boldness at the day of judgment.

Our Savior Christ said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, Luke 23.
46. And so David, Psalm. 31. 5. Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit: for
thou have redeemed me.

No love to God, Luke 7. 47. the woman loved much, because she believed that
many sins were forgiven her, nor that we loved him, but he loved us first, 1.
Ioh. 4 19. nor to our brethren; for then we love them in Christ, when we
believe that we are children of the same Father.

No zeal for God, or obedience in doing or suffering; we cannot mortify our
earthly members, and crucify our beloved sins: oh no, till we be assured
that God has done great things for our soul. So to take up the painful
course of godliness. Much less can we suffer for Christ's sake, before by
faith we believe that he suffered so much for us.

Without faith we can have no right to a bitte of bread; no means to resist
the world or the devil, for it is the shield of faith that quenches all his
fiery darts, Ephesians. 6. 16. 1. Ioh. 5. 4. it is the victory that overcomes the
world; and it overcomes also the flesh and our corruptions, drawing virtue from
Christ's death. No means without it to make us patient, much less joyful in
trouble, as we are bidden, Heb. 10. 35. 36.

No comfort in our life; for what sound comfort but from hence? Psa^. 4. 6. 7.
so no joy in death; for if we know we shall perish, or are in doubt whither
we shall go, we can have no joy but horror and terror.

We can have without it no salvation after this life: for he that believes
not, is condemned already, Ioh. 3. 18. Mark. 16. 16. He that believes not shall
be damned; God has sanctified no other way to heaven.

It is the wedding garment, which whosoever wants, can never sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, but shall be bound hand
and foot, and cast into utter darkness, whatsoever else he has, Math. 22. 13.

It is the oil in our Lamps which we must have, or else we shall never
enter with the Bridegroom, but shall be shut out, though we cry, Lord open
unto us.

It has ever been necessary; for even by this have all been saved from the
beginning. By it our Elders were well reported of, Heb. 11. 3.

Ob. Indeed many are commended for faith, but it is faith in some particular
promise, as, Noah, That he and his should be preserved in the flood; and
Abraham, That he should have a son, etc. but not for justifying faith.

Ans. We must know they had faith in the Messiah to come, who was revealed
though dimly, and from that promise they also believed other particular
promises made by God, but from that as from the original and fundamental
promise of all the rest.

So Christ says, Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced, Ioh. 8. 56. so 1 Cor. 10.
3. the Israelites did eat the same spiritual meat.

It is necessary to all kinds of persons, rich, poor, and both one way; old,
yongue, that be of any discretion, they must have faith or else no salvation.

The poor cannot be excused by their poverty or want of learning, nor the rich
dispensed with; but all must have faith.

Every one must have a faith of his own; for every man must be saved by his
own faith: not the child by the parents, husbands by their wives, or
contrariwise, though they had the greatest believer in the world to their
father or husband. It is true that the parents faith benefits the child, but
to apply Christ to him it can no more do, than my eating can fat or feed
another, or another wearing of clothes can warm me.

It is not a thing needful, and very needful; yet so as we may make ashift
without it, and be saved, but not do so well: but of absolute necessity,
seeing there can be no well-beeing without it. As a key is a thing very
needful to open a door that is locked, yet not so necessary, but that some
other shift may be made: as you may pick the lock, it may be, or break the
door open. But not so here, where there is no other means, for this is the
only key, no picking the lock, no breaking open the door; none can come to
heaven by stealth or violence, whether God will or no. And all that come there
by his knowledge, and will, must come by faith.

Then what a miserable case are all they in; that have not the means to know
Christ, Use.
and therefore cannot possibly believe in him? oh lamentable state of huge
Nations and people in this case!

The works of God are wonderful; severity toward them, toward us
bountifulness. How should we pity and pray for them, and wonder at Gods
mercy to us, and our portion! Was not Goshen a happy place over Egypt was? so
we to them: And Amos 4. 7. God caused it to rain in one City, and not
another, and that it rained not on, withered. Thus it is with us: And oh thrice
happy they that know the day of their visitation.

Secondly, it serves to teach us Ministers to be very much and careful in
handling this most necessary point of faith; and in teaching the things most
fit to work faith: As the doctrine of the Law to humble men, then of Christ,
and of Faith; what it is, the necessity of it, and how it is wrought, and how
we may know it.

And not content our selves to teach this duty and that, and to inveigh against
this and that sin. For we have done the people no good till they be believers.

To what purpose is it to urge the people without faith to do this, and
forbear that? as if one should bid a lame man or one with great bolts on his
legs to run for a wager, or a sick man to go to his work or meat. Till a man
be made alive by faith, and have a state in grace, it is but lost labor. And
ye see that the most amend nothing by preaching, because the doctrine of faith
is no more insisted on.

If one should fall to mend, and to leave this sin, and do that duty, what
were this, not coming from faith, and not being universal? they are but
works of an hypocrite, and of a restrained man, by the common gifts of the
Spirit. And what if we could restrain all our Parish? one converted man and
believer were better than they all: for this will only ^ase his torments, and
be somewhat better for others that live with him, but save him it will never.

This is to build without a foundation, and to put a piece of new cloth into
an old garment, and new wine into old vessels. Paul in all his Epistles first
dwells on the things that serve to bring to faith, and in the latter part of
them comes to particular duties, etc. and so ought we also to do.

This makes the people also trust to their doings, so that if they reform
somewhat at preaching they think they be in a happy case, because so few do
thus much; but for want of knowing this, that without faith it is impossible to
please God in any thing we do, they deceive themselves.

As Popery does foolishly, that calls for a good life, and the mean time
overthrows the foundation of it, a true faith: so when we stand beating upon
this and that point, and do not care how seldom we urge the point of faith,
alas, what do we? It is great pity of the loss of so many good exhortations
for want of a foundation. True it is that all such points in a mixed
congregation must be taught, yet so, as still we often be harping about the
things that should work faith, and especially in such places where most are
without faith quite.

Thirdly, it may serve for comfort to all that know truly they have faith. Oh
let them think what they should have done without it; they had bin miserable
creatures: and therefore that they study how to be thankful to God that has
wrought it; that they nourish it daily, that it may increase, walk worthy of
such mercy, and show forth the fruits of it.

Fourthly, it is for reproof of most people, that regard any thing else but
this, which is not at all, or but little regarded; tith mint and annise, and
legoe weighty matters, cum ber themselves about many things, but choose not the
good part, Luke 10. 42. At last every body would be assured, and on their death
bed they send for the Minister: such a Christian would borrow oil of others,
but they have but for themselves; and therefore many are shut out, though they
cry, Lord, Lord, etc. If it be good in death, it is to be sought for before in
time; many seek knowledge and gifts, but few seek and make sure of a true
faith: yea many regard not this point of faith at all.

Others cousen themselves with every counterfeit; they hope well, etc. People
either believe not what we say of the necessity of faith, or else conceive they
have it when it is nothing so. If they believe it not, let them confute us; if
they cannot, why then do they not labor after it?

Oh that I had grace enough to lament and weep abundantly; oh that my head were
a fountain of tears, that I might power them out abundantly for the misery of
people, whom God has made happy in respect of time and means, but they
unhappily neglect that that should make them happy here, and hereafter for ever.

Fifthly, it serves for instruction to them that have it not; Oh let all both
high and low look to this, and be ashamed you have spent your time so badly
as to be without that, which if you dye without you must needs perish.

Let not the poor find excuses by their poverry or want of learning.

And you aged, look you about you, seeing you have one foot in the grave; if
the other go in too, woe be to many of you.

You yongue ones that be of any understanding, know you also that your life is
uncertain, and that if you dye without faith, you are undone.

And you parents, train up your children religiously in the understanding of
the principles of Religion, and urge things upon them, that by your means and
Gods blessing on the public Ministry, faith being wrought in them, you may
have much comfort of them, if they be taken away in their yonguer years.

And you husbands, long and labor to see faith in your wives, and wives in
your husbands, and be not content that they live a peaceable life, and that you
want nothing; and therefore you will not disquiet your wives and husbands about
such things, seeing so you might fare the worse.

Oh beware of such carnal thoughts, and labor each with other that you may be
brought to faith. And know, that true believers cannot be content that their
husbands, or children be only civil.

The seventh point which I propounded to handle, Perpetuity of true Faith.
and last property of Faith, is the perpetuity of it. And therefore in the next
place I am to show, that true justifying faith is perpetual, and that
wheresoever it is, it can never be lost, over come, nor taken away, nor wholly
fail, but abides to the end.

It is true that a temporary faith may be lost, such as we read of some,
Luke 8. 13. that believed for a season: as the seed in the stony ground soon
springs up, but after withers. And such likewise as build on the sand, which
soon fail, and fail when the wind blows, and the storm arises: but he
that builds on the Rock, the floods and winds cannot move him.

Temporary faith is so called because it lasts not; but this argues there is a
faith that endures, which is that immortal seed that never dies.

Yet we must know, that the reason of our never losing our faith, is not for
any strength in our selves, but from the might of God, else we might lose our
salvation every day: but it is not in our own keeping, as Adams, but in Gods,
1 Pet. 1. 5. and 2 Cor. 1. 21. It is God that stablisheth us with you in
Christ: and therefore though we be weak in our selves, yet we are able to
do all things through Christ Jesus which strengthens us. Phil. 4. 13.

When we apprehend Christ by faith, we do not so much apprehend him, as he
does comprehend us; and therefore if we could let him go, yet he will not
let us go, nay he will not let us let him go: as Jeremiah 31. 34. and 32. 40.

As we are knit on our parts to Christ by faith, so on Gods part by his
Spirit, which is almighty and unchangeable, and holds us to him for ever.

Now this may be proved first by many testimonies of Scripture, Psalm. 1. 3. The
faithful are compared to a Tree planted by the River, and Jeremiah 17. 8. the
same are planted into a head so full of sap and spiritual life as can never
fade, Psalm. 15. 5. with 2 Peter 1. 10. Psalm. 112. 1. Psalm. 125. 1. 2.

And John 3. 16. John the Baptist tells us, that he who believes on the
Son has already passed from death to life. Romans 8. 1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ: and therefore he cannot lose his
faith; for if he could, then he might perish.

So John 6. 35. our Savior gives a reason of that, John 7. 38. such a one
that has rivers flowing out of him cannot thirst, etc.

Secondly, this may be also proved by strong reasons. For first, the election
of God, which is unchangeable, and the foundation of God stands firm, as is
employed by that speech of our Savior, Math. 24. 23. where he says, that the
false christ's would if it were possible deceive the very Elect.

But every believer is Elect of God, as appears, in that Faith is called the
faith of Gods Elect, and Act. 13 48. election is made the cause of believing.

Secondly, the will of God, which is unresistable, and who made the world, by
his will; and does whatsoever he will both in heaven and earth, he wills it,
Ioh. 6. 39 40.

Thirdly, the love of God is unchangeable; for whom he loves, to the end he
loves them. John 13. 1. Ier. 31. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting
love: therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. And his gifts and
calling are without repentance. Romans 11. 29. that is to say, his saving gifts:
for common gifts may be lost; and some saving gifts in some degree and for a
time, as peace, joy, gifts of grace, but the essential gifts to salvation,
vid. Faith and Sanctification, these be never taken away, only they may be
abated, and the degrees may be lost, at least in respect of their acts and
operations, but not the things themselves,

Fourthly, the union of the Believers with Christ, is so true and real an
union, as that it is also indissoluble, we being flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bones, Ephe. 5. 30. what Giant will suffer his limbs and members to be
pulled away? and how much less will Christ suffer any to pull a member from
him, and so to leave him a maimed and imperfect bndy?

Fifthly, it may be proved by Christ's promise and intercession, (who is ever
heard) both for Peter, Luke 22. 32. and John 17. and now his intercession in
heaven for all his Saints.

Ob. But we may have so many enemies, and means to pluck our faith from us;
as also so great troubles may come in rushing upon us, as may deprive us of our
faith.

Ans. Well, the Lord knows to deliver his out of temptation, 2 Pet. 2. 9. yea
and not to lay more on his than he inableth them to bear: and he will also
give an issue with tentation, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

Also the devil is thus and thus strong, yet John 10. 29. My Father is greater
than all, and none can pluck us out of his hand; and faith is a puissant
shield which quenches all his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6. 16. And if the world be
against us, faith is the victory that overcomes the world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4.

Ob. It is said in the fifteenth of S. John, verse 2. that every branch in
Christ that bears not, he takes away: whereby it seems that a man may be
a branch in Christ, and yet bear no fruit, and so be cut off and burnt.

Ans. The answer to this may serve for many such places; which is true, and not
an evasion, videl^et, some be true, some seeming branches.

Ob. Judas, Simon Magus, Demas, Alexander, had faith, and fell away, and lost
all.

I said temporary faith may be lost, and such had all these, of whom that is
true of all, that the Apostle John speaks, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from
us, but were not of us; and of Judas alone, John 17. 12. None of them is lost
but the child of perdition, Romans 11. 17. And whereas the Apostle says that
some of the branches were broken off, he means not the elect or true
believers, but some that were of Abraham's stock and posterity according to the
flesh; in whose stead the Gentiles which were not of Abraham stock were
grafted in.

Ob. David and Peter had true faith, and yet lost it.

Ans. I answer, that they lost not their faith; for Christ prayed for Peter
directly that his faith might not fail, Luke 22. 32. and therefore it failed
not, seeing he was heard in all things. Their faith only was covered for a
time and lay hid, and the working thereof was interrupted: but though they were
in a swoone, yet they came to themselves again.

Indeed, Psalm. 51. verse. 10. David prayed God to create in him a clean heart,
but he spoke according to his own feeling, not as it was in truth.

Ob. But what say you to all the caveats, as Romans 11. 20. Thou stand by
faith, be not high minded, but fear?

Ans. This is meant not of the particular elect of God, but of the whole
Church, and body of the people; for his elect cannot finally fall. Secondly, by
such admonitions and caveats, he puts a bar against it that they may not
fall.

Ob. 1. Cor. 10. 12. Let him that standetb take heed left he, fall, and Heb.
12. 13. Make straight paths for your feet, left that which is lame be turned
out of the way, but let it rather be healed, Phil. 12. 12. Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling.

Ans. Such speeches are used to awaken hypocrites, and to make beginners look
to their foundation; or if they be directed to good Christians, then we are
thus to understand it, that God who has appointed they should not fall, has
appointed to keep them from falling by these admonitions and dehortations.
Otherwise also they may be intended not to make us fear our falling quite
away, but so far as we may fall, or to do any thing unworthy of our hope;
and to walk in fear, that we do not remit any thing nor flacken our pace in
the ways of godlinesses yet true faith may be hindered for a time and hidden,
and a man may lose the sense of it, and the actions and workings thereof may be
hindered, but the habit cannot quite be lost.

Even as fire may be so covered with ashes, as no heat, nor light can be
seen or felt, yet when the ashes be uncovered and more wood laid to, and
blowed upon, it will flame out again, and show it self both in light and
heat. So, as the Sun out of a thick cloud again breaks out and shines;
or as a man in a deep swoune seems dead, but let him alone, or use means,
and by and by he comes again to himself: and when he was at worst, one might
perceive a little breath and pulse, etc. So in this swoune of a Christian, we
shall perceive complainings and mislikings of himself.

As the trees in winter blown with strong winds, which yet indeed make them
root the faster, and by frosts and blasts are nipt, which yet hurt not the
trees, but kill the cankers and hurtful worms: and howsoever in the winter
they seem dead, See Down. Christ. wars. 1. part. l 3. cap. 43.
yet in the spring, Use.
when the Sun and Showers come, they shoot (...) and bud, and bear both
leave and fruit.

And this may serve to confute those erroneous spirit that teach the contrary,
as Papists and Pelagians, who ((...) other of the heretics) will bring
seeming places, and wring them to their own^ meaning, and go against direct
and most plain Scriptures.

Secondly, it serves for^^ singular comfort to all true believers: For if Gods
election, will, love, and our union with Christ be strong enough, the^ are we
safe, and Christ's prayer heard. Therefore be of good comfort, and be holily
secure in respect of the end, only be careful in respect of the means; and
be thankful to him that has thus provided, in whose might also we stand.

Thirdly, what an exceeding encouragement and provocation is this unto all to
make them labor to get this faith, which is of that unspeakeable worth? and
being gotten, can never be lost more. What endless toil do men take for that
which they are uncertain, whether ever they shall obtain it; or if they do,
they know not how soon they shall lose it? It would kill ones heart to toil
for it, and when we have it, may straight lose it. But it is not so of faith,
which being once gotten can never be lost.

Fourthly, it also teaches us what to think of the final fallings away of
such as have seemed great in the Church of God.

But lest upon this doctrine, How far a believer may fall.
any should suck poison, and wax proud and careless, I will tell you of some
fearful things, that may make every Christians heart to tremble within him.
Besides that decay that I have spoken of in the end of the point of strong
faith, a Believer may suffer a most grievous revolt, and fall ^^ far, as may
make all that hear of it, much more that see it, to quake.

A true believer may (...) wax proud (and that usually is the root of
Apostacies and cause of downefalls) he may I say wax proud in himself, in his
knowledge, gifts, and his own strength, as Peter did, as having had some
experience of the power of the grace of God in him; he may thence come to a
careless and overly performance of holy duties, and use of the means, thence
to a neglect of the means, thence to a giving way carelessly to his inward
corruptions, without repentance of them afterward for a time, hence he may
easily drop into some foul sin, as David, and from one to another: or into a
course of base living, which by the continuance of it makes it odious to wit,
to be a companion of base persons, a bibber with those, with whom sometimes he
would have been loath to have spoken with in any familiar manner, a gamester
at home and abroad, spend away his time basely abroad, and in wrangling and
contention at home, and become a most ill example in the family, though
sometimes he were so zealous, as that he tolled on others to goodness, even
the worst plow-boy he kept; he may come to a careless neglect of the
ministry of the Word, Sabbath, and other times and places of Gods worship,
shunning all good company as much as possible can be. In this he may continue
long with a senseless and hard heart.

He may by the occasion of this, come to lose all his sense and feeling of his
peace with God, and in his own conscience, boldness with God, all his credit
with the Church, and become a dead logge to any thing that is good. Yea,
hereupon when God shall awaken his conscience, he may come to horror and
fear, and a wounded soul, not only not feeling any faith, but even feeling
God a revengi^g Judge, ready to cut him off, and give him his portion with
hypocrites: he may further (as it usually falls out) have some heavy cross
fall upon him, under which he may lie in a fearful case wrestling with it,
and the everlasting vengeance of God, yea he may be given up to Satan to be
tempted to Atheism, to blasphemy, impatience, to despair. And herein he may
make all that fear God and know him to shake their heads, and grieve ^n their
hearts for him; and he ^ay also set open the mouths ^f the wicked against him,
and ^o become a common scorn, ^n every ale-bench. Yea the ^ood-gates of
blasphemy may ^ee broken open against him, and the Gospel, and the way of God
may through his fearful ^^all be exceedingly ill spoken ^f, and many thereby
defiled; and hereby many weak ones may be shaken, and the wicked confirmed
greatly in their vile course. Yea he may continue ^ong in this case, and yet
may recover again, so as he may ^estirre him; for it will cost him the
setting on, and hot water, and more than ever it did at first: Or he may
recover in part, as some piece of his comfort, but never any thing like that he
had: Or he may be freed of his outward affliction, but not lightly of both.
But he may lie under both, and so (...) with terror, and never com^ to a
sensible apprehension (...) mercy again, and so dye, (...) that it shall be
doubted of (...) hands, even the most charitable, whether he is gone to heaven
or hell. And this God (...) do, to show to the world (...) he will not ^eare
with sin (...) his own, especially presumptuous sin; and to make (...)
Christians beware, and to (...) the wicked that there (...) maines fearful
things (...) them.

Oh most fearful case (...) hear of. Would one (...) think that a Christian
(...) come to this pass? Yet (...) things may be showed in (...) examples of
David and (...) some in the one, sons in the other The wonderful sins of
David, his admired horrone, compared to breaking of (...), (...) temporal
afflictions sent upon him, and that followed him, (the blasphemy of the enemies
of God by his means.) And though he by Gods mercy be recovered perfectly, yet
he carries the scar to this day.

But Solomon, besides these things in David, fell much more fearfully; so that
his Sun seemed to set in a black cloud. For it is questioned this day by
Divines, whether he everrepented or no, or dyed a reprobate. And the Lord has
of purpose left him so without any infallible and evident testimony of his
repentance, though we have arguments enough from the Scriptures to prove him to
die the servant of God.

Now as this was a foul abasement to Solomon, a man to whom God had twice so
appeared, a man the wisest of men, and one of the holy men of God, whom he used
as a penman of the Scriptures; and therefore inspired with the holy Ghost, as
appears, 2. Pet. 1. 21.

So what a fearful fall is this for a man that sometimes has had a firm
persuasion of Gods love, peace in conscience, boldness with God, credit in the
Church, that has provoked on many to good, and now himself fallen from all,
into the contraries of all these? For this is as if a rich man should come to
beggars state. I heard of a woman so rich and so proud, as she having her
house near the Church, would have it laid with clothes all the way for her to
go upon, and other things accordingly.

But she car^e afterward to that poverty, as she would go up and down to
neighbors to borrow a piece of bread or cheese, being ashamed to beg it our
right; and being sick, lay basely, but that neighbors brought in some things
to lay on her.

Now to a spiritual eye this woeful fall that I have spoken of of a believer,
is far more fearful.

Ob. If it be so, then as good or better not to trouble ones self about
Religion, or the getting of Faith.

Ans. God forbid: for though some one or few may bring themselves to this
misery through their carelessness, yet many and most do, and may enjoy the
sweet peace of it till they attain unto the end of it, even their salvation.

And the worst estate that ever a believer can come to, yet is better than the
best of an unbeleever. We might as well fall wholly and finally as thus far,
and lie so long, but only for Gods unchangeable love and good hand. And
therefore thank we God that has kept us, when we have seen others foully
fallen.

But this use hereof is to be made, Use.
to wit, to make all Christians cast away pride, security, and carelessness,
and to walk in holy reverence and humility. Some having gotten something, and
finding some change, boastingly will say, They have now got past perishing; and
as for faith, that they can never lose. But beware, and examine well, lest this
prove but a temporary faith; for usually true faith is jealous and suspicious
of its self. But if you cannot perish nor quite lose your faith, yet may you
fall so far as may make you a spectacle and scorn to Angels and Men. What if
a man shall not be hanged for his faults? yet if he be whipped at the Carts tail
through diverse Market towns, set on the Pillory, and lose his ears, may not
this be bad enough? therefore beware of pride, and of the negligent and
careless use of the means, and of the neglect of them public and private,
and falling from the society of Gods people, and of giving way to our inward
corruptions and lusts, and of any gross sin: or if we have dropped into any,
let us make haste by true repentance to rise out of them again. Cling to God
and to the means, and a conscionable humble use of them. And if you feel any
thing contrary, spy it, and shake it off quickly, lest ye be brought by
degrees to this fearful state.

But what should such a one do that is fallen into this woeful case? It is
possible he may be recovered: Oh if there be any such in this place, God
grant I may speak to your hearts. I am sure I know such. If there be any here
that lives near such, and have had acquaintance with them, I would pray them
to find a time to tell them from me, nay from the Lord, what you have heard,
and what course they must take if ever they mean to attain unto salvation.
These would be help by prayers, especially of those that have been provoked to
goodness by their counsel and callings; and they are to know, that there is a
possibility of recovery, as we see in the Prodigal.

To which end, they must abase and throw down themselves before the Lord, in
the most lowly manner that they can possibly, lying grovelling on the ground,
kiss the earth; yea, if they could possibly go under the earth: then they
must most humbly confess and rippe up all with a most heavy heart, judging
and condemning themselves to the pit of hell, and worthy to be cut off for
ever: yea and aggravare their vile sins by Gods great mercy showed to them
above (...).

Then must they lie down under the hand of God, being content and willing that
God should do with them in correction as he pleases; yea they must cut
themselves (in holy revenge) short of some of their lawful liberties, and
never leave crying and pleading till they obtain some little hope.

And if they feel but the least moving of the Spirit and comfort, Oh they must
be highly thankful, and follow it till they have obtained it in greater
measure. Neither must they think to speed soon, but if they can after long
time, they have cause to think themselves happy; neither is it like that they
shall find God easy to be entreated and found of them, who have so much
provoked him to just displeasure. If with much adoo and long earnest seeking,
comfort be obtained, they may think themselves well. Then must they for ever
after abstain from the very appearance of evil, and cling to the means, and
suspect themselves, even in their best duties, lest ever they should decline
again, seeing then their case would be worse than ever it was before.

Having showed what faith is, Whether a man may know that he has faith.
the cause, means, degrees, and properties of it, it now follows, according
to the order which I have propounded, that I should set down the signs, by
which examining our selves, we may certainly know whether we have a true
faith or no But because it is a thing which is not granted of all, that a man
may ordinarily attain to this knowledge; therefore before I come to show the
companions, fruits, and signs of faith, whereby every man may try and examine
himself whether he has true faith or no, I will first handle this question,
Whether a man may attain to this knowledge: that I may not seem to beg the
question, or to ground the following discourse upon an uncertain supposition;
and first I will prove that it is possible, and then how it may be done.

First then it may appear that we may certainley know whether we have true
faith, because the Apostle bids us try our selves whether we be in the faith:
which he would not have done, if it were a thing that could not be tried and
known; yea he adds further in the same place, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know you not
that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates? Again, in 2. Cor. 2.
12. The Spirit of God leaves us not to doubtful ghesses, what things God has
given and we received, whereof faith is one and a principal, but would have us
certainly to know them, 1. Ioh. 2. 3.

Of this certainety of knowledge we have also examples; as of David, Psalm 116
10. I believed, therefore have I spoken: Of Job, chap. 19. 25. I know that my
Redeemer lives, etc. And of Paul, 2. Tim. 1. 12. I know whom I have believed,
and Romans 8 38. 39.

Ob. Yea but these were extraordinary men, and knew it by extraordinary
revelation.

Ans. No such thing; for the Apostle Paul tells us, 2. Cor. 4. 13. that we
have received the same Spirit of faith, i.e. he and the rest of Gods Church and
children. Also the Eunuch.

Act 8 knew he believed, seeing he professed his faith, and desired Baptism
for the confirming there of. So the blindeman, John 9 38. says, Lord I
believe. So also this appears by the manner of making the confession of our
faith; I believe, and so forth: which shows, a man may know that he
believes. Again, if a man may be assured and know that he shall be saved
(which I have proved before) then he may know he has faith, seeing there is
no salvation without it.

And who can think that God would work so necessary a grace in his, and they
shall not know it? for what comfort then were there of it?

And finally, is this wrought so secretly and lies it so still in a man that
has it, that it cannot be discerned?

Ob. The heart is deceitful, therefore who can know that he has says?

Ans. True, the heart of an unregenerate man is deceitful, and a ^^^ble false
heart: but in a regenerate man his heart is made new and true, a single and
simple heart, Isa 38. 3. And though a regenerate man cannot know his heart in
every particular, and every winding thereof in smaller things, yet in all maine
and essential things he may know how it is with him, especially being willing
to know as the servant of God is. Cannot a man be truly said to know his house
that knows all the rooms of it, though some odd hole under the stairs, or
lobby in the top of the house be unknown to him?

Ob. Many have thought they have faith, and yet had not; therefore we may be
mistaken as well as they.

Ans. This proves nothing, because some have been deceived, therefore no man
can tell. Though some man dream he ^ates and drinks, or is greatly rich, and
waking finds it contrary, and that he is poor and hungry; this proves not
but that he that has meat, and drink, and riches, knows he has them, and
is rich, Though one in Bedlam besides himself, having got a little piece of
paper in his hand, falsely conceits that he can show all kind of learning
out of it, and that he is wiser than all the learned men in the Country, this
lets not, but that he that is truly learned may know that he is so.

And why is it that some think they have faith, and have not? It is because
they be willing to deceive themselves, or else they might know, but either
they will not try at all, or else so slightly they will try themselves, or be
tried of such as cannot or will not try them to the purpose: now does this
let, but that they that (...)

Some have received themselves and others a long time, as Judas and many
others, who yet if they would have thoroughly tried themselves, or dealt truly,
and submitted themselves to others trial, might have known: but not doing so,
no marvel though they be deceived.

As for example, some counterfeit coin is so like that which is good and
current, as that it is not easily discerned, (as they say there is much
counterfeit gold abroad now, brass underward, but double guilt on the outside)
now if this be not tried at all, or by one that touches it lightly, so that it
goes not through the guilt, it may go unknown: but if this be brought to a
skillful Goldsmith, and tried thoroughly by the Touchstone, it may be known.
And so it is in the trial of counterfeit faith.

Ob. Some that have faith, yet make great question and doubt whether they have
it or no, nay cannot be persuaded they have any at all. And therefore it is
not a thing that can certainly be known.

Ans. This particular proves not against a general, some know not, therefore
none do know, etc.

It is true some that have true faith, yet are not sensible of it, and know it
not. They know they have been about it, but know not certainly that God has
wrought it. And these be of two sorts, first, novices who being newly come to
faith, are not acquainted with the work of God, and are therefore jealous and
suspicious of themselves* as all true believers are: yet this makes not but
that Christians of more standing, and that know the fruit of Faith, (...) know
they have it; and so shall they in time. As Samuel was at first unacquainted
with Gods voice, and being called by God, went to E^, but afterward he made
answer to God, when he called him, as knowing that it was his voice: So these
having some answer, and comfort from God, think it is but some delusion of the
devil, or of their own heart; but upon better knowledge and experience, they
know assuredly that it is God who has spoken this comfort unto them by his
Spirit.

The other sort are believers that be in some great and sore temptation, who
have known that they have had faith, but now indeed make doubt of it, and in
their own feeling have none. Yet this makes not, but that they that be in no
such temptation do know their faith; And that these also in time, when the
temptation is over, shall know it again. As for example, A man by accident
having gotten a great blow on the head, or being in some fit of a burning Ague,
knows not what he says, or does, or has; yet others that be not in this
case may and do know, and so shall he again, when his fit is ^ff, and he
come to himself. And so also it is with some Christians, when they are in the
fit of tentations, or spiri^uall desertions, they cannot ^^dge of their state,
but when ^hese are over, then they are ^ble to discern it. Therefore (...)
conclude, That a man may know that he has faith, if he ^ave it, though not
every one ^an at all times. Use.


And this serves to rebuke them that know not whether they have faith, yea or
no, and yet are content to go by thinks. Go from one end of the Church to
the other, and how few can make a wise answer to this question, Have ye any
faith? I hope, or I thinke^ have, will some say. Do you go by thinks? Do
you but think so? what, is it because you cannot come to know? what a shame is
this, that you suffer such a necessary thing to hang by the eyelids? what if
God had taken you away, or deeply visited you? would ( thinks) have, comforted
or carried you through? Do you but think so? I think you may perish for all
this. Yea have you been long at this pass, and do you but think so, and yet
are therewith content? then I do not think, but am sure, that you have no
faith at all: for if you had any, you would not be content with thinks, but
desire to make it sure.

Some poor weak, yet true Christian, is not indeed certain of it, but yet
they feign would be, and are not content to continue in that case.

You go not by thinks for your evidence of your house and land: or if you did
so sometimes, yet hearing of some claim laid to your land, you have searched it
out, and had counsel; And now you say, I have them in my box locked up sure, I
fear no man: So says a true and wise Christian, I have my Evidences here laid
up in my heart, I would be loath they were to seek now.

2. It serves also to rebuke them that deceive themselves by thinking they
have faith, when it is nothing so. What, is it because they could not know? If
they be deceived, it is the devil and their own hearts that have deceived
them, for God has provided that they might know.

But people are willing to be beguiled, else they would try better. Now what
madness is this to deceive ones self in that, whereupon lies our utter
undoing?

3. It serves likewise for instruction to all, and to teach them to take
pains to know out this matter.

For has God been so gracious as for our comfort to give us means, by which
we may know assuredly how it stands with us, and shall we be slothful and
negligent in the use of them, and so hinder our knowledge and assurance?

The fourth use respects those that know, and can well prove they have faith,
(let them be highly thankful to God that provided such means whereby they
are come to this blessed estate, and has made them also so happy as to know
it) oh what a jewel is this, so to know that they are in the state of grace,
that they are the people of God, and that all shall turn to their good here,
and to their everlasting glory hereafter, seeing hereby they are fitted to go
through prosperity, and adversity, life and death!

And for them that have faith, and yet for unskilfulnesse, by reason of their
small experience, never knew it, or by temptation have lost the feeling of it;
they are to know, that it may be so, they know it not, although they have it:
For as many children have right to lands, that know not of it, so is it with
them in respect of their heavenly inheritance.

So likewise the other in temptation, must yet for a while be judged by others
rather than by themselves; which if they do, they shall come to see it with
their own eyes shortly, if they diligently use the means to attain unto it.

And thus having proved that we may come to this knowledge and assurance that
we have a true faith; Of the signs of Faith.
I will show in the next place how we may come to know it, setting down those
infallible marks and signs of faith, upon which we may safely ground our
knowledge. We may know that we have faith by the antecedents* and consequents
thereof; by the causes of it, and the effects; by what went before it, and by
what does follow and accompany it; and by considering both how (...) is
wrought, and how it is or ^eth.

And not this disquisition (...) are to know, that we may have the best
judgment here of, not by one of these alone, but by considering them all
together. For if we judge only by the fruits of faith (as most do) and never
look to the causes, means, and manner of working of it, we may be deceived,
seeing an hypocrite may do many things which might well beseem a believer,
and go far in many duties, and in the reforming of many outward evils, and
yet in the mean while is utterly desthtute of a true justifying faith. And
many times the fruits in a true Christian be so weak, especially at some
times, and in respect of their own feeling, as if we go by these only,
hypocritical and counterfeit faith will be taken for true faith, and true
faith counted no faith. But when we conjoine them, them both give evidence each
to othen, and both together give such strong and certain assurance to him that
has them, that can not deceive him. And therefore it will do well it we
join; these one with the other. If one can go along with them all, though it be
but weakly, yet he shall have better evidence than he that has but one or
two, though they seem to be in a greater measure, and nothing of some other
at all. For hereby many deceive themselves, whilst they go by halfes,
snatching up some things, and nothing at all in many other. First then we will
examine our faith by the causes of it. If a man be brought along to faith by
those steps that God brings his to faith by, that is a good evidence that he
has faith. As if a man be going to a place, and has been told by one skilful
in the way, that he must go by such a Church, then by a tust of ashes, and a
four way leet, then by such and such a mark: If he go by these one after
the other till he come to the place, he concludes that is the place, because
he came by every of those marks which before were told him: not by some one or
two, but all of them one after the other; and not by things like them, but the
self same he was told of. And so also we may be assured that we are come to
have true faith, when we can discern in us the marks and signs of it
concurring together.

The steps by which God brings a man to faith by the working of the Law
and the Gospel, I have handled at large. I now refer them to three heads,
Illumination, Humiliation, and Desire after Christ. First for Illumination; God
enlightens the understanding with the sight and knowledge of the miserable
state wherein we stand by reason of sin and punishment, and our unability
to get out of it of our selves. And this not only in general, but particular,
that that is my state. And then by the Gospel enlightens him with the
knowledge of the doctrine of Redemption by Christ, as, that God has of his
free grace appointed a sufficient means of salvation by Christ Jesus, and that
by his death, and sufferings, and obedience, etc. and that he has done this,
though not for all, yet for all believers, and only for believers; and that
he may have his part in it, if he can believe. And though this be but small,
yet it is the first step, and not to be left out; for many come not thus
far. As for all ignorant persons that know not these things in some sort,
they have no faith; and if they think they have, it is a vain shadow, and no
such matter, nor possible. And therefore ignorant persons must berowzed up to
know these things.

Next, God humbles all that he will work faith in; and first he smites them
with terror by the Law, for the miserable state they see and feel them
selves in, and casts them down, though not all in like degree, as I have said
before: then the Gospel offering mercy and speaking so kindly to all, though
never so bad, if they do not exclude themselves. And this breaks the heart
with grief for sinning against so patient a God as God has been to him all
his days of rebellion, and that now offers him mercy. Thus he is in a holy
despair of any help or good in himself, Ezra. 9. 6.
and is ashamed and confounded in himself, Dan. 9. 7.
willing to take any course that God shall prescribe him; saying with the
laylour. Acts 16. 30. What shall I do to be saved? but resolving never to go
back to his old course, or to do as he has done. And thus he is cast down
weary, sick, and lost.

Thence God brings him to a desire after Christ, and to have pardon in him and
the favor of God. Not a cold lazy wish, as of Balaam, that he might die the
death of the righteous, without any endeavor to live their life: but the
panting of the heart, sighing, longing, and groaning, as the Heart brayeth after
the river of waters, Psalm. 42. 1. Which inward longing and desire of the heart,
is expressed and uttered by humble confession and condemning of himself, and
with earnest cries for mercy, as we see in the example of the Publicane and the
Prodigal.

And then he further works in him that hungering after Christ, and thirsting
that can abide no delay, but breaks through stone walls, uses all means of
obtaining Christ, and preferres him before all the world. And makes him
willing and ready to sell all, to buy the pearl, that is, the most profitable
or pleasing sins.

Now let us try our selves faithfully, Use.
by these two latter signs, and the particulars of them, and as our heart
makes answer, so make use of it. If we cannot deny, but God has thus dealt
with us, then who dare speak against this? And therefore if this be your
case, you must take knowledge of it and be comforted, seeing they are much to
be blamed, who though they cannot deny but that it has been thus and thus
with them, yet still doubt they have no faith, and think that they never begun
right. For what would these have to certify them? Is there any thing more sure
to be built on than the Word of God? and will not this serve your turns?

It is true I grant that it is good making sure of the foundation, and herein
one cannot be too careful; yet where it is well, it is well. If one have
dug to a firm bottom, and cast out all the light earth, and then have laid
the foundation and groundsells of his house, and every body, and even skillful
workmen say it is well, shall one yet go and pull it up again, and say one
cannot be too careful? such an one may justly be thought weak and childish: so
is it also in our spiritual building.

There are therefore two extreamities here to be avoided; the one to be
careless in laying a good foundation; the other out of needless scrupulosity
to spend all our time and pains about it, and never to go forward in the
building that we may finish it. And at this pass the devil holds many a long
time, which is very unprofitable, and they complain of their dullness, and
many other faults, when this doubtfulnesse and unbeleefe is the maine cause.

But where these proceedings have not been (as in how few are they to be
found) there is no faith; and therefore such remain in the state of
condemnation to this day. In which case there are very many remain at this
day, seeing few be humbled; many continue profane persons, and only civilly
righteous persons; and some are only slightly humbled, and having got comfort
are never more grieved, whereas a true believer even after faith, grieves still
for his daily sins, whereas these think it enough that they were once
grieved, and therefore now grieve no more for their foul sins. How few can
be brought on their knees? or to trouble themselves in coming to a holy
despair in themselves, and how few come to be teachable, or to make an holy
use of what they have learned?

Oh they are too jolly, they cannot away with any such sad matters; and well
they reserve it, till they may have it in Hell, world without end.

How few also (as it might easily be showed) are they that come to any other
desire after Christ except lazy wishes? for why, they have no sense of their
own misery.

How few come to those humble confessions and hearty cryings to God for mercy,
but content themselves with that late and lazy Lord have mercy upon me? Some
feel in themselves flashings at starts and fits, after a stirring Sermon, or
after they have been in the house of mourning, or seen some heavy hand of
God, or are in some affiction: but how few attain to that high prizing of
Christ, and that thirsting after him? Oh no, they prize at too high a rate,
other bables of profits and pleasures, to make high account of Christ. Others
will, as far as they can have Christ and the world together, but if they must
needs part with one, they will leave Christ rather than the world.

And whereas Christ requires that they should sell all to purchase the pearl,
they will part only with some, but not all, and so God and they part. And
surely well worthy is he to lose his part in Christ and all his benefics, that
preferres any lust before him, and the favor of God: These set too base a
price on Christ ever to have any part in him.

And here we might well take occasion to lament the misery of most people whom
God has made happy in the means of faith and salvation, only they make
themselves negligently and wilfully miserable for want of grace to make use
thereof. Here then such people are to be exhorted that they would bethink
themselves, and while life and means of grace last, that they lay about them
to be possessed of this unvaluable pearl, which if they get, is sufficient to
make them happy alone, and if they miss it, all things else will do them no
pleasure.

By the plentiful means which through Gods mercy we enjoy, he makes us more
happy than most of the world. But by our own carelessness and contempt, we
will make our selves more miserable than they. The Lord open peoples eyes.

Moreover, we may know that we have a true faith by the companions and fruits
of it, which I will here briefly go through. Some be marks and companions of
a Faith that has attained some degree and strength. And in this number is
peace of conscience, which if it be sound, is an evident sign of a strong
faith, as might (if it were needful) be showed at large. For it might be
proved by Scripture, that Peace comes from Believing, and that it must needs
bring strange peace, where trouble was before. See Gouge on the Ephesians. 6. 17 in
the point of Faith. And Rogers Trea^ses of the eighth companion of Faith.
And howsoever there be a counterfeit of this peace in hypocrites, yet when
trials and tentations come, it will soon vanish, and so easily be discerned
from the true peace of the faithful.

And joy of the holy Ghost unspeakable and glorious. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Also
thankfulness to God, as Psalm. 116. 12. and Psalm 103. 1. Now what counterfeit
of it is in the hypocrites or wicked? and how it differs from their joy, and
how it may be interrupted: How also we are to admire at the unspeakable
goodness of God, both for the greatness of the mercy, the rareness of it,
seeing it is granted to so few: Also at his daily bearing with our weaknesses,
and faults. But these are points already handled by these authors I last
quoted, and therefore for more brevity sake I refer the Christian reader onto
them.

Another companion of a strong faith is bold confession of the name and truth
of God, even before the enemies thereof.

Also contempt of this world, willingness to dye, and longing to be at home
with the Lord Jesus.

But besides these marks of a strong faith, there are other signs of the
smallest measure of true faith.

First, a purified heart, Acts 15. 9. and a change wrought in it from the love
of all evil, to the love of God and all his commandments.

Secondly, a reformed life in one thing as well as in another, little as well
as great, to God as well as to men, secret and openly; and that not by fits,
but at all times.

Thirdly, love to God, declared by our care to please him, our fear to offend
him, our grief when we have done amiss. And also love to them that love God.

Love for his sake to men, and even an endeavor to love our enemies.

Now this love toward others is declared by doing good unto them according to
their need and our own ability, and by forgiving them that wrong us.

But especially we shall show that we have a lively faith by loving the Saints
in whom Gods Image shines most, and who are most dear to God, and from whom
we may get most good.

And those that be not yet, to seek to win them on, especially them under
our care, or such as are near to us; as parents their children, and children
sometimes their parents, one neighbor another; as Mat. 9 and Acts 16. Psalm.
51. 13. Then shall I teach transgresson the way, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee. Isa. 2. 1. So Philip being called, finds Nathanael, and
brings him to Christ, John 1. 45.

Another sign of Faith, is, when those that believe have an carnest desire
after more faith; and therefore a care to use the means for that end and
purpose. For finding themselves weak, and the devil busy in opposing their
faith, they desire to have it strengthened, and having gotten some assurance,
they desire a stronger, as the Eunuch, Act. 8. and having tasted so sweet a
thing, they desire more of it: and therefore they long for the means from
Sabbath to Sabbath, Sacrament to Sacrament, and for good company.

Also true faith is jealous of it self, and desires to try it self, and is
willing to be tried by others; and the most searching ministry pleases him
best that has it, or the Minister or friend that will sift him most thoroughly.

The use is, that every one of us try our selves, Use.
by these signs: And if our hearts can say in Gods presence without
dissembling, that both God has thus brought us along, and then that we find
these companions last named, then know, that God has wrought true faith in you
and done that for you that he has done for few, that ever were, are, or shall
be, and that which is of more worth than the whole world. Take knowledge of it
that you may be thankful, and comfort you shall have enough, to do, to
nourish it, and walk worthy of it, and to go through this evil world, though
you do not stand with its and ands, being doubtful and uncertain whether you
have faith or no. The devil labors to hinder you from proceeding, seeing he
could not let your coming thus far. It is a great hinderance to profiting,
when people are not resolved whether they have yet any faith: If you can abide
the weight of the Sanctuary, conclude upon it; you can have no surer ground to
build on than the Word of God.

You complain of dullness, when your selves are the cause: where these things
be, know that there is true faith; men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor
figs of thistles; Matthew. 7. 16.

Again, if there be no faith, but where these antecedents and consequents
be, then I testify to the world, that there is very little faith in the land
of England, as might easily appear if I should go over the several fruits of
Faith before specified. For how few have purified their hearts? how few have
any earnest endeavors, or any hungring or thirsting after Christ and his
righteousness? how many have their hearts fraught with the love of all evil?
how few either reformed at all, or but where they list, and by fits?

And yet whosoever lives in any one known sin, let him know to his face, he
has no true Faith. By which it appears, that there be but a few believers;
the more shame for them that have had all that means.

How few are there that love their neighbors, seeing all contraries to love
abound? and as for love to the Saints, that they do as a dog a pitch-fork,
seeing they cannot of all sauce abide them.

As for desire after the means; a Sermon, or no Sermon, Sacrament, or no
Sacrament, all i^ one; and for being examined, they will none of that, no, they
do not mean it: they have a figgetree, but it will be cursed because of the
barrenness.

Well, many talk of Faith, but assuredly it is but as Saint James says, a
dead Faith, that will do them as little pleasure when time comes, as a dead
horse will him that has a long journey to ride. Oh have none Faith but such as
you talk of? It shall be as the Lord will; and as he has set down in his
Word: where these signs be not, assuredly there can be no Faith.

True Faith is a Lady or Queen, attended by a great train of many excellent
virtues: 1. Pet. 5. 6.
show me thy Faith by thy works, show a great Lady by her train; even this
great Lady Faith by that great train of graces, with which the Apostle Peter
says it is attended, 2. Pet. 1. 5. 6. 7. etc. Therefore that Faith the world
talks on, which is but a formal profession of Religion, without all power of
true godliness, is but a roguish Faith that goes alone basely, or a
raggamuffianly Faith that has a sorry ragged reformation, and some shows of
some virtues, but none sound and substantial. The times that we have lived in
and enjoyed the Gospel, may challenge more than such a vain Faith, which the
smallest means and the dimmest times might have wrought and challenged.

And thus much of the signs of Faith: Of the lets and inpediments of faith.
now it follows in the ninth place, that I entreat of the lets and
impediments, whereby men are usually hindered from attaining unto it. To which
end we are to know, that there be many lets within and without men to keep
them from Faith; and so great, as few ever attain it. True it is there be
many helps to Faith, especially in these times, and to (...) above many
others: For i^^^merable numbers there are in the world abroad, who have no
means at all.

They before our Savior Christ's coming saw all in types and shadows; and
therefore but dimmely, and were to believe in a Messiah to come, whom they knew
little of. They (...) our Savior Christ's time had small helps in comparison
of us. It was a worthy faith in them that believed in Christ, when he was in
his swaddling ^louts, as old Simeon and many others. Also in them that believed
in him when he went up and down as a man of no reputation. But we know
Christ to be dead, risen the third day, ascended into heaven, and sitting at
the right hand of God in unspeakeable glory, having overcome all his and our
enemies: and therefore now it is much more easy to believe than in those
days; And also we have the new Testament, Christ come out of his fathers
bosom, all things so clear and plain, plentiful promises, and heaven (as it
were) set open: we have the Word and Sacraments, wherein Christ is crucified
before our eyes; the Ministers of God beseeching us to be through faith in
Christ reconciled unto God, 2. Cor. 5. 20. We have also many worthy examples of
believers gone before us, Martyrs and godly men and women among us, that lived
and dyed in the comfort of their faith, and are gone to rest. Many examples
likewise of the fearful judgments of God against unbeleevers. Yet there be
also many lets to faith, and these both from our selves, and also from the
devil, and the world.

the peoples capacity, and not stouping to their weakness, or not Catechizing
and opening in order, and handling the grounds of Religion. Some also from the
people themselves; for if Ministers were more defective, yet there is light in
the Word, and men might with pains get knowledge: and therefore peoples
ignorance is affected and wilful. Some care not for coming at the Word at
all: the rich have oxen, farms, pleasures to hinder them, the poor sit by the
fire, or lie in bed, or if they come, they sit and sleep, or look up and
down, not minding what they hear, and so the devil steals it all away. Some
never think nor speak more of it when they be out of the Chruch.

In which regard the Ministers of the Gospel are to be persuaded, for the
love of God, to have a care and compassion of the peoples souls, in assurance
of a blessed reward, and to take pains, and wise and fit pains too, that so
if the people get not faith, yet the let might not be in us.

For the people also, they are to be persuaded to rowze up themselves to the
getting of knowledge, that so they may be fitted to attain unto faith.

The second Let is the light esteeming of the Gospel: As there are few that be
cast down by the Law or be moved, so they make as light account of the
Gospel; it is not precious, nay scarce welcome to them. They think that God
in offering salvation by Christ, and tendering the promise, seeks his own good
and not theirs, and that God should be beholding to them if they receive the
Gospel, rather than they to God for making such an offer; whereas they should
fall down and bless the Lord that ever such tidings should sound in their
ears.

3. Some think it impossible to be assured of the forgiveness of their sins
and of salvation; and therefore never go about it.

This is but their own wretched laziness, furthered by Satan; for it is
nothing so. The impossibility lies in nothing but in themselves; if their proud
stomachs could but stoop, and come down to see and feel their vileness,
and to go out of themselves, and to seek for salvation by faith in Christ,
and could but renounce all their beloved lusts, it would be possible enough,
yea easy; but that they will not do. But has not God commanded us to give
all diligence to make our Election and Calling sure? 2. Pet. 1. 10. And is it
not then our own fault if we neglect it?

4. Some think it not impossible, but exceeding difficult and therefore like
the sluggard that will not put his hand to his mouth, nor out of his bosom,
nor go out into the cold to provide necessaries for the preserving of his life
and so dies and perishes in his sloth; so is it with these lazy Christians
in this case, whereas the difficulty (there being a possibility) should but
whet on their desire, especially seeing it is for a thing infinitely of value,
and more worth than all their pains which they take for the obtaining of it.
See what difficulties men go through by sea and land for a little pelf, and
shall we be less painful in seeking for the rich treasures of spiritual
grace and heavenly glory?

5. Some think it needless, because they suppose that they may be saved
without so much adoo. A good hope indeed is well; but if troubles and death
come, they shall find all the assurance they can get little enough to carry
them through, yea to help them to mortify their lusts, corruptions, and
carnal affections, or to continue them in a good course.

6. Some be conceited of their own righteousness, and so think they have no
need to labor much after faith in Christ; like the Laodicean and Pharisee,
and the yongue man in the Gospel, All these have I kept from my youth. The
civil man thinks to be saved by keeping touch, living orderly, keeping his
Church, and paying every man his own, and by being liberal in giving alms to
the poor: and therefore thinks himself in case good enough, without going
out of himself or making such ado, what shall they need the Gospel that can
keep the Law? or if they fail in some things, yet by that time, God has set
the good against the bad, they hope there will be no great odds between them.

But these men must know and confess their Civility, and carnal wisdom and
righteousness to be dogs meat and abominable in Gods sight, and cast it all
down, Phil. 3. 8.
as Paul did, or else they shall never find mercy with God: Nay friend, God
has put in a strong bar against a man's own righteousness, so that there can
be no going to heaven that way. Do thou boast of a filthy clout?

6. Some are so profane, as that they will not be stirred by all the terrors
of the Law, and so go not one step to faith.

Some are cast down, but wear it out again, being utterly impatient of the
pain and burden.

Some beginning to sorrow some what for sin, as soon as they feel any,
straight cast the whole burden on Christ, and so never tarry till they come to
hunger and thirst after him.

Some seeming contrite, and having many good parts, yet stand with God for a
little, and will not part with some one lust that spoils all. And these never
buy because they will not come to the full price, and God will abate nothing of
it.

8. Some think if they should begin, they should never hold out, and therefore
that they were as good not begin at all. But let such get forth first and make
some entrance into the course of Christianity, and then take thought for the
other after.

9. Some think they must not only part with their beloved and profitable
sin, if they would come to this faith, but also that they must take pains to
take up a strickt course of godliness, which will require much labor, and
abridge them of many delights and profits, of which they cannot think with any
patience. And will not think you, the pleasure, comfort, and benefit of faith
pay for all these, and make you great gainers by the exchange?

10. Some think they shall be mocked, reproacht, and scorned as Purita^s, Ioh.
5. 44.
cast off by their friends, huncht at, and jusled to the wa^s, of which
disgraces they are utterly impatient; and the love of the friendship of this
world is a great let to many. And indeed in it self it is no small matter to
endure all these, if we have no other strength but our own natural abilities.

But to these I give this answer, if thou gettest favor with God, whose soever
friendship thou losest, yet art thou happy. If thou losest preferment, or be
jusled and despised in the world, yet thou must rejoice in thy gains by Faith,
for the time will come, when they that do it, will wish they had been thy
half.

This vile amity with the world is the enmity of God, I am. 4. 4. and he that
will have the worlds good will, let him know, he can never have Gods. We
cannot serve God and Mammon, Math. 6. 24.

The devil also will lay in such a number of objections, Devil.
and stumoling blocks, as we cannot pass by without some pains and
difficulty. As he will for before us the falls of professors, and the
variety and difference of opinions in points of religion which are among those
that profess Christianity. See thou not, will he say, that there be some of
one, some of another opinion? some think that we may be assured of our
salvation, some say nays* Therefore never trouble thy head with any thing at
all, follow thy business and live quietly. Also thou see that most Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and great ones, trouble not themselves with any such thing, nay many
Preachers and learned men live at their pleasure; and therefore be not thou so
precise, nor make such scruple.

Also he labors to keep the faithful preaching of the Word, from a place or
people, or at least to make it ineffectuall. Also he makes them believe that
they have it, when they have it not, but only a tempting faith or presumptuous
conceit.

The temptations also of the world are great lets to faith. First the love of
the world, and eagerness after it, lets mamany from faith. And how excellently
well might many do, if it were not for the world? But that must go forward,
whatsoever the Word, Sacrament, Sabbath, or any thing else does. They have no
leisure to set their hearts on these, for their many and great employments. Or
if they begin, the world puts it out again, and choakes the Word, and every
good thought.

Moreover, Example.
the small number that labor after Faith, or take any such pains to get it,
is no small let to the obtaining of it; two in a parish, and three in a Town,
one in a Hamlet, and for a man to go alone, and to be a wonder in Israel, is
a thing much against the hair.

To go against the stream is hard. But if you will needs follow the
multitude, you must speed as they do. You should know that the way to heaven,
is strait, and few find it, and so be content to go alone to heaven rather
than not at all.

Their bad counsel likewise is another great let: for they that give ill
example be as bad of their tongues as in their lives, Counsel.
being ready thus to bait and taunt you. Oh you be so precise, and shall no
body be saved but you, and a few more? what is become of our forefathers, who
made no such ado, and yet I hope you will not say, but that they are saved?
and what shall become of Lords, Ladies, Gentlemen, many Ministers and learned
men, that do not thus, and of most part of the people? you will be wiser than
all your neighbors.

This is I confess no small thing to bear and resist. Many of good hopes have
from this a great let in their way. Some come flattering, some persuading by
worldly wisdom; and will be incensed to anger if you hearken not unto them.

If these prevail not, Persecution.
then they raise up Persecution, and as hard measure as the times and laws
will give leave.

No marvel then so few come to faith.

2. If any, Use.
will come to faith (which they must do, or else they shall never come to
Heaven) then make account to have lets enough, and to meet with an army of
Hindrances: and therefore provide your selves accordingly, and be courageous
and resolute; for if any thing will hinder you, you will never come to faith.

And let them in whom this true faith is, praise God, and wondering at his
gracious bounty make much of it. Let this be the second use, admiring his
mercy that he should help us through so many lets.

Let nothing hinder us from getting faith, for then we lose our souls,
therefore resolve to break through all, and bid the flesh, world, devil, stand
back, casting off fear, and favor, leaving off beloved sins, taking
pains, in the godly life, with the rest of this kind, which let and hinder
many, because they do not shake them off.

And know that if every of these lets be well weighed, they will appear to be
but toys, shows and fraybugges, and not of moment: we should therefore
break them off, as Sampson the cords, and take leave to save our souls. But
if we be tied by these as a drunken man is hanged many hours by a bush in his
path, it is a sign that we are left of God to be snared and taken: for they
that are of God stride over them, like David leap over a wall, and are content
rather to go alone to heaven, thah with company to hell. Yea though we meet
with Persecution, let it not hinder our Christian course, seeing all that will
live godly with Christ, must suffer persecution, and if we suffer with him, we
shall likewise reign with him, 2. Tim. 3. 12. and 2. 12.

But rather seeing God has given us so many helps, let us use them carefully,
and listen to Gods reasons which he uses to move us to faith, which be
weighty; as, his high esteem of it, his readiness to help, and the infinite
benefits that come to us by believing: and contrariwise the infinite
punishments that come upon unbeleevers both in this world, and the world to
come.

Every one of which reasons is sufficient to weigh down all that can be
objected to the contrary.

And so much of the lets and impediments of Faith: now it follows in the last
place that I entreat of the contraries of Faith, by which it is most opposed.

The contraries to Faith are Unbelief on the one side, Contraries to faith.
and Presumption on the other; for every virtue is in the midst between two
vices, as Christ between two thieves, as liberality between covetousness and
prodigality

So is this Faith between Unbelief which falls short, Unbelief.
and Presumption that shootes as far over. These be as two dangerous rocks,
and Faith sails safely to Heaven between them both. But most, split themselves
on the one or the other of these: one believes not where there is a promise,
the other believes where God never spoke. First I will speak of Unbelief,
which is when men believe not the Word of God; for Faith has respect unto the
Word, and builds upon it, and believes it, but Unbelief does not so.

Now as in Faith* there be three things, Knowledge, Assent, and Application,
or Apprehension; so there be three sorts of Unbelievers, some ignorant, not
knowing the will of God; some knowing, and not assenting to it, but denying it;
some knowing and assenting, and yet not particularly applying it to themselves.
And of these I will speak severally.

And first of the Ignorant, which be of two sorts; first such as have no
means of Knowledge: as Pagans, that live far out of the pale of the Church,
and from the sound of the Word, that never heard of the true God, of man's
misery, of Christ Jesus; these not knowing, cannot possibly believe. This is
one kind of unbeleevers who are under a woful^ necessity of perishing.

Ob. John 15. 22. If I had (...) come and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin.

Ans. That is, their sin had not been so great: or thus* They had some
cloak and color for their sin, as in the latter part of the verse. But now
they have no cloak for their sin. This Ignorance does not wholly excuse any,
partly because of the light which we have voluntarily lost in Adam; and
because it is Gods just judgment for their sins, that they have not the
Gospel. Those that have means, either less or more, either amongst the
Papists or our selves; and yet have no competent measure of knowledge of the
will of God; this is yet a thousand times greater sin, (...) b^ing affected
ignorance, 2 Pet. 3. 3. (...) person is but as a horse in a man's shape. An ox
or ass is better than he; for they know all they should or can, but so do
not they; therefore their end will be worse. It was unhappy for these, that
their lot fell to live in these times and places: for light being come into the
world, men should seek after it, and if they do not, their condemnation shall
be the greater. Let such know that ignorance is a thing that God hates and
forbids, Psalm. 32. 9. Be not like a horse or mule which have no
understanding, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 1. These. 4. 13. and complains of such, Isa.
1. 3. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib; but Israel does
not know, etc. and Isa. 28. 9. whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall
he make to understand doctrine? and oftentimes threatens to punish, rendering
this reason, Because they know not me, says the Lord. And again, God will
render vengeance against all that do not know him. (...) is the mother of all
errors and heresies, not (as the Papist falsely affirm and teach) the mother
of devotion; for if the people be blinded with ignorance, it is easy to make
them believe any lies.

Secondly, such as know the Word of God, but acknowledge not the truth of it,
but deny it: as jews and Turks that acknowledge the old Testament, and deny
the new, and Jesus Christ the sum of both: Papists that acknowledge Christ
but in part,, making him but a part of a Savior by joining partners with him
in all his offices.

Also Atheists and Epicures that deny all, God or Devil, Heaven or Hell, and
the immortality of the soul. The family of love that turn all the Scriptures
into an allegory, and so deny all, are also a cursed kind of unbeleevers.

So also all others that deny either the whole Scripture, or any fundamental
points of Religion, etc.

3. Such as know and acknowledge the whole Word of God, and every part of it to
be true, but apply none of it to themselves in particular, to yield obedience
thereto: and this is gross unbeleefe and enough to condemnation. As when men
believe in general the doctrine of man's misery, and acknowledge it true in
particular, but are not at all humbled hereby, or driven out of themselves:
That know the doctrine of salvation by Christ, and of Gods readiness to pardon
and save repentant sinners, and his promises to show mercy to all that seek it
aright, yet are not moved thereby to desire and seek Christ with the affection
as they ought to do

So also when men beleev^ the threatenings, in general against sin and
sinners; but (...) not particularly apply them (...) themselves, that hereby
they might be bridled from evil* Nor are moved by the promises to well doing
and a godly course, in general, or to this and that particular virtue or
duty, yet are nothing induced thereby to take up that course of godliness, or
the practice of this or that duty in their own lives.

This sin of Unbelief is often forbidden in Scripture, as by our Savior
Christ to Thomas, John 20. 27. Be not faithless, but believing. Heb. 3. 12.
Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbeleefe in
departing from the living God.

So the people are often reproached for it, Psalm. 106, 24. They believed not his
Word: and our Savior Christ does of rebuke it in his Disciples. Oh ye of
little faith, Math. 8. 20. and Luke 24. 25. Oh fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken. And this is a greater sin than the
world (...) aware of. Men think theft, murder, drunkenness to be heinous,
and indeed so they be; but unbeleefe is far worse: for it is the mother of
these and all other evils.

It was the first sin that crept into Eves heart, whereby Satan prevailed
over her when she begun to falter about the Word of God, making a
peradventure and doubt of that which God had peremptorily set down. And ever
since it is deeply rooted in our nature, and is the mother of all our other
sins; as contrariwise faith is of all obedience. Not to believe the mercy of
God in Christ, is the cause why (...) continue still in sin. As (...) belief
in the other promises for men not believing th^^ they be the Lords, and
cons^quently that he will present and provide for them; hen^ comes
covetuousnesse, and (...) unlawful courses of craft an^ violence, that
overflow an^ bear sway in all their actions; hence comes running to witches,
and using other unlawf^^ means in trouble, etc. or carnal confidence and
trusting in those means that are lawful. What sin can you name that comes
not from unbeleefe? It was the cause of all the Israelite murmuring, tempting
of God, disobedience, and persecuting the truth, as we see in the Apostles
example, 1. Tim. 1. 13.

This sin is woefully rooted in our nature, Old world.
as we see in the example of the old world, which had warning both by the
ministry of Noah, and also by those real Sermons of making the Arc, and
seeing Noah make provision, and lay in for all creatures, yea and when they saw
all creatures come to Noah and entered into the Arc, and yet for all this they
believed not that there should come a flood.

The like example we have in Lotts sons in law, Lots sons.
who when they were warned of the destruction of Sodom, they counted it as a
mock, an idle jest.

And this may also appear not only in the Egyptians who saw Moses and Aaron
come with such signs, Egyptians.
and then after with such plagues, and yet would not believe, that God was God,
and would have his people let go:

But even in the Israelites themselves, who discovered their notorious
unbelief, fre^ the first murmurings, wh^ Phar aoh increased their (...) them
and after they had see the signs from God by M^^ and Aaron, and for again the
red Sea, for all their mi^^^tie and miraculous delivera^^^* Aegypts first borne
smitten, (...) none at all dying or miscarry^^^ in Goshen, and after they (...)
seen many other signs. So^ gain after they had gone ^^^drie ground through
the re^^ Sea, yet if they wanted but^ little water, they murmured again, and
to Egypt they would, murmuring against Moses and Aaron. Was it, because there
were no graves there that you have brought us ou^ to kill us in the Wilderness
notwithstanding the Lords promise of bringing them into Canaan, and his
confirming it by so many miracles.

This also is plainly to be seen in the Jews notorious unbelief, (...)
when our Savior Christ came into the world, notwithstanding all the
Prophecies which foretold it, (...) all circumstances of it, as (...), place,
and manner, were ful^^^led in him. And though at (...) Baptism, a Dove
appeared and lighted upon him, and a voice from heaven was heard, saying, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. And notwithstanding
John's Testimony of our Savior Christ from time to time, and his own
miraculous works, such as none ever did; as casting out devils by his word,
stilling the Sea, healing desperate and old diseases by his sole word, yet for
all this and many other clear evidences of his divine nature, they hated and
persecuted him to death, as a Prince of ill doers. Yea though the Apostles by
their joint ministry, continued preaching of Jesus, yet would they not be
brought to believe in him; though also they had seen no small miracles at his
death, as the Sun darkened, the veil rent, the graves opened, the dead
raised. Yea this unbeleefe is not only in the wicked who far unto God, depart
from us for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, as it is Job. 21. 14.
and mutter and cavil against Gods service, saying;

It is in vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance? as it is Mal. 3. 14.

But there is also a root of it even in the children of God, as in David who
complained that his feet were almost gone, and that he had cleansed his heart
in vain, Psalm 73. 2. 13. and 1 Samuel 27. 1. doubted that he should (...) day
perish though he had a promise from God of the contrary: and in Zachary,
Luke 1. 18. and Thomas, Ioh. 20. 25.

Now the heinousness of this sin of unbeleefe hereby appears, in that it
defiles both our persons and all our actions: yea all Gods ordinances unto us
are defiled thereby.

In that also it is a sin most odious to God, Olious to God.
Heb. 10. 38. But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him. Where more is meant than spoken, after an Hebrew manner of speech, as
though he should say, I abhor all those that fall away through unbeleefe.

And this must needs be so; for as faith gives much glory to God, so unbeleefe
the contrary: Faith puts too the seal that God is true, unbelief makes, (with
reverence to his Majesty be it spoken) God a liar, seeing thereby men give no
credit to his word, but think his word to be wind, his threats but as fray
bugges, and his promises as nothing but bubbles and dissemblings.

Now if an honest man cannot endure, to be thought a liar, or dissembler (for
how will he plead with such a one as distrusts him?)

Nay, if Russians themselves count it such an indignity, as no less than the
stab is revenge enough, what may the Lord of heaven and earth do when such an
affront is offered unto him?

How hainously will it be taken by that Amen, that faithful and true
witness, abundant in goodness and truth, whose word is so firm, that Heaven
and earth shall fall, but not one jot of his word shall pass unaccomplished,
Mat. 5 18. whose word is not only a word of truth, but the truth it self, John
17. 17. who keeps covenant and mercy, and ever did; for whom did God ever
deceive? what promise has he broken? kept he not his word with Adam? and with
Abraham fulfilled diverse promises? as also with all the rest of his servants.
Whereof it is that his servants have always been so glad when they have got a
promise from God, as Nehe. 1. 5. 8.

Furthermore consider, Punished it.
that God has punished this sin from time to time. As in the old world
fearfully, in Lots two sons in law, the Jews in the Wilderness, who all
perished through unbelief, only Caleb and Joshua came into Canaan, who believed
and followed the Lord constantly; the rest, as it is in the Hebrews, were shut
out for their unbelief.

The lord also who would not give credit to the word of the Lord by the mouth
of the Prophet, perished in his unbeleefe, 2 Reg. 7. 19. 20. also the Jews
thirty four years after our Savior CHRIST'S time, what dreadful judgments
of God by the Romans, came upon them, as never was since the world begun? and
they lie under the judgment of God for the same till this day. So the Jews
not believing the word of the Lord by Jeremy, Ier. 44. 28. shall know whether
his word shall stand or theirs.

Yea God has not spared it in his own servants, as Moses and Aaron, who for
their unbelief were debarred from entering into the land of promise, Numb. 20.
and Zachary, Luke 1. was struck dumb because he believed not Gods word. Yea
the Lord has prepared a woeful place hereafter for the unbeleevers, Revel. 21.
8. that is, for those that sin through total unbeleefe; for there is great
odds between such, and those that showed unbelief in some particulars. So
that as this sin is odious and dishonorable to God, so most hurtful to our
selves. It hinders us from many a comfort and blessing, which we might else
have in this world. As our Savior Christ could not do many works among some
for their unbelief sake, Mark 6. 5. And our Savior Christ tells Martha,
John 11. 40. that she had almost lost the sight of that glorious work of
Lazarus his raising, by her unbelief.

Thus we lose the fruit of many a prayer through our unbelief; for we are
bidden when we pray, to believe and so we shall obtain, Mark. 11. And the
Word becomes unprofitable if it be not mixed with Faith, Heb. 4. 2. and so of
the holy Sacrament.

Yea it is damnable; for who so believes not is condemned already, John 3. 18.
and if ye believe not that I am he (says Christ) you shall dye in your
sins, John 8. 24. Much worldly grief, distrustful care, unlawful shifts,
come from unbeleefe* yea many make away themselves hereby, as we see in Judas:
and so many among our selves being in debt, or fear of shame or trouble, make
away themselves through their unbeleefe; and this also is the cause why most
flinch in time of persecution.

This condemns all these sorts of unbeleefe, Use.
and the whole world: for the whole world lies in unbeleefe. First, the Pagans
are under a necessity of perishing; for ignorance will not excuse them, because
God made man righteous at first, and is not now bound to give them knowledge.

So that to them God has showed severity, but to us bountifulness, if we have
grace to make good use of his bountifulness, else we may make our case seven
times worse than theirs. Our duty is to pray unto God to send his Word among
them, that they may come to the knowledge of the truth, and so be saved. And a
happy thing it were if men would so do, and use all other good means to bring
any such to the saving knowledge of God and his truth. If they had but half
the mind to it, that they have for back and belly, it would not be hard to
effect it. But especially woe be to those that have means, and yet be
ignorant. These love darkness more than light, and so they heat the furnace
seven times hotter for themselves. Many such do swarm amongst us, who are
ready to excuse their ignorance by saying that they be not bookelearned, and
that they have other business: and these in their fond conceits be sufficient
excuses for them; but let such know, that God will pull off these fig leaves.

2. This also condemns such as deny the truth of God and the Gospel, even
Jesus Christ, as Turks and Jews wholly, and Papists that do so in part. For
such we must pray unto God that he will take the veil from before their
eyes, and cause the light of his truth to shine unto them, and thank God for
our selves, etc. And the like duty we must perform for all other Heretics
and damnable unbeleevers. And so also we must return unto God thanks and
praise for our selves, who has not only caused the light of his truth to
shine unto us, but also has opened our eyes to see and discern it.

3. It also condemns the third sort, which so swarm among our selves, that
there are few others to be found. This nation is an unbeleeving and unfaithful
nation: for universally though people acknowledge the truth, both of Law and
Gospel, yet are they moved with neither, nor driven out of themselves, and
humbled by the hearing the doctrine of their misery, nor allured to seek mercy
as they ought by the doctrine of the Gospel. The threatenings against sin
denounced never so fearfully, yet keep them not from their wicked ways, nor
the promises made to godliness, provoke and encourage them to goodness. Who is
moved at any of these? but though they know them, yet they do as they list.
But let all such take notice of the many threatenings against sin and wicked
ways in general, Psalm. 1. 6. Psalm. 9 and 11. But alas, the most men are so
far from laying these threatenings to heart, that notwithstanding they have
seen execution of these threatenings upon others, yet they dare live in the
same sins. As for example in the sins of Sodom, which were punished with
fire and brimstone from heaven. So of the people of Israel, for which they were
carried into captivity, Exodus 30. 16. So of our brethren of the Palatinate and
Bohemia at this time. Thus when God has threatened heavy judgments against
particular sins, yet men are not moved thereby, but securely and
presumptuously continue in them: as the threats against the breach of the
Sabbath, Exodus 34. Ierem. 17. 27. so against adultery, Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. But alas, how few are made to stand in
awe, and to keep from these sins, or are brought to repentance for them, but
run on still as the horse rusheth to the battle?

So the promises made in general to the ways of godliness, Deuteronomy. 29.
as Psalm. 128. 1. Psalm, 112. 1. and so to particular virtues, as to Faith,
Patience, Constancy, to diligence in Prayer, to Liberality to the poor,
especially the Saints, yet who are encouraged hereby to the practice of these
virtues and Christian duties? No, notwithstanding we have had means of Faith
so long, yet who will believe our report? how few are brought to true Faith in
Christ Jesus? notwithstanding that God has set seals to his Word by mercies
and punishments on the Land. May we not therefore fear that some judgment
cannot be far of, as that God will snatch away his Word and bestow it on some
other people which will bring forth better fruits of it, Romans 11 10. For if God
spared not his own people in former times, how can we hope that he will spare
us? Deuteronomy. 32 20. If a man promise to help us in time of our danger, oh it
comforts us grealy: But Gods promises in his Word give us not the like
contentment. If we have not a pawn we trust not God, but are ready to fly out
one way or other. And for every particular unbeleefe, let us labor to make all
men see the grossness of their sin, that trust God no further than they see
or feel him. Such sin more heinously than they be aware of, seeing no less
than condemnation is the end of all unbeleevers.

Let all men therefore be persuaded to labor to get this bitter root to be
stubb'd up, and to be instant in prayer unto God to do it for us. For it is
God only that must root it out, or else it will never be done. To which end
let us know that it were better that ratts baine were in our belly than this in
our hearts. And therefore let us shame our selves for it, and strive against it.

First consider the heinousness of the sin, the dishonor to God, the hurt
to our selves.

Consider again the infallible and unchangeable truth of God; and the
experience that others and we our selves have had of it. For if we look into
the holy Scriptures we shall find that God has fulfilled his threatenings
against the wicked, and does daily in our times: and also his promises to his
servants. Have not the damned in hell and many of our companions found God to
be true in his threatenings, and yet will not this make unbeleeve? which of us
but has found God just of his promise? and more we should if we had marked the
same; yea let the servants of God labor earnestly against this; for oh what a
root is in us still? alas how poor is our faith? how great is our unbeleefe?
If trouble arise we are dashed by and by; if we have means, oh how jolly are
we? but if not, or weak, then how soon are we nipt in the head? How weak
are we in the maine promise, and so in the other? oh how it offends God? oh how
it hinders us? oh what hurt comes of it even to his best servants, who have
smarted for it! and how shall we do for Faith enough to abide the fiery
trial and days of persecution?

Now we are to consider also of the other extreme, Presumption.
Presumption, which shootes over as far as the other comes short, as being very
bold and confident where there is no ground or promise.

As when men presume, and make themselves sure they shall be saved, that if
room shall want in heaven, the Prophets and Martyrs must come out to give them
room, and yet did never look one step toward Faith, were never humbled,
lost, sick, never felt hunger, thirst, and never found will to part with their
lusts to buy the pearl. Now howsoever God has made promise of mercy to such,
yet to no other; nay he has plainly spoken the contrary, namely, that he came
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mat. 9. 13.

Again, men are presumptuous when they are confident, they shall be saved
though they live in some known sin or sins, and do as others do,
especially if they be civil honest men, though they have no dram of religion
in them to Godward, no knowledge, faith, or saving grace, when as God has
spoke no such thing, nay the contrary, as 1 Cor. 6. 10. Be not deceived,
neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, etc. shall
inherit the kingdom of God.

So also when they think that they shall do well enough though they walk
after the stubbornness of their own heart: As the Scribes and Pharisees, who
presumed that they were in good estate, because they had Abraham to their
Father, but John called them a generation of vipers, and our Savior Christ
told them that the ^^vel was their father So when ^^en cry the Temple of the
lord, and presume because it is ^^ong them; that they may do ^ell enough
howsoever they ^^ve in known sins, Ier. 7. 4. 9. ^^ey are like those among the
^^eople of Corinth, whom the ^postle bids not to be deceived, c. 1 Cor. 6. 10.

When men (also for outward things) are very confident, as ^^at God will
provide for them, ^hey are sure they shall never ^ant: very confident also in
their journeyes, to buy and sell and get gain; and they doubt ^ot of it, ^am.
4. 13.

So when women are confident in their travel, and in the mean time have no
cause nor any ground at all, as having no care to walk in the fear of God,
and in his ways, whereas to such only as thus do all Gods promises are made.
And therefore they which do no such thing have just cause rather to expect his
wrath and fearful judgments. God said to Abraham, Walk before me and be
upright, Genesis 17. 1. and then, I am God all-sufficient. And, no good thing
shall be wanting to them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84. 11. And, such as
fear God shall lack nothing that is good. And, Psalm. 34. 9. 10.
be knows to deliver the Righteous out of trouble; and how to give an issue
to the temptation that they may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. and yet
none are so confident for these things, as they that have least right to them.

Also it is great presumption when men are bold to commit sin, because God is
merciful, and to put off their repentance, because though their state be not
good, yet it shall be well enough, and as well as the best for God is
merciful, and they will call to him for mercy, and he will hear them
whenever they call (from which presumptuous sins David prays to be kept
and preserved. Psalm. 19. 12.) when yet he says the contrary, Mat 7. 21. and
Prove. 1. 28. as we see in the example of Esau, and the foolish Virgins.

Thus also men presume when they think that they can repent when they list,
when yet the Scripture tells us in Timothy, that it is God that must give us
a heart to embrace repentance, and to come out of the snare of the devil, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and that we cannot of our selves so much as think a good thought,
1 Cor. 3. 5.

Now this is a most foolish sin for men to build without a foundation, to
challenge to themselves that which nothing pertains to them, to gather and
take up that, that was never laid down for them; for men to be so bold as to
man new ways to heaven, and ^ make new Scriptures, which God never thought of,
nor ev^^ it entered into his heart.

If this be presumption, (...) a heinous sin, Use.
then God be merciful to the land of England; for it is a presumptuo^^ Nation,
and a bold, and the without any warrant from God. They think most i^ England
shall be saved. It (...) the voice of Ministers and people. For do not many
Ministers every where admit all i^ their Parishes to the Lord Supper, good and
bad, beleeve^ and unbeleevers, whether prepared or unprepared? now he that is a
worthy Communica^^ (as none else ought to come to the Lords table) shall be
sure t^ be saved, as having right (...) Christ.

And are not the people lik^ wise when Ministers teach, (...) shall be saved
and most perish, ready to say this is true in respect of Infidells and Turks,
but yet the most in England shall be saved. And indeed if you should go into
all parishes, even the rudest and most ignorant, and g^e^ from the Chancell to
the Bellfree, and ask them if they be not persuaded they shall be saved; is
there any almost make any doubt but that all sorts, ignorant persons, civil
persons, profane worldlings, hypocrites, all shall be saved? And if any in
some places make doubt, it is but a small number that have least cause; but for
the rest, either they are persuaded their case is good already, or else at
least they can make it good when they list, for when they have but a mind to
hold up the finger, and call to God for mercy, they are sure of it. So that all
be assured. But upon what acquaintance I pray you? and where and what be your
grounds? Nay then you must pardon them, for either they have none, or as good
as none; they hope God did not make them to damn them; and that they have not
led their life so ill to be damned. Also they are well thought of by their
neighbors; and they have great crosses in this world, and therefore they shall
have joy in another. Or else they are ready to say contrariwise, that they
thrive in the world, and therefore are beloved of God, seeing he bestows on
them such blessings. And I pray where did God say these should be saved that
be thus? They must get to heaven by strong hand whether God will or not, or
else come in and God not know it; for none shall come there with his good will,
but such as come according to his Word.

And whereas they say that God is merciful; It is true; but yet let them know
that some have found him just too, and so shall they also: for of all others,
presumptuous persons are the furthest off.

Also this Land is wonderful bold, and confident against all enemies and
dangers: Tush (say the most) we have peace with all Nations, and if we should
have any enemies, yet we need not to care for any, if we be true within our
selves. Also God has defended this Nation these sixty years, as in eighty
eight, and at the Kings coming in, and from the powder treason, and so he
will do still, we have no fear.

I acknowledge it to be true, that God had mercy on this Nation formerly, when
it had less means, and more truth of heart to profit by them:

But does that follow, because he has done so, therefore he will do so still,
especially now when as the Nation grows worse and worse; for as the means and
mercies of God abound, so the abominations of our Nation abound more and more:
as horrible contempt of God and his Word, profanation of his holy name, and
Sabbaths, drunkenness, whoredom, oppression, contempt of Gods servants,
hating the ways of God, and calling it Puritanisme when men make conscience to
walk in them. Yet we think our selves so happy as having such a godly King,
wise Council, learned Clergy, and safe from all danger. And therefore though
God call to fasting, we fall to feasting, masking, plays, wherein religion
and the professors thereof are gybed at and derided. Isai. 22. 12. we live in
the same sins that Sodom was destroyed for, and yet rest secure, and cry
peace; and in which the Jews lived, and for which they were carried captive, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. and yet we bless our selves, as if we were in no danger: yea
we are greater sinners than our brethren in Germany, and yet what desolations
are sent upon them? though we in the mean time for the same and worse sins
are not moved to fear. But like sins will bring like punishments, Levit. 18.
28. And therefore what can be expected but Gods heavy punishments, when as men
are grown so impudently profane, as to make plays against all that in
sincerity of heart make conscience of serving God, under the odious name of
Puritans? and when as others also take delight in seeing and hearing them.

May we not rather fear to speed as Joshua, and the Israelites who when they
had conquered Jericho, next morning have up to do the like to Ai, making no
doubt of victory; but when they came there, they were put to flight before
their enemies, and thirty slain, to the great grief of Joshua and the people.
And why? there was sin among them, that weakened and betrayed them. So we
being like them in respect both of their sins and vain confidence have just
cause to expect the like issue. Or as Sampson who telling his harlot, that if
he were thus and thus bound, he should be weak, and when the Philistims
came, he rouzed up himself, and brake all, contemning all their power and
attempts, because he knew his own great strength. But at last when he brake
covenant with God, and told her his strength was in his vow to God of a
Nazarite, and if he were shorn he should become as weak as another man;
then she having cut off his hair and brought in the Philistims, he thought to
have got away as at other times; but all in vain: for now his strength is
gone, and he so faint, that he falls into their hands, and is constrained to
grind without his eyes and become a scorn to all his enemies, whereas if he
had been truer to God, he would have preserved him from all these miseries.

So when any danger comes we may think to escape, and do as before, but we
may hap to be deceived. There is too much sin amongst us, and breach of
covenants with God, that he should defend and deliver us as in times past. The
Lord awaken us, that we may see our sins, and labor to prevent his
judgments by speedy repentance God calls us out of our sins, by his yearly
afflictions, by the great troubles of our brethren, and wastings of other
Churches; to fasting and prayer: but lo the contrary, joy and gladness,
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine, etc. Isa. 22.
12.

But let us take heed, that we hear not the like doom from God which he
denounced against them: Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till
you dye, says the Lord of Hosts; So Isa. 28. 15.

Furthermore, let us take notice of diverse other parts of presumption, as to
think our selves happy, and the Lords, when as we never look one step
toward Faith, or to attain any part in Christ; to think we shall be saved,
and that we be good Christians, though we live in some known sin.

But think thou indeed to be saved? yea, art thou so sure of it that none
can put thee down? and yet walk thou after thine own hearts lusts? why
know, that the Lord who is truth it self, has said that he will not be
merciful to these men that shall bless themselves in their heart, saying, I
shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst: but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke
against them, and all the curses written in Gods book shall lie upon them, and
the Lord shall blot out their name from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.

Also do you live in sin, and defer repentance, and think to do well
enough, because God is merciful, when yet many of your predecessors have
found and do now in hell find him a just God? Again, dare you presume that
God will be at your call, whenever you hold up the finger, when as you see
that Esau and the foolish virgins found it contrary; yea when as you hear God
himself professing, Prove. 1. 24. 28. that he will laugh at their destruction,
who have not hearkened to his voice, calling them to repentance: and that shall
be the help they shall have in the time of their need. Thou that reckonest
without thy host must reckon twice, and once in hell as it is to be feared, if
thou thou changest not thy course. No, Friend, no: If such as thou art be
saved, God must make new Seriptures first, which he will not do to pleasure
thee. How dare any presume to live in many sins, and yet hope? when as they
see how God cast out the Angels from heaven into utter chains for one fault;
so Adam and Eve out of Paradise for one sin; and so severely corrected Moses
and Aaron for one fail at Meribah. Nay our Savior Christ found him a just
God, when he stood as our surety. Thou preparest a back way, and make gates
of thine own to heaven, and promisest great matters to thy self, but God never
said any such thing: Oh vain Fool! And thou look for great things from God
which be promised in his Word, but never look to the conditions to be
fulfilled on thy part: as if a man should occupy a man's land and take all the
profits, and never think of paying any rent; but such are worthy to be turned
out to lie in the streets. Again know, that many dye upon presumption to one
of desperation; Also that it is great madness to presume they can repent when
they list; and therefore put it off, when they be called unto it, seeing the
Scripture tells us that we be dead in sin, and that we cannot think a
good thought: and surely it is to be feared, that God will not give them
repentance at last, that have despised it all their lives.

There are thousands that make no doubt when they live, and at their death, but
that they shall go to heaven, who yet are no sooner dead, but the devil takes
possession of their souls. But because there is some seeming similitude
between Faith and this Presumption, I will set down some differences between
the one and the other: for they differ as much as a rotten post gilded over,
does from a thing of mus^ sie and pure gold.

1. Faith has a ground from the Word of God, and believes because God speaks;
presumption has no such ground, but only self conceit, the pride of his own
heart, which makes him think that, that is not, and because he has got such a
thing in his head; and therefore he is as a man that dreams that he eats,
and when he awaketh is still an hungered.

2. Faith proceeds from knowledge going before; for a man cannot believe what
he knows not: but presumption is joined with ignorance oftentimes, and the
more ignorant the more bold, according to the old Proverb, None so bold as
blind bayard. For if they knew the law of God, the nature of God and
themselves, they could not be so bold.

3. Faith proceeds from some measure of true humiliation, and from seeing and
feeling his own miseserable estate. Presumption knows no humiliation, but
proceeds from a good conceit of their own righteousness, as the Pharisee,
and the yongue man in the Gospel, Laodicea, etc.

4. Faith is gotten with difficulty, and by many steps it is come unto.
Presumption is bred with a man, and it never cost him any labor in seeking,
striving, hearing, prayer, conference, but comes at ease, and at once. And yet
if presumption be any Faith (as they that have it conceit it is) it is a very
strong Faith; for it is very confident, and yet got at once and at ease: the
which is proof enough against it; for base things grow apace, but things of
worth more slowly. Presumption like Ionahs gourd comes up in a night: Ill weeds
grow with speed.

5. Faith is joined with doubting both in the working of it, and after: for the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and there is a continual combat between
them in the believer and the regenerate man, and the devil opposes the Faith
of such a one; therefore they are not soon settled, but are like a man cast
into the sea, who swimming toward a rock is beat back often with waves.
Presumption never had any doubting, they never doubted of Gods good will in
their lives, they thank God, and would be loath now to begin; yea they wonder
at a number of fools that cannot believe, seeing there are many who are never
troubled with any doubtings, nor know not what they mean. But let such know to
their small comfort that the reason hereof is (...) the strength of their
Faith, but because being wholly carnal, corruption fights not against
corruption, and because the devil is no enemy to presumption, but helps it
forward, Vide Negus, cap. 17. Act. 15.


6. Faith purifieth the heart and reformeth the life, Heb. 10. 22.
abandoning the love of al and every sin; 1. Tim. 1. 5
for it believes and applies Christ, not only for justification and
Redemption, but for Sanctification also. A thief desires only a pardon for his
faults, but not for good laws for better ordering of his life. So a
presumptuous person desires to have the pardon of sin, without any desire to
leave and forsake it. The presumptuous man has a corrupt heart, that repents
of no sin, though it refrain from some; some it lives in, what it likes
best; some in the second Table, but many shamefully cold and careless in the
first. Faith as it looks for, and challenges mercy from God, so it is
careful to return thankfulness and obedience to him again: but presumption
looks for all from God, but never thinks of keeping conditions on his part.
As Faith applies Christ to it self, so it gives himself to Christ again:
but the presumptuous or temporary do not so. As Herod gave himself not to
Christ, but to Herodias; Judas not to Christ, but to the bag, etc.

7. Faith goes like a Lady attended with a long train of virtues, as love to
God, to men, especially the Saints, patience, temperance, etc.

Presumption goes like a ragamuffian without any such companion; for you shall
see diverse of these that show neither true love to God nor men, especially the
Saints, that presume more than any other.

8. Faith feeling it self weak, and much opposed by unbeleefe, and set upon
by Satan, is careful to cling to the means of the Word, Prayer, Sacrament,
that it may get more strength and increase. But Presumption cares little for
the means: a sermon or none, one or two, all is one, and the Sacrament only at
Easter, neglects the repetition of the sermons, or prayer, yea it thinks on
no such matter, nay the less the better, yea especially it never uses any
stirring or searching means, but the less they use such means, the stronger
is their persuasion, howsoever sometimes coming to the means, they have a
little unsettled and disturbed their thoughts. Faith is the stronger for means:
presumption is the stronger for want of the true means indeed, not using any
more than their own devotions and blind superstition.

9. Faith abides even in affliction, in sickness, trouble, loss of friends,
goods, and health, etc. for it sees God still as a merciful father, even when
he frowns, and can kiss his afflicting hand. Also it holds up its head in
some measure (though not without conflicts) in times of persecutions and
oppositions. But Presumption fails at such times, and one prick of a pin
will let out this blown bladder. It is nipt in the head in time of trouble,
and becomes like a stone as Nabal, or sometimes being awaked out of his false
confidence, it falls into the contrary extreme, even to despair: As Job
says, Will he call upon God at all times so say I, Will he believe at all
times? And in time of persecution his great brags come to nothing, but turns
plain craven, as we see in Peter for a season. Though all men deny thee, yet
will not I: I will go to prison and dye with thee, etc. yet see what it came
to: But prevailingly and deadly, see it in Doctor Pendletons example. Act. and
Mon.
Faith makes no have out of trouble by any unlawful means: presumption cares
not much how nor by what means deliverance comes, so they be out of their
trouble.

By these let every one of us try our selves, that true believers may receive
comfort; and those that presume may be humbled in the want of true faith, to
wit, such as are bold, without ground, get it at ease, and show no fruits,
would have all from God, but return nothing to him again in token of
thankfulness. It is presumption, the devil and your selves, who have beguiled
you. If you look not better to it, and get a better foundation, your conceits
like a Castle of comedownes will lie in your neck, and press you to hell.

And because thou presumest upon mercy by late repentance, and crying, Lord
have mercy upon me, know, that thousands be now in hell for this trick: for
though God has promised mercy to the humble, yet not to the presumptuous; and
that many such as presume have not had so much time, or if they had, yet God
has pronounced that not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall be accepted
of him, Mat. 7. 22.

Having almost finished this Treatise of Faith, How to live by Faith.
I think meet to add yet one thing as very needful, to wit, how we may use
our faith, and what benefit we may make of it, which is not only to have it,
and to be saved by it when we go hence, but to live by it here: for we may
have use of it at every turn, in every estate we are or may be in, and in
all things that we go about: which is not known or practiced (not only not
of the world wh^^ have no faith) but even of many Christians that have it, and
yet know not to use it, and s^^ it on work in every thing (...) they ought;
and thereby li^^ the worse, and have less comfort. As a man that has a weapon
but no skill in handling it, who may be wounded by his adversary for all that.
And as a man may have an herb in his garden, and yet not knowing the use of
it, may endure a great deal a pain, whereas by the right use of it he might
have eased himself of his grief and sores.

This is called Living by Faith, which is a thing required by God of his
people, Hab. 2. 4. where God having threatened judgment against the Jews by
the Babylonians, does afterward promise deliverance again, but not yet.

What then (may one say) shall become of the people of God in the mean time?
They shall live by Faith, and depending upon God, wait for the ^ccomplishment
of his graci^us promises, The just man shall not only live eternally by ^is
faith, but even here also in his life they shall live by faith, and that a
comfortable life notwithstanding many troubles, ^^at they are subject here to
^eet with.

This living by faith is to feed upon the several promises of ^od made in his
Word, and to ^pply them to our own selves, according to all our needs, and
^uphold comfort, and encou^age our selves, against temp^tion and unto every
good duty. ^ore plainly and fully thus. ^od has made promises in his lord to
us of all sorts, most ^recious and comfortable, which he would have us to
^^leeve and depend on, and that will make our lives comfortable.

For the Lord knowing that our lives have many difficulties, temptations,
duties to be performed, and that we are to meet with many crosses, has
(purposing to help us in all these, as alas else we shall fall short) made us
promises of his aid, assistance, protection, and deliverance, that we might
believe and wait, till we see the accomplishment of them; which if we
believe, they shall be fulfilled in due time to our comfort; but if we believe
them not, we lose the benefit of them. God has made promises of all kinds of
things spiritual, temporal, and eternal. Spiritual, as that he (...)
forgive our sins, and remember our iniquities no more; Ier. 31. 34 that we
shall be all taught of Go^ and have his Law written in (...) hearts, that if
we ask the (...) Ghost, he shall he given us; Luk 11. 13. that his grace
shall be sufficient for us; 2 Cor. 12. 13. that he will never depart from us,
and that he will put his fear in our hearts, that we shall never depart from
him, Ier. 33. 42. that he will be with us to the worlds end, Math. 28. 20.
and that he will finish the work he has begun, Phil. 1. 6.

And some of these promises he has made to all Christians, some particularly
to some sorts; as to the hungry, that they shall be satisfied, Math. 5. 6. to
the weary, that they shall be refreshed, and to mourners that they shall be
comforted, Luke 4. 18. Mat. 11. 28.

So to this and that virtue, as to faith, they that believe shall not perish,
but have eternal life. Ioh. 3. 16. They that trust in the Lord shall never be
moved or confounded, Psalm. 125. 1.

To obedience, see the innumerable promises, Deuteronomy. 28. and Levit. 26. besides
elsewhere. To patience, that the patient abiding of the righteous shall be
gladness, Proverbs. To perseverance, he that holds out to the end shall be
saved, Math. 24. 13. they that be faithful to the death, shall have the
crown of life, Apoc. 2. 10. To uprightness, Psalm. 84. 11.

To the fear of God there are also innumerable promises, and to them that love
God.

Also to every good duty, as to the hearing the word, that wheresoever two or
three he gathered together, there Christ will be in the midst of them, Math.
18: To prayer, whatsoever we ask according to his will and in his Sons name
shall be granted, 1 Ioh. 5. 14. Ioh. 16. 23.

To meditation, conference, and to the use of the Sacrament, that God will be
with us, blessing our labors.

Of temporary things, as, both preservation from all evil things, as, he
will keep his under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 91. 2. 3. watch over and
preserve us as the Apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8. That also he will give his
Angels charge of us to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91. 11. That he will
save us in the fire and ^he water, that they shall not burne^ drown us, Esa.
43. 2. And giving of good things, God will not fail us nor forsake us, Heb.
13. 5. and that all these things shall be ministered unto us, Math. 6. 33. that
those who fear God shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34. 10. that we
shall eat the fruit of their labors, Psalm. 128. 1.

Yea in our troubles and afflictions, that he will lay no more on us than he
will enable us to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13. but will give an issue with the
temptation; that all things shall work together for our good, Romans 8. 28. that
he will deliver us out of them in due time, Psalm. 34. 19. Great are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all, etc. He will
deliver us in six troubles, and the seventh shall not hurt us, Job 5. 19
Call upon me in time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise
^ee, Psalm. 50. 15. Thus also he has made to the faithful promises of heavenly
and eternal things, as, that after the labors of this life ended, he will
translate our souls to his heavenly Kingdom: This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. And this is employed in the Parable, where the Angels
carry up Lazarus soul into heaven, Luk.16. He that overcomes shall inherit
all things, and shall sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am
set down with my father on his throne, Apoc. 3. 21. Also of a glorious
resurrection of our bodies, Who shall change our vile body, and make it like to
his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. It is sown in corruption, but shall be raised
in incorruption, 1. Corinthians. 15. 42. Also of eternal life in both soul and
body after the day of judgment, as in 1. These. 4. 17. Then we shall be ever
with the Lord. And Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you. John 10. My sherpe hear my voice, and I give them
eternal life, and will raise them up at the last day.

There be general promises to all that fear God, and particular promises to
some kinds of persons, as to them that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, Matthew. 5. 11. to the orphans, widows, strangers. There be absolute
promises, and promises conditional. Conditional be the promises of things
temporal, which God will fulfill to his children, as shall stand with his
glory and their best good. Absolute promises are they of things spiritual and
eternal, to wit, that he will not fail to give so much grace to his, as
shall be sufficient for their salvation, and at last eternal life.

Also there be direct promises in the Scripture, and promises by consequent.
The direct we have heard, as that which was made to Abraham of a son, Genesis
18. also to Paul, that not one in the ship should lose his life, Act. 27. By
consequent, as thus. If we find any promise made to one godly man in
Scripture, and no special reason expressed why it should be peculiar to him,
then we may take it as a promise made to us, as being also the children of
God. Thus the Apostle, Heb. 13.5. dissuading from coveteousnesse, uses a
reason from a promise which was made to Joshua, I will not fail thee; but yet
pertaines to all Gods people.

2. Whenever we see that any of Gods people have prayed for any good things,
and been heard, if it were not peculiar to them, we may take it as a promise
to us, and look for the sames as David Psalm. 22. 4. encourages himself to
speed, Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them, they trusted
in thee, and were not confounded, they prayed to thee, and were delivered.

5. Whenever we see God has done any thing for his children (which was not
peculiar) we should expect that he will do the like to us; for God loves all
his children, and whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, Romans 15.
4. Thus Saint James exhorting to patience in trouble, uses Jobs example, Iam.
5. 11.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord,
meaning that we shall have such an end too, if we be patient as he was.

Now then God having made such excellent and sweet^ promises of all kinds, our
part is to believe and apply them to ourselves, and they shall be fulfilled to
our comfort.

And thus are we to do for our spiritual or temporal life, and also for our
eternal. For our spiritual life, for our salvation, our sanctification, and
perseverance therein, and the means thereof; for in all these stands our
spiritual life, and we have promises of every of these, which if we believe,
we shall have a spiritual and comfortable life.

As first for my salvation; When I believe still, and every day hold fast this,
that I am the Lords (so I awake as the Lords to day as well as yesterday, and
so lie down at night, knowing that once the Lords and ever the Lords, and that
whom be loves, be loves them to the end) therefore (I say) I hold fast (by
leading a godly life, and renewing my repentance and my covenant with God) the
persuasion that I am still the Lords, as he has before received me to mercy,
and his mind varieth and changes not. This is to live by faith in one part,
and what a comfort is this still to hold fast my faith? And that not only when
I feel the favor of God, but when all seems contrary, yet then to believe
still, is to live by faith; so that whatsoever temptation of Satan, or my own
unbeleefe, or want of feeling comes in the way, yet to hold out this shield
of faith to quench the fiery darts of all Satan's temptations, this is to live
by faith.

So in the matter of my sanctification I have great use of my faith, to further
me therein, both for the avoiding of evil and doing good. For I must do this
or that duty, because I know its the will of God, and not do the contrary,
because its forbidden, not for this or that sinister reason.

First for the resisting of evil, as mine own strong corruptions; these must
be mastered: but how? I must resist and strive against them: but when as I may
think and feel I shall never prevail over them, then I must live by faith,
grounded on Gods promises, as, God has said his grace shall be sufficient.
And this with such promises will encourage us to set against them, when by
faith we believe that God has promised, and will help us, and bless our
labors; or else we shall resist with no courage. So again we must resist
the devil. Yea but what likelihood is there that we should prevail, he being
as he is, and we as we be? Has God made no promise to help in this case?
Yes, he has said, Resist the devil and he shall fly from you, Iam. 4. 7.
So for the world (which we have to oppose) God has told us, that greater who
that is in us, than he that is in the world, 1. Io. 44 Now we resisting thus
by faith in assurance of victory, shall fight the more comfortably: so that if
the flesh object and say. I know not how I can escape being carried away of the
world; the answer hereunto is, Live by faith. So for doing the contrary good;
God calls for many duties at our hands: as from the Magistrate, Minister,
Householder; how shall we do these duties, seeing we have no power? live by
faith: for has not God said, fear not, I will be with thee, as to Moses,
Exodus 3. and 4. so to Jeremy, cap. 1. Say not I am a child, for thou shall go
to all that I shall send thee.

So that here is use of our faith, to encourage us to go about any duty God
calls for of us; seeing he will enable us to it.

So to the duty of mercifulness, or any such, God has promised not to forget
our labor of love, which we have showed toward his name, in that we have
ministered to the Saints, and do minister; but will reward the same both in
this world and the world to come, Heb. 12. 6.

So for defending the truth against cavillers, or before Rulers. Alas I cannot
tell what to say, I shall shame all. Fear not but live by faith. God has
said, it shall be given thee in that same hour what thou shall speak, Math.
20. 19. and, I will give, thee a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainesay or resist, Luke 21. 15. But I may be called to
suffer persecution ere I dye, and alas I feel no fitness nor ability to
endure the fiery trial. Well, care not for to morrow; do the present duties
which God requires, and spend thy time well, and then leave that to God, and
live by faith: he will give us strength whose power is perfected in our
weakness.

So for perseverance in our Christian course, how shall we do this, we see no
strength in our selves nor likelihood that we shall hold out, but have cause
rather to fear the contrary; for there are so many adversaries which daily
oppose us, that they may hinder us in our course?

And again such grievous sickness, long pain, and trouble, as I may easily
sink or be impatient. Care not for hereafter, which is a sin as well in
spiritual as temporal things, but let us commend our selves to God, assuring
our selves that he who has begun his good work will finish it.

So for the means of grace, as using the Word, Sacrament, prayer, meditation,
conference, here is great use of faith; for what heart can we have to use these
means, but when we by faith use them, believing that God will bless them to
us, for right ends and increase of his graces? for he that blesses
mens-outward labors, will not be wanting to our spiritual endeavors. This
heartens us to take pains in them, yea when we have felt no benefit by them
for a time, yet to, believe and wait, and use them still: So that though
Satan persuade us to forbear them, saying, Thou gettest no good by them, but
rather aggravates thy sin, and increasest thy condemnation. Well, yet I will
use them, seeing God has promised to be with them that use them carefully. If
I go by Sea or Land in great danger, oh what shall I do? live by faith in
Gods promise of protection, in all thy ways, as Ezra 8. 25. and 31. compared:
so Jacob when he heard that Esau was coming against him; prayed, believed,
and went on.

For our temporal life, here is also great use of faith: daily it is
requisite, that every one have a Calling, in which to live and serve Gods
providence for his maintenance. Now it is requisite first, that we be sure
that our Calling be a lawful Calling.

Secondly, that it be our calling, and not another into which we have
intruded our selves; for then if it be an unlawful calling or not our
calling, we can look for no blessing. But if we have our calling from God,
and walk in it with a good conscience, then may we first assure our selves of
Gods protection, who will care for us himself, and has given his Angels
charge to keep us in all our ways, and therefore may be comforted whether
we be at home or abroad, on horseback or on foot: in respect of our selves,
night and day that God will watch over us, and no ill shall fall out; and for
our change also and family in our absence, so long as we are called by God to
be from them, as the Lord promised, Exodus 34 23. 24.

So for success in our lawful businesses, when we have used the means, and
commended the same to God by prayer, we should live by faith, and take no
carking care for the event, for this is to overload our selves needlessly and
vainly; and it is Gods part, which we ought not to incroach upon, but leave
it to the ordering and disposing of his wise providence, and being assured that
he will give that success that shall be best, we should rest in this, and
quiet our selves.

So when we are about a bargain, we should use the best and wisest lawful
means we can, and then commit it to God, and so be at rest, and avoid those
scorns that the world pull upon themselves, pining themselves with care, and
casting in their heads, and breaking their sleep: Oh but how if I should not
have this bargain, if any should come between ^e and home; if the party
should not be at home when I send, or will not stand to his word? how if this
and that should come between and hinder my bargain? So for time to come, we
must leave that to God, failing of no lawful means, but yet using them
without any carking care. How shall I do if I should be lame* when I am old,
or when my lease is out? live by faith, and God will provide against all these
doubts and difficulties.

So for our children; how shall my children do for maintenance? let us go as
far as we can, and leave the rest to God who is all-sufficient to provide for
them, and to perfect all that wherein we are defective. And this we shall find
to be a great quietness to our minds. So when crosses come, there is great
use of our faith. The Lord has thus disposed of it, ^e will turn all to good,
and lay no more upon me than he will enable me to bear, and make a good end
in his due time. And so whether we have means or none, little or great, yet
let us live by faith, having the promise of a strong, merciful, and just God,
and not limit the Lord for the time of our deliverance, nor for the means
whereby we shall be delivered, but leave it to him, depending upon him, who
has said he will not fail nor forsake any of his, and if they call on him in
their trouble, he will deliver them. And so be patient and wait without
discomfort or breaking out into murmuring and impatiency; yea still wait,
though help come not by and by, and so soon as thou expectest and desire.
So also in respect of our eternal life, we must live by Faith, namely, that
we shall one day come to it, and herewith encourage our selves in our
painful labors, and all the crosses of this life, knowing and believing that
heaven will pay for all, and that our momentary and light afflictions shall be
abundantly recompensed by that eternal weight of glory which they cause unto
us.

In the end of our life we have also need of Faith to assure our selves of a
happy departure, and be bold to let our souls go, knowing (though devils
swarm in the air like flies) yet the holy Angels shall carry up our souls
into the joys of heaven; and also we may commit comfortably our miserable
body to the grave, in assured hope of a glorious resurrection unto glory and
blessedness, and so of eternal happiness with God both in soul and body for
ever.

This living by faith God requires, and bids us we should put our faith to
use; as Ephesians. 6. 16. we are commanded to take it to us as a shield, so that
we should not only have it to be saved by, but daily and hourly to use it,
and live by it.

Thus have the holy servants of God done in all ages, Abraham after God had
made him a believer, is called out of his country from house and home, and
kindred, to go whither God should show him, but he knew not whither; so that
as blind folks follow their guide, so he followed God and lived by faith.

So it was promised him that in his seed should all the Nations of the earth
be blessed, and yet he had no child, nor no likelihood of any; he being
old, and his wife also old, and barren at best, yet he believed and waited
upon God for the accomplishment of his promise, and consulted not with reason,
but cast himself wholly upon Gods word and promise, and at last had Isaac. And
when he had him, in time he is bidden to go and offer him up to God,
notwithstanding this cross (the Messiah being to come of his seed) crossed his
salvation, and of all the world: and yet he obeyed, and for the promise let the
Lord alone for that; knowing that he that made it was able to keep it, and to
break it his truth would not suffer him. Being asked, here i^ the wood, but
where is the sacrifice? he answered that God would provide one; Oh unspeakeable
Faith. Noah also lived by faith, as we see in his story, both in making the
Arc, and getting in of the creatures: he disputed not how shall we ever be
preserved in this stinch of the creatures of the Arc? nor what should become
of them when all were drowned; he made no such questions, but did all in
Faith, went in and continued there by Faith, and came out by Gods appointment.

So Isaac lived by Faith, waiting for the promise of a seed, in whom all
Nations should be blessed; the which came not of twenty years after, and yet
he waited, not changing his wife, nor taking any other, but relied upon God by
faith in the use of lawful means. And so believing he conveyed the blessing
to his posterity by Faith.

Jacob did so in all his troubles, in going down to Mesopotamia, in returning
when he heard of Esaus coming against him with four hundred men. For then
did he comfort and strengthen himself by grounding his faith upon Gods
promise; O Lord, thou that say return into thy country, and to thy kindred,
and I will deal well with the, deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my
brother; and so using the means, he went o^^. But how should he escape his
fingers? God promised to do him good, that is enough for him.

And thus he gave commandment to be buried in Canaan in token of his Faith,
believing that his posterity should inherit that land.

So Joseph gave commandment of his bones, and Moses, Heb. 11. 25. 26. David
likewise notably lived by Faith, in all his troubles, as it is to be seen in
his Psalms; in greatest dangers commending himself to God, and refusing to
help himself unlawfully by hurting Saul, because God had promised him the
Kingdom: Though an host (says he) pitched against me, yet mine heart shall
not fear, Psalm. 27. So Psalm. 23. 4. Not but that sometimes his Faith was
shaken a little (for neither he nor the rest had been men if they had been
perfect) but they recovered it again, and lived by Faith.

So he did notably discover his living by Faith, 1. Sam. 30. 6. For when the
Philistines had burnt Ziklag, and the people ready to stone him, it is said
that he comforted himself in the Lord his God, and said, Into thy hands I
commed my spirit: thou have redeemed me O Lord God of truth, Psalm. 31. 5.

So Nehemiah, cap. 1. when he heard of the misery of his people, fell to
prayer, clinging to a promise that he knew made by God, that he had read and
marked out of Deutronomie: and so in other things.

So Ezra would not ask the King a guard to go with them, though the way were
full of danger, but committed himself and his company by Faith to Gods keeping.

And Mordecai discovered his Faith in his speech sent to Hester, Hest. 4. 14.
namely, that if she failed to speak to the king in the behalf of her nation,
God would send deliverance to his Church some other way. Some other way? which
way trow you did he see? nay that he could not tell: Indeed if she had used
her best skill, it had been much to expect a recalling of such a decree, and
there had been use of Faith. But though she should fail, yet to believe God
would help some other way, this argued a great Faith. And why was he so
confident? because he knew they were the Church of God; and therefore that they
could not be cut off.

So Ester her self being thus urged, used the means, and said, If I die, I
die, I will do it by the help of God; a worthy Faith, as we would easily see
if we knew and weighed well her case. Such a Faith was in Job, that said, If
God killed him he would put his trust in him, Job 13. 15. Thus also Paul lived
by Faith, both for spiritual life, Romans 7. and for temporal life, 2. Tim. 4.
17. 18. and for eternal^ life, 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.

So the Martyrs, as appears by their courageous and faithful speeches in
extremities of danger: As, that if God sent no meat, he would send no hunger:
That their enemies could do no more than God would suffer them; and that either
God would abate the force of the fire, or else increase their strength. As also
we see this in their faithful commending their souls into the hand of God:
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

So many godly Saints in our times have showed their confidence by their
comfortable speeches both in life and death.

For our further provocations hereto, Reason.
understand some reasons. It is a great glory to God that we live by Faith: For
then we make him a God inindeed, when we trust him on his bare word against
reason, and when we see nothing to persuade us, but rather the contrary. Then
we make him our God, when we so put our confidence in him, and in prosperity
and adversity, when we have means or no means, for our souls, bodies, for us
our selves, and for our friends and family, for this and the other life.

As Joseph took this most kindly of his Master, and esteemed it the greatest
benefit that he could have bestowed on him, that he trusted him with all he
had, Genesis 39. 8. so God takes it well at our hands when we trust him on his
word, seeing it is a putting to our seal unto it; though herein we should do
no more than there is wonderful cause we should, yet we are weak to do it:
Lord increase our faith, and pardon our unbeleefe. And therefore God has
recorded the examples of believers, as taking such pleasure in them as he would
not have them forgotten, and for our learning. The contrary, how dishonorable
is it to God the faithful and true witness!

2. It is a wonderful benefit to our selves, and makes our life sweet; For it
freeth us from much heart-griefe, carking care and sorrow, and much
unprofitable trouble we put our selves to; as might easily appear, if we
should examine particulars. And what a comfort every of these is to believe
them: As first for our spiritual life, daily to hold fast the assurance of the
favor of God.

Also in the matter of sanctification, what a heartening is this to resist
evil, and to do any good duty, when we believe God will be with us, in the
one and the other, to give us help against our corruptions, or Satan's
temptations, and to enable us to any duty he calls us to. So what a comfort
to believe our perseverance, notwithstanding we think of Satan, and the
worlds power and our weakness, and whe^^ we hear of the falls of goodly
ones, who seemed of fa^^ greater strength than we.

So what an encouragement is this to the Word, Sacrament, Prayer, when we
believe we shall get good by them? So for our temporal life, look over the
particulars of that.

And for our eternal life, what a comfort is it that when our troubles be many
and great yet we may ease our selves, by considering of the blessed en^ of
all, when we shall enjoy everlasting rest with God in heaven? So in our death,
when w^^ can boldly commend our selves^ our souls and bodies unto God as unto
a faithful Savior, who will safely keep them to the last day, 2 Timothy 1. 12.
On the contrary side, what a miserable thing it is not to have use of our faith
in these things? As, for our spiritual life to be ever and anon doubting we
are not the Lords, what a life is this? what heart can we have to strive
against our corruptions, or Satan's temptations, when we fear we shall never
prevail over them? So that we shall never hold out, but lose all at the end,
especially if persecution should come.

So for duties to be performed, which (for want of faith) we sometimes omit,
or withdraw our selves from such duties as we be called to, or do them
untowardly. So what heart can we have to the means, when we doubt we shall
get no good by them?

So for our temporal life, what a misery is it to be ever in fear, to go
out in fear, and be abroad with a distrustful fearing mind?

So when we have used the means and prayed, yet to be distracted with care,
break our sleep, lie tossing, and so waste our bodies with grief, and make
our selves unfit for other good duties. If we had the greatest thing in the
world in hand, when we had used the means once, we should lay our heads
down in Gods lap, as quiet as if we had nothing to do: but alas, if we
have but a small thing in hand, we so trouble our selves, as we be unfit for
holy duties, and all for want of more faith.

So in troubles, what a misery is it to be weak in faith then? For we hereby
fall to impatience on the one side, or on the other to be struck like a stone,
or ready to use unlawful means, when we cannot believe that God will bless
those that are lawful.

So for time to come, what a misery is it to be always in suspense, and
doubtful of the issue of all our labors?

So for our children, when we cannot believe that he who is our God will also
be the God of our seed, and will take care to provide for them, when both we
and all our means fail.

So for our eternal life, what a pitiful thing is this, and what wrong to our
selves, when we are weak and wavering about that in our great troubles, and
in the end of our life, when we are going hence?

3. Hereby our faith shall be greatly increased, for, use faith and have faith,
as they say of legs and of memory: whereas the not setting it on work is a
cause it is so weak.

4. Thus shall the promises be accomplished, and we get many good things at
the hand of God, and else not, so that we miss many a good turn by our
unbeleefe.

Now if all this be so, Use.
then must we needs acknowledge that most men be in an ill case; for few will
be found to live by Faith.

First, for the most part they have no Faith; and therefore they cannot live by
Faith. Ignorant, profane, civil worldlings, these are quite without Faith,
and some that make better show, that yet fall short of true Faith.

They live by other rules; False rules.
as first, by carnal and natural reason, thinking if they follow their
calling, and pay every man his own, and live orderly, and keep their Church,
that God will hold them excused, if there be somewhat amiss, and they shall be
both blessed and do well here, and be saved hereafter, or else God help. If
such should not do well who are not borne again, John 3. 3. our whole nature
being so vile, as we must not be restrained only, but universally changed anew,
theirs were very strickt: but this is a false rule; for our Savior Christ told
the Scribes and Pharisees, that they should not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, nor any other, except their righteousness exceeded theirs.

The yongue man in the Gospel had done thus at the height, yet there was
somewhat wanting to bring him to the Kingdom of heaven, to wit, to sell all
and follow Christ, which he could not do without Faith. Many among the
Heathens, their Philosophers and wise men among them especially, went thus
far, and yet came short.

2. Also they live by sense only, and not by Faith; as far as they see, they
will believe, but no further. If they have means, then they are jolly, if not,
then dead, and shift as they can.

If God promise to a duty done a reward of blessing, if God stop into their
hand and give them a pawn, they will believe, but if it be but his bare word,
(as to give all to the poor) they dare not take that. Yet if a rich man come
to them for forty or a hundred pound, and tell them they shall have it with
increase at the quarters end, they will let him have it cheerfully, and trust
him: If he say, you shall have a pawn also if you please for better security;
No, says he, I will trust you for more than that: if I have but your word or
have it under your hand for mortality sake, it is sufficient. But yet they will
not give to the poor, which is to lend to the Lord, though he promise to repay
it with advantage; yea though he have given it under his hand. Esau lived by
sense, choosing the pottage before the birthright. Moses lived by faith,
choosing rather to be in adversity with Gods people under the hope and promise
of deliverance out of Egypt, than to live still in Pharaohs Court, and there
for the present to enjoy the pleasures of sin, and preferments of the world.

If they commit their children to a rich man who is their friend, oh they are
very glad, but not so confident and comfortable to commit them to God. If a
great man promise to deliver them out of a trouble, they are quiet and secure,
but though the Lord promise so, they are not comforted. Now all this is because
they live by sense, and what they see they believe, and not by faith in God,
whom they see not: and therefore they will not believe him. If they have wealth
to leave their children they are comforted, if not, they distrust Gods promise,
and choose rather to get riches by deceit, than to rest upon his word in the
use of just and true dealing.

So they live in that course of life that is most plausible in the world, and
not in that whereto God has made his promise, as Moses did. In time of
persecution they take the easiest way, and think them fools that lose here,
in hope of future gain.

3. They live by presumption, making no question but that their state is good,
and that God will not suffer them to want, and that he will save them at their
death, when he never said any such thing, nor they be the parties to whom his
promises are made. Or else if their case be not presently good, yet they can
call to God for mercy, and then all shall be well. What a saucie boldness is
this to challenge great things of God, which he never promised, to reap where
he never sowed? As if one should come to a man and ask him twenty pound,
saying, I know you will give me it; Why, (will he say) did I ever promise you?
if I did, I will be as good as my word, if not, thou art a bold fellow, in
presuming to obtain so groundless a suit.

4. Also they live after their own lusts, every one as their heart leads them,
either wholly or in part, not crossing themselves of their will. It is for
their profit, their pleasure, their mind, and therefore they will do it; If
they be in danger they will help themselves with a lie, a false oath, going
to a Witch, and think it folly if they should not. These be false and wicked
rules, which make ill work, and lead men to destruction.

Now if all this be so, then how much may we bewail the estate of the most
that live among us, in that, that after such means of faith, so few will be
found true believers. For take out the five sorts that be here mentioned, who
are no true believers, and how many will be left? But let us know their misery
that are without true faith, and what punishments remain for such among us as
live and die without it.

And therefore Ministers are to be exhorted to preach Faith more carefully, and
the people to labor for this above all, and to know by what steps they may
come unto it.

Secondly, it serves also to rebuke the servants of God, and such as have
faith, that yet have little use or benefit of it, but live too much by sense
(as was said before and as might plainly appear if we should examine the
particulars,) whereby they dishonor God, and draw out an uncomfortable life
full of misery oftentimes.

Oh what a happy life might we lead, if we had this grace of faith? For what
is it that makes us miserable at any time? our crosses, troubles? No, but this,
that we cannot depend upon God in these cases, for then we should be quiet,
The servants of God have been cheerful in great troubles, as Paul and Silus
in the prison and stocks at midnight, Act. 16. The Martyrs cheerful in
prison, at the stake, in the fire, and have clapped their hands over their heads,
to express the inward joy of their hearts. But we dishonor God and disquiet
our selves. And this is the reason, because our faith is no stronger, and we
make so little use of it. And this is the cause that we miss many a good thing
we might have from God, if we did believe.

3. It serves likewise for instruction, that seeing there is such a
comfortable life to beeled, that we would labor to grow better acquainted
with it.

And to this end first, to know the promises of God scattered in his Word, and
that we gather them together; and get them written out, especially such as
most concern us. If we have an herb in our garden that would case our
grief, and we know it not, what are we the nearer? And so if we know not the
promises, though they be in the book, what are we the better? If we be to
seek when we have need of them, we may do ill, though we have them in our
book; for though sometimes God helps his servants, that when they know not a
promise, as soon as they in their trouble open the book, they light upon a
most fit place; yet this not to be trusted to.

2. We should remember them, and by Faith meditate on them, and apply them to
our selves, and lean upon them as upon a rock, fearing more that the earth
should reele from you, and give you a fall, then the promises should fail you.

If we had a most sovereign medicine or cordial, but have quite forgot where
we have laid it, it will little avail us when we stand in need to have it
presently applied: and so it is in this case, seeing it is not


