THE FAITH, DOCTRINE, and religion, professed, and protected in the Realm of
England, and dominions of the same:

Expressed in 39 Articles, concordablie agreed upon by the reverend Bishops,
and Clergy of this Kingdom, at two several meetings, or Conuocations of
theirs, in the years of our Lord, 1562, and 1604:

THE SAID ARTICLES ANALISED INTO Propositions, and the Propositions proved to
be agreeable both to the written word of God, and to the extant Confessions of
all the neighbor Churches, Christianlie reformed:

THE ADVERSARIES ALSO OF NOTE, AND name, which from the Apostles days, and
primitive Church hitherto, have crossed, or contradicted the said Articles in
general, or any particle, or proposition arising from any of them in
particular, hereby are discovered, laid open, and so confuted.

Perused, and by the lawful authority of the Church of England, allowed to be
public.

Romans 16.17. I beseech you brethren, Mark them diligently, which cause
divisions, and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, and
avoid them.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATT, PRINTER to the University of Cambridge. 1607.

TO THE MOST REVErend Father in God, and his right honorable good Lord Richard,
by the divine providence Archb. of Canterbury, and Primate of England; and
Counselar to the most high, and mighty Prince, James, King of great Britain,
France, and Ireland.
MOst reverend Father in God, there is no one thing in this world that of men
truly zealous, and Christian in these latter days of the world with greater
earnestnes has bin desired, then that by a joint, and common consent of all
the Churches rightly, and according to the canons of the sacred Scriptures,
reformed, there might be a draught made, and diuulged, containing, and
expressing the sum, and substance of that Religion, which they do all both
concordablie teach, and uniformly maintain.

That holy man (of happy remembrance) D. Cranmer (who sometime enjoyed that
room in our Church, Archb. Cranmer.
which your Grace now worthily possesses) in the days of that most godly
young Prince, King Edward the sixth, employed a great part of his time, and
study for the effecting of that work; and imparted his thoughts with the most
principal persons, and of rarest note in those days for their wisdom,
piety, and credit among the people of God throughout Christendom. M. Calvin,
understanding of his intent, addressed his letters unto the said Archbishop,
and offered his service, saying that might his labors stand the Church in
steed, ne december quidem maria, it would not grieve him to sail over ten Seas
to such a purpose.

2. But this proouing a work of much difficulty, if not altogether impossible
in man's eyes, especially in those days, to be brought about, the next course,
and resolution was, Unity of doctrine in all Churches reformed.
that every Kingdom, and free state, or principality, which had abandoned
the superstitious, and Antichristian religion of the Church of Rome, and
embraced the Gospel of Christ, should diuulge a Brief of that religion, which
among themselves was taught, and believed, and whereby through the mercy of
God in Christ, they did hope to be saved. Which to God his great glory, and
the singular benefit, and comfort of all Churches, both present, and to come
(as the extant Harmony of all their confessions does most sweetly record)
with no great labor was notably performed.

This work of theirs told the Churches in those days, and does us, and will
inform our posterity, that not only in every particular State, and Kingdom,
but also throughout Christendom, where the Gospel was entertained, the
primitive, and Apostolical days of the Church were again restored. For the
multitudes of them that did believe (I speak both jointly of all, and
severally of each reformed people, not of every particular person, fantastique,
False-apostles, and perverse teachers, or professors in any Church, who were
not wanting even in the Apostles days) touching the maine, and fundamental
points of true religion, were then of one heart and of one soul, and did
think, and speak one thing, and live in peace Ab initio reformationis
ardebant amore veritatis omnes Poli^ici ecclesiastic^, plebei. Jezler. de
diutur. belli Euchar. p. 49.
.

3. The said Archbishop (for unto whom better, after God, and the King can we
ascribe the glory of this worthy act? he wrought this Unity, and Uniformity
of doctrine in this kingdom, in the Halcyon days of our English Josias, K.
Edward the sixth of that name: and the same doctrine, so by his means
established in the time of peace (a notable work of peace) like a manly,
Unity of doctrine in the Church of Eng. in K. Ed. 6. his days.
haeroicall, and heavenly Capitane, under our General, Jesus Christ, he
resolutely, even with his heart blood, and in the fiery torments, afterward
confirmed in the days of persecution.

An. 1552.
A certain learned man (speaking of the Religion here then professed, and
wrighting unto the Lords of our late Queens Counsel) does say, he (meaning
the Papist his adversary, who charged our Church with discord, and
disagreements about matters of religion) He ought (says he) if he had bin
able, K. Edward 6.
to have brought out the public Confession, and Articles of faith, agreed in
K. Edwards time, and have showed any in England, that professing the Gospel,
dissenteth from the same. So esteemed he (and with him many thousands of
learned, and iudicous men) of the doctrine then ratified by authority, and
professed in this kingdom.

But those days of our Churches peace continued not long (through our
unthankfulness, and sins) neither on the other side was our persecution
permanent (through the goodness of god), though for the time exceeding vehemt,
and violent. q. Mary
For nubecula fuit, and cito transiit, it vanished away quickly, as do many
raging storms even upon the sudden: yet not through the power of Gunpowder,
and treasons, but through the force of ardent prayers unto the Almighty. For
arma ecclesiae preces.

4. We find that M. Latimer (that sacred, The pr^iers of the persecuted
Saints for the reducing of true religion into the realm.
and reverend Father) addicted himself very seriously in those days unto the
exercise of prayer; and his principal, and most usual prayers were first, for
himself, next for the afflicted church of England, and lastly for Lady
Elizabeth, the deceassed K. Edwards, and Q. Mary's sister.

For himself he prayed, that as God had made him a minister, and Preacher, of
his truth: so he might constantly bear witness unto the same, and have the
grace, F. Latimer
and power to maintain it in the face of the world, even till the hour of his
death. For the church of Enla^d he prayed, that God would be pleased once
again, to restore the free Preaching of the Gospel to this realm (and this
withal possible feruencie of Spirit, he craved at the hands of God). And for
Lady Elizabeth, that he would preserve, and make her a comfort to his then
comfortless people in England. And the almighty, and our heavenly Father both
heard, and granted, all, and every of his petitions.

M. Gualter (that learned, painful, and excellent divine at Tigure) dedicating
his holy, B. Parkhurst,
and Christian comments upon the lesser Prophets unto D. Parkhurst, Bishop of
Norwich (who in the days of the forementioned Q. Mary, voluntarily had exiled
himself so far as Switzerland, for his preservation, if it might be, unto
better times) says of the said Parkhurst, that when he lived in Tigure, Lady
Elizabeth was ever in his mouth: her Faith, her wisdom, her magnanimous,
spirit, her virgineous and chaste behavior he would ever celebrate with high
words, and commendations, and that God would guard, and safeguard her person for
the good of his people, was his daily prayer: yea (says the same Gualter)
orabant idem te cum pii omnes, it was not your prayer only, Q. Elizab.
but all Gods people so prayed besides. And their prayers were not made in
vain. For both Q. Mary lived not long; and L. Elizabeth was placed in the
royal throne; superstition was expulsed, and true religion again, to the
singular comfort, and multiplication of Gods people in this kingdom, very
solemnly restored.

.5 Nothwithstanding an Uniformity of doctrine to be taught embraced, and
professed, by authority of the Prince, and State was not published till
certain years after the Queens attaining the kingly diadem; True doctrine
restored. an. 1558. and an uniformity of the same established, and publshed,
an. 1562.
but then Articles of religion, to the number of thirty-nine, drawn yet three
years before, were commended to the consideration, and perusal of the whole
clergy of both Provinces, in an orderly, and lawful assembly, or Convocation
of theirs at London; and by a sweet, and unanimous readiness, thereupon by them
allowed. This was effected in the year of our Lord 1562. (the same year that
the merciless Massacre at Vassey in France was committed by the Duke of Guize;
An. 1562.
and the same very time also that all the Protestants in that country of
France, for holding and professing the same doctrine, were sentenced unto
death, and destruction by the Parliament at Paris: after which their
condemnation ensued those horrible, and more then savage murders, and
slaughters of the Religious, and only for this Religion, at Carrascone, at
Toulouse, Amiens, Towers, Sens, Again, Aurane, and many other cities, towns,
and villages throughout France).

A principal contriuer of this Uniformity in religion, and thereby Unity
among us, Arch. Parker.
was another Predecessor of your Graces, even D. Parkar the first Archbishop of
Canterbury in the said Queens days.

Here upon Beza from Geneva, Doctrinae puritas viget in Anglia, Pure and
sincere, religion flourishes in England; Zanchius, from Strasborough, Per hanc
reginam factam, by her (meaning Q. Elizabeth's) coming to the Crown, God
again has restored his doctrine, and true worship; and Daneus, The whole
compass of the world has never seen any thing more blessed, nor more to be
wished then is her gouernenment.

So now again flourished those Apostolical times (as I may say) of unity,
and Uniformity of doctrine in our Church. For then were there no contentions,
nor dissentions, nor thornie, and pricking disputations among us about
questions of religion, tantum res nobis fuit cum satellitibus quibusdam
Pontificiis (as Bishop Jewel said) we then skirmished only with the Papists.
As it was at the building of Salomons temple: so was it with us then. We set
upon the building of Gods house (which is his Church) without deane, without
noise, and stirs. The adversaries without heard us, and heard of our doings
abroad by the pens of the learned Jewel, Nowel, Calfehill, and such other
Architects of ours; to our selves we were comely as Jerusalem; to our enemies,
terrible as an army of Banners.

6. Also what before, viz. an. 62. they had agreed upon, the same at another
Assembly at London, an. 71. and the 13. of Q. Elizabeth, according to a Act of
Parliament then made, Subscription required unto the Book of Art. an. 1571.
An. 1572.
the said Clergy of England (the Archbishops and Bishops first beginning, and
giving the example) by their several Subscriptions with their own hands, most
readily did approve.

Howbeit in the year next ensuing, sciz. an. 72 (a year many ways memorable,
especially for the great, and general Massacre of above an hundred thousand
Protestants in France, chiefly in Paris, and the country thereabout adjoining,
begun on S. Bartholemewes eeue Bartholomaeus flet quia gallicus occu^hat a^las.
, for Pope Gregory's excommunicating of Q. Elizabeth, for defending this
doctrine, and religion, which here we speak of; and thirdly for the erecting
of private Presbyteries now first in England) diverse of the inferior ministers
in, and about London, and else where in this kingdom, not a little disturbed
the quiet of our state, and peace, some of them by untimely, and inconsiderate
Admonitions, pamphelets, and Libels; others by obstinate refusing to subscribe,
as both Law did enjoin, and their Fathers in Christ, and superiors before them
had done. But these men speedily both by learning were answered, and by
authority censured, suspended, or deprived.

7. And yet not one of these Recusants, and so not one of Engla^ds clergy,
Unity of doctrine still continued.
either now, or before did ever oppugn the received, public, and catholic
doctrine of our Church, but most willingly approved, and applauded the same, as
the truth of God.

For even the admonitioners themselves (which said that they did strive for
true Religion; and wished the Parliament even With perfect hatred to detest the
church of England, whereof notwithstanding they were members) even they do say
how they (meaning the Bishops, and their partakers) they hold the substance of
Religion with us, and we with them. And again. We (all of us) confess one
Christ. And their Champion does acknowledge, that her majesty has delivered
us from the spiritual Egypt of Popery.

So that for doctrine (I mean still for the maine points of doctrine) there
was now a sweet, and blessed concord among us: which Unity continued all that
holy, and reverend Fathers, I mean Archbishop Parkers time, which was till the
17. year of Q. Elizabeth.

8. After him succeeded in the said Archiepiscopall chair B. Grindall, a right
famous, and worthy Prelate; and for religion so sound, as in K. Edwards days
(had the Prince lived a while longer) he had bin promoted unto the Bishopric
of London, Archbish. Grindall.
upon the translation of B. Ridly unto Durham (for these things had the State
then in purpose). But God otherwise had decreed for their advancements, as that
the one of them should pass through the fire unto the kingdom of heaven; and
the other escape the dangers of many storms, and waters before he came unto
any preferment at all. And so accordingly Ridley was burned, and Grindall
banished, and both of them deprived either of life, or living, or both, and
that for one, and the same cause, and doctrine, which they had preached, and
we profess.

But the tempest being ouerblowen, and Q. Elizabeth (her self having likewise
escaped the bloody hands of her cruel enemies, yea and Gunpowder trains, and
Treasons too, in most barbarous manner laid to have blown up her saint-like,
and sanctified Body, and Soul, into the heavens; and all for her constant
favoring, and embracing this very doctrine) her Majesty (not forgetful what
he had endured for the cause of Christ, and his Church) advanced this zealous
Confessor, and tried Soldier, unto the Sea first of London (before designed
him); next of York, and lastly of Canterbury.

The care of this Archbishop was great to further the glory of God, but,
through the envy and malice of his ill willers, his power was but small; his
place, high, but himself made low, through some disgraces, by his potent
adversaries: which he meekely, and patiently endured till his dying day.

9. During the time of this man's troubles, among other, two things especially
deserve observation: One is, The f^ctious increase, and grow confident.
the flocking of Jesuits into the kingdom (who before them never came among us)
the other is the insolency, and boldness of our homefaction.

The Jesuits indicted Councels; summoned Synodes; enacted and reversed orders,
and exercised Papal jurisdiction among us, we not weeting, nor so much as
dreaming of any such matter.

The Brethren (for so did they now style themselves) in their Churches and
charges would neither pray, nor say service, nor Baptize, nor celebrate the L.
Supper; nor Marry, nor Bury, nor do any other ecclesiastical duty according
to the Law, but after their own deuisings. And abroad (as if they had bin
acquainted with the Jesuitical proceedings; or the Jesuits with their
practices) they had their meetings both classical, and Synodicall; they set
down decrees, reuersed orders, elected ministers, exacted Subscriptions, and
executed the censures of suspension, and excommunication where they thought
good.

The Jesuits had for their provincial first Roberr Parsons, alias Cowbuck,
then Weston, and lastly Garnet (which Garnet continued in that office till the
year 1605. when he was apprehended, and for most horrible and hellish
treasons, as an arrant Traitor put to death in Paul's Churchyard the same year.
And the Brethren had their (I know not what) chief men. All of these residing
in, and about London; and in special favor both with the Gentiles, and vulgar
people of their several factions: and so continued multiplying their number,
and growing strong, even headstrong in boldness, and schism till the dying day
of this most grave, and reverend Archbishop, which was in the month of July.
1583.

10. Some four months before whose death the said Brethren, at a certain
Assembly of their own appointing, among other things (as I find) decreed,
that if Subscription unto the book of Articles of religion (before mentioned,
and still meant) should again be urged, Unity of doctrine still holds among
us.
the said Brethren might subscribe thereunto according to the Statute. Which
declares that what diversity, and disagreement soever was about other
matters, An. 1583.
yet abode there still a blessed Unity among us touching the foundation of
Christian religion. And this was in 25. year of Q^ Elizabeth.

11. Next unto him D. Whitegift, then Bishop of Worcester (a man deservedly
unto that dignity promoted and for his manifold pains in writing, Arch.
VVhitegift
teaching, and defending the truth; his wisdom in governing; and his well
demeaning of himself every way, worthy the double honor which he did enjoy,
or the State could advance him unto) from thence was translated unto the Sea of
Canterbury.

No sooner was he confirmed in his office, but (observing both the open and
intolerable contempt in many places of all Church orders by authority
prescribed; and hearing both of many secret conuenticles, and unlawful
assemblies in his Province; and of the tumults, and garboiles abroad, and even
at his very admission unto his charge, raised in Scotland, and that for the
self same cause, which by the Brethren here in England was maintained; and
foreseeing the dangers, and troubles likely to ensue (for which he should give
an account, if in time he sought not means to prevent them) he thought it
his bounden duty (for the preservation of unity, and purity in religion; the
preventing of further schism; and the discovery of men's inclinations either
unto peace, or faction) that all, and every Minister eclesiastical (having cure
of souls within the Province of Canterbury) under his own hand, and by
Subscription, should testify his consent both unto the points of religion in
the Conuocatio^ an. 62. approved, Subscription the second time called for.
and likewise unto other Articles, necessary for concord sake of all, and every
man, minister especially to be acknowledged: and accordingly, by due course of
Law called then thereunto, Which was done the very first year of his
removeall, and of her majesty the 26.

This of the brethren was termed the woeful year of subscription, but that
they should so do there was no cause, An. 1584.
unless they are greiued that factious spirits, and maleco^te^ted Ministers,
and Preachers were discovered; and their erroneous, and schismatic opinions
brought into light. And surely never was their subscription hitherto by
authority urged in this land, but diverse new fancies (held yet for truths,
not to be doubted of, among the brethren) were thereby detected, for Gods
people to avoid as monsters; neither has our Church lost, by imposing, nor the
adversaries gained at the long run, by refusing Subscription.

12. In the years 71, and 72. when subscription first was required, the whole
land will witness, that many, How basely the Brethren conceive of the
doctrine by the Bishops agreed upon, and established by the prince.
and sundry books (as well in Latin, as English) then, and afterward flewe
abroad. In which we read how then, and in those days The truth of God did in
a manner but peep out (as it were) at the screene; that Cranmer, Parker,
Grindall, and all the other Martyrs, Preachers, and learned men (which first in
our age brought the light of the Gospel into this realm), did see a little,
and had a glimpse of the truth, but ouersaw many things, which in these days
of the Sunshine of the Gospel, men of meaner gifts do see; and yet may not
utter them without great danger of the Laws (through the iniquity of the
times), though the said things now seen be comprised in the book of God, and
also be a part of the Gospel, yea the very Gospel it self (so true are
they); and of such importance, as if every hair of our heads were a life (say
the Brethren,) we ought to afford them in defense of these matters; the
Articles of Religion penned, and agreed upon by the Bishops, and Clergy, and
ratified by the Prince, and Parliament, in comparison of these things now
revealed and newly come to light, are but Childish, and toies.

Thus write they (as your Grace best knows; and I would have quoted the
places where they may be read, had I either not written unto your self, or did
write unto a man unacquainted with their books). And had they here stayed,
there words had bin able (without the more grace of God) to have moved the
Parliament, and all the people of this land (as they have prevailed but too
much already with their too credulous favorites) to think our Church, for all
the reformation wrought, and Uniformity in doctrine established, to be much
awrie, and far from the truth it should profess. But setting down (as they
have done) and publishing both what the truth is, which now breaks out, and
offers it self by their ministry to the view of the whole world (which
before did but peep out at the Screene); and what the things be, which theie of
mean gifts do see, and our Fathers, the Martirs, Bishops, and Preachers, both
in King Edwards days, and afterward (known, and acknowledged to be men of
excellent parts) either did not see at all, or Ouersee; and what likewise the
points of doctrine newly now revealed, their aeternum Euangelium (which without
great danger may not be preached in England, no more then the doctrine, and
Articles of the Church of England may be preached at Rome; and for defense
whereof they ought to afford even their very lives, wear they so many as the
hairs of every of their heads) is, and be, they demonstrate themselves to be
most childishly vain, and idle in their imaginations (which they take yet to
be illuminations of the spirit).

13. For all their doings, and discourses (to say the best of them) are but to
erect a new (which they term a true) ministry; The vncoath doctrine of the
factious Brethren.
and their Discipline among us.

Themselves do say, The controversy betwixt them, and us, is not as (the
Bishopes, and their welwillers) they would bear the world in hand, for a Cap,
a Tippet, or a Surplesse, but for greater matters, concerning a true
ministry, and regiment of the Church, according to the word: the one whereof,
that is a true ministry they shall never have, till Archbishops, and Bishops
be put down, and all Ministers made equal: the other also will never be
brought to pass, till Kings and Queens do subject themselves unto the
Church, and submit their scepters, and throw down their Crows before the
Church, and lick up the dust of the feet of the Church; and willingly abide
the censures of the Church, that is, of the Presbytery. For, as the Church is
subject unto the civil magistrate in respect of his civil authority: so must
the magistrate, the King and Queen, subject themselves, and be obedient to
the just, and lawful authority of the Church. The civil magistrate is none
officer at all of the Church. For Church officers be non Magnates, aut
Tetrarchae, not gracious, or honorable Lords, but Ministers of the Church. The
Presbytery is the Church; and every Congregation, or Church, should and must
in it have a Presbytery.

This is the Light, which indeed the Martyrs, never saw; the Religion, which
our Brethren strive for; the Truth, which they may not preach; not Childish
doctrine, like the Bishops Articles, but the wise Gospel; the maine, and
material points of religion, now in these last days last of all (yea after
the eight Through breaking of H. N. his Euangelium regni) revealed, and for
furtherance whereof they are to lend, and spend even all their lives, if
occasion be ministered.

14. Strange, and strong delusions: First to take these and other such
assertions for Truths, and heavenly mysteries, which are but the fancies of
troubled brains, not grounded, nor truly gathered from Gods word:

Next, to teach one another, and al their favorers, how they should be as
ready, and prepared even for these matters, to give over their livings, and to
give their lives (were they as many as the hairs of (all) their heads as
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer did; and Parker, Grindall, and all other Preachess
would, and every Christian man, and woman, should (if they be called
thereunto) for the Apostolical, and Catholic doctrine of our Church, which
all Gods people do know, and the Brethren themselves (as before has bin
noted) do confess, is originally from God, and his written word.

These, and many more (too many here to be recapitulate) such fantasies of
theirs, or phrenesies rather, this first subscription brought first to light
(and yet happy had it bin for Gods Church, and people, they had never bin
broached).

15. Semblably the next Subscription called for by the last Archb. your L.
predecessor, an 84. discovered even the very thoughts, Of the second
Subscription urged. an. 84.
and desires of those (Brethren before, but now styled) faithful Brethren,
which have, and do seek for the Discipline, and reformation of the Church.

Many Treatises before, but now, and diverse years ensuing they flewe about,
and abroad like Atomies; and by them the same things which before, but in a
differing sort, and in other words, they publish.

For touching Church officers, they name who, and how many sorts they be of
them, viz. Doctors, Pastors, Governors, Deacons, and Widows (no more, no fewer.

They say, Every Church must be furnished with a Teacher, and a Pastor, as
with two Eyes; with Elders, as with Feet; with Deacons, as with Hands. Every
Congregation must have Eyes, Hands, and Feet, and yet neither all, nor at all
any Congregation is to have an Head, answerable to those Feet, Hands, and Eyes.

The doctor, by their doctrine, must be a distinct minister from the pastor,
and only teach true doctrine, and neither exhort, nor apply his doctrine
according to the times, and his auditorie, nor minister the Sacraments. For
these things the pastor is to perform. Which pastor also, whenever he
administreth the Sacraments, must necessarily make a Sermon, or else he
commits Sacrilege.

And concerning discipline, by their doctrine, every Congregation must have
absolute authority, to admonish, to censure, to excommunicate, and to
anathematize all offending persons yea even Kings, and Princes, if they be of
the Congregation. And no Prince but must be of some parish, and under one,
Presbytery or other always, Where this power is not, in their judgments, one
of the tokens of a true Church, is wanting. For this Discipline with them is a
Mark of the Church, and numbered among the Articles of their Faith.

16. This (say they is the great cause, the holy cause, which they will never
leave suing for, though they should be a thousand Parliaments in their days,
until either there obtain it, or bring the Lord in vengeance, and blood
against the Stare, The Brethre^s divine conceits of their Discipline.
and the whole land, for repelling the same. The Discipline is Gods holy yoke,
Gods scepter; the kingdom and throne of Christ.

Our controversy (say they) is whether Jesus Christ shall be King, or no.
Again, the end of all our travail is to build up the walls of Jerusalem, in
to set up the Throne of Jesus Christ, our heavenly King, the mids thereof;
the aduauncing whereof is a testimony unto us that we shall have part in that
glory, which shall be revealed hereafter.

So learn we now from their said books, learned and demonstratiue discourses
(which the Fathers, and our fore fathers never saw, nor had learned) both that
their Discipline established, and exercised is a visible mark of a true
Church; and to desire the advancement of the same, an invisible token of an
elect child of God: so as neither is that a Church, at least no true Church,
where their Discipline is not; neither they but titular christians, no true
christians indeed, which either sigh, or seek not to have it established, and
Presbyteries in every parish to be advanced.

17. The Articles of our religion (concluded upon by the reverend Clergy of
our Church) with these learned, The Br. renew and continue their base co^ceits
of the public Art. of in our religion, comparison of their new Gospel.
and all seeing Brethren, are but the Bishops decrees, the Articles of the
Convocation house; and reveal some little truth: but these wise Brethren (so
faithful have they bin between God, and his Church) they have not failed to
show us the whole counsel of God.

And yet these faithful Brethren, either through forgetfulness, or frailty, or
(which I rather think) forced thereunto by the power of truth, do plainly
confess, that those very decrees of our Bishops, and Articles of the
convocation house, even that little, little part of the Gospel, which the said
Bishops, and Martyrs brough to light, and has enlightened the whole realm,
contains the very fundamental points of Christianity.

Whereof I still gather that had their newly revealed, termed learned
Discourses, and doctrines touching Discipline, and their Presbyteries
(howsoever with goodly, and glorious titles, to ravish poor hearts with the
desire thereof, brandished, and set out) never bin diuulged, or preached, we
may be saved, but without knowing, and believing, the Articles or doctrine of
our Church (which yet is not ours, but Gods) there is no salvation ordinarily
to be looked for, of any man: so true, and of such necessity, is this; so
impertinent, and vnneedefull the other.

18. Octogesimus octauus mirabilis annus: it was prophesied to be a wonderful
year long before it came, and will never be forgotten now it is past. An. 1588.
Q. Elizabeth opposes her authority against the Br. their books, and writings.


Among the things for which the year 88. is famous, one, and not of least
regard, is, that before it expired, these books of the brethren, by a
Proclamation from Q. Elizabeth, were denounced Schismatic, and seditious;
and the doctrine in them contained, erroneous, tending to persuade, and bring
in a monstrous, and apparent dangerous Innovation within her dominions, and
countries; and to make a change, even a dangerous change of the form of
doctrine then in use. And therefore the said books were commanded to be
brought in, and delivered into the hands of authority; and special charge
given that no more of that nature should come abroad, or be printed.

Whereby (so much as in that blessed Queen, whose name with eternal honor
shallbe recorded) these new fancies of the brethren were hissed, and exploded
out of this Christian kingdom; and the articles, or public doctrine of our
Church, confirmed, countenanced, and by the royal prerogative of that
peerless Prince, more strongly ratified, and commended to her awefull and
good subjects then before.

19 The zeal of learned, and godly men hereupon was inflamed, and their
courage so increased, as whereas before this time but one or two, or a very few
(the first whereof was your L. imediate Predecessor, whose memory be always
honorable among the Saints) did encounter the Brethren and oppugned their
fancies: now an Army of most valourous, Most learned and worthy men set
themselves against the Br. and the Presbyterian discipline.
and resolute Champions, and Challengers rose up, which then, and diverse years
ensuing (among whom as your Grace was the first in time which gave the onset:
so are you to be reckoned with the first, and best for zeal, wisdom, and
learning) did conflict with these Brethren, defended the Prelacie; stood for
the Prince; and State; put the new Doctors to the foil; profligated the
Elders; set upon the Presbytery: and so battered the new Discipline, as
hitherto they could never, nor hereafter shall ever fortify, and repair the
decaies thereof.

20. Notwithstanding what the brethren wanted in strength, and learning, they
had in wilynes; A Stratagem of the Br.
and though they lost much one way in the general, and maine point of their
discipline; yet recovered they not a little advantage another way, by an odd,
and a new devise of theirs, in a special article of their classical
instructions.

For while these Worthies of our Church were employing their engines, and forces
partly in defending the present government Ecclesiastical, partly in
assaulting the Presbytery and new Discipline, even at that very instant the
Brethren (knowing themselves too weak either to overthrow our holds, and that
which we hold; or to maintain their own) they abandoned quite the Bulwarks
which they had raised, An. 1595.
and gave out were impregnable; suffering us to beat them down, without any,
or very small resistance: and yet not careless of their affairs left not the
wars for all that, but from an odd corner, and after a new fashion, which
we little thought of (such was their cunning) set upon us a fresh again, by
dispersing in printed books (which for ten years space before they had bin
in hammering among themselves to make them complete) their Sabbath
speculations, and Presbyterian (that is more then either Kingly; or Popely)
directions for the observation of the Lords day.

This Stratageme of theirs was not observed then, neither I fear me is
regarded as it should be yet: and yet did, and since has, and doubtless in
time to come, if it be not timely seen unto, with unsound opinions, and
paradoxes will so poison many, as the whole Church, and Commonweal will find
the danger, and inconvenience of them (so plausible are they to men either
popularlie religious or preposterouslie, and iniudiciouslie zealous.)

Certain fruits, and effects of the Sab. doctrine published by consent of the
Brethren.
21. In this their fallie (as I said before) they set not upon the Bishops and
their calling, their Chancelars etc. (as Popish, and Antichristian) they let
them alone, seeing and knowing they are too well backed for them to subvert: but
(which are of great, all; and almost of the same antiquity with Bishops diverse
of the^; and I had almost said as necessary) they ruinate, and at one blow
beat down all Times, and days by just authority destined to religious, and
holy uses, besides the Lords day, saying plainly, and in peremptory words
that the Church has none authority, ordinarily, or from year to year
perpetually to sanctify any other day to those uses but only the Lords day.

They build not Presbyteries expressedly (though under hand, if it be well
marked, they do erect them in their exercises of the Sabbath: but they set up
a new Idol, their Saint Sabbath (erst in the days of Popish blindness S.
Sunday) in the mids, and minds of Gods people.

By the former they have opened not a gap, but a wide gate unto all
licentiousnes, liberty, and prophanes on the Holy days (which is readily,
and greedily apprehended of all sorts of people every where, especially of
their favorites) to the hie dishonor of God; decay of devotion; hinderance of
Christian knowledge and wisdom in all sorts, especially in the vulgar
multitude, and poor servants; advantage of the common enemies; and gross
contempt of the necessary, and laudable orders of our Church. By the latter
they have introduced a new, and more then either Jewish, or Popish
superstition into the land, to no small blemish of our Christian profession,
and scandal of the true servants of God, The sum of the Sa^. doctrine
broached by the Brethren.
and therewith doctrine most erroneous, dangerous, and Antichristian.

22. Their doctrine summarilie may be reduced unto these two heads, whereof the
one is, that the Lords day (even as the old Sabbath was of the Jews) must
necessarily be kept, and solemnized of all, and every Christian, under the
pain of eternal condemnation both of body, and soul.

The other, that under the same penalty it must be kept from the highest to
the lowest, both of King, and people, in sort, and manner as these Brethren
among themselves, have devised, decreed, and prescribed.

The former of these is like that of the false Apostles, which came from Judea
unto Antioch, and taught the Brethren, that unless they were Circumcised after
the manner of Moses, they could not be saved. Whom the Apostles, Paul and
Barnabas first; and afterward Peter, James, and the rest at Jerusalem both
zealously did resist, and in their first Synod, or convocation powerfully
suppress.

The latter, as bad as that, has bin the mother of many heretical assertions,
and horrible conclusions.

I have read (and many there be alive which will justify it), how it was
preached in a Mercate town in Oxfordshire, that to do any servile work, or
business on the Lords day, is as great a sin, as to kill a man, or to
commit adultery. It was preached in Sommersetshire, that to throw a bowl on
the Sabbath day, is as great a sin, as to kill a man. It was preached in
Norfolk, that to make a Feast, or wedding dinner on the Lords day, is as great
a sin, as for a Father to take a knife and cut his childs throat. It was
preached in Suffolk (I can name the man, and I was present when he was
conuented before his ordinary for preaching the same) that to ring more Bells
then one upon the Lords day to call the people unto Church, is as great a sin
as to commit murder.

When these things I read, and heard, mine heart was stricken with an horror,
and so is it still, when I do but think of them, and calling into mind the
Sabbath doctrine (at London printed for I. Porter and T. Man. an. 95, which I
had read before (wherein very many things are to this effect) I presently smelt
both whose disciples all those preachers are; and that the said doctrine had
taken deep impression in men's hearts, and was dispersed (while our watchmen
were otherwise busied, if not asleep) over the whole kingdom.

The Br. doctrine of the Sabbath called in by authority, and forbidden any
more to be printed.
23. It is a comfort unto my soul, and will be till my dying hour, that I have
been the man, and the means that these Sabbatarian errors, and impieties are
brought into light, and knowledge of the State, whereby whatsoever else, sure I
am, this good has ensued, namely that the said books of the Sabbath
(comprehending the above mentioned, and many more such fearful, and
haereticall assertions) have been both called in, and forbidden any more to be
printed, and made common. Your Graces predecessor, Archb. Whitegift, by his
letters, An. 1599. 1600.
and Officers at Synods, and visitations an. 99. did the one: and Sir John
Popham, L. chief Justice of England, at Bury S. Edmonds in Suff. an. 1600.
did the other.

And both these most reverend, sage, and honorable Personages by their censures
have declared (if men will take admonition) that this Sabbath doctrine of the
Brethren, agrees neither with the doctrine of our Church, nor with the laws,
and orders of this kingdom; disturbeth the peace both of the Commonweal, and
Church; and tends unto Schism in the one, and Sedition in the other: and
therefore neither to be backed, nor bolsterd by any good Subject, whether he
be Church, or Commonweal man.

Purity of doctrine all Q. Eliz. reign maintained in England.
24. Thus have errors, and noisome doctrines (like boiles, and Botches) ever,
and anon risen up (to the overthrow of our Churches health, and salfety if it
might be) but yet (such has been the Physic of our discipline as) what by
launcing, purging, and other good means used, the Body still has been
vpholden, and preserved from time to time.

And well may errors (like gross humors, and tumors) continue among us (as
never Church was, or will be quite without them while it is militant here upon
earth): yet are they not of the substance at all of our Religion, or any part
of our Churches doctrine (no more then ill humors, which be in, are of the
Body; or dregs in a Vessel of wine, be any part either of the Vessel, or
Wine) which remaneth, as at the first, most sound, and uncorrupted; and so
continued even until the dying day of that most illustrious* and religious
Princess Queen Elizabeth.

The very Brethren themselves do write, that

In regard of the common grounds of Religion, An. 1602.
and of the Ministry, We are all one. We are all of one Faith, one Baptism,
one Body, one spirit, have all one Father, one Lord; and be all of one Heart
against all wickedness, superstition, idolatry, haeresie; and we seek with one
Christian desire, the advancement of the pure Religion, worship, and honor of
God.

We are Ministers of the word by one order; we administer prayers, and
Sacraments, by one form; we preach one Faith, and substance of doctrine. And
we praise God heartily that the true Faith, by which we may be saved, and the
true Doctrine of the Sacraments, and the pure Worshipe of God, is truly taught,
and that by public authority, and retained in the book of Articles. Hitherto
the said Brethren. And this was their verdict of our Churches doctrine in the
last year save one of Q. Elizabeth's reign; then which nothing was ever more
truly said, or written. And this Unity, and purity of doctrine she left
with us when she departed this world.

25. Now After Elizabeth reigned Noble James. K. James.
Who found this our Church (as all the world knows) in respect of the
grounds of true Religion, at Unity; and that Unity, in Verity, and that
Verity confirmed by public, An. 1603.
and regal approbation.

These ecclesiastical ministers therefore (though a thousand for number) who
at his Majesty's first coming into this kingdom either complained unto his
Highness of (I know not what) errors, and imperfections in our Church, K. James
abused and troubled with false informations, and petions of the Br.
eue^ in points of doctrine (as if she erred in matters of Faith); or desired
that an Uniformity of doctrine might be prescribed (as if the same had not
already bin done to his hands); or (as weary belike of the old, by Queen
Elizabeth countenaunced, and continued) desired his Majesty to take them out a
new Lesson (as did the the 71. Brethren of Suffolk) are not to be liked.

Neither can we extol the goodness of our God sufficiently toward our King, and
us all for inspiring his royal heart with holy wisdom to discern these
unstaid, and troublesome spirits; and in abling his Highness with power, and
graces from above, to decree orders, and directions for the general benefit,
and peace of the whole Church; neither suffered he his eyes to sleep, nor his
eie-lids to slumber, nor the temples of his head to take any rest till he had
set them down (before all other, though never so important, and weighty
affairs of the Crown, and Kingdom.

K. James patronizeth the doctrine and religion countenaunced by Q. Eliz.
26. My self have read, and thousand thousands, with an hundred thousand of his
Subjects besides, have either read, or heard of Proclamations after
Proclamations (to the number of six, or seven at the least) of books, and
open speeches of his Majesty, uttered in the Parliament house (and all of them
made vulgar within a year, and little more after his happy ingresse into this
kingdom, and taking the administration of this most famous, and flourishing
Empire upon himself) whereby the doctrine (in this land allowed, and publicly
graced, and embraced of all sorts at his entrance into the Realm) has been
not only acknowledged to be agreeable to Gods word, sincere, and the very
same, which both his Highness, and the whole Church, and kingdom of Scotland,
yea and the primitive Church, professed; but also by his authority regal, and
paramont (as one of the maine pillars, supporting his Estate) ratified to
continue; and all hope either of allowing, or tolerating in this kingdom of
any other doctrine, religion, or faction whatsoever, opposite, or any way
thwarting the Faith, and confession of the Church of England, in most plain,
pithy and peremptory words, and speeches, cut off.

The year 62. was not more famous for the Uniformity of doctrine in religion
then concluded, Dominini Incarna^i. an. 1604.
then the year 604. is memorable, and will be for seconding the same: neither
got the Clergy in those days more credit in composing the Articles of our
Unity in Faith, then did the last Convocation (whereat your Grace, then Bishop
of London, was present and President) in ratifying the Acts, and Articles of
their Antecessors; neither was Q. Elizabeth more honored in establishing them
at the first; then is our K. James renowned, and more and more will be for
approouing under the great Seal of England, the late, and last Constitutions,
and Canons ecclesiastical.

27. Whereby no person shall hereafter be received into the ministry, nor
neither by Institution, Subscription the third time urged.
or Collation admitted to any ecclesiastical living, nor suffered to preach,
to catechize, or to be Lecturer, or Reader of Divinity in either University,
or in any Cathedral, or Collegiat Church, City, or Market town, Parish
Church, Chapel, or in any other place in this realm, except, etc. and except
he shall first Subscribe to these three Articles, etc. Whereof the third is,
that he allows the book of Articles of Religion, etc. Nor any licensed to
preach, Read, Lecture, or Catechize, coming to reside in any Diocese, shall
be permitted there to preach, read, lecture, catechize or minister the
Sacraments, or to execute any other ecclesiastical function (by what
authority soever he be thereunto admitted) unless he first consent, and
Subscribe to the three Articles.

Neither shall any man teach either in public schole, or in private house,
except he shall first subscribe to the first, and third Articles simply, etc.

Neither shall any man be admitted a Chancellar, Commissarie, or official; to
exercise any ecclesiastical jurisdiction, except, etc. and shall Subscribe to
the Articles of Religion agreed upon in the Convocation in the year 1562, etc.

And likewise all Chancellours, Commissaries Registers, and all other that do
now possess, or execute any places of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or
service, shall before Christmas next in the presence of the Archbishop, or
Bishop, or in open Court, under whom, or where they execute their offices,
take the same Oaths, and Subscribe, as before is said; or upon refusal so to
do, shallbe suspended from the execution of their Offices, until they shall
take the said Oaths, and Subscribe, as before said.

28. In which Constitutions the wisdom of his Highness shows it self to
be excellent, Of the subscription called for.
who indeed (as exceeding necessary, both for the retain of peace in the
Church; and preventing of new doctrine, curious speculations, and offenses,
which otherwise daily would spring up, and intolerably increase (calls for
Subscription, in testimony of men's cordial consent unto the received doctrine
of our Church, but exacteth not their Oaths, as some do, much less Oaths,
Vows and Subscription too, (but only in a particular respect, and that of a
very few in public office) as our neighbors have done.

Again, he requires Subscription, but not of civil magistrates; not of the
Commons (as elsewhere some do;) not of every man, yea of women, as well as of
men (as did the persecuted Church at Frankeford in Q. Mary's days) not of
Noble, Gentlemen, and Courtiers (as in Scotland was exacted in our Kings
minority); but only of ecclesiastical Ministers, Teachers, and spiritual
Officers, or of those which would be such, and so do the reformed Churches in
France, and Germany at this very day.

Last of all, his Majesty calls for Subscription unto Articles of religion,
but they are not either Articles of his own, lately devised; or the old newely
turkened* but the very Articles agreed upon by the Archbishopes, and Bishops
of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London,
and that in the year of our Lord God. 1562, Can. 2.127.
and unto none other; even the same Articles, for number thirty nine Ibid.
, no more, no fewer; and for words, sillables, and letters the very same,
vnaugmented, undiminished, unaltered.

29. And being the same, the whole world is to know, that the Church of
England is not in religion changed, or variable like the Moon; The Church of
England settled, and co^st^nt in her Religion.
nor affects novelty, or new lessons, but holds steadfastly, and
conscionably that truth, which by the Martyrs, and other Ministers in this last
age of the world has bin restored* unto this kingdom; and is grounded upon
Gods written word, the only foundation of our Faith.

And being the same, all men again may see that we are still at Unity both
among our selves at home; and with the neighbor Churches abroad in all matters
of chiefest importance, and fundamental points of religion, though our
adversaries, the Papists, would feign beat the contrary into the common
peoples heads.

And being the same, there is now (as also from the first restoration of the
Gospel among us there has been) an Uniformity likewise of doctrine by
authority established, which at the King his first arrival among us, was so
much desired by the Brethren.

And finally being the same, let us not doubt, but persuade our selves that we
shall find the Antichristian Church of Rome too the same, which for the same
doctrine, and for none other cause, prosecuteth all Christian churches, but
ours of England especially, with sword, fire, and powder in most hostile, yea
and hellish manner: the effect of whose hatred against us as we have often
seen: so especially had we felt the same the next year after our Kings
ratification of these Articles, had not our ever merciful God most
miraculouslie detected both the Treason, and Traitors. For which his favors
his holy Name be glorified of us, and our posterity, An. 1605.
throughout all generations.

30. So our Church is the same. But be the Brethren, the faithful and godly
Brethren too the same now, The Brethren no changlings
which they have also been? If they be, then will they not deny (which an.
72. they writ) that We hold the substance of religion with them; nor (which an.
602. they published, and is before remembered) that the true Faith by which we
may be saved, and the true doctrine of the Sacraments, and the pure worship of
God, be truly taught, and that by public authority and retained in the book
of Articles. And in this Confession I pray God they may constantly persevere.

Howebeit even these men (which in a generality do allow the doctrine of our
Church) being called by authority to acknowledge their assent unto every
Article thereof in particular, they do not a little debase the estimation of
this doctrine of our^ and show themselves but too apparent, and professed
disseruors from the same. And though all of them do, and will approve some:
yet not one of them will subscribe unto all, and every of the Articles.

For unto the Articles of religion, and the Kings Supremacy they are willing
to subscribe. And they may subscribe (as before has been noted) unto such of
them, as contain the sum of Christian Faith, and the doctrine of the
Sacraments. But unto the same Articles, for number 39. agreed upon in this
Convocation at London an. 62. they neither will, nor dare, nor may subscribe.
For neither the rest of the Articles in that book, nor the Book of common
prayer, may be allowed, no though a man should be deprived from his ministry
for it (say the said Brethren in a certain Classical decree of theirs). The
late Politician is not affraide to move the high, and most honorable Court of
Parliament, that Impropriations may be let to Ferme unto Incumbent ministers,
viz. which faithfully preach in the Churches the true doctrine of the Gospel,
according to the Articles of religion, concerning Faith and Sacraments: meaning
that such Ministers as preach the same doctrine, if they proceed to the rest of
the Articles, Concerning either Conformity in external, and ceremonial
matters; or Uniformity in other points of doctrine contained in that book,
should not be partakers of that benefit, or of Benefices Impropriat.

31. If it be demanded, what the causes may be, why they will unto some, Why
the Br. will subscribe unto some, but not unto all the Articles.
but will not unto all; or why they will unto those Articles which concern
Faith, and the Sacraments, but will not unto the rest, subscribe? The reasons
hereof be two, whereof.

The one is, for that in their opinion, there is no Law, to compel them to
subscribe unto all, For (say the brethren resiant I know not where), We have
always been ready to subscribe to the Articles of religion concerning the
doctrine of Faith, and of the Sacraments, which is all that is required by
Law. Also the Brethren in Devonshire, and Cornewale: We are ready (say they)
to subscribe to the third (which concerns the book of Articles of religion)
so far as we are bound by Statute, concerning the same, viz. as they
concern the doctrine of the Sacraments, and the confession of the true faith.
And the 22, London Brethren tell K. James to his head, how the Subscription
which he calls for, is more then the Law requires.

Their other reason is, because (as the Lincolnshire do say) sundry, (as the
London Brethren affirm) many things in that book be not agreeable, but
contrary to Gods word.

32. If these things be true which they do allege, surely then are those men
to be chronicled for the Faithful, the godly, and innocent Brethren indeed,
whom neither present Benefices can allure; nor the angry countenance, and
displeasure of a king, even of the puissant, and powerful king of great
Britain, can force to do any thing at his beck, and pleasure, either against
Law, or for which there is no law; and who had rather to forgo all their
earthly commodities, and livings, yea and to go from their charges, and
ministry, and to expose themselves, their wives, and children to the myseries
of this world (grievous for flesh and blood to endure), then to approve any
thing for true, and sound by their hands, which is opposite, or not agreeable
to the revealed will, and Scriptures of God.

But if these allegations of theirs be but weak, and sinful surmises, or
rather apparently most false, scandalous, and slanderous imputations to their
Prince, their mother Church, and this State, then doubtless, as they even
Christians now living cannot but take them: so the ages to come will
everlastingly note, and censure them both for disloyal Subjects that so
traduce a truly, and most christianly religious King; il deserving children,
that so abuse their honorable, and reverend Fathers, and superiors of State,
and authority: turbulent spirits, not peaceable men, which raise such broiles,
troubles, and divisions in the Church and kingdom (the issues whereof no
tongue can foretell, and are fearful being thought of) without cause; and
finally neither faithful, nor godly Preachers, but ungodly broachers of
untruths, and slanders, and the very authors, and fautors of horrible
confusion, and faction in Gods Church, whose peace they should seek, and promote
eue^ with their dearest blood.

33. Since the Statute for Uniformity in rites and doctrine was first enacted,
more then 35. years have passed, in all which space, neither the Brethren now
being, nor the Brethren before them living, have hitherto shown, of the 39.
Articles, for names and titles, Which; for number, How many the Articles be
which ecclesiastical Ministers necessarily must; how many which they may not,
or need not, unless they list, subscribe unto (which I am sure they, or some
of them, at one time, or other would have expressed, had the Law favored their
recusancie, and they been able to have justified their Maxim, which is, That
they are not compellable by subscription to approve them all. Again, since
the first establishment of that Statute Law, the most reverend Fathers, and
truly reformed Ministers of this Church (sound, for judgment; profound, for
learning; zealous, for affection; sincere, for religion; faithful, in their
Churches; painful, in their charges; more profitable many ways; of as tender
consciences every way, as any of these Brethren combined), according both to
their bounden duties, and (as they are persuaded) to the very purport, and true
intent of the said Statute, have always both with their mouths acknowledged,
and with their pens approved the 39. Articles of our religion for truths
not to be doubted of, and godly.

Yea, and the Brethren too themselves (which now so scrupulouslie, when they
are orderly called thereunto, do hold back their hands, and will subscribe
but choisely unto some of them) even they with their mouths (which is
equivalent, and all one) have, and that according to the Statute (or else their
livings be void) upon their first entrance into all, and singular their
ecclesiastical benefices, openly both read, and testified their consent unto
the said Articles, for number even nine and thirty, acknowledging them, I say
all of them to be agreeable to Gods word: whereof the people in there several
charges be ready witnesses to testify so much before God, and the world.

34. Again, of these Brethren (that will subscribe but unto which they please
of these Articles) there be some who feign would beat into men's heads, if they
could tell how to make it credible), A late devise of the Br. to shun
subscribtion.
that the Doctrine of our Church is altered from that it was in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

But this assertion being too gross, egregiously untrue, and no way
justifiable, they secondly give out, and report (so industrious be they to
invent new shifts to cloak their inueterate, and rooted pertinacie) how the
purpose, if not doctrine of our Church is of late altered from that it was. And
therefore though they can be well content to allow of the old doctrine, and
ancient intention: yet unto the old doctrine, and new Intention of our
Church, they cannot subscribe, might they either gain much, or loose
whatsoever they have thereby.

Besides, this new Intendement, contrary to the old purpose, if not doctrine
of our Church, is become now the maine, and principal obstacle, why they
cannot subscribe unto the book of Common prayer, and book of Ordination, as
erst they (some of them) four times have done, when as well the Intention, as
Doctrine of our Church, was pure, and holy.

Lastly, they seem not obscurely to intimate unto the State, that were they
sure, or might be assured, that the purpose of our Church were the same which
it was, neither varied from the doctrine; they would be pressed, and as ready
even four, if not forty times more, to subscribe unto the fore mentioned
books of Common prayer, and of Ordination, as before times they did, when they
were out of doubt the Intention of our Church was correspondent to her
Doctrine, that it was sound, and good. I have four times subscribed (says a
Brother) to the book of Common prayer with limitation, and reference of all
things therein contained (not unto the purpose only, or doctrine only, but)
unto the purpose, and doctrine of the church of England. Yet cannot the same
man with a good conscience so much as once more subscribe (which formerly, and
that with a good conscience had subscribed four times). His reason is, Because
the purpose, if not doctrine of our Church, (to which he referred his
subscriptio^) appears to him, by the late Canons, book of conference, and
some speeches of men in great place, and others, to be varied somewhat from
that which he before (not without reason) took it to be.

35. The purpose of our Church is best known by the Doctrine which she does
profess; the Doctrine by the 39. Articles, established by Act of Parliament;
the Articles by the words, The purpose, and doctrine of our Church continue the
same.
whereby they are expressed: and other purpose then the public Doctrine does
minister; and other Doctrine then in the said Articles is contained, our Church
neither has, nor holds; and other sense they cannot yield, then their words
do impart. The words be the same, and none other, then erst, and first they
were. And therefore the sense the same; the Articles the same; the Doctrine the
same; and the purpose, and Intention of our Church still one, and the same.

If then her purpose be known by her Doctrine, and Articles; and their true
sense by their very words: needs must the purpose of our Church be the same,
because her Doctrine, and Articles for number, words, sillables, and letters,
and every way be the very same.

And so our Churches intention in her public Doctrine, and Articles revealed,
being good at the first, it is to still. For her purpose (continuing one, and
the same) cannot be ill at the last, which was good (and so believed, and
acknowledged, even by the Brothers subscription) at the first; or good, in good
Queen Elizabeth's, and ill, in illustrious King James his days.

36. If the premises sufficiently explane not the constancy of our Churches
purpose in professing religion sincerely, then cast we our eyes upon the
Propositions, Neither the Doctrine, nor purpose of our Church altered.
which she publicly maintains; and if we find them the same which ever
they have been, then need we not doubt (the Brethren themselves being
Judges) but the Articles again, their sense, the Doctrine, purpose, and
Intention of the Church of England (the Propositions interpreting, as it were,
the said Articles) is the very same it ever was.

Now that the Propositions (pregnantly, and rightly gathered, and arising from
the articles) be the same, and for substance unaltered (though upon good
considerations, some few be added to the former); and all of them approved
for true, and Christian, by the lawful, and public allowance of our Church,
the book here ensuing plainly will declare, and so demonstrate withal not the
Doctrine only, but intention also of our Church, to be the same, and not
changed: and being unchanged the books then of common prayer, and of
ordination too, considered in the purpose and intention of the Church of
England and reduced to the Propositions (as the Brethren would have them), be
well allowed, and authentically approved; and the said brethren with as good
conscience now again, and afresh may subscribe unto all the Articles, even
concerning the Book of common prayer, and of ordination, as well as of the
Kings supremacy, and of Religion, as before, often, and always they did.

37. Fot my self (most reverend Father in God) what my thoughts be of the
religion in this realm at this instant professed, and of all these Articles,
if the premises do not, that which here follows will sufficiently
demonstrate, Twenty, yea 22, years ago, voluntarily, of mine own accord,
and altogether unconstrained, I published my subscription unto them; my Faith
is not either shaken, or altered, but what it then was, it still is: years
have made those hairs of mine gray, which wear not; and time, much reading,
and experience in theological conflicts, and combats, have bettered a great
deal, but not altered one whit my judgment, I thank God.

Nothing have I denied, nothing gainesaid, which before I delivered.

The^ Propositio^s are (and yet not many) more; the method, altered quotations,
added, both for the satisfaction of some learned, and judicious friends of
mine, requesting it at mine hands, and for the benefit both of the common, and
unlearned, and of the studious, and learned Reader.

The whole work expresses as well my detestation, and renunciation of all
adversaries and errors, opposite, crossing, or contradicting the doctrine
professed by us, and protected by our King, or any article, or particle of
truth of our religion; as my approbation of that truth which in our Church by
wholesome Statutes, and ordinances, is confirmed.

There is not an heretic or Schismatike (to speak of) of any special mark,
that from the Apostles time hitherto, has discovered himself, and his
opinions vulgarly in writing, or in print against our doctrine, but his
heresy, fancy, or frenzy may here be seen against one proposition or
other. The Sects, and Sect masters adversaries unto us either in the matter, or
maine points of our doctrine, or Discipline; to one of our Articles, or other;
wholly, or in part, which here be discovered to be taken heed of, and avoided,
are many hundres.

38. This, and whatsoever else here done, either to the confirmation of the
truth, or detestation of heresies, and errors I do very meekely present unto
your Grace, as after God, and our King best meriting the patronage thereof.

My self am much, the whole Church of England much more bound unto your
Lordship; yea not we only now living, but our successors also, and
posterity shall have cause in all ages, while the world shall continue, to
magnify almighty God, for the inestimable benefits, which we have and shall
receive from your self, and your late Predecessors (D. Whitgift, Grindall,
Parker, Cranmer (of famous, and honorable remembrance) Bishops of our Church,
Archbishops of the Sea of Canterbury) for this uniform doctrine by some of
your Lordships drawn, and penned, by all of you allowed; defended, and (as
agreeable to the Faith of the very Apostles of Christ, and of the ancient
Fathers, correspondent to the Confessions of all reformed Churches in
Christendom; and contrariant in no point unto Gods holy, and written word)
commended unto us both by your authority, and Subscriptions.

Now the all merciful God, and heavenly Father, which so inspired them, and
your Lordship with wisdom from above, and enabled you all to discern truth
from falsehood; and sound religion, from Atheism, idolatry, and errors,
vouchsafe of his infinite goodness to increase his graces more and more upon
your Grace, to his own glory, the Churches benefit, and your own everlasting
comfort.

And the same God, which both mercifully has brought, and miraculously against
all hellish, and devilish practices of his, and our enemies, continued the
light of his truth among us, give us all grace with one heart, and consent not
only to embrace the same, but also to walk, and carry our selves, as it
beseems the Children of light, in all peaceablenesse, and holiness of life,
for his Son, our Lord and Savior Christ his sake. At Horninger near S. Ed.
Bury in Suff. the 11. of March ^n. 1607.

Your Graces poor Chaplain, always at command Thomas Rogers.

Constitutions, and Canons ecclesiastical, an. 1604.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Church of England by Law
established under the Kings Majesty, is not a true, and an Apostolical
Church, teaching, and maintaining the Doctrine of the Apostles: let him be
excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop after
his repentance, and public reuocation of this his wicked error. Can. 3.

Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that any of the 39. Articles agreed upon by
the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London, in the year of our Lord God 1562. for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of consent
touching true Religion, are in any part superstitious, or erroneous, or such as
he may not with a good conscience subscribe unto: let him be excommunicated
ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop, after his repentance,
and public reuocation of such his wicked errors. Can. 5.

Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints as
it is approved by the Apostles rules in the Church of England, and combine
themselves in a new Brotherhood, accounting the Christians, who are
conformable to the Doctrine, Government, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, to be profane, and unmeet for them to join with in Christian
profession: let them be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but by the
Archbishop, after their repentance, and public reuocation of such their wicked
errors. Can. 9.

The Titles of the 39. Articles, with the Pages where to find every of them in
this book.
Art. 1. OF faith in the holy Trinity. Page. 1. Art. 2. Of the Word of God,
which was made very man. Page. 7. Art. 3. Of the going down of Christ into
Hell. Page. 15. Art. 4. Of the Resurrection of Christ. Page. 17. Art. 5. Of the
holy Ghost. Page. 21. Art. 6. Of the sufficiency of the Scripture for
salvation. Page. 26. Art. 7. Of the old Testament. Page. 33. Art. 8. Of the
three Creedes. Page. 39. Art. 9. Of Original, or birth sin, Page. 41. Art.
10. Of Free will. Page. 47. Art. 11. Of the Justification of man. Page. 50.
Art. 12. Of good works. Page. 56. Art. 13. Of works before Justification.
Page. 56. Art. 14. Of works of Supererogation. Page. 59. Art. 15. Of Christ
alone without sin. Page. 62. Art. 16. Of sin after Baptism. Page. 65. Art.
17. Of predestination, and Election. Page. 69. Art. 18. Of obtaining salvation
only by the Name of Christ. Page. 82. Art. 19. Of the Church. Page. 86. Art.
20. Of the authority of the Church. Page. 98. Art. 21. Of the authority of
general Counsels. Page. 112. Art. 22. Of Purgatory. Page. 118. Art. 23. Of
Ministering in the Congregation. Page. 131. Art. 24. Of speaking in the
Congregation in such a tongue as the people understand not. Page. 141. Art. 25.
Of the Sacraments. Page. 142. Art. 26. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers,
which hinder not the effect of the Sacraments. Page. 160. Art. 27. Of Baptism.
Page. 165. Art. 28. Of the Lords Supper. Page. 170. Art. 29. Of the wicked
which do not eat the body, and blood of Christ in the use of the Lords
Supper. Page. 178. Art. 30. Of both kinds. Page. 179. Art. 31. Of the oblation
of Christ finished upon the Cross. Page. 181. Art. 32. Of the marriage of
Priests. Page. 185. Art. 33. Of Excommunicate persons, how they are to be
avoided. Page. 189. Art. 34. Of the Traditions of the Church. Page. 193. Art.
35. Of Homilies. Page. 192. Art. 36. Of Consecration of Bishops, and Ministers.
Page. 196. Art. 37. Of the civil magistrate. Page. 201. Art. 38. Of Christian
men's goods which are not common. Page. 215 Art. 39. Of a Christian man's Oath.
Page. 217.
FINIS.
THE CATHOLIC Doctrine, believed and professed in the Church of England.
1. Article. Of faith in the holy Trinity.
There is but 1 one living, and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions: of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness: 2 the maker, and preserver
of all things, both visible, and invisible. 3 And in unity of this Godhead,
there be three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost.

The propositions.
1. There is but one God, who is living, true, everlasting, etc.

2. God is the maker, and preserver of all things.

3. In the unity of the Godhead, there is a Trinity of persons.

1. Proposition. There is but one God, who is living, true, everlasting,
without body, parts, or passions: of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness.
The proof from the word of God.
THat there is but one God, who is, etc. is a truth which may be gathered from
the al-holy, and sacred Scripture; and is agreeable to the doctrine of the
reformed Churches. For both Gods word gives us to know, that God is one, and
no more Thou shall have none other Gods before me. Ex. 20.3. the lord our God is
Lord only. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Who is God beside the Lord? Psalm. 18.31. Has not one
God made us? Mal. 2 10. There is none other God but one. 1. Cor. 8.4.
, living Mine heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. Psalm. 84.2. Ye are
the Temple of the living God. 2. Cor. 6.16.
, and true God For a long season Israel has bin without the true God. 2 Chronicles.
15.3. The Lord is the God of truth, he is the living God, and an everlasting
King. Ier. 10.10. This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only
very God, etc. Ioh. 17.3. Ye turned to God from idols, to serve the living and
true God. 1 Thessalonians. 1 9.
, everlasting O my God, etc. thy years endure from generation to generation,
etc. thy years shall not fail. Psalm 102. v. 24, 26, 27. He is the living God,
and remains for ever. Dan. 6.16.
: without body, parts, or passions O Lord my God, thou art exc^eding great,
thou art clothed with glory, and honor, which covers himself with light as
with a garment, etc. Psalm. 104. v. 1. etc. God is a spirit. Ioh. 4.24. The Lord
is the spirit. 2. Cor. 3.17. He is not a man, that he should repent. 1. Sam.
15.29 I will not execute the fiercenes of my wrath, I will not return to
destroy Israel: for I am God, and not man. Hos. 11.9.
: of infinite power The sound of the Cherubims wings was heard into the utter
court, as the v^ice of the Almighty God, when he speaks. Ezekiel. 10.5. I will
be a Father unto you, etc s^ith the Lord Almighty. 2. Cor. 6.18 We give thee
thanks, Lord God Almighty. Revel. 11.17
, wisdom Great is our Lord, and great is his power: his wisdom is infinite.
Psalm. 147.5. To God only wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever. 1. Tim.
1.17. To God, I say, only wise be praise through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.
Romans 16.27.
, and goodness Praise ye the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever. Psalm. 106.1.107.1.108.1. etc.
: and Gods people in their public confessions from Ausburgh Art. 1.
, He^uetia Confess. 2. ar. 2.
, Bohemia cap. 3.
, France art. 1.
, Flanders art. 2.
, and Wittemberge cap. 1.
, testify the same.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Then impious, and execrable are the opinions of Dragoras, and Theodorus, who
fasly denied there was any God Deos esse dubitabat Protagoras, nullos esse
omnino Diagoras, and Th^o^^rus Cyreniacus putauerunt. M. T. Ci^e. de Not. Deor.
l. 1.
.

Of Protagoras Protagoras Deos in dubium vocavit, Diagoras exclusi^. Lactan. de
fall. Rel. cap. 2.
, and the Machiuilian Athiests, which are doubtful whether there be a God.

Of such as fained unto themselves, diverse and sundry gods, as did the
Manichies August. contra Manich. l. 2 c. 1, 2.
, the Basilidians Clemen. Alex. str. l. 5.
, the Valentinians Valentinus trigintae Deorum praedicator, says Cyril,
catech. 6.
, the Messalian heretics Epiphan.
, the Gentiles, and heathen people, whereof some in place of God, worshipped
Beasts unreasonable, as the Egyptians did a Calfe Exodus 32.
, an Ox, Cats, Vulturs, and Crocodils Gand. Merula demi^abil. lib. 3. c. 56.
; The Syrians, a Fish Piscem Syri venerantur. Cic. de Senect.
, and Pigeons Merula de mirab. l. 3. c. 48.
; the Persians, a Dragon Histor. of Bell.
: some as Gods, have adored men, under the names of Jupiter, Mars, Mercury,
and such like Gods are come down to us in the likeness of me^, and they called
Barnab^s, Jupiter* and Paul Mercurius, etc. Then Jupiters priest, etc. Act.
14.11. etc. who knows not that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of
the great Goddess Diana? Act. 19.35.
: and some, even at this day for God do worship Kine, the Sun, and what they
think good, so do inhabitants of Baly in the East Indies Voyage of the
Holland. ships.
.

Of the Anthropomorphites, which ascribed the form and lineamentes of man unto
God Theodoret. l. 4. c. 10.
, thinking God to be like unto man.

Of such as put their trust and confidence, to be reposed in God alone, either
in men living, as do both the Persians in their Sultan Tu es nostra fides, and
in te credimus: will the Persians s^y unto the Sultan. P. Bizarus rerum Pe^
sic. l. 11.
, and the Papists in their Pope, who with them is God Panormit. C. quanto Abbas.
, their Lord and God Extruag. Joan. 22.
, of infinite power Extrauag. de transl. epist. Quanto.
: or in Saints departed this life, as do the same Papists, both in their S.
Francis, whom they term, The glory of God, prefigured by Esaias, when he
said, Holy, Holy, Holy, Alcar. Francisc. l. 1.
etc. and in their Thomas Becket, whom they say, God has set over the works
of his hands Horum B. virginis Ma. secundum vsum Sarum. p. 51.
; or in Beasts unreasonable, as does the Mordwite Tartar Russe commonvveale.
c. 19.
; or finally in riches, and other senseless creatures, as do the Atheists, and
irreligious worldlings.

2. Proposition. God is the maker, and preserver of all things.
The proof from Gods word.
THat the world, and all things both visible and invisible therein, both were
made, and are preserved, by the almighty, and only power of God, are truths
grounded upon the holy Scripture, and agreeable to the confessions of Gods
people.

For touching the creation of the world, we read that in the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth Genesis 11. etc.
etc. He made heaven and earth Psalm. 124.8.134.3.
, by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which are in earth,
things visible and invisible, whether Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities,
or Powers, all things, were created by him, and for him Coloss. 1.16.
: by his Son he made the worlds Heb. 1.8.
, and all these acknowledged by the Churches primitive Creed Apost and Nicen.
, and reformed at this day Confess. Helv. 2. c. 6, 7. Basil. ar. 1. of France.
ar. 7. Fland. ar. 12.
.

And touching the preservation of all things by him created: My soul, praise
thou the Lord, etc. (says the Psalmist) which covers himself with light as
with a garment, spreads the heavens like a curtain; which lays the beams
of his chambers in the waters, and makes the clouds his chariot, and walks
upon the wings of the wind; which makes the spirits his messengers, and
flaming fire his ministers, Psalm. 104.1. etc.
etc.

Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the
ground without your Father? yea, and all the hairs of your head are numbered,
says our S. Christ Mat. 10.29, 30
. God, that made the world, and all things that are therein, he is Lord of
heaven and earth; he gives life, and breath, and all things; and has made of
one blood all mankind to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has assigned
the times which were ordained before, and the bonds of their habitation, says
S. Paul Act. 17.24, 25, 26.
.

The Son is the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of his
person, and bears up all things by his mighty word Heb. 1.3.
.

The Churches of God in Heluetia Confess. 2. ^. 7.
, Basil Confess. Basil. ar. 1.2.
, France Confess. Gal. ar. 18.
, and Flanders Confess. Belg. ar. 12.13.
, testify the very same.

Errors, and adversaries unto these truths.
Hereby are condemned all Heretics, and errors impugning either the creation
of the world by God; or his providence in the continuing, and preservation of
the same.

Of the former sort was,

First Aristotle, and his followers, which said the world was eternal, and
without beginning.

Next, the Marcionites, that held, how God made not the world, as being too
base a thing for him to create Tertul. lib. 1. contr. Marc.
.

3. Simon Magus, Saturnius, Meander, Carpocrates, Corinthus, who ascribed the
worlds creation unto Angels Iren. Epiph. Phila^^er.
.

4. The Manichies, who gave the creation of all things unto two Gods, or
Beginnings: the one good, whereof came good things; the other evil, whence
proceeded evil things Epip. August. cont. Man. c. 49.
.

5. The same Manichies D. August. de side. contra Manich. c. 40.
, and Priscillianists Council. Brac. cap. 11.
, which did affirm man to have bin the workmanship not of God, but of the
Devil.

6. The Family of Love, who deliver that God by them made heaven, and earth
Display of the Fam. of Love. H. 8. b.
.

7. The Papists, who give out how sacrificing Priests are the Creators of
Christ Qui creavit me sine me, iam creatur mediante me. Stella cleric.
.

Of the latter sort were,

The Stoike Philosophers, and the Manichies, who are the great patrones of
Destiny, Fate, and Fortune Socrat. hist. eccles. l. 1. c. 22.
.

The Family of Love, which may not say, God save any thing: for they affirm
that all things be ruled by nature, and not ordered by God Display of the Fam.
H. 5. b.
.

The old Philosophers, who thought that inferior things were too base for God
to be careful of Dii magna curant, parva negligunt. Cic. de not. Deor. lib. 2.
.

And lastly the Epicures, who think God is idle, and governs not the same.
Of which mind was Cyprian, who held that God, having created the world, did
commit the government thereof unto certain celestial powers In exposit. Symb.
.

3. Proposition. In the Unity of the Godhead, there is a Trinity of persons.
The proof from Gods word.
THe Scripture says,

In the beginning God the Father The Father by the Son made the worlds. Heb.
1.2.
, the Son In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that
word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. Ioh. 1.1, 2.
, and the holy Ghost In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth,
etc. and the spirit of God moved upon the waters. Genesis 1.1, 2.
, created the heaven, and the earth.

By 1 the word of the 2 Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by
the 3 Breath of his mouth Psalm. 33.6.
.

Lo, the heavens were opened unto 1 him; and (John) saw 2 the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him: and lo, a voice from heaven
saying, This is 3 my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased Math. 3.16, 17
.

Because ye are sons, 1 God has sent forth 2 the Spirit of his 3 Son into
your hearts, which cries, Abba, Father, says the Apostle Gal. 4.6.
: and again, The grace of 1 our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love 2 of God, and
the communion of the 3 holy Ghost be with you all 2. Cor. 13.13.
.

And S. John: There are three which bear record in heaven, 1 The Father, 2 the
word, and 3 the holy Ghost, and these three are one 1. John 5.3.
.

This truth has always bin Creed Apo. Nic. Athan.
, and serously is Confess. Helv. 1. art. 6. and 2. c. 3. August. art. 1. Gal.
art. 6. Belg. art. 6. Bohem. c. 3. VVittemb. c. 1. Suca^. art. 1.
, confessed in the church of Christ.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Then cursed are all opinions of men contrary hereunto: whereof

Some denied the Trinity, affirming there is one God, but not three persons in
the Godhead: so did the Montanists Socrat. eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 23.
, and Marcellians Theod. haeret. fab. lib. 2.
, and so do the Jews Lud. Carettus lib. diuinor. visor. ad Iudae.
, and Turks Pol. of the Turk. emp. c. 5.
.

Some, as the Gnostikes Clem. Alex. strom. l. 5.
, Marcionites Epiphan.
, and Valentinians Cl. Alex. str. l. 4.
, affirm there be more Gods then one, and yet not three persons, nor of one and
the same nature, but of a diverse, and contrary disposition.

Some think there be three Gods, or spirits; not distinguished only, but
divided also, as did the Ennomeans Philaster.
, and Trethectes Zanch de 3. El. par. i. l. 7. c. 1.
.

Some fear not to say, that in worshipping the Trinity, Christians do adore
three Devils, worse then all the idols of the Papists: such blasphemers were
the Heretics, Blandrat, and Alciat Calvin. epist.
.

Some will have a Quaternitie of persons, not a Trinity to be worshipped, so
did Anastasius the Emperor command; and the Apollinarians did hold Athanas. ad
Epictet.
. Some do grant, and acknowledge the names of three in the Godhead, but
deny their persons, such were the Noetians, Praxeneans, and Hermogenians: This
did say, how the same God was called by diverse names in the holy Scripture: and
therefore that the Father became flesh, and suffered, because one and the same
God is called the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. For which cause they
were termed Patripassians. In this number was Sernetus.

Again, some do grant the names, and persons of three, and yet deprive not
only the Son, and holy Ghost of their divinity, but the whole Trinity also
of their properties. For they say, there be three in heaven, viz. the Father,
the Word, and holy Ghost, howbeit (say they) the Father only is very God; the
word is the breath of the Father; and the holy Ghost is the spirit created by
God of nothing, through the word: spoiling so both the Son, and holy Ghost of
their deity, and the whole Trinity of their properties. Such were the Arrian,
and Macedonian heretics, hence by-named Pneumatomachons, because they waged
battle with the holy Ghost.

And some do bring in other names of deity, besides of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, as did the Priscilianists Council. Bracar. cap. 2.
.

2. Article. Of the word of God, which was made very man.
The Son, which is 1 the word of the Father, begotten from euer-lasting of
the Father, the very, and eternal God, of one substance with the Father, 2
took man's nature in the womb of the blessed virgin, of her substance: so
that 3 two whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and manhood
were joined in one person, never to be divided, where-of is one Christ, very
God, and very man ^: who suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not only for original
guilt, but also for all actual sins of men.

The propositions.
1. Christ is very God.

2. Christ is very man.

3. Christ is God, and man, and that in one person.

4. Christ is the Savior of mankind.

1. Proposition. Christ is very God.
The proof from Gods word.
IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was
God Ioh. 1.1.
. This is written of Christ. Therefore Christ is God.

Christ was begotten of the Father from everlasting Psalm. 2.7. Acts 13.33. Heb.
1.5.
. Therefore very God.

This is life eternal, that they know thee to be very God, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ John 17.3.
.

They shall call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us
Matthew. 1.23.
.

Christ he is the brightness of the glory, and the engraued image of (the
Father) his person, and bears up all things by his mighty hand Heb. 1.3.
. Therefore very God.

And this both has bin of the ancient Christians I believe in God the Father
etc, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. Symb. Apost. The godhead of
the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one: the glory equal,
the majesty coeternall. Such as the Father is, such is the Son. The Father
uncreate, the Son uncreate. The Father incomprehensible, the Son
incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the Son eternal. The Father is
almighty, the Son almighty; the Father is God, and the Son is God; the
Father is Lord, and the Son is Lord. Symbol. Athanas. I believe in God the
Father almighty etc. and in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son
of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God, light of light,
very God of very God; begotten, not made; being of one substance with the
Father. Symbol. Nicen.
, and is the Faith of the reformed Churches Confess. Helvet. 1. ar. 11.2. cap.
11. Bohem. cap. 4.6. August. ar. 6. Gal. ar. 13, 14. Belg. ar. 10. VVittemb.
cap. 2. Suevica ar. 2.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Miserably therefore do they err, which either deny, or impugn the deity
of our Savior, as did certain old heretics. viz.

The Arrians, whereof some were called the Douleians, because in scorn they
termed the only begotten of God, the Fathers servant Theod. haeret. fab. lib.
4.
.

The Cerinthians Irenaeus.
.

The Ebionites, among whom some said that Christ Jesus was a mere man; others
acknowledged him to be God, but not from everlasting Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 3.
c. 27.
.

The Eunomians Basil. l. 5. contra Eunom.
.

The Samosatenians, who thought that Christ was not the Son of God, before
his incarnation Council. Bracar. cap. 2.
.

The Nestorians, whose opinion was, that Christ became God by merit, but was
not God by nature Liberatus.
.

The Macedonians, which utterly denied the Son to be of one substance with
the Father Theodoret. l. 4. haeret. fab.
.

The Agnoites, who held that the divine nature of Christ was ignorant of some
things Gregor. epist. 22. l. 8.
.

Again, some late heretics even to the death never would acknowledge Christ
Jesus to be the true and very God, as namely.

Certain Catabaptists Zuing. lib. contra Catabap.
.

Blandrat Beza, epist. 19.
.

Matthew Hamant (burnt at Norwitch an. 1579. one of whose heresies was that
Christ was a mere, and sinful man Holnis. chron. 12^99.
.

Francis Ket (burnt also at Norwitch an. 1588.) who most obstinately
maintained that Christ was not God til after his resurrection.

David George, sometime of Basil, who affirmed himself to be greater for power
then ever Christ was Hist. Dauidis Georg.
.

In oppugning the deity of our Savior with these heretics join the Jews
Lud. Caret. l. divinor. visor. ad Judaeos.
, and Turks, which say that Christ was a good man, such as Moses and Mahomet
were Policy of the Turkish Emp. c. 5. p. 16.
, but not God. Hence Amurath* the great Turk in his letters unto the Emp.
Rodolph. the second, an 1593. termed our Savior in derision, The crucified
God; unto whom may be added the Family of Love Display of the Fam. of Love.
H. 7. a.
.

2. Proposition. Christ is very man.
The proof from Gods word.
HOlding the humanity of Christ we join with the blessed Prophets, and
Evangelists, who either prophesied of his future incarnation The seed of the
woman shall break thine head. Genesis 3.15. The Scepter shall not depart etc.
until Shiloh come. Genesis 49.10.
, and conception in the womb of a virgin Behold, a virgin shall conceive,
and bear a son. Esa. 7.14.
, or plainly avouched, and writ, both that the virgin Marie was his mother
Math. 10.18.23. Luke 1.27.31.34.
, and that, as very man, he grew, and increased in strength Luke 2.40.
, endured hunger When he had fasted 40 days, and 40 nights, he was afterward
hungry. Mat. 4.2.
, and thirst Ioh. 4.7. He said, I thirst. Ioh. 19.28.
, wept Luke 19.41.
, and slept Mark. 4.38.
, and suffered death Math. 27.50. Mark. 15.37. Luke 23.46. Ioh. 19.30.33.
.

Hence the ancient Fathers, and Christians,

I believe in God, the Father almighty, etc. and in Jesus Christ, etc. which
was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary, suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried Symb. Apost.
.

The right faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, is God and man. God, of the substance of the Father, begotten
before the world; and man, of the substance of his mother, borne in the world.
Perfect God, and perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting. Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead; and inferior to the
Father, touching his manhood Symb. Athan.
.

I believe in one God, the Father almighty, etc. and in one Lord Jesus Christ
etc. who for us men, and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was
incarnate by the holy Ghost of the virgin Marie, and was made man, etc Sym.
Nicen.
.

The very same testify Gods people in Heluetia Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 11. and
2. c. 11.
, Basil, Confess. Basi. ar. 4.
, Bohemia Confess. Bohem. c. 6.
, the Low countries Confess. Belg. ar. 18.
, France Confess. Gal. ar. 14.
, Ausburgh Confess. August. ar. 3.
, Wittemberg Confess. VVittemb. c. 2.
, Suevia Confess. Suevica. ar. 2.
, with many more besides Harman. confess. praef.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore most wicked were the opinions of those men which held, viz. that,

1. Christ really, and indeed had neither body, nor soul, but was man in
appearance only, as the Manichies August. l. 14. contra Faust.
, the Eutychians Niceph. l. 18. c. 52.
, the Marcionites Philast. Beza, epist. 81.
, and the Saturnians Iren. l. 1. c. 22.
.

2. Christ had a body without a soul; as thought the Eunomians Basil. contra
Eunom.
, the Arrians Theodoret. haeret. fab. l. 4.
, the Apollinarians Ruffin. lib. 2. c. 20.
, with the Theopaschites Niceph. l. 18. c. 53.
.

3. Christ took not flesh of the virgin Marie; so did the Valentinians think
Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
, and so think the Anabaptists Confess. Belg. ar. 18.
, and the Family of Love, who make an allegory of the Incarnation of Christ
H.N. prophecy of the Spir. c. 19. sent. 9.
.

4. Christ took flesh only, of the virgin, but no soul; as the Arrians
Epiphan.
.

5. Christ took flesh not of the virgin only, but by the seed of man too;
so said Ebion Eusch. eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 27.
, and Carpocrates Iren. l. 1. c. 24
.

6. The flesh of Christ was spiritual, and his soul carnal; so dreamed the
Valentinians.

7. The carnal body of Christ was consubstantial with the Father; as published
the Apollinarians Athan. lib. de incar. Christ.
.

8. The humane nature of Christ before his passion, was deuoide of humane
affections; so thought the Seuerites Tertul. lib. de car. Christ.
Niceph. lib. 17. c. 29.
.

3. Proposition. Christ is God, and man, and that in one person.
The proof from Gods word.
THat the Divine, and humane natures of Christ, are united in one person, it
accords with the holy Scripture. For, The word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us (and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten
of the Father) full of grace and truth, says the Evangelist John Ioh. 1.14.
. And Matthew: Jesus when he was baptized etc. lo, a voice (came) from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased Math. 3.17.
.

He that descended, is even the same that ascended, far above all heavens,
that he might fill all things, says S. Paul Ephesians. 4.10.
.

Again, Christ Jesus, being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man, etc.
wherefore God has also highly exalted him, etc. that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father Phil.
2.6, 7, 9, 11.
.

And the same Apostle: There is one God, and one mediator between God and man,
even the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all men 1. Tim. 2.5,
6.
.

Upon these, and the like grounds.

I believe in God, the Father almighty, etc. and in Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin
Mary Symbol. Apost.
.

The right faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, is God and man, etc. who although he be God and man; yet he
is not two, but one Christ. One not by the conversion of the Godhead into
flesh; but by taking of the manhood unto God. One altogether, not by confusion
of substance, but by unity of person Symbol. Athan.
. I believe in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God, begotten
of the Father before all worlds, God of God, light of light, very God of very
God; begotten not made; being of one substance with the Father, by whom all
things were made: Who for us men etc. came down from heaven, and was
incarnate, etc. He suffered, and was buried, etc. and he shall come again etc
Symb. Nicen.
. say the ancient and first Christians.

The very same is the belief, and confession of all the reforformed Churches
at this present and always has bin Confess. Helv. 1. c. 11. and 2. ar. 11.
Basi. ar. 4. Bohem. ar. 6. Gal. ar. 15. Belg. ar. 19. August. ar. 3. VVittem.
c. 2. Suevica, ar. 2. Harmon. confess. praef.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Detestable therefore is the error,

Of the Acephalians; who denied the properties of the two natures in Christ
Hartman Schedel.
.

Of the Seuerites Niceph. l. 16. cap. 33.
; of Eutiches and Dioscorus, who affirmed the divinity, and humanity of
Christ to be of one, and the same nature.

Of the Monothelites; who denied that two wills, viz. a divine, and humane, were
in Christ Volater. l. 17.
,

Of Theodorus Mesechius; who said that the word was one thing, and Christ
another Magdeburg. eccles hist. Cen. 6. c. 5. fol. 319.
.

Of Nestorius; who denied the two natures of Christ to be otherwise united,
than one friend is joined to another Niceph. l. 18. c. 48.
, which only is in good will, and affection.

Of Seruetus; who said of Christ, that he was the pattern of all things, and
but a figure of the Son of God; and that the body of Christ was compact of
three uncreated elements Beza epist. 81. Confess. Gal. ar. 14.
, and so confounded, and ouerthrewe both natures.

4. Proposition. Christ is the Savior of mankind.
The proof from Gods word.
Christ to be the Savior of mankind we find it perspicuously in the holy
Scripture, which teaches us that Christ was crucified, dead and buried Math.
27.26. etc.
; and that to reconcile his Father unto us We were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son. Romans 5.10. God has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Chr.
2. Cor. 5.18. by his cross, Ephesians. 2.16. It pleased the Father etc. by him to
reconcile all things unto himself. Colos. 1 19, 20.
; and to be a Sacrifice for all sins of men He has borne our infirmities,
and carried our sorrows. Esa. 53.4. He is the lamb of God, which takes away
the sin of the world. Ioh. 1.29. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, when he was made a curse for us. G^l. 3.13. God h^th made him sin
for us, which knew no sin, that we should be the righteousness of God in him
2. Cor. 5.2. He is the reconciliation for our sin, and not for ours only,
but ^lso for the whole world. 1. Ioh. 2.2.
.

Hence, I believe the forgiveness of sin Symb. Apostol.
.

He suffered for our salvation Symb. Athanas.
.

For us men, and for our salvation, he came down from heaven Symb. Nicen.
say our forefathers in their confessions: as do also our brethren through-out
Christendom Conf^ss. He^vel. 1. c. 11. and 2. ar. 11. Basil. ar. 4. Bohem. ar.
6. Gal. ar. 13.16.17. Belg. ar. 20.21. August. ar. 3. Saxun. ar. 3. VVittemb.
c. 2. Suevica. Harmon. confess. praef.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Wicked then are all opinions, and assertions, contrarying, and crossing this
truth: as;

That the Father, in his deity, not the Son, in his humanity, did suffer,
which error the Patripassians did hold D. August. de Trin. l. 5.
.

That Christ, as well in his divinity, as in his humanity, suffered for
mankind: an error of Apollinaris of old Magdeburg. eccles. hist. Ce^. 4. c. 5.
; and of Islebius, and Andreas Musculus, of late years Beza, epist. 60.
.

That the whole and holy Trinity was crucified; as said Petrus Antiochenus.

That Christ really, and indeed hung not on the cross: for his passion was in
show only, said the Cerdonites Iren. l. 1. c. 23.
, the Euticheans Nic. l. 18. c. 52.
, and the Manicheans August. contr. Faust. l. 15. c. 10.
: and another man, said the Theopaschits Antoni^. tit. 13. c. 5. 3.
, and Basilides Theod. Tert.
, yea the very Devils, and not Christ, said the Manichies August. lib. de Fide,
c. 32, 33.
, suffered, and hung on the cross.

That the whole passion of Christ is to be understood allegorically, and not
according to the letter; as the Family of Love do think H.N. Instr. ar. 4.
sent. 17.29
.

That Christ on the Cross has suffered 1 for the redemption of mankind, and
shall suffer again for the salvation of the Devils; such heretics there have
bin Witness Tho. Aquin. on 1. Pet. 3.
; 2 as Jesus, but shall again suffer as Jesus Christ (which was one of Francis
Ket his heresies, for which he was burned); 3 for men, but one mother Jane is
the Savior of women, a most execrable assertion of Postellus, the Jesuit
Jesuits Catec. 1. book. c. 10.
.

The fantasies of the Iacobites Niceph. l. 18. c. 52.
, and Turks Lonic. Tur. hist. tom. 1. l. 1.
.

The popish doctrine touching the Mass, prayers unto Saints, Pardons, and
Purgatory, which make the passion of Christ either of none effect, or to put
away but original sin only See art. 22.31.
.

That albeit our Savior has suffered for all men in general: yet both each
man must suffer for himself in particular Test. Rhem. in. Romans 8.17.
; and the works of one man may satisfy the justice of God for another Ibid.
in. Col. 1.24.
: which are popish errors.

That Christ died not for the sins of all men; and that some sins are so
filthy, and enormous, as Christ his blood upon true repentance of the
delinquents part, cannot wash them away: which was Kains Genesis 4.
, Fr. Spiras Hist. Fr. Spir.
, and other desperate persons error.

That whatsoever is written touching Christ his sufferings, must in us, and
with us be fulfilled; the false doctrine of H.N. Prophet. of the Spir. cap. 19.
sent. 3.


3. Article. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
As Christ died for us, and was buried: so also it is to be believed, that he
went down into Hell.

The Proposition. Christ went down into Hell.
The proof from Gods word.
Sundry be the texts of Scripture for Christ his descension into Hell.

Mine heart was glad (says David Psalm. 16.10.11. Act. 2.26, 2^.
, a figure of Christ) and my glory rejoiced, my flesh also shall rest in hope.
For why? Thou shall not leave my soul in hell.

O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me. Thou Lord have
brought my soul out of Hell Psalm. 30.1, 2.
.

I will thank thee, o Lord my God, with all my heart; and will praise thy name
for evermore. For great is thy mercy toward me; and thou have delivered my
soul from the nethermost hell Psalm. 86.12.13.
.

In that he ascended, what is it but that he had also descended first into the
lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is even the same that ascended,
far above all heavens, that he might fill all things Ephesians. 4.9, 10.
.

O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is this victory 1. Cor. 15.53.
?

Also that Christ went down into Hell, all sound Christians both in former
days He descended into hell. Symbol. Apost. Athan.
, and now living Confess. Helv. 2. c. 11. Basil. ar. 2. August. ar. 3. Suevica.
ar. 2.
, do acknowledge: howbeit in the interpretation of the article, there is not
that consent as were to be wished, some holding that Christ descended into Hell.

1. As God only, and not man; as they do which say, how Christ descended
powerfully, and effectually, but not personally into hell; and that the deity
exhibited it self, as it were present in the infernal parts, to the terror of
the devil, and other damned spirits.

2. As the man only; and that as some think, in body only, as when death as
it were prevailed over him lying in the grave; as others deem, in Soul only,
when he went unto the place of the reprobate, to the increasing of their
torments.

3. As God and man in one person; as they do which affirm that Christ in
body, and soul, went, some think, as it were into Hell, when upon the
Cross, and else where he suffered the terrors and torments prophesied of Esaias.
53. v. 6.10. Psalm. 116. v. 2. and mentioned, Matthew. 26. v. 38. or 27. v. 46.
Luke 22. v. 42. some say even into Hell (the very place destinied for the
Reprobate) which he entered into the very moment of his Resurrection, at which
time he showed and declared himself a most glorious conqueror both of death,
and Hell, the most powerful enemies.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
But till we know the native, and undoubted sense of this article, and
mystery of religion, persist we adversaries unto the^ which say:

That Christ descended not into hell at all, calling this article, an error,
and a fable, as Carlisle does Cor^ile against D. Smith. p. 28.77.
.

That Christ being dead, descended into the place of everlasting torments,
where in soul he endured for a time the very pains which the damned spirits,
without intermission, do abide. Bannisters error Treat. of Bannisters errors.
.

That Christ alive upon the cross, humbled himself, Vsque ad inferni tremenda
tormenta, even unto the dreadful torments of hell Pagets Catec. Latia.
: endured for a time those torments, quales reprobi in aeternu^ sensuri sunt,
which the reprobates shall everlastingly suffer in hell Pis^. in Luc. 12.10.
: even despaired of Gods mercy, finding God at this time, Non Patrem, sed
Tyrennum, no a Father but a Tyran; and overcame Despair by despair, death by
death; hell by hell; and and Satan by Satan Ferus in Matthew. 27.
: suffered actually All the torments of hell for our redemption; and descended
into the heauiest torments that Hell could yield Humes rei^i ^d. p. 38.138.152.
: suffered the torments of hell, The second death. Abiection from God Ho.
se^old catech.
: and was made a curse, that is, had the bitter anguish of Gods wrath in his
soul, and body, which is the fire that shall never be quenched Giffords catech.
.

That Christ personally in Soul went down into Lake Lymbo, to fetch from
thence as Canisius; to loose from thence, as Vaux he says Vaux catech.
, the souls of our forefathers, Ca^^is. catech.
which before his death (as the Papists dream) were shut up in the close prison
of Hell Test. Rh^m. an. Luke 16 26.
.

That Christ by his descension has quite turned Hell into Paradise: Costerus,
the Jesuits error ^oster. ins^it. l. 5.
.

4. Article. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
Christ did truly 1 arise again from death, and took again his body, with
flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature: 2
wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sits 3 until he return to
judge all men at the last day.

The propositions.
1. Christ is risen from the dead.

2. Christ is ascended into heaven.

3. Christ shall come again at the last day, to judge all men, even the quick
and the dead.

1. Proposition. Christ is risen from the dead.
The proof from Gods word.
THe resurrection of Christ may easily be proved from the holy Scriptures, in
which it is evident, first that Christ should Thou will not suffer thine holy
one to see corruption. Psalm. 16.10. After he is killed, he shall rise again
the 3. day. Mark. 9.31. and 10.34. Luke 9.32.
; and next that he did rise from death unto life, both by his appearing to
Marie Magdalene Ioh. 20.14.
, to diverse women Math. ^8.9.
, to two Luke 24 13.15, 30, 31.
, to ten Ioh. 20.19.
, to all the disciples f, to more then 500. brethren at once 1. Cor. 15.6.
, to sundry persons by the space of 40 days together Act. 1.3.
; and by the testimony also of the Apostles Peter Act. 1.22. and 2.32. 1. Pet.
1.3.
, and Paul Act. 17.2, 3. Romans 10.9 1. Cor. 15.4, 5, etc.
.

A truth both believed, and acknowledged by Gods people from age to age Symbol.
Apost. Athan. Nicen. Confess. Helvet. 1. ar. 11. and 2. c. 11. Basil. ar. 4.
Bohem. c. 6. Gal. ar. 15.16. Belg. ar. 20. August. ar. 3. Suevica, ar. 2.
Harmon. confess praef.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Utterly false then, and unchristian is the opinion of those men.

Which utterly deny the resurrection of any flesh, as did the Sadduces The
Sadduces say there is no resurrection, Matthew. 22.23. they deny there is any
resurrection. Luke 20.27. they say there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor
spirit. Act. 23 8.
, the false Apostles How say some among you that there is no resurrection of the
dead. 1. Cor. 15.12.
; Simon Magus Epiphan.
, and the Manichies August. contra Faust. l. 4. c. 16.
.

Which would acknowledge no resurrection of Christ, as would not, nor will the
Jews Matthew. 28.13.15. Lud. Caret, l, divinor. visor.
, nor heretic Hamant Holinsh. chron. fol. 1299.
, nor David Georg, one of whose errors was, that the flesh of Christ was
dissolved into ashes, and so rose no more Hist. Dauidis Georg.
.

which affirm (as did Cerinthus) that Christ shall rise again, but yet is not
risen Philaster.
.

Which say, how our Savior, after his resurrection, was so deified, as he
retained no more the parts and properties of his body, and soul; nor the
union of both natures, but is merely God. So thought the Schwenkfeldians:

Which take the Resurrection of Christ to be but an allegory and no true, and
certain history; as do the Family of Love Display in Allens confess.
.

2. Proposition. Christ is ascended into heaven.
The proof from Gods word.
In saying how Christ with his body is ascended into heaven, and there
sits, and abides, we do agree with the Prophets Ps l. 47.5.68.18.110.1.
, Evangelists Math. 23.44.26.64. Act. 1.9. Luke 24.51.
, and Apostles Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 4.8.
, with the ancien fathers Symb. Apost. Athan. Nicen.
, and Gods people our brethren, throughout all Christendom Confess. Helv. 1.
ar. 11. and 2. c. 11. Basi. ar. 4. Bohem. c. 6. Gal. ar. 15. Belg. ar. 20.
August. ar. 3. Saxon. ar. 3. Suevic. ar. 2.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
But we altogether dissent

From Hamant, the English heretic, which denied the ascension of Christ
Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299.
.

Also from Ket, the heretic and Apostata, which likewise denied our Saviors
asscension, affirming that his humane nature is not in heaven but in Iudaea,
gathering a Church and people.

Also from the Germane Vbiquitaries, and Papists, they saying that Christ as
man, is not only in heaven, but in earth too at this instant, wheresoever the
deity is Ia. Smidelinus, Vbiquitatis Apostolus. Beza, epist. 61.
, these affirming the humane nature of Christ is, wheresoever the Sacrament of
the Altar is administered Ergo it is not in heaven, unless heaven be upon earth.
.

Also from the Montanists, Cataphrygians, and Carpocratians Philast. Theodor.
, who held how Christ not in body but in soul ascended into heaven.

From the papists, who say that Christ ascending into heaven carried with him
the souls, which he loosed from captivity, and bondage of the devil; even
the souls of the righteous, before that time were not in heaven, but in Lymbo
Catech. Tri^. in Symb. verba, d. (...). c. 1. Te^t. Rh^m. 11. marg..633.
.

And lastly from those Germane divines, which think that our Savior carried
with him into heaven the faithful people, in soul and body, raised at his
resurrection D. M^. Dom. in Euang. in fes^o Ascen. Dom. and in epist. Dom.
Ascen. D.
.

3. Proposition. Christ shall come again at the last day, to judge all men,
even the quick and the dead.
The proof from Gods word.
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with power, etc.
Hence God raised up the third day, etc. And he commanded us to preach unto the
people, and to testify, that it is he, that is ordained of God a Judge of
quick, and dead, says S. Peter Act 10.38.40, 41.
.

God shall judge the world by Jesus Christ Romans 2.16.
.

Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, etc. Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which
the Lotd, the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his appearing; says S. Paul 2. Tim. 4.1.8.
.

The Judge stands before the door, says. S. James Iam. 5.9.
.

And this Gods church and people do firmly believe and faithfully confess
Symb. Apost. Nicen. Athan. Confess. Helv. 2. c. 11. and 1. ar. 11. Basil. ar.
9. Bohem. c. 6. Belg. ar. 37. August. ar. 3. Suevi^a, ar. 2.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
On the other side both they abroad, and we at home, abhor them for their
opinions which said that,

There shallbe no genera^l judgment at all, as did the Manichies Philaster.
, and do the atheists.

That the devils, and the most ungodly, some of them, and namely so many as
in hell do call upon God for mercy, and forgiveness, say the Turks (...) 23.
, yea of al them, say the Originists (...). 17.
, and Catabaptists Bulling con^r. Catah^^. l. 1. tra^t. 1.
, shall be saved.

That the wicked shall not be judged at all, but shall die as the brute
beasts, and neither rise again in body, nor come unto judgment. An error of
the Family of Love Dis^l^y of the Fam. H. 6. b.
.

That Christ shall not be the future Judge; so thought both David George,
Coppinger and Arthington: For that George rumord himself to be the judge of
the whole world (...). David^s Georg.
, and Coppinger and Arthington, published how one William Hacket was come to
judge the world, and themselves to be his angels for the separating the sheep
from Goats Conspir. f^r pretend. Ref^r. p. 47 55. Arthing. s^duc.
.

That besides Christ, the Pope is judge of the quick, and dead; An error of the
Papists Extrauag. de sent. Excom. C. a nobis, and 24. q. 2.
.

That before the judgment there shall be a golden world, the godly, and none
besides, enjoying the same peaceably, and gloriously, as the Jews imagine
Confess. Aug. ar. 17.
.

That the Belief, touching the general Judgment of Christ, over the living,
and dead, is a doctrine mystical, or a mystery (no history); as H.N.
teaches H.N. in his Jnstruct. praef. (...). 5.
.

That the righteous are already in godly glory, and shall from henceforth
live everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the Earth; as the Family of
Love holds H.N. ibid. (...). 1. ar. 8. 35. and in his Euang. c. 1. 1. (...),
confess. in the Displ^y.
.

5. Article. Of the holy Ghost.
The holy Ghost; proceeding from the Father, and the Son, 2 is of one
substance, majesty, and glory, with the Father, and the Son, 1 very, and
eternal God.

The Propositions.
1. The holy Ghost, is very, and eternal God.

2. The holy Ghost is of one substance, majesty, and glory with the Father
and the Son.

3. The holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son.

1. Proposition. The holy Ghost is very, and eternal God.
The proof from Gods word.
THe holy Ghost to be very, and eternal God, the Scripture teach us. For he
is the Creator of all things. In the beginning God created the heaven, and the
earth, etc. And the spirit of God moved upon the waters Genesis 1.1, 2.
. O Lord, how manifold are thy works, etc. If thou hide thy face, they are
troubled, if thou take away their breath, they die, and return to their dust:
if thou send forth thy spirit, they are created Psalm. 104.24.29.30.
: Ergo the holy Ghost is God.

Christians are to be baptized in the name of the holy Ghost Math. 28.19.
, as well as of the Father, and the Son. Therefore is he very God.

Ananias lied unto God Act. 5.3.4.9.
, and Sapphira tempted God, when both he lied unto the holy Ghost, and she
tempted the spirit of the Lord.

As God, he chooses, assigns, and sends forth men for the ministry of
the Gospel Act. 13.2.4.
; as God he decrees orders for his Church and people Act. 15.28.
, and as God he is to be invocate, and prayed unto, as well as the Father, and
the Son 2. Cor. 13.13.
.

Upon this, and the like words, I believe in the holy Ghost Symb. Apost.
; I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life Symb. Nicen.
; the Catholic Faith is this, that we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity, etc. The Father is God, the Son is God, and the holy God.
And yet they are not three Gods, but one God Symb. Athan.
, etc. say the ancient Fathers which also is the Faith and confession of all
Gods people at this day Confess. Helv. ar. 6. and 2. c. 3. Basil. ar. 1. Bohe.
c. 3. Belg. ar. 8. August. ar. 1. VVittemb. c. 1. Suevica, ar. 1. Gal. 6. Harm.
confess. praef.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This makes to the condemnation of the Pneumatomacheis, whereof

Some impugn the deity of the holy Ghost, as did in old time, Samosatenus
Epiph.
and Photinus Vinc. Lyr. ^. advers. haer.
; of late years, Seruetus Beza epist. 1.
, Ochinus Zanch. de 3. El. l. 4. c. 1.
, abroad; and Francis Ket burnt at Norwich 14. Ian. 1588.
, Hamant Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299.
, and certain Brownists who whisper in corners that we must not believe in
the holy Ghost, says Bredvvel, vvriting against Glover. p. 102.
, among us at home: Some affirm the holy Ghost to be but a mere creature, as
did Arius Theod. l. 5. c. 10.
, the Semiarians Philast.
the Macedonian heretics Soz. l. 4. c. 27.
, the Tropickes Athan.
, Ochinus Zanch. de 3. El. par. l. 2. c. 5.
. Some have assumed the style, and title of the holy Ghost unto themselves; as
did Simon Magus D. Iren.
: Montanus Eus^. l. 5. c. 18.
, and Manes Chry. l. des. S.
.

Some have given the title of the holy Ghost unto men, and women; so

Hierax said, that Melchisedech was the holy Ghost Epiphan.
.

Simon Magus termed his Helene the holy Ghost Epiphan.
.

The Helchesaites said the holy Ghost was a woman, and the natural sister of
Christ Epiphan.
.

Many Papists, and namely the Franciscanes Alcar. Fr. l. 1.
, blush not to say, that S. Francis is the holy Ghost.

2. Proposition. The holy Ghost is of one substance, majesty and glory with the
Father, and the Son.
The proof from Gods word.
The holy Ghost effected the incarnation of Christ Math. 1.18 20. Luke 1 35.
, teaches all things Ioh. 14.26.
; leads into all truth Ioh. 16.13.
, gives utterance to his servants Act. 2.4.
, and gifts unto his people 1. Cor. 12.8.
, places rulers in the Church and overseers to feed the flock of God Act.
20.28.
; seals the Elect unto the day of redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
, as well as the Father, and the son: and these three, viz. the Father, the
word, and the holy Ghost, are one 1. Ioh. 5.7.
. Therefore is the holy Ghost of one substance, majesty, and glory with the
Father, and the son.

And this was the belief of the ancient Fathers.

I believe (say they) in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, etc. who
with the Father and the son together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke
by the Prophets Symb. Nicen.
.

The Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is all one,
the glory equal, the majesty coeternal. Such as the Father is, such is the Son,
and such is the holy Ghost. etc, And in this Trinity none is before or after
other, none is greater or less then another: But the whole three persons be
coeternall together, and coequal Symb. Atha.
.

The very same do all reformed Churches believe, and confess Conf^ss. Helv.
1. ar. 6. and 2. c. 3. Basil. ar. 1. Bohem. c. 3. Gal. ar. 1. Belg. ar. 1.
Aug^st. ar. 1. VVittemb. c. 1.2. Suevi^a, ar. 1.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
The premises do make

Against the Tretheites; which affirm the holy Ghost to be inferior unto the
Father Zanch. de 3. El. par. 2. l. 5. c. 1.
,

Against the Arrians; who said the holy Ghost was inferior to the Son August.
cont. Mar. Arcian.
.

Against the Macedonian heretics, who held the holy Ghost to be but a
minister, and servant of the Father, and the Son Ruffin. l. 1. c. 25.
: yet of more excellent majesty, and dignity then the Angels Niceph. l. 9. c.
47.
.

Against many erroneous spirits, which deliver the holy Ghost to be nothing else
but,

The motion of God in his creatures, as did the Samosatenians Confess. Aug. ar.
8.
.

A bare power, and efficacy of God working by a secret inspiration; as the
Turks Pol. of the Turk. Emp. c. 5.
; and certain English Sadduces do imagine Hutchinson in his Image of God, c.
24. p. 112. a.
.

The Inheritance allotted to the faithful H.N. in his Instruct. praef. sent. 7.
; and the being or virtuous estate of Christ Jdem in his Spir. land. praef..
14.
, as dreameth H.N.

The affection of charity, or Love within us; an error of Petrus Lombardus
Sent. l. 1. did.. 5.2.
.

Gods love, favor, and virtue, whereby he works in his children; so thought
Ochinus Zanch. de 3. El. par. 2. l. 4. c. 1.
, and Seruetus Zanch. ib. l. 1. c. 2.
.

3. Proposition. The holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son.
The proof from Gods word.
The proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father, and the Son, we gather
from the holy scripture, which teaches how

The Father sends the comforter, which is the holy Ghost, in the name of the
Son Ioh. 14.26.
, and the son sends the comforter, the spirit of truth from the Father Ioh.
15.^6.
; he proceeds of the Father Ibid.
, and is sent of the Son Ioh. 16.7.
.

So with us, say the ancient Fathers, and Christians.

He proceeds from the Father and the Son Symb. Nicen.
.

The holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son; neither made, nor created,
but proceeding. So there is one Father, not three Fathers, one son, not three
sons; one holy Ghost, not three holy Ghostes Symb. Atha.
, which is the faith of the modern christians Confess. Helv. 1. c. 3. Gal. c.
3. Belg. ar. 8.11. VVittemb. c. 3. Suevica, ar. 1.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This discovers all them to be impious, and to err from the way of truth,
which hold and affirm,

That the holy Ghost proceeds neither from the Father, nor the Son, but is
one, and the same person that Christ is: as the Arrians do Basil. sermon. de sp.
S.
.

That the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, but not from the son: as at
this day the Graecians Russe Commonvveale, c. 23.
, the Russians Guagnin. de relig. Moscov.
, the Moscouites Father de relig. Moscov.
, maintain.

That there is a double proceeding of the holy Ghost; one temporal, the other
eternal; an error of Peter Lombard ^. Sent. l. 1. distinct. 14.
, uncontrolled hitherto, and therefore well liked of the Papists.

6. Article. Of the sufficiency of the holy Scripture for salvation.
Holy Scripture 1 contains all things necessary for salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the Faith or
be thought requisite necessary to salvation. 2 In the name of the holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical books of the old and new
testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and number of the Canonical books.
Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numbers. Deuteronomium. Iosue. Judges. Ruth. The
1. Book of Samuel. The 2. Book of Samuel. The 1. Book of Kings. The 2. Book
of Kings. The 1. Book of Chronicles. The 2. Book of Chronicles. The 1. Book
of Esdras. The 2. Book of Esdras. The Book of Esther. The Book of Job. The
Psalms. The Proverbs. Eccles. or the Preacher. Canticles or song of Solomon.
4. Prophets the greater. 12Prophets the less.
3 And the other books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life, and instruction of manners: but yet does it not apply them to stablish
any doctrine, Such are these following.

The 3. Book of Esdras. The 4. Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The Book
of Judith. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of wisdom. Jesus the
son of Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. Song of the 3. children. The story of
Susanna. Of Bell, and the Dragon. The prayer of Manasses. The 1. Book of
Macchabes. The 2. Book of Macchabes.
4 All the books of the new Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive, and account them for Canonical.

The propositions.
1. The sacred Scripture contains all things necessary (to be known, and
believed) for the salvation of man.

2. All the books in the volume of the Bible are not Canonical, but some and
namely those here specified, are.

3. The 3. and 4. books of Esdras, the book of Tobias, etc. are apocryphal.

4. Of the new Testament all the books are Canonical.

1. Proposition. The sacred Scripture contains all things necessary (to be
known, and believed) for the salvation of man.
The proof from Gods word.
THe holy Scriptures to be sufficient to instruct us in all things necessary,
to be known and believed, for man's salvation, the word of God teaches.

Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you (says the Lord),
neither shall ye take ought therefrom Deuteronomy. 4.2.
.

Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therfrom Ibid. 12.32.
. Thou shall not turn away from it to the right hand, nor to the left, that
thou may prosper whither soever thou go Ios. 1.7.
.

Every word of God is pure, etc. Put nothing unto his words least he reprove
thee, and thou be found a liar Prove. 30.5, 6.
.

These things are written that ye might believe, etc. and that in believing ye
might have life through his Name Ioh. 20.31.
.

The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man
of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works 2. Tim. 3.16,
17.
.

If any man shall add unto these things: God shall add unto him the plagues,
that are written in this book: and if any man shall diminish of the words of
this book, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy city, and from those things which are written in this book Revel.
22.18, 19.
.

Hereunto Gods people both always have, and at this present do subscribe
Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 1.4. and 2. c. 1. Basil. ar. 10. Bohem. c. 1. Gal. ar.
2.4.5. Belg. ar. 7. Saxon. ar. 1. VVittemb. c. 30. Suev. ar. 1.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore adversaries be we to all adversaries to this truth, especially.

To such as scorn, and contemptuously reject the book of God, as both did the
Circumcellians, which defaced, and burnt the holy Scriptures Aug. contra Petil.
l. 1. c. 27.
, and Pope Leo the tenth, who termed the holy Gospel, A fable of Christ Apol.
Steph. fol. 358.
: and do the profane Atheists Nash in Christ his tear^s. p. 59. a.
.

Also to such as debase the credit and estimation of the holy Scriptures, as
David George did Hist. Davidi^ Georg.
: and both do the papists, who have an opinion that the scriptures of God are
not sufficient to instruct mankind unto salvation Lindan. l. 1. c. ^.
: and the Anabaptists, which deem not the holy Bible to be the word of God
Bulling. contr. Catabap. l. 1.
, with the Family of Love, in whose books nothing is more frequent then the
tearming of Gods reverend ministers, and preachers, Scripture learned.

Also to them which with Gods word do equal their own doctrines,
Injunctions, precepts, and Traditions, as do the Papists. For of their
doctrine, say the Rhemists: whatsoever the lawful Apostles, Pastors, or
Priests of Gods church preach in the unity of the same Church (meaning the
new church of Rome) is to be taken for Gods own word Test. Rhem. an. 1. These.
2.12.
. To the same purpose, but more blasphemously Stapleto^: As the Jews were to
believe Christ: so are we simply, and in every thing to believe the church (of
Rome), whether it teaches truth or errors Stapl. antid. Euang. in Luc. 10.16.
p. 528.
.

Whatsoever by the authority of the Church is commanded, ought of all men to
be esteemed as the very Gospel, says Abbat Trithemius Tract. de propriet.
Monach. c. 4.
, of Popish precepts: and our English Rhemists, He that despises the Churches,
or her lawful Pastors precepts, And of their Traditions: ^est. Rhem. an. 1.
These. 4 8.
He that refuses ecclesiastical traditions, deserves to be thrown out of
the church among the Heathen, as well as he which refuses the Gospel, says
Didacus Stella Stella in Luc. 10. fol. 20.
, and the counsel of Trent; with like affection of godliness and reverence,
embrace we, and worship the books of the old, and new Testament, and
ecclesiastical Traditions, says the Counsel Council. Trid. s^ss. 4.
. The like opinion have the Moscovites of Traditions Russe Com. c. 23.
.

To them finally are we adversary which above the Scriptures do prefer*
their own 1 inventions, as did the Philosophers; whereof one said of Moses,
That good man makes a trim discourse, but proves nothing; and the
Graecians, to whom the Gospel is foolishnes 1. Cor. ^.23.
; 2 and imaginations, as did the Manichies Epiphan.
, David George Hist. Da. Geo.
, and do the Turks Pol. of the Turk. Emp. c. 3.23.
, and Family of Love Display. A. 6.
, 3 or Traditions, as do the Papists, who more cruelly do punish the
violators of their own Traditions, and ordinances, then they do the breakers
of Gods commandments; 4 or Statutes, Edicts, Judgments, Proclamations etc.
proceeding from the brain of man; as Mac^hiauell does, and his scholars.

2. Proposition. All the books in the volume of the Bible are not Canonical,
but some are.
That some books, and namely those above mentioned, are Canonical, it has
bin granted by the best learned, and most godly of long time. And as all
reformed churches in the world are of the same judgment with us; so in their
public Confessions, some have so accounted, and judged of them as we do
Confess. Gal. ar. 9. Belg. ar. 4.
.

Adversaries to this truth.
Therefore (to speak first of the canonical books of the old Testament) much
have they offended, which either rejected all, or allowed but some of the
books of the old testament: of the former sort were the Seuerians Triteut. de
eccles. scrip.
, Basilides Epiphan.
, Carpocrates Epiphan.
, and the Manichies August. de bono pers. l. 2. c. 11.
; are the Catabaptistes Zuingl. lib. contra Calabap.
: of the latter were sundry, whereof

Some received no more but only the five books of Moses, as the Sadduceis D.
Whit. de S. Scrip. contra Bella^. q. 1. c. 3.
.

Some, of all the books in the old testament, reject the works of Moses, and
namely his four last books; as the Moscovites Russe Com. c. 23.
.

Some embraced the Law only, and the Prophets; as the Samarites Cyril. catech.
18.
.

Some esteemed neither the Law, nor the Prophets; as the Appelleans Tertul. de
praes. haeret.
.

Some had in contempt the book of the Canticles, as Sebastian Castello Beza in
vita Calv.
.

And some the book of Job, as the Anabaptists Whitaker. de S. Scrip. contra
Bellar. q. 1. c. 3.
.

3. Proposition. The third and fourth books of Esdras, the book of Tobias,
etc. be Apocrypha.
That diverse, and namely these books mentioned, are Apocrypha, we are neither
the first that said; nor they alone which affirm the same. For so judge of
them did the ancient council at Laodicea Can. 59.
, and do the Churches reformed and namein France Confess. Gal. ar. 3. Confess.
Belg. ar. 4.
, and Belgia c.

Adversaries unto this truth.
So that they are to be held, and taken heed of, as Seducers which upon the
Church would thrust, either other men's works, and devises, not comprised in
the Bible, as would Some, the new Prophets, Barrobas, and Barrolf, of Basilides
the heretic E^seb. eccles. hist. l 4. c. 8.
.

Some, the manifestations of Marcion the heretic Tertul. de haeret.
.

Some, the mysteries of Manichie the heritike Magdeburg. eccles. hist. C. 3. c.
11.
.

Others, Esaias Ascensorium, of Hierax the heretic E^iphan.
.

Others the Gospel after the Egyptians, after S. Andrew, S. James the lesser,
S. Peter, S. Bartholomew, the 12. Apostles Barnabas, Nicodemus, Thaddeus.

The Canons of the Apostles, others.

Others, the Acts of S. Abdie, S. Andreas, S. Paul, Peter, Philip, Thomas.

Others the Revelation of S. Paul, Peter Steven, Thomas.

Others, the books of the Anabaptists, of H.N. with Popish Legendes, and the
like,

Or the books Apocrypha, within the volume of the Bible, as the Papists, who
therefore anathematize, and curse so many as take them not for Canonical
Council. Trid. sess. 4. decr. de Can. scrip.
.

4. Proposition. Of the new Testament all books are Canonical.
Although some of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors, accepted not all the
books, contained within the volume of the new Testament, for Canonical: yet
in the end they were wholly taken and received by the common consent of the
Church of Christ in this world, for the very word of God, as they are at this
day, almost in all places, where the Gospel is preached, and professed.

Howbeit we judge them Canonical, not so much because learned, and godly men
in the Church so have, and do receive, and allow of them; as for that the
holy Spirit in our hearts does testify that they are from God: They carry a
sacred and divine authority with them; and they do also agree in all points
with the other books of God in the old Testament.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore in admitting all and every of these books, and acknowledging them
to be Canonical, we demonstrate our selves to be against.

Such as rejected all the new Testament, as did the Jews, and our Matthew
Hamant Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299.
.

Such as allowed part, but not the whole new Testament; and these were of
diverse sorts, whereof

Some allowed of the Evangelists, only Matthew, as the Cerdonites Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 27
, and Ebionites Jren. l. 1. c. 26.
; others only Luk, as the Marcionites Iren. ibid.
, others, only John as the Valentinians Idem l. 3. c. 11.
.

Some accepted only the Acts of the Apostles, as the Tatians: others of all
other books rejected the said Acts, as the Manichies August. lib. de vtil.
cred.
, and the Seuerites Eusebius.
.

Some of S. Paul's epistles, took the epistles unto Timothy, and Titus only
to be Canonical, as Marcion the heretic Jren. l. 3. c. 12.
.

Some, as Apocryphal, refused the epistle unto Philemon Theodor. arg. in epist.
Pauli ad Tit.
, others the epistle unto the Hebrews, the epistle of S. James, as Althemerus
Althemer. in. c. 2. epist. Ia.
, others the first, and second epistles of John with the epistle of Jude, as
Wigandus VVigand. Syntag. l. 5.
; others the epistle unto the Hebrews, of James, the two last of John, and of
Jude, as Cardinal Caietane See Whitaker. against VV. Rainolds. c. 7.
.

Some rejected the book of S. John's revelations, or the Apocalypse, as
Heshusius Lib. de 600. error. pontif.
: we are also against them which allowed neither the whole new Testament, nor
those books wholly, which they embraced, as the Marcionites, who defaced all
those places in the Gospel after Luke, and in the epistles, which concernd
either the divinity, or humanity of our Savior Christ Iren. l. 2.5.29.
.

And lastly are we against them which receive the whole new Testament, but
deface and put out such textes as mislike them; as the Turks who scrape out
whatsoever they find touching the passion of Christ, alleging how it was
added purposely by the Jews in derision of Christians Aul. Tur. l. 2. p. 50.
.

7. Article. Of the old Testament.
1 The old Testament is not contrary to the new. For both in the old, and new
Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
mediator between God and man, being both God, and man.

2 Wherefore they are not tr be heard, which feign that the old Fathers did
look only for transitory promises.

Although the law given from God by Moses, as touching 3 Ceremonies, and rites,
do not bind Christian men: 4 nor the civil precepts thereof ought of
necessity to be received in any Common wealth: yet notwithstanding 5 no
Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the Commandments, which
are called moral.

The Propositions.
1. The old Testament is not contrary to the new.

2. The old Fathers looked for eternal happiness, through Christ, as well as
for temporal blessings.

3. Christians are not bound at all to the observation of the Iudaical
ceremonies.

4. The Judicial laws of the Jews are not necessarily to be received, or
established in any common wealth.

5. No Christian man whatsoever is freed from the obedience of the law Moral.

1. Proposition. The old Testament is not contrary to the new.
The proof from Gods word.
THat the old Testament is not contrary to the new, it may be proved by many
invincible arguments: yet it is most apparent, in that our Savior Christ, very
God and very man (as above art. 2. has bin declared) is offered unto mankind
for his eternal salvation, by them both. For,

We learn that there is one and no Christ's more in the new Act. 3.25. G^l.
3.8.10.
, and we learn the same in the old Genesis 22.18.
.

That Christ is the Son of God, in the new M^th 16.16. Act. 13 33.
, we learn the same in the old Psalm. 2.7.
.

That Christ is very man, in the new Heb. 2.14, 15, 16.
; we learn that he should be so from the old Esa. 11.1. and 53.3.
.

That Christ was borne at Berhelem in the new Matthew. 2.1.
, we learn that he should be so from the old Micah. 5.2.
.

That Christ was borne of a virgin in the new Matthew. 1.23.
, we learn that he should be so from the old Esa. 7.14.
.

That Christ was honored of wise men in the new Matthew. 2.11.
, we learn that he should be so, from the old Esa. 60.6.
.

That he road upon an Ass unto Jerusalem, from the new Matthew. 21.1.
, we learn that he should so do, from the old Zach. 9.9.
.

That he was betrayed in the new Luke 22.7.
: we learn that he should be so, from the old Zach 11.12.
.

That he suffered not for his own, but for our transgressions, in the new
Act. 8.33. 1. Cor. 15.3. 1. Pet. 2.24.
; we learn that he should so do, from the old Esa. 53.5.
.

In the new that he rose again from the grave Act. 2.29.31. 1. Cor. 15.4.
Matthew. 12.40.
; from the old, that he should so do Psalm. 16.10. Jonas 1.17. and 2.10.
.

And in the new, that he ascended into heaven Ephesians. 4.8.
, and in the old, that he should so do Psalm. 68.18.
,

The adversaries unto this truth.
We are then adversaries to all them, which reject, as of no reckoning, the
old Testament, as did both old heretics, as Basilides, Carpocrates, and the
Manichies See before ar. 6. prop. 2.
, and the new Libertines, who say the old Testament is abrogated Bulling.
cont. Anabap. l. ^. c. 14.
.

2. Proposition. The old Fathers looked for eternal happiness, through Christ,
as well as for temporal blessings.
The proof from Gods word.
The old Fathers to have looked not only for transitory promises, but also
for eternal happiness, through Christ, the holy Scripture does manifest.

S. Paul says 1. Cor. 10.1.
,

Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, that all our Fathers were under the
cloud, and all passed through the sa; 2.
and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same
spiritual drink* 3.
(for they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them; and the Rock was
Christ.)

By faith Noe was made heir of the righteousness which is by faith Heb. 1i.7.
.

By faith Moses, when he was come to age, refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the rebukes
of Christ greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward Ibid. 24.25.26.
etc.

All these through faith obtained good report, and received not the promise;
God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect Ib. 39.40.
.

Abraham rejoiced to see my day Ioh. 8.56.
, Abraham above hope, believed under hope, that he should be the father of
many nations Romans 4.18.
.

Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired, and searched 1. Pet. 1.10.
.

This truth was never doubted of in the church of God, and is publicly
acknowledged by some confessions Helvet. 2. c. 13. Saxon. ar. 3.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
They are not then to be heard, which think the Fathers, and faithful people
before Christ his time, hoped only for temporal, and not for spiritual, and
if for spiritual, yet not for etetnall happiness; as did many of the Jewish
Atheists Psalm. 53.1.
, and Sadducis Acts 23.18.
, and do the Family of Love, which make the promises of happiness, by
temporal blessings to be accomplished in this transitory life.

Hence H. N. very strangely allegorizeth of the land of promise, when he
calls it, The good land of the upright, and concordable life; and says that,
The lovely being, or nature of the Love, is the life, peace, and joy, mentioned
Romans 14.6. and the land of promise, wherein honey, and milk flows, spoken of
Exodus 3. a. 13. a. Deuteronomy. 8. b. This, and more a great deal to this effect has
H. N. In his book entit. The spir. land of peace, c. 18. 10. etc. 25. 4.


3. Proposition. Christians are not bound at all to the observation of the
Judicial ceremonies.
The proof from the word of God.
That neither the whole law ceremonial of the Jews, nor any part thereof is
necessarily to be observed of us christians, the holy Scripture teaches us by
Peter's vision Act. 10.13.
, the Apostles decree Act. 15.24.29.
, and by the doctrine of S. Paul Gal. 2.3, 4. and 4.10.11. Ephesians. 2.14, 15.
Coloss. 2.16.17.
.

As all believe, so some Churches publicly acknowledge the same Confess. Gal.
ar. 23. Belg. ar. 25.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
In a wrong opinion therefore be they, who are of mind, either that the law
Ceremonial wholly is to continue, and be in use, or that part thereof is yet
in force, and must be.

The former of these was the opinion of the false prophets Act. 15.1.2.
, the Cerinthians Eusebius.
, the Ebionites Jren. l. 1. c. 26.
, and is of the Jews, Armenians, and Family of Love H. N. euang. c. 13. 4.9.
; the latter is an error of our home Sabbatarians. For say they:

The Sabbath was none of the Ceremonies, which were justly abrogated at the
coming of Christ D. B. Sac. doctrine, 1. book, p. 11.
.

When all Jewish things have bin abrogated, only (be their very words) the
Sabbath has continued still in the Church in his propet force, that it might
appear that it was of a nature far differing from them Ibid. p 20.
.

Whereas all other things were so changed, that they were clean taken away, as
the Preisthood, the Sacrafices, and Sacraments, this day (meaning the Sabbath
day) was so changed that it yet remains: which shows that though all the
other were ceremonial, and therefore, had an end, This (Sabbath) was moral,
and therefore abides still Jbid. p. 41.
.

The Commandment (of sanctifying every Seventh day, as in the Mosaicall
decalogue) is natural, moral, and perpetual (is their doctrine Jbid. p. 7.
.)

4. Proposition. The Judicial laws of the Jews, are not necessarily to be
received, or established in any Common wealth.
The proof from Gods word.
The truth hereof appears, by the Apostles decree Act. 15.20.28, 29.
; which shows whereunto only the primitive church necessarily was tied

By the Apostles doctrine Romans 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13, 14.
, which enioyneth Christians to yield obedience unto the ordinances of their
lawful gouerners, and commanders whosoever.

By the Apostles example, and namely of the blessed S. Paul Act. 16.37. Act.
22.25. etc. Act. 25.11, 12.
, who took benefit, and made good use of the Roman, and Imperial laws.

Adversaries unto this truth.
This truth neither is, nor ever was oppugned by any Church. Only among our
selves some think us necessarily tied unto all the Judicials of Moses, as the
Brownists (For they say, The laws Judicial of Moses belong as well unto
Christians, as they did unto the Jews Barrovves disco. p. 127.
.

Others, that we are bound, though not unto all: yet unto some of the
Iudicialls, as holds T.C. 1. Reply. sect. 1.2.
, and Philip Stubs Anatom. of abuses, 2. part. D. b.
.

5. Proposition. No Christian man whosoever is freed from the obedience of the
law Moral.
The proof from Gods word.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, I am not come
to destroy them, but to fulfill them. For truly I say unto you (says our
Savior Christ), till heaven, and earth perish, one jot, or one title of the
law shall not escape, till all things be fulfilled: whosoever therefore shall
break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven, etc Math. 5.17.18.19.
.

If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. etc. Thou shall nor
kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal; thou shall not
bear false witness; Honor thy father, and thy mother Math. 19.17.18.19.
.

Do we make the law of none effect, through faith? God forbid, yea, we
establish the Law Romans 3.31.
. Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God 1. Cor. 7.19.
. The public confessions of the Churches of God in France Art. 23.
, and Belgia Art. 25.
agree with this Doctrine.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Whereby are condemned, as most wicked and vnsond, the opinions

Of the Manichies, who found fault with the whole Law of God, as wicked, and
prooceeding, not from the true God, but from the Prince of darkness August.
cont. Faust. epist. 11. and 74.
.

Of Brownist Glouer, whose opinion was, that Love now is come in the place of
the ten commandments Bredvvel detect. p. 119.
.

Of Johannes Islebius, and his followers, the Antinonies, who will not have
Gods law to be preached; nor the consciences of sinners to be terrified, and
troubled with the judgments of God Sim. Pauli meth. par. 2. de lege Dei, p. 54.
.

Of Banister (among our selves) who held how it is utterly evil for the Elect,
so much as to think, much less to speak, or hear of the fear of God (which
the Law preaches) Bannist. error.
.

8. Article. Of the three Creedes.
1 The three Creedes, Nicene creed, Athanasius creed, and that which is
commonly called the Apostles creed, ought thoroughly to be received, and
believed. For 2 they may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

The propositions.
1. The Nicen, Athanasian, and Apostolical Creedes, ought to be received, and
believed.

2. The three creedes, viz. the Ni. Athan. and of the Apostles, may be prooved
by the holy Scripture.

1. Proposition. The Nicen, Athanasian, and Apostolical Creedes, ought to be
received, and believed.
THis Proposition the Churches of God, both aunciently, and in these days
Confess. Helv. 2. c. 11. Gal. ar. 5. Belg. ar. 9. Saxon. ar. 1.
, do acknowledge for true.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore much out of the way of Godliness are they, which term the
Apostles Creed, A forged patcherie, as Barrowe does Bar. disco. p. 76.
, and Athanasius, Sathanasius creed, so did Gregorius Paulus in Polouia
Genebr. l. 4. p. 1158.
, and in the new Arrians, and Nestorians in Lituania Surius chron. p. 329.
.

My self some ^8. years ago, heard a great learned man, whose name upon an
other occasion before is expressed (to whose acquaintance I was artificially
brought) which in private conference between him, and my self, termed worthy
Zanchius a Fool, and an Ass, from his book de tribus Elohim, which refuteth
the new Arrians, against whose sounders, the Creedes of Athanasius, and Nicene
were devised. Him attentively I heard, but could never, since abide for those
words: and in deed I never saw him since.

2. Proposition. The three Creedes, viz. the Ni. Athan. and of the Apostles,
may be proved by the holy Scripture.
The proof from Gods word.
Than this assertion nothing is more true. For the Creedes, I mean these three
Creedes speak first.

Of one and the same God, whom we are to believe is for essence, but one Deuteronomy.
6.4. Mal. 2.10. 1. Cor. 8.4. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
, in persons three Matthew. 3.17. Gal. 4.6. 1. Ioh. 5.7.
, viz. the Father, the Creator Psalm. 134.3.
, the Son, the Redeemer Esa. 53.4. Romans 5.18. Gal. 3.13. Ephesians. 2.16. 1. Ioh.
2.2.
, the holy Ghost, the sanctifier 1. Cor. 1.21, 22. 1. Pet. 1.2.
. Next of the people of God which we must think, and believe is,

The holy Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and 2.21. Colos. 1.22.
, and Catholic Church Esa. 54.2. Psalm. 87.4. Act. 1.8. etc. Ephesians. 2.14. Revel.
5.9.
,

The communion of Saints Ephesians. 4.15. 1. Cor. 10.16. Heb. 10.25. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
,

Pardoned of all their sins Esa. 44.22. Matthew. 18.23, etc. Coloss. 2.13.
,

And appointed to arise from death Ioh. 5.28. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 3.21.
, and to enjoy eternal life, both in body and soul Ioh. 6.39. 1. Pet. 1.4.
Revel. 21.4.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore we are enemies to all adversaries of this doctrine, or any whit of
the same in them comprised, whether they be Atheists, Jews, Sadduces,
Ebionites, Tretheites, Antitrinitarains, Apollinarians, Arrians, Manichies,
Nestorians, Origenians, Turks, Papists, Familists, Anabaptists, or whosoever.

9. Article. Of Original, or Birth sin.
1 Original sin stands not in the follwing of Adam as the Pelagians do
vainly talk), but 2 it is the fault, and corruption of the nature of every
man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very
far gone from original righteousness, and is inclined to evil, so that the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and therefore in every person, borne into the
world, it deserves Gods wrath, and damnation.

3 And this infection of nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated,
whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...). Which some do expound,
the wisdom: some the Sensuallitie, some, the affection: some the desire of
the flesh, is not subject to the law of God. And although there is no
condemnation for them that believe, and are baptized: yet the apostle does
confess, that 4 Concupiscence, and Lust has of it self the nature of sin.

The propositions.
1. There is Original sin.

2. Original sin is the fault, and corruption of the nature of every man,
etc.

3. Original sin remains in God his dear children.

4. Concupiscence, even in the regenerate, is sin.

1. Proposition. There is Original sin.
The proof from Gods word.
In the holy Scripture we find of Original sin, the cause, the subject, and
the effects: the cause thereof is Adams fall Romans 5.15. 1. Cor. 15.21.
, partly by the subtle suggestions of the devil Genesis 3.4. 2. Cor. 11.3.
, partly through his own freewill: and the propagation of Adam his corrupted
nature unto his seed and posterity.

Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, says our
Savior Christ Ioh. 3.3.
. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
went over all men: forasmuch as all men have sinned, says S. Paul d. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby,
says S. Peter 1. Pet. 2.2.
. And S. James James 1.18.
, Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be as
the first fruits of his creatures. And the forementioned Apostle Paul again
Ephesians. 2.1, 3, 4.
: You that were dead in trespasses and sins, etc. and were by nature the
children of wrath, as well as others. But God, which is rich in mercy, through
his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has
quickened us together in Christ, etc.

The subject thereof, is the old man, with all his powers, mind, will, and
heart. For in the mind there is darkness, and ignorance of God, and his will
Math. i2.34. Romans 8.7. 1 Cor. 2.14. 1. Ioh. 3.1. and 5 19, 20.
: and in the will and heart of man, there is concupiscence, and rebellious
affections against the law of God Math. 5.29. Act. 7.39. and 15.9. Romans 1.21.
Iam. 1.13, 14.
.

And the effects of this Birth, or Original sin, are first actual sins,
and they both inward, as ungodly affections; and outward, as wicked looks,
profane speech, and devilish actions Math. 15.19.
; next, an evil conscience 1. Ioh. 3.21.
, which brings the wrath of God Romans 1.18. Coloss 3* 5, 6.
, death Ioh. 8.24. Romans 5.12. Iam. 1.15.
, and eternal damnation Romans 5.18.
.

All churches of God believe this, and some in their public confessions
testify so much Confess. Helvet. 1. ar. 8. and 2. c. 8. Basil. ar. 2. Bohem.
c. 4. Gal. ar. 9.11. Belg. ar. 15. August. ar. 1. Saxon. ar. 2.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Thus armed with authority, and forces from the word of God, and assisted with
the neighbor churches, we offer battle,

1. To the Jews Fr. Laur. a Villa. nin. de forman. S. concion. l. 1. c. 13.
, Carpocratians Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 3.
, and Family of Love Display in Allens confess.
, who flatly deny there is any original sin.

2. To the Papists, which say, that

Original sin is of all the least sin, and less then any venial sin.

Original sin is only the debt of punishment for the sin of Adam, and not
his fault.

Original sin is not properly sin: all this has Ruardus Tapperus Tapp.
tract. de pec. Orig.
.

Such as are infected only with Original sin, are free from all sensible
punishment Th. Aquin. l. 4. did. 16. q. 1. ar. 2.
.

3. To Florinus and Blastus, who make God the author of sin Confess. Helv. 2.
c. 8. ex Iren.
.

4. To the Sabbatarians among us, who teach, that

The life of God in Adam before his fall, could not continue without a Sabbath
Sah. doct. 1. book, p. 15.
.

The Sabbath was ordained before the fall of Adam, and that not only to
preserve him from falling Jbid.
, but also that being holy and righteous still, he might have bin preserved in
the favor of God Ibid. 2. book, page 182.
; which D. B. delivers in his Sabbath doctrine.

5. We are also adversaries to the like curiously affected, who enquire.

Whether it was Gods will, that Adam should fall?

Whether God enforced our first parents to fall?

Why God stayed not Adam from falling? etc.

2. Proposition. Original sin is the fault, and corruption of the nature of
every man, etc.
The proof from Gods word.
Original sin is not the Imitation of Adam his disobedience: For the
Scripture speaks of no such thing; neither does Gods people so think, and
some Churches, by their extant Confessions, with us deny the same: as the
Church in France Confess. Gal. ar. 10.
, and the Low countries Confess. Belg. ar. 15.
: but it is, partly the Imputation of Adam his disobedience unto us Romans 5.12,
16. Confess. August. ar. 2. Saxon. ar. 2. Wit. c. 4.
, and partly the fault, and corruption of man's nature Romans 3 23. and 7.18. Ephesians.
2.3.
, as the Churches also acknowledge Confess. Helv. 2. c. 8. Gal. ar. 10. Bohem.
c. 4. August. ar. 2. Saxon. ar. 2. VVittemb. c. 4.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries unto this truth, are,

The Pelagians August. de pec. meritis, c. 1, 2, 3.
, and Family of Love Display in Allens confess.
, who say that Original sin comes not by propagation, but by Imitation,

Such as ascribe Original sin in no sort unto man, but either unto God, as
did the Hermogenians Tertull.
, or unto the devil, as did the Valentinians Augustine.
.

The Manichies, who preached that this sin is another, and a contrary
substance within us, and proceeded no^ from our corrupted nature August. de
haeres.
.

The Appollinarians, who held original sin to be from nature Athan. de
incar. Christi.
.

The Papists, who affirm that some persons, and namely the virgin Mary
Council. Trid. sess. 5. decr. de pec. Orig. Alb. Mag. c. 74. super Euang. Missus
est, etc. Paulus de Palacio in Math. c. 11. p. 463.
, is free from this Original sin sin.

3. Proposition. Original sin remains in God his dear children.
The proof from Gods word.
I allow not that which I do; for what I wouid, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I, says S. Paul Romans 7.15.
.

The flesh lusts against the spirit; and the spirit against the flesh: so
that ye cannot do the same things that ye would Gal. 5.17.
.

Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
entised Iam. 1.14.
.

Dearly belooued, I beseech you, as strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts,
which fight against the soul 1. Pet. 2.11.
.

Nothing is more true in the judgment of Gods people, Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 8.
and 2. c. 8. Basil. ar. 2. Gal. ar. 11. Saxon. ar. 11.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
We stand therefore in this point,

Against the Papists, who say that Original sin was not at all, much less
remained in the Virgin Mary Council. Basil. sess. 36. Test. Rhem. annot. Romans
5.14.
.

Against Giselbertus, whose doctrine is, that Baptism once received, there is
in the baptized no sin at al, either original, or actual Giselb. lib.
altercat. Synag. and eccles. c. 8.
.

Against the Family of Love, who affirm that the elect, and regenerate sin
not H.N. document. sent. c. 2. 1. c. 13. 5.
.

Against the Carpocratians, whereof some boasted themselves to be every way as
innocent as our Savior Christ. Iren. l. c. 24.
.

Against the Adamites both old Epiphan.
and new Aeneas Sylv. hist. Bohem. c. 41.
, who said they were in so good a state as Adam was before his fall, therefore
without original sin.

Against the Begadores in Almaigne, affirming they were impeccable, and had
attained unto the very top, and pitch of perfection, in virtue, and godliness
Carcauza, summa^ Council.
.

4. Proposition. Concupiscence, even in the regenerate, is sin.
Concupiscence in whomsoever, lusts against the Spirit Gal. 5.17.
, fights against both the soul 1. Pet. 2.11.
, and the law of the mind Romans 7.23.
, and therefore (but that there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus Romans 8.1.
, it brings death, and damnation Gal. 5.17.21. Iam. 1.14, 15.
.

Mortify therefore your members, which are upon earth (says S. Paul Coloss.
3.5.
unto the Colossians) fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence etc. for the which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the
children of disobedience.

And unto all Christians, S. Peter, I beseech you, as strangers, abstain from
fleshly lusts 1. Pet. 3.11.
.

To the same purpose is both the doctrine, and Confessions of Gods people
Confess. Helv. 2. c. 9. Saxon. ar. 2.10.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore we mislike their opinions, as unsound, which say that co^cupisce^ce
either is no sin at all; or but a venial sin, the former was an assertion of
the Pelagians Confess. Aug. ar. 2.
, and is of the Papists: that latter was one of Glouers errors.

Francis, the Monk of Colen counted concupiscence no sin, but said it was as
natural, and so no more offensive before God, for man to lust, then for the
Sun to keep his course.

Petrus Lombardus says, that Concupiscence before Baptism is both a
punishment, and a sin, but after Baptism is no sin, but only a punishment
Lomb. l. 2. did. 32.
.

The Church of Rome, both teaches that the power of lusting is not, but the
use of wicked concupiscence, is evil, and numbered amongst most greiuous sins
Catech. Trid. praecep. 9.
; and decrees how, Concupiscence is not sin, but proceeds from sin, and
inclines unto sin Council. Trid. ses. S. decreto de pec. Orig.
.

Glouer, the Brownist said that the intemperate affections of the mind, issuing
from Concupiscence, are but venial sins Bred. detect. p. 69.119.
.

10. Article. Of Freewill.
1 The condition of man, after the fall of Adam is such that he cannot turn,
and prepare h^mselfe by his own natural strength, and good works, 2 to
faith, and calling upon God, wherefore we have no power to do good works
pleasant, and acceptable to God, 3 without the grace of God preventing us, that
we may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

The Propositions.
1. Man of his own strength, many do outward, and evil works, before he is
regenerate.

2. Man cannot do any work that good is, and godly, being not yet regenerate.

3. Man may perform, and do good works, when he is prevented by the grace of
Christ, and renewed by the holy Ghost.

1. Proposition. Man of his own strength may do outward, and evil works,
before he is regenerate.
The proof from Gods word.
We deny not, that man, not yet regenerate, has free will to do the works
of nature, for the preservation of the body, and bodily estate, which thing
had, and have the brute beasts, and profane Gentiles, as it is also well
observed in our neighbor churches Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 9. Aug. ar. 28.
Saxon. ar. 3.4.7.
: Besides man has free will to perform the works of Satan, both in thinking,
willing, and doing that which evil is. For the imaginations of the thoughts of
man's heart are only evil continually Genesis 6.5.
; evil, even from his youth Confess. Helv. 2. c. 9. and 1. ar. 9. Bohem. c. 4.
. A truth confessed by our brethren d.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
A false persuasion is it therefore, that man has no power to move either his
body so much as unto outward things, as Laur. Valla dreamed Simon Pauli meth.
par. 2. de lib. Ar.
, or his mind unto sin, as the Manichies maintained, affirming how man is
not voluntarily brought, but necessarily driven unto sin August. epist. 28.
.

2. Proposition. Man cannot do any work that good is, and godly, being not
as yet regenerate.
The proof from Gods word.
The wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God: for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. They that are in the flesh cannot
please God Romans 8.7, 8.
.

The naturnll man perceives not the things of the spirit of God; for they are
foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned 1. Cor. 2.14.
.

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost 1. Cor. 12.3.
.

We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is from God 2. Cor. 3.5.
.

Without me ye can do nothing, says our Savior Christ Ioh. 15.5.
.

Which is the confession of the godly reformed Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 9. and 2.
c. 9. Basil. ar. 2. Bohem. c. 4. Aug. ar. 18. Belg. ar. 14.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries unto this truth are all such as hold, that naturally there is Free
will in us, and that unto the best things. So thought the Pharisees, the
Sadduceis, the Pelagians August. de pec. mer. l. 3.
, and the Donatists Jdem contra Pelil. cap. 19.
: and the same affirm the Anabaptists Z^^ng. contra Catabap.
, and Papists. For say the Papists,

Man, by the force and power of nature, may love God, above all things Gab.
Biel 3. sent. did. 37.
.

Man has free will to perform even spiritual and heavenly things Council.
Trid. sess. 6. cap. 1.
.

Men believe not but of their own free will Test. Rhem. an. Matthew. 20.16.
. It is in a man's free will to believe, or not to believe, to obey, or disobey
the Gospel of truth preached Ibid. annot. marg. p. 408.
.

The Catholic (popish) religion teaches freewill Hills quart. 13. reas.
.

3. Proposition. Man may perform, and do good works, when he is prevented
by the grace of Christ, and renewed by the holy Ghost.
The proof from Gods word.
In a man prevented by the grace of Christ, and regenerate by the holy Spirit,
both the understanding is enlightened* so that he knows the secrets and will
of God; and the mind and the mind is altogether changed, and body enabled to
do good works.

To this purpose the Sriptures are plentiful.

I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts Ierem.
31.33.
.

No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reuiele
him Matthew. 11.27. Luke 10.22.
.

Blessed art thou, Simon, the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
revelled it unto thee, but my Father, which is in heaven Matthew. 16.17.
.

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost 1. Cor. 12.3.
.

To one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom; and to another the word
of knowledge, by the same spirit, and to another faith, by the same spirit; and
to another the gifts of healing, by the same spirit; and to another the
operations of great works; and to another prophecy; and to another, the
discerning of spirits; and to another, diversities of tongues, and to an other,
the interpretation of tongues etc. 1. Cor. 12.8.
.

God he purifieth man's hearts, Act. 15.9.
; works in us both the will, and the deed Phil. 2.13.
; the spirit helps our infirmities; for we know not what to pray as we
ought, etc Romans 8.26.
. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God 1. Cor.
6.11.
.

Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake Phil. 1.29.
.

And this do the Churches of God believe, and confess Confess. Helv. 2. cap.
9. Aug. ar. 18. Bohem. c. 4. Saxon. ar. 4.
.

11. Article. Of the justification of man.
We are accounted righteous before God, only for 1 the merit of our Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ 2 by faith, and 3 not for our own works, or deseruings.

Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only is a most wholesome doctrine,
and very full of comfort, etc.

The propositions.
1. Only for the merit our Lord and Savior Christ are we accounted righteous
before God.

2. Only by Faith are we accounted righteous before God.

3. Not for our own works, or deseruings are we accounted righteous before
God.

1. Proposition. Only for the merit of our Lord, and Savior Christ, we are
accounted righteous before God.
The proof from the word of God.
BY Christ his blood only we are cleansed.

He is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world Ioh. 1.29.
.

We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus Romans 3.24.
.

We are bought with a price 1 Cor. 6.20.
, even with the precious blood of Christ, the lamb undefiled and without spot
1. Pet. 1.19.
; which cleanses us from all sin 1. Ioh. 1.7.
.

By his only righteousness, we are justified.

By the obedience of one many be made righteous Romans 5.19.
.

Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that
believes Ibid. 10.4.
. He of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption 1. Cor. 1.30.
: and we are made the righteousness of God in him 2. Cor. 5.21.
. And therefore from heaven we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ Philip. 3.2^.
.

And this is the faith, and Confession of all Churches reformed Confess. Helv.
2. cap. 15. Bohe. c. 6. Gal. ar. 12. Belg. ar. 22. August. ar. 4. VVittemb. ar.
5. Sucvica. c. 3.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
This truth is neither believed, nor acknowledged

Of the Atheists, who are neither persuaded of the life to come, nor understand
the mysteries of man's salvation through the merits of Christ.

Nor of the Pharise is, and their followers, who think that by civil, and
external righteousness we are justified before God Math. 5.20.
.

Nor of Matthewe Hamant; who held that man is justified by Gods mere mercy
without respect unto the merits of Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299.
Christ.

Nor of Galeotus Martius, which was of opinion, that all nations, and persons
whosoever living according to the rules of nature, should be saved, and inherit
everlasting happiness P. Iovius eleg. doct. vir. p. 97.
.

Nor of the Turks, who think that so many as either go on pilgrimage unto
Mecha, or do kiss the sepulcher of Mahomet, are justified before God, and
thereby do obtain remission of their sins Lo^ic. Tur. hist. Com. 1. l. 2.
par. 2. c. 14.15.18.
.

Nor of the Family of Love: who teach by the shedding of Christ his blood, is
meant the spreading of the Spirit in our hearts Display, in Allens confess.
.

Nor of the Papists, whose doctrine is, that

1. Though Christ has suffered for all men in general: yet not only each man
must suffer for his own part in particular Test. Rhem. an. Romans 8.17.
: but also that the works of one man may satisfy for another Ibid. an. Col.
1.24.
.

2. They teach next, that sins venial are done away, and purged by prayer,
Almes-deedes, by the worthy receiving of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar; by
taking of holy water; knocking upon the breast with holy meditation, the
Bishops blessing, and such like Vaux catech. c 4.
, by holy water, and such ceremonies Test. Rhem. an. Joh. 13.10.
, sacred ceremonies Test. Rhem. an. marg. ^. 258.
. as Confiteor, tundo, conspergor, conteror, oro,
Signor, edo, dono, per haec venialia pono: that is:
I am confessed unto the priest,
I knock mine heart and breast with fist;
With holy water I am besprent,
And with contrition all yrent;
I pray to God, and heavenly host,
I cross my forehead at every post;
I eat my Savior in the bread;
I deal my d^ale when I am dead.
And doing so, I know I may,
My venial sins soon put away.


And sins mortal, not by the merits of Christ only, but many ways besides
are cleansed, think the said Papists, as By the mirits of dead Saints, namely
of S. Mary the virgin: Threnosa compassio dulcissimae Dei Matris
Per^ucat nos ad gaudiasummi Dei Patris.
The pitiful compassion of Gods best pleasing mother,
Bring us to the joys of God the sovereign father.


Horum B. Virg. S. Mar. secundum v^um Sarum.
And of Thomas Becket, Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro^e impendit,
Fac nos Christ soandere, quo Thomas ascendit.
By the Blood of Thomas, which he for the expended,
Make us Christ, to climb up, where Thomas ascended.


By Agnos Deis, whereof they say: Peccatum frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and
angit.
It breaks sin, and does good,
As well as Christ his precious blood Cerem. lib. ^ tit. 7.
.


By reading certain parcels of Scripture, according to their vulgars.

Per Euangelica dicta,
Deleantur nostra delicta Breviar. secundum Sarum
.
Through the sayings and words, evangelical,
Our sins blot out and vices all.
2. Proposition. Only by Faith are we accounted righteous before God.
The proof from Gods word.
Only believe Mark. 5.36.
, all that believe in Christ, shall receive remission of sins Act. 10.43.
: from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses, by
Christ every one that believes is justified Act. 13.39.
.

The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes Romans
1.16.
.

To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness Romans 4.5.
, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes
Romans 10.4.
.

Know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ, etc. Gal. 2.16.


God would justify the Gentiles through faith, etc. They which be of faith,
are blessed with faith full Abraham Gal. 3.8, 9.
.

By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves Ephesians. 2.8.


Yea, doubtless I think all things ^ut loss for the excellent knowledge sake
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do
judge them to be doung, that I might win Christ; and might be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through
faith Phil. 3.8, 9.
.

The Cburches of Christ by their public confessions give testimony unto this
truth Confess. Helv. ^. cap. 16. Basil. ar. 8. Bohem. c. 6, 7. Gal. ar. 20.
Belg. ar. 22. August. ar. 4. Saxon. ar. 3.8. VVittemb. ar. 4. Suev. cap. 3.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Matthew. 27.24.
Pertakers of the prophet, and sweetens of this doctrine are, not they which be
altogether ignorant of this mystery.

Nor they who know the same, but apply it not to their own souls, and
consciences, but altogether despise the same, as did Pilate, in condemning
Christ; Herod, in killing James Act. 12.1.
; Agrippa, in not defending Paul Act. 26.26.
; the Jews in, persecuting the Apostles: and do the Devils Iam. 2.19.
, and many ungodly persons, Tyrans, false Christians, and Apostataes.

Nor they which teach not a sure confidence in Jesus Christ, but an historical
knowledge of him, as the Papists Canis. catech. c. 1. Vaux catec. ^. 1. Test.
Rhem. an. Romans 4.14. 1. Tim. 3.15.
.

Nor they which hold that all and every man is to remain doubtful, whether he
shall be saved or no, as do the same Papists Conci^. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 9.
Test. Rhem. an. Romans 5.1.
.

Nor they which teach that man is justified,

Either by works, without faith, as did the false Apostles in Asia 2. Tim. 1.
, and do the Turks, and Anabaptists Bale mist. of iniquit. p. 53.
.

Or by faith, and works, as both the Pseudapostles at Jerusalem Act. 15.1.
, the Ebionites Eusebius. l. 3. c. 24.
, and the Papists Test. Rhem. an. Luke. 7. marg. Luke 10.28. Ioh. 3.18. James
2.2^.
, with the Russians Russie Comm. weal. cap. 23.
.

Or neither by faith, nor works, as they which contemn both faith in Christ
Jesus, and good works too, hoping yet to be saved, as they carnally secure
worldlings.

Neither shall they be partakers of the sweetness of this truth, which say that
for Christians to trust only by Christ his passion, or by Faith only to be
saved, is a breach of the first commandment, as Vaux Catech. c. 3.
, is the doctrine of Devils, as Friar Lawrence a Villanicentia De fo^atu^. S.
con^^^^. lib. ^. c. 2^.
; and the doctrine of Simon Magus, as do the Rhemists Tossed. Rhem. an. Act. 8.18.
.

Nor they finally which maintain how the truly righteous apprehend not Christ
by Faith, but have him, and his rigteousnesse essentially, and inherent within
them, which is an error of the Catharists Jsidor. c^y^. l. 8. c. de haeris.
, Papists Conci. Trid. sess. 6. c. 16.7.
, Osiandri^ns Calvin. contra Osiand. epist. fol. 303. (...) epist. 1.
, and Family of Love Displ^y in A^lens confess.
.

3. Proposition. We are accounted righteous before God, not for our own
works, or deseruings.
The proof from Gods word.
Besides what has bin said, that works have no place, nor portion in the
matter of our justification, it is evident in the holy scripture, where we
find, that

All men be sinners, and destitue of the glory of God. And therefore that no
man can be justified by his own works Psalm. 14.2, 3. Psalm 53.2. and 51.4.
Romans 5.12.
.

Eternal life comes unto us, not by desert; but partly of promise Act. 2.30.
Act. 3.25. Act. 13.32. 2. Tim. 1.1.
. partly of gift Ioh. 17.2. Romans 6.23. 1. Ioh. 5.11. Revel. 2.10.
.

The just shall live by faith; and the Law is not of faith Gal. 3.11, 12.
.

Moreover, as the godly in old time were; so Christians in these days, are,
and shall be justified: But the godly were justified, not for any good works,
or worthiness of their own, so justified was Abraham Romans 4.1, 2. Gal. 3.6.
Heb. 11.17.
, the Jews Act. 2.44. etc.
, the Samaritans Act. 8.12.
, Paul 1. Tim. 1.14, 16. Act. 22.16. Phil. 3.6.9.
, the Eunuch Act. 8.36.
, the Iailo^ Act. 16.31. etc.
, and the Ephesians Ephesians. 2.4, 5, etc.
.

All Churches reformed with a sweet consent applaude and confess this
doctrine Confess. Helvet. 2. c. 16. Basil. ar. ^ Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22.
Belg. ar. 24. August. ar. 6.26.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries hereunto are,

The Pharisees, who thought men were justified by external righteousness,
moral Mat. 5.21. etc.
, and ceremonial Math. 15.2.
.

The false Apostles in Asia 2. Tim. 1.
, and at Jerusalem Act. 15.2.
.

The Pharisaicall Papists, who against the justification by faith alone do
hold a justification by merits, and that of Congtuitie, dignity, condignitie
Gab. Biel. l 2. did. 27. q. 1.
.

The said Papists teach besides, that life eternal is due unto us of debt,
because we deserve it by our good works Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 32.
.

They teach finally that by good works our sins are purged Petrus a Solo
asser. cath. de bonis oper.
.

12. Article. Of good works.
Albeit that good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow after
justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods
judgment: 1 yet are they pleasing, and acceptable to God in Christ, 2 and do
spring out necessarily of a true, and lively Faith, insomuch that by them a
lively Faith 3 may be as evidently known as a tree discerned by the fruit.

The propositions.
1. Good works do please God.

2. No work is good except it spring from Faith.

3. Good works are the outward signs of the inward Belief.

1. Proposition. Good works do please God.
The proof from Gods word.
THough God accepts not man for his works, but for his dear sons sake:
yet that good works, after man his justification do please God, it is a
clear truth every where to be read in the holy Scripture. For

God has commanded them to be done Math. 5.16. Ioh. 15.12. Phil. 2.14. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. etc 2. Tim. 2.19.
, and requires righteousness, not only outward of the body James 2.
, but also inward of the mind Math. 5.22.28 Act. 24.16.
, and has appointed for the virtuous and godly, rewards both in this life
Math. 5.5. Mark. 10.29, 30. 1. Tim. 4.8.
, and in the world to come Math. 7.21. and 10.32. Luke 14.13, 14. Romans 2.10.
, and to the wicked, punishments, spiritual Esa. 59.1, 2. Ioh. 9.31. 1. Ioh.
3.21.
, corporal Deuteronomy. 28.15. etc. Ier. 5.25. Romans 13.2.
, and of body, and soul, eternal in the pit of hell Math. 10.33. Math.
21.41. etc. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10. Heb. 12.14. etc. 25. Revel. 21.8.
.

And this is believed and acknowledged by the Churches Confess. Helvet. 2. c.
16. Basil. ar. 8. Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 7. Belg. ar. 24. August. ar. 6. and 26.
Saxon. ar. 3.5.6. VVittemb. c. 7. Suevica, c. 4.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This truth is oppugned by adversaries of diverse kinds. For

Some hold, that seeing man is justified by Faith, he may live as he lists;
as the Libertines.

Some think, that to attend upon virtue, and to practice good works is a
yoke too heavy, and intolerable; as the Simonians Iren. Theodor.
.

Some utterly cast of all grace, virtue, and godliness, as did the Basilidians
Iren. l. 1. c. 23.
, the Aetians Epiph. l. 3.
; the Circumcellians August. contr. Pet. l. 1. c. 24.
, and do the Macchiuilians, and Atheists. Some permit, though not all manner,
yet some sins: so allowed was both whordome, and unclean pollutions, by the
Carpocratians Cl. Alex. str. l. 3. Epiphan.
, and Valentinians, Theodor.
, and is of the Jesuits, Spar. disco. p. 13.
, and Papists Constitut. Othonis de concub. Cler. rem^nendi^.
, and perjury in the time of persecution, by the Basilidians Philast. Iren.
, Helchesaites Eus. l. 6. c. 38.
, Priscillianists August.
, Henricians D. Bernard. sup. Cant. ser. 65
, and Family of Love Display, H. 5. b
; and violaters of promise, yea and oaths made unto heretics Council. Constable.
sess. 19. and Coch^ens hist. Hussi, l. 2. p. 74.
, as they call them:

Some (as the Turkish priests called Seiti, and Chagi) take it to be no sin,
but a work meritorious, by lies, swearing, yea forswearing, to damnifie
Christians what they can Pol. of the Turk. Emp. c. 24.
. Much like unto these are the aequi^ocating Jesuits, in deluding, and
deceiving Protestant Princes, and their officers, by their doubtful speeches,
even when they are sworn to answer plainly, and truly by their lawful
magistrates.

Some suppose that God is pleased with lip service only, and outward
righteousness; as the hypocritical Pharisees, or Pharifaicall hypocrites Mat.
7. and 23.
.

2. Proposition. No work is good excep^ it spring from faith.
The proof from Gods word.
All which man does is not pleasing unto God, but that only which proceeds
from a true faith in Jesus Christ: so says God in his word.

They that are in the flesh cannot please God Romans 8.8.
.

In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love Gal. 5.6.
.

Unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving is nothing pure Tit. 1.15.
.

Without faith it i^ impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
.

And although the works of the Believing do please God: yet are they not so
perfect that they can satisfy the law of God. Therefore eue^ of the
regenerate, and justified, says our Savior Christ pray, forgive us our debts
Math. 6.22.
, say, we are unprofitable servants Luke 17.10.
: and S. Paul.

We know that the law is spiritual but I am carnal etc Romans 7.14.
.

We, which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we do sigh in our
selves* etc. and have infirmities Romans 8.23.
*

Ye cannot do the same thing that ye would Gal. 5.17.
.

Which is the faith, and confession of the Churches Confess. Helv. 1. cap. 16.
Basil. ar. and Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22. ^ Belg. ar. 24. August. ar. 26. Saxon.
ar. ^. 5.6. VVittemb. c. 7. Suev. c. 4*
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore we mislike, and condemn the opinions, of the Valentinians, and
Papists.

The Valentinians say, that please God do Spiritual men (which are themselves
only), not by Faith, but only by their knowledge of divine mysteries; and
Natural men do please him by their bodily labor, and upright dealing Iren. l.
1. c. 1.
.

The said Valentinians fained three sorts, or degrees of men, the first
spiritual, who through bare knowledge, the next Natural, who by labor, and
true dealing shall be saved; the third they call Material, me^ utterly
incapable of divine knowledge, and religious speculations, who must perish both
in soul and body Epiphan.
.

The Papists teach that

They only are not good works, which God commands, but they also which be
either voluntarily done of our selves, or enjoined us by priests Tapp. p. 188.
.

They are good works, and acceptable before God, which are done without faith
Andrad. de fide, lib. 3.
.

Works of themselves, without respect unto Christ, please God Tapp. p. 189.
.

Men perfectly may keep the Laws of God Tapp. ibid.
, in which error also be the Anabaptists Bulling. cont. Anabap. l. 4. c. 3.
, and Family of Love Display. L. 6.^.
.

3. Proposition. Good works are the outward signs of the inward Belief.
The proof from Gods word.
Many are the reasons, why good works are to be done, in part cited before page
49. yet not the least cause is, that men may be known what they are. For the
Scripture says, and shows, that thereby are known, the good trees, from the
bad Math. 7.16.
, the wheat, from the chafe Math. 3.12.
, the true disciples, from the false Ioh. 13.35.
; the sons of God, from the children of Satan Luke 6.36. Ephesians. 1.1. 1. Ioh.
3.10.
, the regenerate, from the unbelievers Iam. 2.18. 1. Pet. 1.17. Ephesians. 4.17.
.

Hereunto the Saints, and Churches do subscribe Confess. Helvet. 2. c. 16.
Basil. ar. 8. Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22. Belg. ar. 24. Saxon. ar. 3. VVittemb.
c. 7. Suevica, c. 4.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
The faithful show their works, yet neither to have them seen of men, as
did the hypocritical Pharisees Math. 6. and 7.
, nor thereby to merit heaven, as do the Pharisaicall Papists, whose doctrine
is, that

Good works are meritorious Test, Rhem. an. Romans 2.6. 1. Cor. 3.8. 2. Cor.
5.10. Heb. 6.10. Iam. 2.22.
.

Good works (as Contrition, Confession, and satisfaction done in penance) not
only do merit, but are besides a Sacrament for to attain reconciliation with
God, and forgiveness of sins Council. Trid. sess. 4. c. 3.
.

Life eternal is due unto good works by the justice of God Council. Trid.
sess. 6. can. 32.
.

13. Article. Of works before Justification.
Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, 1
are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ,
2 neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the school authors
say) deserve grace of congruitie: yea rather 3 for that they are not done as
God has willed, and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
nature of sin.

The Propositions.
1. Works done before justification please not God.

2. Works done before justification deserve not grace of congruitie.

3. Works done before justification have the nature of sin.

1. Proposition. Works done before Justification please not God.
The proof from Gods word.
BEfore men do please God, nothing that they do can please him. But men
please not God being not renewed, and justified by the Spirit. For before men be
regenerate, they are not grapes, but thorns; nor figs, but thistles Math. 7.16.
; not good, but evil trees Math. 12.33. Luke 6.43.
; not lively, but dead bows Ioh. 15.4.
; not engraffed, but wild olives Romans 11.17, 23.
; not friends, but enemies Romans 5.10.
; not the sons of God, but the children of wrath Ephesians. 2.3.
, which bring forth no good fruit. As the Churches also acknowledge Confess.
Helv. 2. cap. 15. Aug. ar. 20.
.

Errors Adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby the vanity of them is perceived, which think before man's
justification his deeds do please God, such are the Papists, and were the
Basilideans.

The Papists teach, that

Works done without faith, do please God Andrad. de Fide, lib. 3.
.

Good works, not in respect of Christ only, but in themselves considered,
please God Tapp. p. 189.
.

The Basilidians placed the doers of civil, and philosophical righteousness,
performed without faith in Christ, in the very heavens Clem. Alex. strom. lib.
2.
.

2. Proposition. Works done before Justification deserve not grace of
congruitie.
The unregenerate, not yet justified, have nothing in them to move God to be
gracious unto them; and being, as they are, old Ephesians. 4.22.
, not new creatures; enemies Romans 8.10.
, not favorers of Godliness; The children of wrath Ephesians. 2.2.
, not of God; sinners Romans 5.8.
, not virtuously bent; Infidels Tit. 1.15.
, and not believers, of congruitie deserve no grace at Gods hands: which is the
faith too, and confession of other Churches Confess. Helv. 2. c. 16. Bohem. c.
7. Belg. ar. 23. August. ar. 4.20 Saxon. ar. 3. and 8. Wit. ar. 5.
.

Errors and Adversaries unto this truth.
This overthrows the Popish assertions, concerning merits of congruitie Test.
Rhem. an. Act. 10.2.
; and that by good works man is justified before God, and made heir of
eternal life Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 10.
.

As evil works deserve hell fire: so eternal happiness is deserved by good
works Andrad. de Fide, lib. 6.
.

3. Proposition. Works done before justification, have the nature of sin.
The proof from the word of God.
Whatsoever men do, not yet justified before God, it is sin: For of such
persons, the best works which they, even their Fasting Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see it not? we have punished our selves, and thou regardest
it not. Esa. ^8.3. Did you fast unto me? Zach. 7.5. They have their reward.
Matthew. 6.16.
, praying, He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer
shall be abominable. Prou. 28.9. When thou pr^iest, be not as the hypocrites,
etc. they have their reward. Matthew 6.5.
, almes-deedes Take heed that ye give not your alms before men, etc. they
have their reward. Math. 6.1, 2.
, sacrificing unto God Will I eat the flesh of Bulls? or drink the blood of
goats? Ps. 50.13. Bring me no more oblations in vain: incense is an
abomination unto me, etc. Esa. 1.13. He that kills a bullock, is as if he
slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he
that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remembers
incense, as if he blessed an idol. Esa. 66.3.
, prophesying, and working of miracles, even in the name of Christ Lord, Lord,
have we not by thy Name prophesied? and by thy Name cast out devils? and by
thy Name done many great works? Then will I profess to them, I never knew
you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Matthew. 7.22, 23.
, yea all their actions whatsoever Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans
14.23. Unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even
their minds, and consciences are defiled. Tit. 1.15. Without faith it is
impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.
, are abominable before God.

And this is agreeable to the Confessions of our brethren Confess. Hell. 2. c.
15. and 16. Bohe. c. 7. Belg. ar. 23. August. ar. 4.20. Saxo^. ar. 3. and 8.
VVittemb. ar. 5.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Erred therefore has the Council of Trent, in pronouncing them accursed,
which hold that all works of men whatsoever done before his justification, are
sin Council. Trid. sess. 6. an. 7.
.

14. Article. Of works of Supererogation.
Voluntary works 1 besides, over and above Gods commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogancy, and impiety. 2
For by them men do declare that they do not only render unto God as much as
they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake then of bounden
duty is required whereas Christ says plainly, when ye have done all that
are commanded to you, say, we be unprofitable servants.

The propositions.
1. Works of Supererogation cannot be taught without arrogancy, and impiety.

2. Works of Supererogation, are that sub^ersion of godliness, and true
religion.

1. Proposition. (...) arrogancy, and impiety.
The proof from Gods word.
Works of Supererogation (which are voluntary works, besides, over, and above
the commandments of God) are often condemned in the holy Scripture, where we
are commanded to walk, not after the laws of men, but according to the
Statutes of God Josh. 1.7. Ezekiel. 20.19.
; and to hear, not what man speaks, but what Christ does say Mark. 9.7.
: and he, teaching the duty of christians, sets before them, as their rule,
and direction, the law, and word of God Matthew. 5.19.
, and more then that he does neither urge, nor require.

And against man's Injunctions.

They worship me in vain (says he) who for doctrine teach the commandments
of men Mark. 7.7.
.

Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you Matthew. 28.20.
.

My sheep here my voice, and know not the voice of strangers Ioh. 10.25.
.

Which doctrine, ordinances, and works whatsoever (besides, over, and above
that which God has revealed, and imposed, is called of the Apostle, sometimes
ordinances of the world Coloss. 2.20.
, voluntary religion Jbid. 23.
sometime the doctrine of Devils 1. Tim. 4.1.
and cursed Gal. 1.8.
: And the same is condemned in all Churches reformed after the word of God
Confess. Helv. 2. c. 16. August. ar. 20. Basil. ar. 10. Gal. ar. 24. Belg. ar.
12. Sax. ar. 3.17.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore both arrogant, and ungodly be the Papists, which teach, and speak in
the commendation of such works, and namely Petrus a Soto In his Asser.
catholic. fidei.
, the Rhemistes Aanot. marg. Luke 10.35. 1. Cor. 9.23. 2. Cor. 8.14.
; yea and the Counsel of Trent Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 10.
.

2. Proposition. Works of supererogation are the subversion of godliness, and
true religion.
The proof from Gods word.
Where the works of Supererogation are taught, and in regard, the Law of God
there is broken, against the will of Christ Matthew. 5.19.
, that men's traditions may be observed Mark 7.7.
.

The holy Scripture must be contemned, not as sufficient enough to bring men
unto the knowledge of salvation, which S. Paul says is able to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
.

God, who is only wise 1. Tim. 1.17.
, is made unwise, in not prescribing so necessary works.

Faith, and other spiritual, and most special virtues are brought into
oblivion.

Perfection is imputed not unto Faith in Jesus Christ, but unto works: and
which is most detestable, unto the works too, not commanded but forbidden of
God, ordained by men.

The Law of God is thought to be thoroughly satisfied; and more duties performed
then man needed to have done. The same think our brethren of these works
Confess. Helv. 2. etc. as in the former prop.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrariwise the Papists of supererogatorie works: they do merit (say they)
remission of sins, and that not for the doers of them only, but for others
besides Test. Rhem. an. 2. Cor. 8.14.
.

They are tokens of the forgiveness of sins, so well as Baptism; yea deliver
fom the wrath of God, so well as Christ Confess. Aug. ar. 20.
.

Are greater, and more holy, then are the works commanded in the Decalogue, or
Law moral Pet. a Solo assert. Cath. de Lege.
.

And so preferring their own works, and inventions before God his Law,
Sacraments, and the blood of Christ, both ought this doctrine of works
supererogatorie to be counted the doctrine of Devils, and the maintainers
thereof taken for the subuerters of godliness, and true religion.

15. Article. Of Christ alone without sin.
Christ in the truth of our nature was made like unto us in all things, sin
only except 1 from which he was clearly void, both in his life, and spirit.
He came to be the Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once made,
should take away the sins of the world: and sin as S. John says, was not
in him. But 2 all we the rest, although baptized, and borne again in Christ,
yet offend in many things, and if we say, we have noe sin, we deceive our
selves and the truth is not in us.

The propositions.
1. Christ is truly, and perfectly righteous.

2. All men besides Christ, though regenerate, be sinners.

1. Proposition. Christ is truly, and perfectly righteous.
The proof from Gods word.
THat Christ was pure from sin, it is abundantly to be seen in the holy
Scriptures. For

He was both conceived Matthew. i.20.
, and borne without sin Luk 1.36.
;

He appeared to loose 1. Ioh. 3.8.
, but not to fulfi^l, the works of Satan.

He lived, and was tempted, yet without sin Heb. 4.15.
, and did no sin 1. Pet. 2.22.
knew no sin 2. Cor. 5.21.
; nor had any sin in him 1. Ioh. 3.5.
.

He died a guiltless and just man, even by the testimony of Paul Romans 5.6.
etc.
, Peter Act. 3 4.
Stephen M^tth. 27.24. Ioh. ^9 4.6.
, yea of his advsrsarie, and judge, Pilate ^o^f^ss. Helv. 1. ar. 11. and 2. c.
11. B^hem. c. 4. 7 Gal. ar. 14. Belg. ar. 18.
.

As ours, such is the confessions of the purer Churches m.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Cursed therefore before God are the Jews, which said that

Christ was a violator of the Sabbath,

That he taught, Matthew. 12.10. Luke 13.14. Ioh. 5.16.
being not lawfully authorized thereunto Matthew. 21.23.
.

That he forbad tribute to be given unto Caesar Luke 23.2.
.

That he was the destroyer of the law Matthew. 5.17.
.

That he overthrew all religion, and moved the commons unto rebellion Luke 23.5.
.

In this state with the Jews are

The Marcionites, which said that he dissolved the Law, the Prophets, and all
the works of God Jren. lib. i. c. 29.
.

The Saturnians, which blazed that his coming into the world was, to overthrow
the God of the Angels Theodoret.
.

Our new Heretics, viz. Matthew Hamant in England, which divulged that Christ
was a sinful man, and an abominable Idol Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299.
; and Leonardus Vairus, among the Papists, which has written that Christ was
Veneficus, or a common poisoner of men, and women Leon. Vairus de Fas^. lib. 2.
c. 11. cir. a finem.
.

2. Proposition. All men besides Christ, though regenerate, be sinners.
The proof from Gods word.
All me^ either be regenerate, or unregenerate, the unregenerate be all
sinners, unrighteous proved page 53.
, and sin in whatsoever they do proved page 54.
.

The regenerate also be not without their sins, both original proved page
39, 40.
, and actual proved page 50.
.

Besides, there is no man just in the earth, that does good, and sins not,
says the preacher Eccles. 7.22*
, ye cannot do the same things that ye would Gal. 5.17.
: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, says
S. Paul 1. Tim. 1.15.
.

In many things we sin all; is S. James saying James 3.2.
, and S. John, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us 1. Ioh. 1.8.
.

Pray therefore, Forgive us our debts Matthew. 6.12.
.

A truth believed and confessed by all Churches, expressedly by some Confess.
Aug. ar. 20. Sax. ar. 3.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Many adversaries has this truth had, and has; as the Papists, the Manichies,
the Catharans, the Donatists, the Pelagians, Family of Love: Marcionites,
Adamites, and Carpocratians. For

The Papists say that the blessed virgin was pure from all sin, both
Original Council. Trid. sess. 5. decr. de pec. Orig.
, and actual. For (these are their own words)

Our Lady never sinned Test. Rhem. an. Col. 1.24.
.

Our Lady sinned not so much as venially in all her life Test. Rhem. an. Mark.
3.33.
: she exactly fulfilled the whole Law, that is, was without sin Stapl. an^^d.
euang. in Mat. 12.50. p. 118.
.

Also of S. Francis they write, that for virtue, and Godliness he was like unto
Christ; and has fulfilled every jot of the Law Sicut Adae Deo non parcuti,
omnis creatura rebellis extitit: sic B. Francisco omnia praecepta Dei implenti,
creatura omnis famulata est: omnia Deus subiecit sub p^dibus eius. Alcar. Fran.
lib. 1.
.

The Manichies Hier. in prol. Dial. contra Pelag.
, and Catharans Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2.
, thought, they could not sin so much as in thought.

The Donatists dreamed how they were so perfect, as they could justify other
men August. l. 2. cont. Petil. c. 14
.

Some were of opinion, as the Pelagians Council. Meli. cap. 8.
, and Family of Love Display H. 6. b
, how they were so free from sin, as they needed not to say, Forgive us our
trespasses. Which Family also teaches, how there be men living as good, and
as holy, as ever Christ was. An error of Christopher Vitels Ans. to the Fam.
libert. L. 3
, a chief Elder in the said Family: and that

He which is a Familist, is either as perfect as Christ, or else a very Devil
Display. H. 6. b.
.

Some deemed themselves as pure as Paul, Peter, or any men, as the Marcionites
Jren. l. 1. c. 9.
; yea, as Adam, and Euah before their fall, as the Adamites Epiphan.
, yea as Jesus Christ himself, as the Carpocratians Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24.
.

16. Article. Of sin after Baptism.
1 Not every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against
the holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of repentance is not to
be denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. 2 After we have received
the holy Ghost we may depart from grace given, and into sin, and by the grace
of God (we may) rise again, and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be
condemned, which say, they can no more sin, as long as they live here, 3 or
deny place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

The propositions.
1. Every sin committed after Baptism, is not the sin aganst the holy
Ghost.

2. The very regenerate may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and
yet rise again, unto newness of life.

3. No men utterly are to be cast off, as reprobates, which unfeignedly repent.

1. Proposition. Every sin committed after Baptism, is not the sin against
the holy Ghost.
The proof from Gods word.
THough every sin in it self considered deserves damnation: yet is there a
sin which shall be punished with many; and a sin, which shall be punished
with few stripes Luke 12.40.
: a sin unto death and a sin not unto death 1. Ioh. 5.6.
, a sin against the Father, and the Son, which shallbe forgiven; and a
sin against the holy Ghost, which never shallbe forgiven Matthew. 13.31. Mark.
3.39. Luke 22.10.
.

So in their extant confessions witness the Churches in Bohem Confess. Bohe. c
4.
. Saxony Confess. Sax. ar. 10.
, and Heluetia Conf^ss. Helv. 2. c. 8.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Diuerslly has this doctrine bin oppugned. For

Some have thought all sins to be like, and equal, as the Stoikes, Pelagians
Council. Mil^vit.
, and Iouinians D. Hieron. advers. In^i^.
.

Some have taught, as Manes the heretic Epiphan.
, how none of the godly fathers, and others from the beginning of the world,
till the 15. year of Tiberius the Emperor (though earnestly they did repent,
were saved; but were all punished alike with utter confusion.

Some give out that such persons be utterly out of Gods favor, and condemned,
which depart out of this world, either before they are baptized, as the Papists
do Sp^c. per^grin. quaest. d^c. 1. c. 3. q. 5. Position. Ingo stad. de Purgat.
, or before they come unto years of discretion, as Hieranites did Epiphan.
.

2. Proposition. The very regenerate may depart from grace given and fall into
sin, and yet rise again unto newnes of life.
The proof from the word of God.
That the Regenerate may fall into sin, and yet rise again, it is a doctrine
grounded upon the Scriptures. For in them we evidently may see, that fall they
may, partly by the admonitions of our Savior unto the man healed of the Palsy
Ioh. 5.14.
, and unto the adultresse Ioh. 8.11.
; of S. Paul, unto the Ephesians Ephesians 4.21, 22.
, Colossians, Coloss. 3 8.
, Hebrews Heb. 3.12.
, and Timothy 1. Tim. 1.19. 2. Tim. 4.3. 2. Tim. 2.22.
, and of S. Peter unto all the godly 1. Pet. 2.10. and 58. 2. Pet 3.17.
, and partly by the examples of David 2. Sam. 11 4.
, Solomon 1. king. 11.3.
, Peter Math. 26.70.72.74.
, who egregiously, and very offensiuely did fall, and that they do fall, it is
most evident by the fifth petition of the Lords prayer were nothing else to
prove the same, but see before 9. art. Prop. 3. art. 12. prop. 2. art. 15.
propo. 2.

Next, that being fallen they may rise again, and be saved, it is apparent
both by the exhortations of the Angel unto the Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus,
and Thyatira Revel. 2.
, and by the examples of Peter, who denied Luke 22.55.
, and yet afterward confessed his master Christ Act. 2.23. etc. and 3.13. and
4.10. etc.
; and of all the disciples, who fled Matthew. 26 56.
, and yet returned.

This both granted is, and published for truth by the Churches Confess. Hel^.
2. c. 7. Bohem. c. 5.8. Saxon. ar. 10, 11. VVittem. ar. 32. S^e^ic^, ar. 15.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Unto this truth subscribe will not

Either by the Catharans Magd. eccles. hist. c^n. 12. c. 5.
, Nouatians Eus. l. 5. c. 43.
, Iouinians Magd. eccles. hist. cent. 4. c. 5.
, which think Gods people be regenerate into a pure, and Angelical state, so
that neither they be, nor can be defiled with any contagion of sin.

Either the Libertines, whose opinions were that.

Whosoever has Gods spirit in him, cannot sin.

David sinned not after he had received the holy Ghost Wilkinson against the
F. of Love, ar. 14.
.

Regeneration is the restoring of the estate wherein Adam was placed before his
fall Calv. contra Libert. fol. 217.
.

Or the Papists who are of mind that

The works of men justified are perfect in this life Tapp p. 189.
. No man which is fallen into sin, can rise again, and be saved without
their Sacrament of Penance Council. ^rid. sess. 6. can. 29.
.

S. Francis attained unto the perfection of holiness, and could not sin at all
Vis ad apice^ venire perfectionis? Vita cum moribus attend B. Francisci.
.

3. Proposition. No men utterly are to be cast off, as reprobates which
unfeignedly repent
Such as do fall from grace, and yet return again unto the Lord by true
repentance, are to be received as members of Gods church: and this by the
Scripture is verefied. For there we read, that

God would have all men saved Matthew. 11.28. i. Tim. 2.4.
.

God is always ready to receive the penitent into favor. For there is joy in
heaven for the sinner that conuerteth Luke 15.7.
.

Christ is grieved when sinners will not repent Luke 19.41, 42. etc.
.

He shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of sins, which
conuerteth a sinner from going astray out of his way Iam. 5.20.
.

The Lord would have no man to perish, but al men to come to repentance 2. Pet.
3.9.
.

If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness 1. Ioh. 1.9.
.

He exhorts his erring people to repent, and do their first works Reu.
2.5.16.
: neither refuses he the sinner that repents, as appears in the example
of the Prodigal son Luke 15.20.
, and of the debtor Matthew. 18.26. etc.
.

God then being so gracious, and merciful, man after his ensample is both by
all good means to provoke sinners unto repentance, and they testifying the
same to receive them into favor.

So did S. Paul will the Galatians. Brethren (says he) if a man be fallen by
occasion into any fault, yea which are spiritual, restore such one with the
spirit of meekenes, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted Gal. 6.1.
.

So did he enjoin the Corinthians, when he said

If any has caused sorrow, the same has not made me sorry, but partly
(least I should more charge him) you all. It is sufficient unto the same man,
that he was rebuked of many. So that now contrariwise ye ought rather to
forgive, and comfort (him) least the same should be swallowed yp with overmuch
heaviness 2. Cor. 2.5, 6, 7.
.

When also he said, Receive him (meaning Ouesinus Philem. v. 12.
.

And so teach the Churches Confess. Helv. 2. c. 14. Bohem. c. 5. August. ar.
11. Saxon. ar. 3. VVittem. ar. 12.
.

Errors and Adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries unto this truth are they

First, which leave nothing but the unappeasable wrath of God to such as do
sin after Baptism, as as did both in old time the Montanists D. Hieron. adv.
Marc.
, and Nouatians Cypr. epist. 4. ad Antonian.
, and of late years Melchior Hoffman, the Arch Heretic of his days Bulling.
contr. Anab. l. 2. c. 13.
, and the Anabaptists in German Calv. Institut.
, and the Barrowists among our selves in England Giffords repl.
.

Next, who say that being once regenerate, sin is cut away, as with a Rasor,
so that the godly cannot sin, and therefore need no repentance: so did the
Messalians Magd. eccles. hist. cen. 4. c. 5.
, and do the Family of Love H. N. spirit. land. c. 33. 3. c. 34. 11. c. 37.
8. and Proverbs c. 5. 15. and Crying voice 6.
.

Lastly, the desperate, whose sins being either most infinite, or abominable,
they think how God he neither can, nor will forgive them: such in times past
were Kaine Genesis 4.
, and Judas Act. 1.
, in our fathers Franciscus Spira Hist. Fr. Spir.
, and one Doctor Kraus Luther on Gal. 3.^.
, and in our days, Bolton even he that first hatched that sect in England,
which afterward was termed Brownisme Giffords repl. to Bar. and Green. p. 17.
.

17. Article. Of praedistination, and election.
1 Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God whereby 2 before
the foundations of the world was laid he has 3 constantly decreed by his
council secret to us, to deliver from curse, and damnation, 4 those whom he
has chosen 5 in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to
everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor wherefore they which be
endued with so excellent a benefit of God, 6 be called according to Gods
purpose by his Spirit working in due season, 7 they, through grace obey the
calling, they be justified freely: they be made sons of God by adoption: they
be made like the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk
religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy, they attain to
everlasting felicity, 8 As the godly consideration of Predestination, and our
election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to
godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of
Christ, mortifying the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and
drawing up their mind to high, and heavenly things, as well because it does
greatly establish, and confirm their faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed
through Christ: as because it does fervently kindle their love toward God: So
for curious, and carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have
continually before their eyes the sentence of Gods predestination is amost
dangerous down fall, whereby the Devil does thrust them into desperation, or
into rechlesnes of most unclean living, no less perilous then desperation.
Furthermore, 9 we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be
generally set forth unto us in holy Scripture: and 10 in our doings that will
of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the word
of God.

The Propositions.
1. There is a Predestination of men unto everlasting life.

2. Predestination has bin from everlasting.

3. They which are predestinate unto salvation cannot perish.

4. Not all men, but certain, are predestinate to be saved.

5. In Christ Jesus of the mere will, and purpose of God some are elected, and
not others, unto salvation.

6. They, who are elected unto salvation if they come unto years of discretion
are called both outwardly by the word, and inwardly by the spirit of God.

7. The Predestinate are both justified by faith, sanctified by the holy Ghost;
and shall be glorified in the life to come.

8. The consideration of Predestination, is to the godly wise, most
comfortable; but to curious, and carnal persons, very dangerous.

9. The general promises of God, set forth in the holy Scriptures, are to be
embraced of us.

10. In our actions the word of God, which is his his revealed will, must be
our direction.

1. Proposition. There is a predestination of men unto everlasting life.
The proof from Gods word.
That of men, some be predestinate unto life, it is a truth most apparent in
the holy Scripture by the testimony both of Christ himself, who says.

To sit at my right hand, and at my left hand, is not mine to give, but (it
shall be given) to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father Matthew. 20.23.
.

Many are called but few chosen Ibid. 22.14.
.

For the elects sake, those days shall be shortened Ibid. 24.2.
.

Fear not little flock; for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom Luke 12.32.
.

I tell you, in that night there shall be two in one bed; the one shall be
received, and the other shall be left Ibid. 17.34.
.

All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me Ioh. 6.37.
.

Witnessed also is this by the Evangelist Luke, and Paul, the one says how of
the Gentiles at Antioch, so many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed
Act. 13.48.
, and the other, those whom he knew before he did also predestinate Romans 8.29.
.

We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them which perish: to the one we are the favor of death unto death; and to
the other the savor of life unto life 2. Cor. 2.15, 16
.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which etc. has
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world etc. who has predestinate
us, to be adopted through Ies^^ Christ unto himself, etc Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5.
.

The examples also of the elected creatures, man and Angels Math. 25.34.41.
Jude 6.
, of the two brethren, Abel, and Kaine Genesis 4.4.
, Isaac, and Ismael Romans 9*7. etc
, Jacob, and Esau Mal. 1.2, 3. Romans 9.13.
, of the two Eunuchs of K. Pharao Genesis 40.20.
, of the two kingdoms, Judah and Israel: the two peoples, Jews, and Gentiles;
the two Apostles, Peter, and Judas; the two Thieves upon the Cross Luke 23.39,
40, 43.
, the two men in the fields, and the two women at the Mill Matthew. 24.40, 41.
, make to the illustration of this truth.

All Churches consent with this doctrine.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Err therefore do they, which stand in opinion, that

Some are appointed to be saved, but none to be damned.

In soul, some persons; but in soul, and body together, none shall be saved:
of this mind were the old heretics, viz. the false Apostles 1. Cor. 15.12.
, the Carpocratians Clem. strom. lib. 4.
, the Valentinians Iren.
, the Cerdonites Iren.
, the Manichies Aug. contra Faust. l. 4. c. 16.
, and the Hieranites Epiphan.
, and of their opinion be the Family of Love H.N. Instr. ar. 5. 24. Prophecy
of the spir. c. 16. 7.
.

2. Proposition. Predestination has bin from everlasting.
The proof from Gods word.
Predestination began before all times. It will be said (says our Savior
Christ) Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundations of the world Matthew. 25.34.
.

God has chosen us in Jesus Christ before the Foundation of the world Ephesians. 1.4.
.

God has saved us, etc. according to his own purpose, and grace, which was
given to us through Christ Jesus before the world was 2. Tim. 1.9.
.

The public confessions of the Churches, namely in Heluetia Confess. 2. c.
10.11.
, Basil ar. 1.
, and France ar. 10.
, bear witness hereunto.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Those wrangling Sophisters then are deceived, who, because God is not included
within the compass of any time, but has all things to come, as present
continually before his eyes, do say, that God he did not in the time long ago
past only, but still in the time present, likewise, does predestinate.

3. Proposition. They which are predestinate unto salvation, cannot perish.
The proof from Gods word.
All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes to me,
I cast not away, says Christ Ioh. 6.37.
.

I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand, etc. none is able to take them out of my Fathers
hand Ioh. 10.28, 29.
. The gates of hell shall not overcome the Church Matthew. 16.18.
.

Moreover whom be predestinate, them he also glorified Romans 8.30.
. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance Romans 11.29.
.

They went o^t from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us 1. Ioh. 3.19.
.

So the Churches of God: as before in this article.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Wander then do they from the truth, which think

That the very elect, totally, and finally may fall from grace, and be damned.

That the regenerate may fall from the grace of God; may destroy the temple of
God; and be broken off from the vine Christ Jesus: which was one of Glouers
errors Bredvvels detect. p. 85.
.

That the number of those which be predestinate, may both increase, and be
diminished: so thought the Pelagians.

4. Proposition. Not all men but certain, be predestinate to be saved.
The proof from Gods word.
We deny that all, and affirm that a certain chosen and company of men be
predestinate, and so does Gods word.

Rejoice that your names are written in heaven Luke. 10.20.
.

I know mine, and am known of mine, is the saying of Christ Jesus Ioh. 10.14.
.

I suffer all things for the elects sake, says S. Paul 2. Tim. 2.10.
.

The very same with us do the Churches affirm Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 10.
Basil. ar. 1. Gal. ar 12. Belg. ar. 16.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
We are therefore against them which teach, how not certain, but all, even the
most ungodly, and damnable; yea, the very Devils shall be saved; of which
opinion were the Originists Wolf. Musculus in epist. ad Philip. praef.
, and are the Cptabaptists Bulling. cont. Catabap. lib. 1.
.

All men be elected unto life everlasting.

There is no hell, nor future, and eternal mystery at all, but only either in
ma^s opinion, as hold the Atheists Nash in Chr. his tears, p. 58.
, or in the heart, and conscience of man in this life, as the Familists
maintain Ramseis, and Allens confess.
.

No certain company be foredestined unto eternal condemnation.

None more then others, be predestinate unto salvation; which was an error of
Henry Bolsteck Calvin. epist. ministr. Basil. fol. 105.
.

In like sort we condemn such as either curiously enquire, who, and how many
shall be saved, or damned; or give the sentence of reprobation upon any men
whosoever: as do the Papists upon Calvin, Beza, and Verone, when they call
them Reprobates Test. Rhem. an. Romans 11.23.
.

5. Proposition. Of the mere will, and purpese of God, some men in Christ
Jesus are elected, and not others unto salvation.
The proof from Gods word.
In the Scripture we read of man's predestination the cause efficient to be the
everlasting purpose of God That the purpose of God might remain according to
election. Romans 9.11. Who does predestinate us, etc. according to the good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5. Not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace. 2. Tim. 1.9.
, the cause formal, God his infinite mercy, and goodness I will show mercy,
to whom I will show mercy. Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15.
; the cause material, the blood of Christ He has chosen us in Christ, etc.
and has predestinate us through Christ unto himself. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, etc. but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb undefiled, and without spot, which was ordained before the
foundation of the world, but was de^lared in the last times for your sakes. 1.
Tim. 1.18, 19, 20.
, the cause final, or end, why both God the Father has loved and Christ for
his elect has suffered, is the glory of God Who does predestinate us, etc. to
the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians. 1.6. The Lord has made all things
for his own sake; yea, even the wicked for the day of evil. Prou. 16.4.
, and the salvation of man Romans 8.29. Those whom he knew before, he did also
predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the
first borne among many brethren. Has not the potter power of the ^lay, to make
of the same lump, one vessel to hon^ur, and another unto dishonor? Romans 9.21.
.

And this do all the Churches militant, and reformed, with a sweet consent
testify, and acknowledge.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby is discovered the impiety of those men which think, that

1. Man does make himself eligible for the kingdom of heaven by his own good
works, and merits; So teach the Papists,

The kingdom of heaven (say they) is prepared for them that are worthy of it,
and deserve it by their well doing Test. Rhem. an. Mat. 20.23.
.

Licet electis gloria ex eterna Dei predestinatione dimanet, non tamen provenit
nisi ex eorum operibus, etc. Sine nobis non glorificamur. 1. Although from Gods
eternal predestination glory flows to the elect: yet for all that it
springs not but from their own works, etc. Without our selves we are not
glorified Stella in Luc. c. 10. fol. 35.
.

2. God beheld in every man whether he would use his grace well, and believe
the Gospel, or no; and as he saw a man affected, so he did predestinate,
choose, or refuse him.

3. Besides his will, there was some other cause in God, why he choose one,
and cast off another man, but this cause is hidden from us.

4. Men by nature be elected, and saved; an error of the Basilideans, and
Valentinians Clem. strom. lib. 2.4.
.

5. It is in man his power to be elected, the error of Theophylact Theoph. in
Matthew. 22.
, and of Bolseck Calvin. epist. minist. Helvet. fol. 104.
.

6. God is partial, and unjust for choosing some, and refusing others; calling
many, and electing but few.

6. Proposition. They who are elected unto salvation, if they come unto years
of discretion, are called both outwardly by the word, and inwardly by the
Spirit of God.
The proof from Gods word.
Though true it be, the Lord knows all, and every of his elect: yet has he
revealed unto us certain notes, and tokens, whereby we may see, and
certainly know, whether we be of that number, or not. For such as be
ordained unto everlasting life, if they live long in this world, they one time
or other be called unto the knowledge of salvation by the preaching of Gods
word; they obey that calling, through the operation of the holy Ghost, working
within them; they feel in their souls the same spirit, bearing witness unto
their spirits, how they are the children of God; and finally they walk
religiously in all good works.

These things are most evident, and clear in the holy Scripture, where is set
down, both the calling of the predestinate Whom he predestinate, them also
he called. Romans 8.30. God separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by
his grace. Gal. 1.15. He has called you to his kingdom, and glory. 1 Thessalonians.
2.12. He has saved us, and called us with an holy calling. 2. Timoth. 1.9.
They that are on his side, called, chosen, and faithful. Reu. 17.14.
, and their obedience to the word being called Your obedience is come abroad
among all. Romans 16.19. in Christ ^ho ye trusted after ye heard the word of
truth. Ephesians. 1.13. Jesus Christ is in you, except ye (...) reprobates. 2. Cor.
13.5.
, and their adoption by the spirit to be the children of God Ye received the
spirit of adoption, whereby we ^rie A^^a, ^a^her. The some Spirit bearing
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God (...). 8.15, 16.
After this manner pray ye, Our Father etc. M^tth. 6 9. And because ye are
s^nnes, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, which
cries Ab^^, Father ^al. 4.6.
; and last of all, their holiness of life, and virtuous conversation He has
chosen us in him, etc. that we should be holy, and without ^lame (...) him in
love. Ephesians. 1.4. We are his workem^nship, created in Christ jesus unto good
works, which God h^th ordained, that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2 10 For the
grace of God and^. h^th appeared, and tea^heth us that we should deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we should live lo^e^ly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world. Tit. 2.11, 12.
.

All Churches reformed consent hereunto.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Sundry adversaries has this truth, and

First the Papists, who teach that none are to think, or persuade themselves,
that they are of the number of the Predestinate unto salvation, but to be ever
doubtful thereof Council. Trid. s^ss. 6. cap. 12. can. 15. Test. Rhem. an. Romans
8.38. an. 1. Cor. 2.12. an. Phil. 2.12.
.

The said Papists deliver, that so many persons, as are not marked with the
sign of the cross upon their forehead, are damned, and reprobate Test. Rhem.
an. Apoc. 9.4.
; also, that they which will be saved, must be Franciscans Conform. F. lib. 1.
fol. 101.
, at leastwise become members of the Church of Rome Ans. to the recall. of Just.
c. 8. p. 192.
.

Secondly, the Antonomies, which think the outward calling by the word (though
they have not the inward calling by the Spirit, and be destitute of good
works) a sufficient argument of their election unto life Simon Pauli meth.
par. 2. de Lege Dei.
.

Thirdly, the Puritanes, who among other assurances given them from the Lord of
their saluations, make their advancing of the Presbyteriall kingdom (by the
putting down of Bishops, Chancellours, etc.) a testimony that they shall have
part in that glory, which shall be revealed hereafter Dem^n. of Dis. epist.
ded.
.

Fourthly, the Schwenfeldians, and all such as depending upon immediate and
divine revelations, condemn and contemn the ordinary calling of God, by the
ministry of his word.

Lastly, the Russians Sar^an. de Relig. Ruthen. c. 2.

Zuingl. contra Catabap. fol. 10^.


, Catabaptists, and Family of Love Display, H. 6. b. D. 5.
, who believe that themselves only, and none besides, shall be saved.

7. Proposition. The Predestinate are both justified by faith, sanctified by
the Spirit, and shall be glorified in the life to come.
The proof from Gods word.
Diverse be the effects of man's Predestination; but chiefly it brings to the
Elect, justification by Faith in this life Know that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Chr. Gal 2.16. They which be
of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. Ephesians. 2.8.
, and in the life to come, glorification Moreover, whom he predestinate, them
also he called; and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Romans 8.30. Come ye ^lessed of my Father,
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you. Matthew 25.34.
, always a conformity to the image of the only begotten Son of God, both
in suffering troubles here, and in enjoying immortal glory hereafter If we be
children, we ^re also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with
him. Romans 8.17. And as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we
bear the image of the heavenly. 1. Cor. 15.49.
, as testify all the Churches in their confessions.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This is flatly against Papias Tritenhem. de eccles. scrip.
, Justinius Wolf. Musculus i^ epist. ad Philip. praef.
, and all Millinaries Eus. eccl. hist. ^. 7. c. 23.
, who deny the eternity of man's happiness, and dream of I know not what
bliss in this life to endure a thousand years, but no longer.

Also against the Manichies, who said, the soul only shall be saved
Philastrius.
.

Also against those heretics which deny the resurrection of the flesh, as did
the Carpocratians Clem. strom. lib. 4.
, Manichies Aug. contra Faust. l. 4. c. 16.
, and others See before ar. 4 prop. 1.
.

Likewise against the Hieranites,, who have a fantasy that no children,
departing this life before they come unto years of discretion, and knowledge,
shall be saved Epiphan.
. So the Papists do teach, that no infants, dying unbaptized do go to
heaven, but unto another place adjoining unto Hell, called Limbus puerorum
Positiones Ingo^stad. de Purgat.
.

8. Proposition. The consideration of Predestination, is to the godly wise most
comfortable; out to curious, and carnal persons very dangerous.
The proof from Gods word.
This doctrine of Predestination is to the godly full sweet, pleasant, and
comfortable, because it greatly confirms their faith in Christ; and
increases their love toward God.

I account the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory,
which shall be showed unto us Romans 8.18.
.

If God be on our side, who can be against us? who spared not his own Son,
but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? etc Ibid. 31.34.
.

Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the praise
of his glory Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
.

Greiue not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
.

But to the wicked and reprobate the consideration hereof, is very sower,
unsavory, and most uncomfortable, as that which they think (though very
untruly, and sinfully) causes them either to despair of his mercy, being
without faith; or not to fear his justice, being extremely wicked: whereas
neither from the word of God, nor any Confession of the Church, can man gather
that he is a vessel of wrath, prepared to damnation; but contrariwise by many,
and great arguments may persuade himself that God would not his destruction,
as in the next proposition immediately ensuing, plainly may appear.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Therefore they are to be taken as much out of the way, which say that this
doctrine leads either unto desperation, which is without all comfort; or unto
loosenes of life, and so unto Atheism; and therefore to be published neither
by mouth, nor book: and so thought both the Pelagians Prosper in epist. ad
Aug. de reliquis Pela. haeresis.
and the Predestinates (a sort of heretics so called) in old time Magd.
eccles. hist. Cent. 5. c. 5. p. 620.
, and the Family of Love in our days, who term the doctrine of
Predestination, a licentious doctrine, and say it fills all the prisons
almost in England Display, in an epist. of the Families, l. 7. b.
.

9. Proposition. The general promises of God, set forth in the holy Scripture
are to be embraced of us.
The proof from Gods word.
That men the better may avoid both desperation, and carnal security, they
are to have always in mind, that

1. The promises of grace, and favor to mankind, are universal: as

Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will case you Matthew.
11.38.
.

God sent not his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world; but
that the world through him might be saved Ioh 3.17.
.

God will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth
1. Tim. 2.4.
.

2. The doctrine of the Gospel for the free remission of sins, is to be
preached not unto a few but universally, and generally unto all men.

Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them, etc Math. 28.19.
.

Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe,
shallbe damned Mark. 16.15.16
.

3. The seals of the covenant be appointed to be given to all men, and members
of the visible Church, or desirous to be ineorporated there into. For

All are to be baptized Matthew. 28.19.
, and all are to participate of the bread, and cup at the Lords supper Math.
26.26, 27. 1. Cor. 11.24, 25
.

4. As the disobedience of Adam brought condemnation upon all men: so the
blood, and obedience of Christ is able, and all-sufficient to wash away all
sins, and that of all men.

5. No man ever truly repented, but he was received again into favor; so was
David after his adultery 2. Sam. 12.13.
, Manasses after his Idolatry 2. Chr. 33.12, 13.
, Peter after his Apostacy Ioh. 21.15. etc.
, the Thief upon the Cross Luke 23.42, 43.
, the Ninevites Jonas 3.10.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
They are not to be heard then which say, that

The number of the Elect is but small; and seeing we are uncertain, whether
we be of that company, or no, we will proceed in our course as we have
begun.

God is an acceptor of persons, and so unjust in choosing some and refusing
others.

God has predestinate all those personns to eternal death, which are not in
the state of true repentance: which was one of Glouers errors Bredvvels detect.
p. 96.
.

It is the part therefore of all and every man.

Not to refuse the mercies of God both generally, and graciously offered unto
all men by his word, and Sacraments.

Not to despair in respect either of the greatness, or multitude of his sins.

Nor yet to provoke the Lord to execute his vengeance upon them, through
prophanes of life, or security.

10. Proposition. In our actions the word of God, which is his revealed will,
must be our direction.
The proof from Gods word.
In our doings, but cheiefly in the matter of Predestination, we are to follow
not our own judgment, and what seems good in our own opinions: but the will
of God, and that will too not which is concealed from us, viz. of God his
omnipotency, whereby he governs at his pleasure the things by himself
created; whereof mention is made both in the Psalms Psalm 115.3.
, in the Prophet Isay Esa. 46.10.
, and other places of his word, but of his favor, Romans 9.15.
and good pleasure toward man, revealed in the holy Scriptures, by Jesus
Christ, whom we are to hear Matthew. 3.17.
.

Subscribed hereunto have, and do Gods church every where.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This truth is gainesaid by the Phrygians, Montanists, and Messalians
Theodoret. l. 3. de haeret. fab.
, also by the Enthusiastes Beza epist. 8^.
, Anabaptists Sleidan. com. lib. 6.
, And Family of Love H.N. euang. c. 13. 6.
, which leave the written word of God, and rely upon their own dreams,
visions, and lying revelations. Hence proceeds the contempt of Gods written
word and of the Preachers, and all religious exercises thereof. For says the
Family of Love In a letter of theirs unto the B. of Roch. in VVilk. confut.
, No difference is there between a ceremonial, either Letre Doctor Christian,
and an uncircumcised Heathen.

18. Article. Of obtaining eternal salvation only by the name of Christ.
1 They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say that every man shall
be saved by the Law, or sect which he professes, so that he be ^iligent to
frame his life according to that Law, and the light of nature. For holy
Scripture does set out unto us 2 only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men
must be saved.

The propositions.
1. The profession of every religion cannot save a man, live he never so
virtuously.

2. No man ever was, is, or shall be saved, but only by the Name or faith of
Jesus Christ.

1. Proposition. The profession of every religion cannot save a man, live he
never so virtuously.
The proof from the word of God.
THis we cannot but acknowledge to be a truth if we believe the Scriptures,
for they testify that Jews, and Gentiles are all under sin, culpable before
God, and deprived of the glory of God Romans 3.9.19, 23.
.

All men, that would be saved, must be borne again of the holy Ghost Ioh. 3.3.
.

No man is justified by the works of the Law Gal. 3.16.
, either ceremonial Act. 15.24.28. Coloss 2.16, 20. Gal. 5.18.
, or moral Romans 3.20.28 Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
.

God hates the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes Reu. 2.15.
, and of Balaam Ibid. 14.
.

The Reprobate, whose names are not written in the book of the life of the
Lamb, they do worship the Beast Reu. 13 8.
.

Punishments eternal, and intolerable are threatened, both to the Beast, and
the false prophet Reu. 20.10.
, and likewise to all such as will not go out of Babylon Reu. 18.4.
, and to all Idolaters Reu. 21.8.
.

The confessions of Gods people are to this end, and purpose Confess. Helv. 1.
ar. 12. and 2. c. 12. Bohem. c. 6. Gal. ar. 22, 23. Belg. a. 22, 23. August.
ar. 4.5.21. VVittemb. ar. 5.6. Suev. c. 3.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Then to be had accursed are they which affirm, that

This observation of the Judicial ceremonies is necessary unto salvation, as
did the false apostles Act. 15.1.
, the Ebionites Iren. l. 1. c. 26.
, and the Corinthians Philas^rius.
.

Such throughout the world as lead an upright life, and be morally righteous,
whatsoever their religion is, shall be saved, as many of the Philosophers were
in the opinion of the Valentinian and Basilidian heretics Clem. Alex. b. 2.4.
, of Galeatus Martius Pa^^. ^ovius leg. doct. vir. p. 97.
, and Erasmus Roterodam Praef. sua Tuscul. q^aest.
.

That men externally may profess any religion, and notwithstanding be saved,
if their affections, and heart be with the Family of Love H.N. ^raef. to his 3.
Reform. 2.6.
.

That all those which live uprightly and do good deeds shall be of equal
happiness in the kingdom of heaven; be they Turks, Christians, Jews, or
Moors. A Turkish error Pol. of the Turk. emp. c. 23. Lonicer. Turk. hist. tomo
1. l. 2. par. 2. cap. 12.
.

That men may embrace, and follow the sect, and religion, which they have most
mind unto, and so doing please God, and and shall be saved: the Lampatians
doctrine Damascene.
.

That no sect ever erred, or were out of the way to heaven; a fancy of the
Rhetorians D. August. ^p. ad Quodvult.
.

1. Proposition. No man ever was, is, or shall be saved, but only by the name or
Faith of Jesus Christ.
The proof from Gods word.
This we cannot but acknowledge to be true, if also we believe the
scriptures, which say that

Among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved Act. 4.12.
.

Through (Jesus Christ) his name, all that believe in him, shall receive
remission of sins Act. 10.43.
.

In thee ( viz. Christ Jesus) shall all the Gentiles be blessed Gal. 3.8.
.

And this is the Faith, and confession of the reformed Churches Confess. Helv.
1. ar. 10.11. and 2. cap. 11.13. Basil. ar. 4. Bohem. cap. 4.10. Gal. ar.
13.16.17. Belg. ar. 17.20.21.22. Augustan. ar. 3. Saxon. ar. 3. VVittemb. c. 8.
Suevica, ar. 9. 2.
.

The errors, and Adversaries unto this truth.
Many ways this truth very heretically is oppugned. For

Some teach that we are saved not by Christ, (but as the Valentinians said) by
the labor of their hands, and by their own good works Iren. lib. 1.
, (as Simon Magus boasted)* by his fair Helene Iren.
, (as Matthew Hamant held) by other means, and that all persons which
worshipped Christ, are abominable Idolaters Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299.
, as Neuserus, and Siluanus believed by Mahomet Beza resp. ad repetit. Io. And.
Call. p. 8.
, and therefore he revolted from Christianity unto Turcisme.

Others confess that we are saved by the name of Christ, but either not by
the right, and true Christ, for they said themselves, and every of themselves
were Christ, as in old time did Saturninus Epiphan.
, Manes Eusebius. l. 7. c. 3i
, Desider, Burdegal, and Eudo de Stella Genebr. chro. l. 3. p. 358.709.
, and of late years, at Basil, David George Hist. David. Georgii.
, and in England, first one John Moore Stow.
, and afterward William Hacket Conspir. for pretend. refor.
, the former was whipped for the same at Bethlehem in the second of Queen
Elizabeth, the other hanged and quartered in Cheapside, An. 1591.

Or by the true Christ, but either distinguish between Jesus and Christ,
saying Jesus was one man, and Christ another, as did the Marcionites Philaster.
.

Or say there be two Christ's, one revealed already in the days of Tiberius
the Emperor, who came for the salvation of the Gentiles, another yet to come,
for the redemption of the Jews, so thought the same Marcionites Tertul. l. 4.
contr. Marc.
, Nestorius held also there were two Christ's, whereof one was very God, the
other very man, borne of a woman Vincen. Lir. adv. haereses.
.

Or publish, how none were saved by the true Christ til the 15. year of the
foresaid Tiberius, an heresy of Manes, and his company Epiphan.
.

Others besides (as the Family of Love) understand all things written of
Christ, allegorically, and not according to the letter of Gods word. For they
teach that whatsoever is written of Christ, must in us, and with us be
fulfilled H.N. proph. of the Spir. c. 7. 3.
.

Others have thought, yea have spoken blasphemously of the constant, and holy
Martyrs, who for the name of Christ, gave their lives in England in the reign
of Queen Mary, some saying: They were stark fools, as did Christophet Vitel,
a chief Elder in the Family of Love Ans. to the Fam. let. L. 3. a
, others (as Westphalus, and Marbachius) that they were the Devils martyrs
Sturmius, antipap. 4. par. 3. p. 189.
.

19. Article. Of the Church.
1 The visible Church of Christ, 2 is a congregation 3 of faithful men: in the
which 5 the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As 6 the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch has erred: so also 7
the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living, and manner of
ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith.

The Propositions.
1. There is a Church of Christ, not only invisible, but also visible.

2. There is but one Church.

3. The visible Church is a Catholic church.

4. The word of God was, and for time is before the Church.

5. The marks, and tokens of the visible Church, are the due, and true
administration of the word; and Sacraments.

6. The visible Church, may, and from time to time has erred both in doctrine,
and conversation.

7. The Church of Rome most shamefully has erred in life, ceremonies, and
matters of faith.

1. Proposition. There is a Church of Christ both invisible, and visible.
The proof from Gods word.
A true saying is it, the Lord, and he only knows who are his. For to man
the Church of Christ is partly invisible, and visible partly. The invisible are
all the Elect, who be, or shall be either in heaven, triumphing; or on earth
fighting against the flesh, the world, and the Devil. These as members of the
Church are said to be invisible, not because the men be not seen, but for that
their faith, and conscience to Godward is not perfectly, known unto us.

The members of the visible Church are some of them for God, and some against
God: all of them notwithstanding deemed parts of the Church, and acco^nted
faithful, so long as they make no manifest, and open rebellion against the
Gospel of Christ.

And all this we gather from the holy Scripture, where mention is made of the
Church invisible, and triumphing, Rev. 2.26.28. and 3.5.12. and 7, 14.55.
invisible, and militant, in the epistles of S. Paul. Gal. 4.29. Ephesians. 6.10. etc.
2. Tim. 3.12.
, Peter 1. Pet. 5.9, 10.
. and book of S. John's revelations Reu. 12.7. 11.17. and 17.14.
, also of the Church visible, and mixed with good and bad, by the parable of
the sower Matthew. 13.
. of the Marriage Matthew. 22.
and of the Virgins Matthew. 25.
, as also by the saying of our Savior Christ Have not I chosen you twelve, and
one of you is a devil? Ioh. 6.70.
, and of S. Paul For he knew who should betray him: therefore said, Ye are not
all clean. Ioh. 13.11. in a great house are not only vessels of gold, and of
silver, but also of wood, and of earth, and some for honor, and some unto
dishonor. 2. Tim. 2.20.
.

The Churches bear witness hereunto Confess. Helvet. 1. ar. 14. and 2. c. 17.
Bohem. c. 8. Gal. ar. 27. Belg. ar. 27. August. ar. 7. Saxon. ar. 11. VVittemb.
ar. 32. Sue^ic^, ar. 15.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This truth has many adversaries, whereof

Some renounce our Christ, the Savior of mankind; and so think his people are
not the Church, as the Jews, Turks, and heretics have done see art. 2. prop.
4. ar. 18. prop. 2.
.

Some acknowledge no triumphing state of the godly in heaven, but dream of an
ever glorious condition in this world, as the Family of Love Leon. Ramseis and
I. Allens confess. Also H. N. document. sent. c. 6. 1. c. 3. 5. Sp. land. c.
44. 12. Proverbs, c. 5. 15. Proph. c. 16. 8
.

Some think the church Catholic to be visible, as the Papists Vaux catech. c.
1. Test. Rhem. an. Act. 11.24.
.

Some imagine the Church militant is not visible at all, as the Libertines.

Some give out, that the visible church is deuoid of sin, and sinners, as did
the Donatists Aug. contra Petil. cap. 19.
, and do the Anabaptists Calvin. contra Libert.
, Family of Love H.N. ^. exhort. c. 13. 10. and 1. epist. praef.
, Brownists A confused gathering together (of good and badde in public
assemblies) is no Church. The Brovvnists answer to M. Cartwright* p. 39.
, and Barroistes The assemblies of good and bad together, are no Churches, but
heaps of profane people, says Barrovv in his discovery. p. 33.
.

2. Proposition. There is but one Church.
The proof from Gods word.
When we do say that the Church is visible, invisible; and that there is a
Western, East, Greek, Latin, English Church, we mean not that there be
diverse Churches of Christ, but that one, and the same Church is diversely taken
and understood, and also has many particular Churches, as the Sea many rivers,
and arms, branching from it. For the visible Church is not many congregations,
but one company of the faithful.

We being many are one Body in Christ, and every one, one another members
Romans 12.5.
.

We that are many, are one Bread, and one Body 1. Cor. 10.17.
.

For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the
body, which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is
Christ. For by one spirit, are we all baptized into one body, etc. Now ye are
the body of Christ, and members for your part 1. Cor. 12.12, 13.27.
.

For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same
office: so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another
members Romans 12.4, 5.
.

There is neither Jew, nor Grecian; there is neither bond, nor free; there is
neither male, nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.28.
.

All Gods people agree with us in this point Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 17. Bohe.
cap. 8. Gal. ar. 26. Belg. ar. 27. August. ar. 27. VVittemb. ar. 32. Suc^. ar.
15.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
The adversaries unto the 18. article, be also, for a great part, adversaries
unto this truth.

Furthermore, although it be acknowledged by many, and they too baptized for
Christians, that there is but one Church: yet the same persons do err, which
condemn so many (as no members of Christ's church) which join not with them in
their singular, and private opinions, arrogating the style, and title unto
themselves only, and denying all other men to be either the Church, or members
of the body of Christ. Such are

The Russeis, who boast, how themselves with the Grecians, are the only Church
of God Alex. Gaguine de relig. Mosc. p. 231.
. themselves only are the men who shall be saved Sacranus de ^ relig. Ruthen.
cap. 2. p. 188.
, all Christians beside themselves, are no better then Turks Russic Comm. cap.
25 p. 103. b
.

The Papists also which say, that

The present Church of Rome is Gods Church, Test. Rhem. an. marg. p. 323.
Gods catholic church Ans. to the recul. of Inst. cap. 7. p. 151.
, the mystical body of Christ Quod libets. p. 34^.
; Papists, Catholics, and true christians, are all one Test. Rhem. an. marg.
p. 323
.

Muncer, and the Anabaptists, termed themselves (clean opposite to the church
of Christ) the elect of God; and said that all other men were wicked, and
worthy to be slain Sl^idan. hist. lib. 5.
.

The Family of Love, who publish how themselves only are the Church, and all
other men are Heathen Allens confess.
, and Beasts Display H. 6. b
, themselves only are the Catholic Church of God Vitels letter, display D. 5.
, the Saints of God, and his acceptable people H.N. instruct. ar. 8. 35. ar. 9.
36.
, and that such as are no Familists, they have no living God, Fidel. declar. c.
4. 11.
, and shall perish H.N. euang. cap. 4. 7.
.

The Puritanes finally they say,

If God have any Church, or people in the land, no doubt the title (Puritan)
is given them Dial. concer. the strife. p. 10.
; Notable words, either God has no Church in England, or Puritanes are the
Church.

The Marprelate is not afraid to utter this speech.

They against whom I deal (namely the ecclesiastical officers, as Bishops,
and their favorers, and partakers) have so provoked the anger of the Lord, and
prayers of his Church, as stand long they cannot Protest. p. 16.
, others, of the said Bishops, and the like, write thus, they bid battle to
Christ, and his Church, and it must bid defiance to them till they yield 2.
Admon.
.

3. Proposition. The visible Church is a Catholic Church.
The proof from Gods word.
The visible Church, properly understood, is but a part of the Catholic: yet
forasmuch as it is a Congregation of the faithful, who are for calling,
Governors, and subjects, noble and base: rich and poor: teachers, and
learners: for sex, men and women, for age, old and young, for nation, Jews
and Gentiles, Grecians and Barbarians, for time and continuance, in all ages,
even from our first parents, it may rightly be called a Catholic Church.

This is grounded upon Gods word, where we find that excluded is no calling
Preach the Gospel to every creature. Mark. 16.15. Teach all Nations. Matthew.
28.19. Not many (yet some) wise men after the flesh; not many (yet some)
mighty; not many (yet some) noble are called. 1. Cor. 1.26.
, no sex Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Act.
2.21. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes.
Romans 1.16. There is neither Jew, nor Grecian; there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female: for you are all one in Christ Jesus. Gal.
3.28.
, none age He that shall believe, and is baptized, shall be sued. Mark. 16.16.
By him every one that believes, is justified. Act. 13.39. He is the head of
the Law to every one that believes. Romans 10.4.
, no nation They shall ^ome from the East, and from the West, and from the
North, and from the South, and shall sit at table in the kingdom of God. Luke
13.28. The promise is m^de unto you, and to your children, and to all that are
a far off, etc Act. 2.^9 In every n^tion he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Act. 10.35.
, and that the Church, as it has bin from the worlds beginning Reu. 13.8.
, so shall it continue to the end Matthew. 28.20.
.

And this is the confession of the Churches Conf^ss. Helvet. 2. cap. 17. Bohem.
cap. 8. Belg. ar. 27. VVittemb. ar. 32.
.

Errors and Adversaries unto this truth.
Unsound be they in religion therefore which have, and do as it were tie the
church to a certain August. lib. 2. cont. Pet. c. 15.
, country, as the Donatists did to Africa a people, as the Jews to themselves
Clenard. epist. lib. 2. p. 196.
, persons, place, calling, or time, as do the Papists,

To certain persons, when they say,

The Church is founded upon Peter, and his successors Confess. Petroceniensis,
c. 26.
.

All that will be saved, must of necessity be subject to the Bishop of Rome
Banifac. 8. C. Vnam extra de mayor, and obed.
.

The true Church is united to the obedience of the Pope of Rome Bell. de eccl.
milit. c. 2.
.

To a certain place when they say

The Church of Rome is the Catholic Church Test. Rhem. an. 1. Tim. 3.15.
.

The Church of Rome is the mother of the faith Jus canonic. distinct. 22.
.

To a certain calling, by their Petrus a Soto, to Bishops, and Prelates Pet. a
Soto asser. p. 133.
.

To a certain time, as when the said Papists affirm, how

The time was when holiness was only in the virgin Mary Coster. enchir. con.
, when faith rested only in the virgin Mary Disput. council. Basil. Acts and
Monu. in K.H. 6. fol. 796.
, when all the faith was lost, save only in our Lady Festival feria 4. post
festum Palmarum.
.

It is a bold assertion also, and very presumptuous of Apostata Hill, that in
England al men were Papists without exception from the first Christening
thereof, until the age of K. Henry the eight Hills quart. 1. reas. p. 5.
.

4. Proposition. The word of God was, and for time, is before the Church.
The proof from Gods word.
Forasmuch as the visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of men (either in
the eyes of God, or in the judgment of the godly) faithful, it follows,
that the word of God must be before the Church for time, as likewise for
authority. For time, because Gods word is the Seed, the faithful the Corn
Luke 8.11, 12.
, and the Children 1. Pet. 1.23.
, Gods word is the Rock, or foundation Matthew. 16.18. Ephesians. 2.20.
, the faithful, the House Ephesians. 2.21.
.

For authority also the word is before the Church; because the voice of the
Church is the voice of man, who has erred, and may err from the truth: but
the voice of the word, is Gods voice 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21.
, who cannot deceive, nor be deceived.

Of this judgment be the Churches reformed Confess. Helv. i. ar. 14. and 2.
cap. 13.17. Bohe. c. 1.8. Gal. ar. 7. Belg. ar. 3.7. Saxon. ar. 1.11. Su^v. ar.
1.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
This makes to the strengthening of us against those Popish assertions of
Vignerinus, and such like, viz. that the Church was before the word, for time,
and is above the word, for authority Vigner. Insti^. ad Chr. Threl. c. 10. 3.
v. 10. fol. 83. a.
.

4. Proposition. The marks, and tokens of the visible Church, are the due, and
true administration of the word, and Sacraments.
The proof from Gods word.
There is the visible Church of Christ, where the word of God sincerely is
preached; and the Sacraments instituted by our Savior, are duly administered.

Hence is it that our Lord, and Savior calls them his mother, and his
brethren, which hear the word of God, and do it Luke. 8.21.
, and says, He that is of God, hears Gods word Ioh. 8.47.
: also, My sheep hear my voice Ioh. 10.27.
, and how shall they hear without a preacher, says S. Paul Romans 10.14.
.

Likewise the Apostle S. John.

He that knows God hears us, he that is not of God, hears us not 1. Ioh.
4.6.
: Again, they are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the
world hears them Ibid. v. 5.
.

And touching the Sacraments, first of Baptism.

Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and the Son, and the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you Mat. 28.19, 20*
.

We have bin baptized into Jesus Christ Romans 6.3.
, ye are washed, ye are sanctified 1. Cor 6.11.
.

By one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body 1. Cor. 12.13.
.

Next of the Lords supper.

The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed took bread, and when he had
given thanks he brake it, and said, take eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had Supped, saying, This
is the new Testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me 1. Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. Luke 22.19.
.

The Christians in all reformed churches acknoledge these things Confess. Hell.
1. ar. 14. and 2. cap. 17. Bohem. c. 8. Gal. ar. 27.28. Saxon. ar. 11.
VVittemb. ar. 32. Suev. ar. 15.
.

Some (and they also many of them very godly men) add ecclesiastical
Discipline for a note of the visible Church. But because the said Discipline in
part is included in the marks here mentioned, both we, and in effect, all
other well ordered Churches, over pass it in this place, as no token simply of
the visible Church.

Neither tie we the Church so strictly to the signs articulate, that we
think all those to be without the Church, and no Christians, which neither do
hear the word ordinarily and publicly read, and preached, nor participate in
the Sacraments, if so be they would, and yet can neither hear the one, nor
receive the other, as it falls out sometimes, especially in the times of
blindness and persecution.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
We renounce therefore, as altogether unsound, and Antichristian, the opinions,

1. Of the Papists, who both deny the pure preaching of Gods word, and the
administration of the Sacraments among Protestants, to be the marks of Christ
his visible Church Petrus a Soto assert. de Eccl.
, and affirm the tokens hereof to be antiquity, Unity, Universality,
Succession, etc. as does Stapleton in his Fortress.
, Bristow in his Motives.
, Bozius De signis visib. ec.
, Hill, in his Quartron.
, and Alabaster in his Motives.
.

2. Of the Brownists, who make discipline (and that too of their own devising)
such an essential argument of the visible Church, as they think, where that
is not, the magistrates there be Tyrants, the ministers false prophets: No
Church of God is, Antichristianitie does reign R. H. in Psalm. 122. Bar. disco.
p. 86. Ans. to M. Cartvv. letter, p. 13.
.

3. Of the same Brownists, and Barrowists, who neither allow frequenting of
sermons, and ministering of the Sacraments, nor have any Sacraments administered
among themselus Alison confut. of Green. and Bar. p. 113.116.
.

4. Of the Family of Love, which have in utter contempt, and derision both the
Preachers, and the Sacraments, scornefully tearming the Preachers, Scripture
learned men H.N. Euang. c. 33. 11.
, Ceremonial, and Letre Doctors Fam. letter to the B. of Roch.
, and the water at Baptism, Elementish water H. N. Euang. c. 19. 56.
.

Neither do we approve them, who for these visible, and external, put down
invisible, and spiritual tokens of the visible Church, as Faith in Christ
Jesus, and Love toward the Saints, which thing I. K. does Jn his confut. of
Pop. L. 4. b.
.

6. Proposition. The visible Church may, and from time to time has erred, both
in doctrine and conversation.
The proof from Gods word.
Had not this bin most true, it had never bin avouched both by our Savior
Christ, and S. Paul.

Our Savior says unto his disciples concerning doctrine, Take heed etc.
Matthew. 24.4.
Believe it not Ibid. v. 23, 26.
,

Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod Mark. 8.15.
; even of the doctrine of the Pharisees, and Sadduces Math. 16.12.
.

Many shall be deceived Math. 24.11.
, yea the very elect, if it were possible Jbid. v. 24.
.

Shall he find faith on earth Luke 18.8.
?

And concerning conversation, and manners, he prophesied, that iniquity shall
be increased, and the love of many shall be cold Math. 24.12.
.

S. Paul writes touching doctrine, that

We know in part 1. Cor. 13.12.
.

Antichrist sits in the temple of God 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
, etc. whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenes, among them that perish beuause
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; and
therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies
Jbid. v. 9, 10, 11.
.

Beware of dogs: beware of evil works, beware of concision Phil. 3.2.
.

And touching conversation,

Restore, etc. least thou also be tempted G. l 6.1.
.

I do not the good thing, which I would, but the evil which I would not, that
do I, If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin
that dwells in me Romans 7.19, 20
.

There is a fight even in the best men, and members of Ibid. v. 23.
.

Besides, that Churches visible, and glorious have erred, it appears
evidently by the superstition, heresies, yea and Atheism now reigning at
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch.

This with us the Churches in their, confessions do acknowledge Confess. Helv.
2. Saxon. ar. 11. VVittemb. ar. 32. Suev. ar. 15.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
The premises will not be granted for true, neither by the Papists, which
maintain that in faith and doctrine, the church, meaning thereby the visible
Church Test. Rhem. an. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
, whose Rector is the Pope of Rome Ibid. an. 1. Tim. 3.13.
, never erreth Ib. an. Ephesians. 5.24.
, never has erred Jb. an. marg. p. 264. Gab. Biel. l. 4. did. 6. quaest. 2.
, and never can err Ibid. an. 1. Tim. 3.13. Catech. Trid. in exposit. Symb.
Apost. Costerus enchirid. controvers. c. 3. de summo Pont. p. 136.
. Nor yet by these which say the Church cannot err for manners, such were the
Donatists, and are the Anabaptists, with the Family of Love See of this art.
prop. 1.
.

7. Proposition. The church of Rome most shamefully has erred in life*
ceremonies, and matters of faith.
The proof.
Justly is the church of Rome condemned of us, and all churches reformed,
because she has erred, and still very badly every way does offend.

1. In life. For.

At Rome the harlot has a better life*

Then she that is a Romans wife VV. Thomas hist. of Italy.
. O Roma, a Roma quantum mutata, vetusta es?
Nunc caput es scelerum, quae caput orbis eras.


If ye spell Roma backward (says I. Bale,) ye shall find it to be Amor,
Love in this prodigious kind. For it is a preposterous Amor VV. Thomas hist. of
Italy.
, Love out of kind Acts of the Eng. volari^s, 2. book, praef.
. Hence the Pasquil poets: Roma quid est? Quod te docuit praeposterus ordo.
Quid docuit? Iungas versa elementa, scies.
Roma: Amor est, Amor est? qualis? Praeposterus. Vnde hoc?
Roma mares, Noli dicere plura, scio.


Again: Roma vale; vidi: satis est vidisse. Reuertar,
Cum Leno, aut meretrix, Scurra, cynadus ero.


2. In ceremonies, which are for number, infinite. Gerson writes, how diverse
men have run into desperation; others have killed themselves, finding that
they were not able to keep, and perform the ceremonies of the Romish church
Confess. Aug. ar. 4.
.

For use a so they are vain, and impious, as their leading up and down of an
Ass on Palm Sunday, their battering of hell; there burial of the Cross, etc.
yea, and damnable, because Romish ceremonies are held both necessarily to be
observed, as well as the laws of God Eckius enchir de hum. constable. axiom. 2.
, and also to merit heaven. For sins venial (say the Rhemists) be taken away
by sacred ceremonies Test. Rhem. an. marg. ^. 258.
.

3. In doctrine. For proof hereof, see the popish errors in every article
almost, if not proposition of this book.

Again look we unto the heads of the Antichristian synagogue, and we shall
find that of them.

Some have bin Coniurers, Sorcerers, and Inchanters, as were Pope Martin 2.
Siluester the 2. and third, Benedict 8. John. 19.20.21. Sergius 4. Gregory 6.
and 7. and such were all the Popes (even 18. for number) from Siluester the
second until Gregory the seventh Cyp. Valera in his of the Pope, etc. out of
Card. Benon.
.

Some Heretics. For Siricius, Calixtus, Leo 9, and Paschalis condemned the
marriage of Priests; Liberius was an Arrian; Marcellinus, an Idolater; Honorius
a Monothelite Cath. Apol. 2. part. p. 31. Test. Rhem. an. Luc. 22.31.
.

John the 22, held many errors, whereof W. Occam wrote a book Biblioth.
Simleri.
, one whereof was that the souls of the wicked should not be punished, till the
day of judgment Gerson ser. 1. Pasch.
,

Pope John the 23. denied the souls immortality B. Ievvel def. fol. 644.
.

And some worldly, profane, and deuilish Atheists. For Sixtus 4. builded a
Male stews Acts and Mon.
.

Paul 3. received a monthly pension for 45000. whoores at Rome D. Spark
against I. d Albine, p. 399.
.

Leo the 10. made a Fable of the Gospel of Christ Smeton. contra Hamilt. p.
104.
.

Hence it proceeded, that

Rome has bin called Babylon, both by S. Augustine De civit. Dei, lib. 18.
, and Hierome Praef. lib. de Sp. S.
, and by Pope Pius S. was said Magis gentilizare, quam Christianizare: rather
to gentilize: or to be a city of Heathens, rather then of Christians Chr.
Franck. praef. ad Paradox.
.

S. Bernard said how the Romans in his time were hateful unto heaven and
earth, yea and hurtful unto both, wicked against God; rash against holy
things, and seditious among themselves De consider. ad Eugen.
.

Genebrard (himself an Antichristian Romanist) writes that 50. Popes
successively, and within the space of 150. years, departed from the virtue of
their Elders, and showed themselves Ab^urers of Christianity, and Apostataes,
rather then catholic Bishops Chronol. lib. 4. p. 817.
,

The Pope was proclaimed Antichrist at Rhemes by the Council there, under Hugh
Capet Arnolph. in council. Rhem. inter opera Bernardi.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
What the Papists are then it appears, whose doctrine (as has bin shown)
is, that the church of Rome neither has, nor can err,

Erraverunt aliae ecclesiae (says Di. Stella) other churches, as of Antioch,
Alexandria, Constantinople etc. have erred, sed nunquam ecclesia Romana, but
the church of Rome never yet erred Stella in Lucae 9. fol. 430.
.

Id constanter negamus (says Costerus the Jesuit) we constantly deny, that
christ his Vicars and Peter's successors, the Bishops of Rome have either taught
heresies, or can propound errors Enchirid. controvers. cap. 3. de summo Pontif.
p. 136.
.

God preserves the truth of christian religion in the Apostolic sea of Rome
Test. Rhem. an. Matthew. 23.2.
, and It is not possible that the church (meaning the church of Rome) can err
or has erred at any time, in any point, say the Rhemists Ibid. an. marg. p.
264.
.

20. Article. Of the authority of the Church.
1 The Church has power to decree rites or ceremonies 2 and authority in
controversies of faith. And yet it is not lawful for the Church 3 to ordain
any thing that is contrary to Gods word, 4 neither may it so expound one place
of Scripture 5 that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although 6 the
Church be a witness, and a keeper of holy writ: yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same so 7 besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

The propositions.
1. The church has power to decree rites, or ceremonies.

2. The church may not ordain what rites, or ceremonies she will.

3. The church has authority to judge, and determine in controversies of
faith.

4. The church has power to interpret, and expound the word of God.

5. The Analogy of faith must be respected in the exposition of the Scripture.

6. The church is the witness, and keeper of Gods written word.

7. The church may not enforce any thing to be believed, as necessary unto
salvation, that is either contrary, or besides the word of God.

1. Proposition. The church has power to decree rites, or ceremonies.
The proof from the word of God.
THe churches authority to decree rites, or ceremonies is warranted in the
word of God, first by the example of the Apostles, who did ordain rites, and
ceremonies: among other things that

In the church men should not be covered 1. Cor. 11 4.7.14. etc.
.

Women should keep silence 1. Cor. 14.34.
, and be covered 1. Cor. 11.5.
.

A known tongue understood of the common auditorie, should be used 1. Cor.
14.2.
, with other things 1. Cor. 11.2, 3, 4
. Next, by the general, and binding commandment of God himself, who at all
times will have every thing in the church to be done unto edifying 1. Cor.
14.26.
, honesty, and by order Ibid. v. 40.
, as being not the author of confusion, but of peace Ibid. v. 33.
.

All churches protestant confess the same Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 13. and 2. c.
22, 23, 24. Basil. ar. 10. Bohem. c. 15.17. Gal. ar. 32. Belg. ar. 32. August.
ar. 4.5.7.15. Saxon. ar. 20. Suevic. c. 8.14. VVittemb. c. 27.35.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This power being given by the Supreme authority unto the Church, they do
greatly offend, which do condemn either generally all, or particularly some
rites, and ceremonies orderly, and lawfully established: of the former sort are.

1. The Family of Love, who say of themselves, how they are a free people H.N
Sp. l^nd c. 31. 6.
, in bondage unto no creature, nor to any created thing Ibid. cap. 40. 1.
, they have no several distenting, or variable religions, either ceremonies
Ibid. cap. 39. 7.
.

2. The Brownists: who teach that every Christian is to ioyn himself unto that
people, among whom the Lords worship is free, and not bound, or withholden
with any jurisdiction of this world R.H. on Psalm. 122.
.

3. The Puritanes, whereof some would have all matters of ceremonies to be left
in christian liberty unto every man Such a one was that Scottish minister
which said unto the head of K. James, how he would hold conformity with
his Majesty's ordinances for matters of doctrine, but for matters of ceremony,
they were to be left in Christian liber^ie unto every man. This D. Barlovv
reports in the sum of the Confer. p. 71.
.

Others would have both temples to be left without service, Sermons and
Sacraments: and Princes to be scared with the fear of vproares, and sedition,
and all because they would be freed from the obedience unto ceremonies, not
impious of themseluees, imposed by the Church: the Father of these men was
Illyricus, of whom Melancton writes Epist. ad pium Lect. p. 455.
.

Of the latter kind, be

1. The Family of Love again, who utterly dislike our Churches, or Temples,
also our Liturgies, and forms of serving our God and finally our designed
times of meeting together for the worship of God.

Our Churches there blasphemously term Common houses (and so we term
Brothell houses or the stews) H.N. Sp. land cap. 5. 5.
.

Our Lyturgies, and manner of serving of God, they call Foolishnes of taken on
services Ibid.
, false and seducing Gods services H. N. exhort. c. 15. 2.3.
, of no man to be ordained I^. c. 16. 14.
, nor to be obeyed, or used, when they are established Jbid. 3.
, with these join the Barrowists, who do write that, to have Leiturgies, and
forms of common prayer, is to have another Gospel, and another Testament
Barrovves refut. p. 244.
.

Our Sabboths they contemn, yea they condemn, for they say, There ought to be
no Sabbath day Display H. 8 b.
, Our Sabbatarians go not so far, yet come they near unto these Familists,
when they divulge, that

The Church has no authority, ordinarily, and perpetually, to sanctify any
day, but the seventh day, which the Lord himself had sanctified D.B. doct. of
the Sab. 1. book. p. 31.
.

The church cannot take away this liberty of working six days in the week
^.C. 1. repli^, p. 120.
. These assertions are against all holy days lawfully established. Barrow yet
goes further then do these men, for he says how the observing of times, as
it is in our church, is an error fundamental Bar. ref. p. 36.
.

They also be alike culpable, who approouing some rites and ceremonies, do yet
tie the church, or people of God to the observation of the ceremonies, either
Mosaicall, as many have done, and do See art. 7. prop. 3.
, or of the Romish Church, as do the Papists Council. Trid. sess. 7. can. 13.
, and the half papists, the Family of Love H.N. euang. c. 31. 1.
.

Finally they are out of the way which think that either one man, as the Pope:
or any certain calling of men, as the clergy, has power to decree, and
appoint rites, or ceremonies, though of themselves good, unto the whole church
of God, dipersed over the universal world.

2. Proposition. The Church may not ordain what rites, and ceremonies she
will. Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their
manners, nor defile your selves with their idols. Ezekiel. 20.18.

The proof from Gods word.
As it is a clear truth that the church may ordain ceremonies: so true is it
also that the church has no power to appoint what rites, or ceremonies she
will. For she must decree none which be

Either for their owe nature, impious, like the ordinances, manners, and Idols
of our forefathers: teachers of vanity Ier. 10.8.
, and of lies Hab. 2.18.
.

Or for use, superstitious: like the brazen Serpent, which king Ezekiah brake
in pieces 2. king. 18.4.
.

Or for their weight, over heavy, and greiuous to be borne; like the Jewish
constitutions Yel^de men with burdens grievous to be borne. Luke 11.46. Why
^e^pt ye God, to l^y a yoke on the disciples necks, which neither our fathers,
nor we were able to bear? Act. 15.10. Why, as though ye lived in the world,
are ye burdened with traditions? Col. 2.20.
.

Or for their worthiness, in the eyes of the ordainers, either of equal price,
or of more account then the very ordinances of God, so as for the performance
of them, the laws of God must be left undone; such were many of the
Pharisaicall tires, and traditions Ye lay the commandment of God apart, and
observe the tradition of men, as the washing of pots, and of cups, and many
other such like things ye do. Mark ^.8. Ye reject the commandments of God,
that ye may observe your own traditions, etc. making the word of God of none
authority, by your tradition which you have ordained. Ibid. 9.13.
.

Or against the liberty of christians, and to the entangling of them again
with the yoke of servile bondage Stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Gal. 5.1.
.

Or last of all, any way contrary to the commandments, word, and will of God
Every plant, which my Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Matthew 15.13.
.

But the rites, ceremonies, and constitutions of the church they must make
altogether, and tend both to the nourishing, and increase of love, friedship,
and quietness among christians, and also to the retaining of Gods people in the
holy service, worship, and fear of God, according to the rule of the Apostle
before mentioned, let all things be done honestly, and by order 1. Cor. 14.40.
.

All churches reformed consent hereunto Conf^ss. Helvet. 2. cap. 5. Gal. ar.
33. Belg. ar. 32. August. ar. 7.15. ^a^. ar. 20. VVittemb. ar. 35. Suevica. c.
14.
.

Errors and Adversaries unto this truth.
The premises being, as they are, most true, most false then is it which the
Papists do publish, viz. that

The church has power to change the Sacraments ordained even by Christ
himself Council. Trid* sess. 5. cap. 2.
.

Whatsoever the Apostles, and Rulers of the Church command, is to be kept, and
obeyed Test. Rhem. an. m^rg. p. 336.
.

The authority of the of the Church is greater then of the Sacred Scripture
Confess. Patroceniens. cap. 15.
.

3. Proposition. The Church has authority to judge, and determine in
controversies of faith.
The proof from Gods word.
Authority is given to the Church and to every member of sound judgment in
the same, to judge in controversies of faith; and so in their places, to
embrance the truth, and to avoid, and improoue Antichristianitie, and errors;
and this is not the private opinion of our Church, but both the straight
commandment of God himself particularly unto all Teachers C^st away profane,
and old wives fables. 1. Tim 4.7 O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto
thee. 1. Tim. 6.20. A Bishop must etc. hold fast the faithful word according
to doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and
improoue them that say against it, etc. Tit. 1.9. etc.
, and hearers Hear not the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you, and
teach you vanities: they speak the vision of their own heart, and not of the
mouth of the Lord. Ier. 23.16. Beware of false prophets. Matthew. 7.15. Beware of
dogs; beware of evil workers. Phil. 3.2. The sheep kn^w the shepherds
voice: and they will not follow a stranger, but they fly from him: for they
know not the voice of strangers. Ioh. 10.4, 5. Be not carried about with diverse
and strange doctrines. Heb. 13.9. Beware least you be also plucked away with
the error of the wicked, and fall from your own stedfastnes. 2. Pet. 3.17. If
there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house,
neither bid him, god speed 2. Ioh. 10.
, of Gods word, and generally unto the whole Church ^f any shall say unto you,
Lo here is christ, or there, believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false prophets. Matthew. 24.23, 24. I speak as unto them which have
understanding, judge ye what I say. 1. Cor. 10.15. Try all things, and keep
that which is good 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
, and also the judgment of our godly brethren in foreign countries Confess.
VVittemb. ar. 32. Suevica, ar. 15.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Unsound therefore in judgment are the Papists. For first they maintain,

That the Pope of Rome has the power to judge all men, and matter, but may be
judged of no man Did. 40. ^. Si Papa.
, to decree (without controlment) against the epistles of S. Paul Carol. Ruinus.
; to dispense even against the new Testament Panorm. Extra. de divertiis.
; and to give the sense, and meaning of the holy Scripture, to which sense, or

Interpration of his all, and every man without contradiction, must yield, and
obey Hernaeus de potestate Papae.
.

Next, they publish, and hold, that the power to judge of religion and points
of doctrine is, either in Bishops only, as some of the^ do think The
mysteries of religion are committed to the trust of Bishops, plebi tantum
s^iendum est, quod ad mores formandos, and vitam pertinet, the common people
are only to know that which pertains unto manners, and good behavior, says
Friar Laurence a Villanni^ence, de Forman. conc^^^. l. 1. cap. 10. Nec gratia,
nec interior aliqu^ virtus requirenda est in membris, vel ministris Ecclesi^e
praeter publicam professionem fidei: It is sufficient for the members, and
ministers of the Church, to make open profession of the faith, more is not
required of them, neither grace (to judge of doctrine,) nor any other inward
virtue, says Petrus a Soto, assert. cath. de Ec.
; or in their Clergy only, as other deem The common and faithful people may
in a generality refuse, and forsake all new doctrine, dissenting from that
which they have learned and embraced. Non autem vt doctrinam in particulari ex
causis, and fundament^^ suis examinetur, and sic proprio iudicio discutiant
quid verum quid falsam sit: But they have none authority to examine any
doctrine in particular from the very causes, and grounds, and thereby search
out what is true, what false; quod proprium est Ecclesi^rum magist^^s, this
they must leave to the masters of Churches, to whom properly it belongs,
says Stapleton, Anti^. cua. in Mat. 7.
; and in the Church of Rome only, as all of them suppose Sacrae s^ripturaes
^^^^nativus and indulitatus ab ecclesia catholica est pete^dus, (says the
forementioned Petrus a Solo.) The native, and true sense of the sacred
Scripture, is to be fetch from the C^tholike Church (of Rome.) Ass^rt. Cath. ^e
E^. The whole Church throughout the world knows, that the holy Church of Rome
has power to judge of all matters, neque ^^iquam licebit de (...) iudicio
iudicare, neither is it lawful for any man to give any sentence of her
judgment. Gelasuis 9. q. Cuncta.
.

4. Proposition. The Church has power to interpret, and expound the word of
God.
The proof from Gods word.
To interpret the word of God is a peculiar blessing, given by God only to the
Church, and company of the faithful, though not to all, and every of them. For

No man knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the Father,
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him Matthew. 11.27.
.

It is given to you to know the secrets of heaven (says our Savior unto his
disciples, but to them it is not given Matthew. 13.11.
.

The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For
to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, etc. and to another,
Prophecy 1. Cor. 12.7.
.

If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his
peace, says S. Paul unto the Church at Corinth 1. Cor. 14.30.
.

Ye have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye have known all things,
etc. ye need not that any man teach you, says the Apostle John 1. Ioh. 2.20,
21, 27.
.

Hereunto subscribe the Churches in Heluetia Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 2.
, Wittemberg confess. VVittemb. cap. 30.
, Boheme Confess. Bohe. cap. 1.
.

The errors, and Adversaries unto this truth.
Many, and sundry are the adversaries unto this truth, whereof.

Some think that to expound the word of God is so easy a matter, as any
Student, endued with a good natural wit, by diligence and industry of his
own, may do the same.

Some teach, how to interpret the Scriptures, is too hard a thing for any
mortal man to attain unto; so did Johannes de Wessalia Aeneas Sylv.
, and do many Anabaptists.

Some, though they acknowledge that diverse have the gift to open the sense of
Gods word: yet that some, say they, are not the known Preachers, and writers
in the reformed and Christian assemblies, whom the Family of Love in scorn
do term the scipture learned (For, says the said Family, It is mere lies,
and untruth, etc. whatsoever the Scripture learned, through their knowledge out
of the Scriptures* institute, preach, and teach H.N. euang. c. 33. 11.12, 13
. They preach the letre, etc. but not the wotd of living God Idem 1. ^xhor.
cap. 16. 18.
. but themselves only have that gift, neither every one of the Family, but
the illuminate Elders. For to them it is given to know the truth Idem in his
Prove. c. 21. 2*
, and they are the Elders of the godly understanding, and of the manly wisdom
Sp. land. cap. 7 10.
, the Primats or principalls in the Light 1. Exhort. c. 14. 1.
.

Some do suppose that to interpret the holy Scriptures, is not so much a
special gift of God upon some chosen persons, as an ordinary power annexed to
the state, and calling of Popes, Bishops, and Clergy men See the proposit.
rect. immediate. aforegoing.
.

Others be so far from giving the people of God, not being of the Clergy,
power to expound, as they will not suffer them to read, nor so much as to have
the Scriptures by them in a vulgar tongue, except it be their own most
corrupt, and barbarous translation, which but of late years neither, and that
in part too, is granted by the Papists; but in place thereof they thrust upon
the Laity, their most idolatrous, and blasphemous Fustinals, Legendes,
Rosaries, Horaries, and Psalteries of our Lady, as falsely they called her.

5. Proposition. The analogy of faith must be respected in their exposition of
the Scripture.
The proof from Gods word.
Forasmuch as no prophecy is of any private motion 2. Pet. 1.20.
, and whatsoever interpretation man gives, if it agree not to the analogy of
faith, which S. Paul gave in commandment to be observed Romans 1^.6.
, is a private interpretation, special heed is to be had that one place of
Scripture be so expounded, as it agree with another; and al to the proportion
of faith.

The Churches reformed approve this assertion by their subscriptions Confess.
Helv. 1. ar. 2. and 2. c. 2. Gal. ar. 7. Sax. ar. 1. VVittem. cap. 30.31.33.
Suev. ar. 1.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Of another judgment are many. For

Some do think the Scriptures may be expounded in what sense, and to what
purpose men list, as the Pharisees D. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 25.
, the Seuerians Eus. eccl. hist. lib. 4. c. 29.
, and Papists, among whom there be which from this opinion do term the most
holy word and Scriptures of God most reprochfully, A shipmans hoase, a Leaden
rule, a Nose of wax Pighius controuer. 3. de Ec. and Hierarch. l. 3. c. 3.
(...). a^. praef. Ce^s. Colon.


Some do mislike all interpretations, and written Commentaries upon the
Scriptures, as unnecessary, and vain, such were Seruetus, Valdesius, Coranus
with others of late years Beza epist. 59.
, and are the Libertines, Scwenkfeldians Ibid.
, and Family of Love H.N. 1. exhor. cap. 16. 4.
.

Some depend wholly upon visions, and revelations, as did the Enthusiasts
^^eod. haeret. fab. l. 3.
, Nicholaus Storch,

Thomas Monetarius, the Anabaptists D. Mayor in Dom. 8. post Trinit. homil.
fol. 440.
, and our late English reformer Hacket Arthing. sed^. p. 17.
.

Some dislike of the literal, and prefer the Allegorical sense of the
Scriptures; and thereby devise what them list, most monstrously from the word
of God; as did the Originists, and do the Libertines Calv. contra Anabap.
, and Family of Love hence teaching on the other, that the spiritual
understanding is the word of God, and that to embrace the literal sense, is
to commit Idolatry Allens confess
.

Some of every place of Scripture will have an exposition both Analogicall,
Allegorical, historical, and moral, as the curious Thomists, and Monckes.

Some are addicted to an interpretation which they call mystical, and
prophetical, as Brocardus, Morelius, and others.

Some are of mind that the Gospel, or Evangelical word cannot be committed
to letters, and wrighting, says Lindanus Lib. 1. c. 23.
.

Some do think (as before also has bin shown) how that is the old, and
only true sense of the Scriptures which is made, and given by the Church
Haere^^ci Scripturarum cognitionem, and int^^ligentiam extra Ecclesi^m po^unt:
nos a^tem (Papista) volumus Ecclesiae Romanae) esse annexam, nec ab ea separari
patimur. Stapl. antid. Euang. in Joan. 19.23. p. 418. Sicut Christo Iudaei: sic
nos Ecclesiae (Romanae) simpli^iter credere debemus, says Stapleton. Antid. in
Lucae 10.16. When the uthoritie of the Church leaves the holy Scripture, then
are they of no more account then Esops fables. Wolf. Herman.
, and Pope of Rome Si Papam, qui Christi vicarius est, et eius omnimodam
potestatem habet in terris, consulerent, non errarent (haeretici) says Stella
in Lucae 9. fol. 499.
.

Some do maintain, that as the Church in time does alter: so the
interpretation of the Scripture also therwithal does vary, whereby that which in
the Apostles time was a truth, in these days shallbe a falsehood. In which
error was Cardinal Cusanus Cusam. ad Bohemos epist. 2.
.

6. Proposition. The Church is the witness, and keeper of Gods written word.
The proof from Gods word.
Though the Church has authority to hear, and determine in controversies of
faith: yet has the Church power neither to judge the word of God, nor to judge
otherwise then Gods word does judge. For it is said to the Church, and people
of God.

I beseech you brethren mark them diligently which cause divisions, and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them Romans
16.7.
.

Here him Matthew. 17.5.
. To him give all the Prophets witness Act. 10.43.
.

Search the Scriptures Ioh. 5.39.
: whosoever trangresseth, and abides not in the the doctrine of Christ, has
not God 2. Ioh. v 9.
.

ye are, etc. built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets Ephesians.
2.19.
.

And of the holy Scriptures.

Thy word is the the truth Ioh. 17.17.
. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them Luke 16.29.
, says our S. Christ.

We have also a sure word of the Prophets, says Saint Peter 2. Pet. 1.19.
.

And S. Paul. The whole Scripture is profitable to teach, etc. 2. Tim. 6.16, 17
.

If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of our
L. Jesus Christ, he is puffed up, and knows nothing etc 1. Tim. 6.3, 4.
.

And so with us do other Churches conceive both of the Scriptures, and Church
Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 1. Bohem. cap. 1. Gal. ar. 5. Belg. ar. 7. VVittemb. ar.
30, 31, 32. Sax. ar. 11.
. yet all of us do grant, that the Church as a faithful witness may, yea of
necessity must testify to the world, what has bin the doctrine of God his
people from time to time, and as a trusty Recorder is to keep, and make
known what the word of God, which it has received, is, which truly has bin
perfomed before the word was written by the Patriarchs, and after the same was
committed to writing, before Christ his incarnation, by the Jews, in Christ
his life time Luke 4.17.
, in the primitive Church Act. 13.27 Act. 15.21. 2. Cor. 3.15. 2. Cor. 8.18.
, From the Apostles time, by the godly Christians thoroughout the world.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Be it far therefore from us to think, which the Papists do not stick to
write, and say, namely that

The Church is to judge the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures the Church Io.
Maria Verract^s. Pighius in controvers. de Ec.
.

The Scripture is not of the essence of the Church: Because without it a Church
may be, though not very well. So said Card. Cusan. Card. C^san. epist. 2. ad
Boh.
.

The Scripture, because (in their opinion) it is imperfect, cannot: obscure,
may not: ambiguous, ought not be the judge. So Lindan Lind. l. 1. c. 1.
, Latomus Contra Biuer.
, Petrus a Soto De S. Scrip.
, Pighius Eccl. Hierar. l. 1. c. 4.
, Coster Enchir. de S. Scrip. c. 1.
, etc.

He is an heretic that cleaves to the Scriptures. So said Iacobus Hocstratus.

Again the careful keeping of the holy Scriptures by Gods people from age to
age, and time to time, declares first, how the mother Church of Rome, is not
the only keeper of the holy writ; and next that cursedly they do offend,
which either as greatly esteem the Ethickes of Aristostle, as the
commandments of god, the Odes of Pindar, as the Psalms of David Ang. Polit.
, the works, and books of men, as the writings of God, which the Council of
Trent does Ses. 4.
: or before, and above the scripture prefer unwritten Traditions. Hence Petrus
a Soto:

Tradition (says he) is both more ancient, and more effectual the^ the holy
Scripture Confess. Cath. de Eccles.
, and Lindan, The scriptures would be of no validity, neither had continued
till this day but for traditions Lind. l. 1. c. 4, 5.
.

7. Proposition. The Church may not enforce any thing to be believed, as
necessary unto salvation, that is either contrary or besides the word of God.
The proof from the word of God.
Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
take ought there from Deuteronomy. 4.2.


Put nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee and thou be found a liar
Pro. 30.6.
.

Though it be but a man's covenant, when it is confirmed, (yet) no man does
abrogate it, or adds any thing thereto Gal. 3.15.
.

If any man shall add unto these things, God shall ad unto him the plauges
that are written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the words of
the book of this prophecy, god shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from those things which are written in
this book Reu. 22.18, 19
.

And so witness with us the Churches reformed Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 4. and 2.
c. 2. Basil. ar. 10. Bohem. cap. 1. Gal. ar. 5. Belg. ar. 7. Saxon. ar. 1.
VVittemb. cap. 30.33. Suevica, ar. 1.
.

Whatsoever also is grounded upon Gods written word, though not by our common,
and vulgar terms to be read therein, we do reuerendly embrace, which
makes us for doctrine to embrace the Consubstantiality of our Savior with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, which the Arrians would not: a Trinity of persons
in the Godhead, which the Sabellians would never do; the justification by
faith Only, which the Papists will not; the baptism of Infants, and young
children, which the Anabaptists dare not: and for discipline not to refuse of
Church officers, the names Archbishops, Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitanes,
Suffragans, Parsons, Vicars, etc. of ecclesiastical censures the terms,
Suspension, Excommunication; of Ceremonies, none at all which tend either unto
order, comelines, or edification.

But from the heart we abhor in matters both of doctrine, and disciple,
whatsoever either agrees not with the canon of the Scripture, or is not
grounded thereupon.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Hence detest we both all the old heretics, and their fancies, with the new
prophets of Basilides: the Manifestation of Marcio^; the mysteries of the
Manichies; the Iobolia of the Sathia^s; the Symbonia of the Archo^tikes, the
Cabala of the Jews: the Alcaron of the Turks: and also all new heretics,
and Schismatikes with all their cursed opinions, as first the Anabaptists, and
namely the Libertines, the Dauigeorgians, and Family of Love, and all the
codeified Elders thereof, as Henry, Nicholas, Eliad, Fidelitas, Christopher
Vitell, Theophilus, the Exile, and the rest.

Next the Papists whereof.

Some have commanded that all the Popes decrees should be taken, as confirmed
by the mouth of God himself; so did Pope Agatho the first Gra. did. 19. Sic.
.

Some write (as Busgradus) that if the Pope believe there is no life to come
(as some Popes have done) we must believe it, as an article of our faith.

Some say, if the Pope carry innumerable souls with him unto hell, yet he may
not be judged, so did Pope Boniface the 8. Decr. lib. 3. tit. 2. Crantz. lib.
8. c. 36.
.

Some, as Bellarmine, conclude that it is a point of faith to hold that the
Bishop of Rome has succeeded Peter in the universal regiment of the Church
Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans l. 2. c. 12.
.

Others, as the Jesuits, persuade their Catholics, that the king of Spain,
and their Catholic faith are so linked together as it is become a point of
necessity in the Catholic faith to put all Europe into the hands of the said
King otherwise the Catholic religion will be utterly extingvished, and perish
Spar. disco. of the Eng. Jes. p. 7.
.

Others of them have published a new Gospel called Euangelium aeternum, and
Spiritus sancti, which they say does so far excel the Gospel of Christ, as
the Cernell surpasses the shell, the Sun, the Moon, and light, darkness.
The author whereof was one Cyrellus a Carmelite,

And lastly the Puritanes, and all the speculations of Brown, Barrow, Green,
Penrie, Marprelate, T.C.E.G.R.H. A.C. I.B. with the new Sabbatarians, and
their fancies.

21. Article. Of the authority of general Counsels.
General Counsels 1 may not be gathered together without the commandment and
will of Princes. And 2 when they be gathered together (forasmunch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit, and word of God)
they may err, and 3 sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God:
wherefore 4 things ordained by them, as necessary unto salvation have neither
strength, nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scriptures.

The propositions.
1. General Counsels may not be gathered together, but by the commandment,
and will of Princes.

2. General Counsels may err.

3. General Counsels have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.

4. The things ordained by general Counsels, are so far to be embraced, and
believed, as they are consonant to Gods holy word.

1. Proposition. General Counsels may not be gathered together, but by the
commandment, and will of Princes.
The proof from Gods word.
GReat is the power, and authority of Kings, and Princes by the word of God.
For as the defense of Religion is committed unto them: so must they see that
all men do their duties. That these things the better may be performed, they
are, as just occasion is offered, not as men under the power of others, to
Simon, but as Supreme governors, within their own terretories, and dominions,
to command all sorts of men to meet together, and that either to the
implanting of the truth where it is not; or to the suppressing of sin,
errors, idolatry, and superstition, where, or in whomsoever it does arise, or
is rooted. Such Counsels were holden, both in the time of the Moisaicall
government, by the commandment of the most godly Kings, David 1. Chr. 13.i, 2.
, Solomon 1. king. 8.1.
, Asa 2. Chr. 15.9.
, Ezekiah 2. Chr. 29.4.
, and Josiah 1. Chr. 24.29.
, and since the Gospel has bin received into kingdoms, and Commonweales, by
Christian Princes, kings, and Emperors, who gathered Counsels both General,
as the Nicene was by Constantine the great Ruffin. l. 10. c. 1. Eusebius. de vita
Constable. l. 3. c. 6.
, the Council of Constantinople, by Theodosius the elder Theod. l. 5. c. 9
, the Counsel of Ephesus, by Theodosius the younger Euagr. l. 1. c. 2.
, the council of Calcedon, by Marcian Leo epist 43.53
, and National, and Provincial, so the Counsel at Frankford, Rhemes, Taron,
Arelot, and Moguntia, by the will, and commandment of Charles the great
Aventin. Carranza, summa Council. Carrion. lib. 3.
, at Matison, by Gunthranus Turon. l. 8. c. i0
, at Paris, and Orleance, by the direction, and appointment of Childebert
Magdeburg. eccles. hist. Cen. 6. ^ap. 9.
, were kept, and holden.

And never yet has there bin a council, either General, or national, or
whatsoever (I only except the counsels held by the Apostles, and Apostolical
men in a troublesome state, and time of the Church, there being then no
Christian Princes, and Emperors to countenance the truth) either begun or
ended, to the glory of God, but it has bin, I say not called only, but
confirmed also by some godly Emperor, King, or Queen. This in effect is
granted by all reformed Churches Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30. Bohem.
c. 16. Belg. ar. 36. Saxon. ar. 23. VVittemb. c. 35. Suc^icain perorat.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This assertion has bin oppugned, and that diversely both by the Papists, and
Puritanes, For the Papists they say,

Emperors, and kings be the Pope his Summoners, but of themselves are no
absolute, and powerful commanders, and callers of Councels Harding. confut.
par. 5. cap. 6. 3.
.

There ought no council to be kept without the determinate consent of the
Bishop of Rome Harding.
.

No council ever yet had firm, and lawful authority, which was not confirmed
by the Bishop of Rome Duraeus cont. Whitaker. l. 2. Cardil. in d^fe. Council.
Triden. disp. 1.
.

The Popes of Rome, (and not Christian Princes) have the authority, and power
of making laws ecclesiastical, and of calling Counsels Test. Rhem. an.
Matthew. 16.
.

And the Puritanes do think, that private persons without the leave, or
priuitie of Princes, may summon assemblies about Church causes at their
pleasures, and consult about the public affairs of the Church. Of this mind
was Beza Perpla^et autem mihi quod de conuentu absque vlla principum, aut
civitatum authoritate priua^im instituendo, sc^ibis, Beza epist. 68. page 292.
, and be the disciplinarians both of South Witness their Classical
assemblies, at Commencements, Faires, etc. See Discipline grounds.
, and North Britain The approbation, or disallovvance of a general Assembly,
has been, and should be a matter, and cause spiritual, and alvvaies
cognosced, and judged by the Church, as Judges competent within this realm;
say certain Scottish Ministers in their letters unto the Lords of the Kings
privy Council in Scotland, which letter is printed in the said Lords
declaration etc. published an. 1606. and printed by Rob. Barker.
.

Others (adversaries to both Puritanes and Papists) are of mind, that were the
Pope a good man (as he is nothing less) he might, and he being wicked, other
good Bishops (though subject unto Kings, and Emperors) may summon Counsels at
their discretions. An error of Seluererus Analyct* page 35.
.

The Muscouites have a fancy that since the seventh general Counsel that
was, neither Prince, nor Pope, nor any other men else have power to call a
general counsel Surius comment. an. 1501. page 30.
.

2. Proposition. General coucells may err.
The proof from Gods word.
General Counsels, consisting, first of men, who may err, nothing more
easily (for all the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually Gen
6.5.
, even from his youth Genesis 8.21.
, but God only is true, and all men are Psalm. 116.11.
,) yea, and every man is a Liar Romans 3.4.
.

Next, of men differing in years, riches, learning, judgment, calling and
authority: whereby distractions of opinions often do arise.

Thirdly of many me^, whereof the wicked be for number commonly the mayor part,
and the better in outward countenance of the world.

Lastly of men, not al, nor always either governed with Gods holy Spirit, and
word; or gathered together in the Name of Christ: none of sound judgment in
Religion, do doubt but they may err.

If Paphmitius had bin absent at Nice, that Council had erred Sozom. lib. 1.
c. 33.
.

If Hierome had bine away at Calcedon, that Council had erred B. Ievvel del.
fol. 58.
.

At any time (if some be believed) be the Pope of Rome not present at such
meetings, either per se or per Legatum, by himself, or his Legate, no Council
but must err Roffen. contra Luther.
.

Therefore Counsels may err.

That which one Counsel does establish, another will disanull. They will not
(we must think) revoke, that which is well decreed. Therefore counsels may
err Test. Rhem. an. Joh. 16.13.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore err do the papists which say, that the holy Spirit is the director
of all Counsels, and

That counsels cannot err.

3. Proposition. General Counsels have erred, even in things pertaining unto
God.
The proof from Gods word.
Counsels both general, and particular have erred, and that in matters of
Faith Confess. VVittemb. cap. 33.
.

For in the holy Scriptures we find, that it was ordained, If any man did
confess that Jesus was the Christ, he should be excommunicate Ioh. 9.22. and
12.42.
, which could not be but by a Council.

A council was gathered to suppress Christ, and his doctrine Ioh. 12.47.
.

A council consulted how they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him Matt.
26.3, 4.
.

A council sought for false witness to put him to death Mar 14.53.55.
.

By a counsel Jesus was bound, led away, and delivered unto Pilate Mar. 15.1.
.

A council judged our S. Christ to be both a deceiuer Matthew. 27.63.
, and a blaphemer Luke 21.71.
.

A council corrupted the Soldiers, and willed them to tell a Lie Matt. 28.12,
13
.

A counsel withstood Peter, and John: and commanded them that in no wise they
should speak, or teach in the name of Jesus Act. 4.5, 6, 18.
.

A council both caused the Apostles to be beaten, and commanded them also that
they should not preach in the name of Jesus Act. 5.40.
.

In ancient writings of credit, we may read, how (contrary to Gods word), by
Counsels, Arrianisme has bin confirmed; as by the Council at Ariminum D.
Hieron. in vita Damasi Papae.
.

By counsels the traditions, and books of foolish men, have bin made of
equal authoririe with the word of God; as by the counsel of Trent S^s. 4.
de^r. 1.
.

By counsels has bin established both the adoration of images, as by the
second council of Nice; and the Invocation of creatures, as by the Tridentine
council. Brev. Romans ex decr. S.S. Council. ^rid. r^stitut. and edit. a ^io 5.


By counsels the authority of princes has bin empaired, and the Pope, and
Clergy, advanced above all earthly Princes; as by the Council of Lateran
Council. Later. cap. 5. apud Innocent.
.

The consideration of the premises, and the like, moved S. Hilarie to call the
Synod of Mediolane, The Synagogue of the malignant Hilar. epist. ad Constable.
Imper.
, and

S, Augustine to write unto Maximinus: Neither ought I to object against thee
the Synod of Nice; nor thou against me the Synod of Ariminum D. Aug. contra
Max. lib. 3.
, and

Nazianzene openly to pronounce, that He never saw any good end of a Council
Naz. ad Pr^c^p. epist. 42.
, and

The French king his Ambassador to say unto the chapter of Trent, that
scarsely any good at all, or very little, came by Counsels unto the state of
Christendom Orat. Synod. Legate. regis Fan. an. 1562.
, and

Cornelius Bishop of Bitonto, to break out into these words in the face of the
Council at Trent; I would that with one consent we had not altogether
declined from religion unto superstition; from faith unto infidelity; from
Christ unto Antichrist; from God unto Epicures B. Jewels def. par. 1. fol. 39.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
This notwithstanding the Papists do continue in an opinion that counsels
cannot err Test. Rhem. an. Ioh. 16.13.
.

4. Proposition. The things ordained hy general Counsels, are so far to be
embraced, and believed, as they are consonant to Gods holy word.
The proof from Gods word.
General counsels we simply condemn not: yet do we not ground our faith
upon any council, but only upon the written word of God.

Therefore in general Counsels whatsoever is agreeable unto the written word
of God, we do reuerendly embrace; but whatsoever is contrary unto, or besides
the will of God, revealed in the holy scriptures, we do carefully avoid.

And so are we commanded to do even by God himself.

Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing
thereto; nor take ought therefrom Deuteronomy. 12 32.
.

Walk ye not in the, ordinances of your fathers; neither observe their manners
etc. I am the Lord your God: walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and
do them Ezekiel. 20.18, 19
.

Though that we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so
say I now again, If any man preach unto you otherwise, then that ye have
received, let him be accursed Gal. 1.8, 9.
.

And so think the Churches reformed with us Confess. Helv. 2. c. 18. Bohem. c.
1. Gal. ar. 5. Belg. ar. 7. VVittem. c. 33.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrary hereunto are the opinions of the Papists. For of them

Some do think, that the decrees of Counsels do bind all nations; as Pope
Hormisda decreed they should.

Some, as Pope Gregory the great, supposed that some cou^sells, and namely the
council of Nice, of Constanstinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon Greg. ^. l. 1.
epist. 24. and l. 2. epist. 49.
, some, as Campian Campian. rat. 4.
, thought that all counsels were of equal authority with the word of God.

Others, as the Guisia^ faction in France, be resolved in matters of religion
to follow the footesteps of their ancestors, though (Gods word, and) a thousand
counsels decree to the contrary Calvin. epist. ^ulling. fol. 231.
.

22. Article. Of Purgatory.
The Romish doctrine concerning 1 Purgatory, 2 Pardons, worshipping, and
adoration as well 3 of images, as 4 of Relics: and 5 also Invocation of
Saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrantie of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.

The Propositions.
The Romish doctrine concerning 1. Purgatory.

2. Pardons.

3. Worshipping, and adoration of Images.

4. Relics.

5. Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, and not warranted by the holy
Scripture, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

1. Proposition. The Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, is fond, and not
warranted by the holy Scripture, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.
The proof from Gods word.
IT is granted as well by the Romish, or false, as by the true Church, that
none unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of God. And because all men
either have bin, or be still unclean, therefore they must be purged from sin.

But in the manner of purging them who are vnpure, they do greatly differ. For
the true church, looking into the word of God, does find that we are
sanctified, or made clean in diverse respects, diversely, as by Baptism Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and
cleanse it by the washing of water thorough the word. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
, by the word preached Now are ye clean thorough the w^rd that I have spoken
unto you. Ioh. 15.3.
, by the blood of Christ The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
, and by the spirit of God Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 6.11.
, and that in this life, and not in the other world.

For in the sacred scripture there is mention but only of two ways, one
leading unto destruction, the other bringing unto life Matt. 7.13, 14.
, of two sorts of men, whereof some believe, and they are saved; some believe
not, and they are damned Matthew. 16.16. Ioh. 3.18.
, and of two States, one blessed, where Lazarus is; the other cursed, where
Dives does abide Luke 16.
. A third way, or sort, or state cannot be found in the word of God.

And therefore the Purgatory in another world both denied has always bin by
the Greek Churches Alphons. de haeres. lib. 8. de Indulgentiis. Polydor. de
Inventor. lib. 8. cap. 1.
, and neither is, nor will be acknowledged by any of Gods reformed Churches in
this world, as their Confessions do testify Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 26. Gal.
ar. 24. Saxon. ar. 11. August. ar. 11. VVittemb. cap. 25.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Erroneous therefore, and not warrantable by Gods word concerning Purgatory is
the doctrine both of the old Heretics, the Montanists who thought there was a
purging of souls after this life Tertul. de cor. militis: and De Anima, in
fine.
, and of the new, and renewed Heretics, the Papists. For

They think it to be unsound doctrine, and not sufferable in any book, for
Christians to diliuer, that it is impossible for godly, and faithful men or
women to be punished after they be dead. Therefore deleatur say they: Blot out
such doctrine Puniripios post mortem impossible: deleatur, Jndex expurg. p. 26.
.

They teach by their Catechismes, that to doubt whether there is a Purgatory,
or no, is a breach of the first commandment V^ux catech. chap. 3.
.

Thus do they pray for the souls of the faithful (as they fancy) boiling in
the torments of purgatory. Auete, omnes animae fideles, quarum corpora hic,
and vbique conquiescunt in puluere: Dominus Jesus Christus, qui vos, and nos
redemit suo pretiosissimo sanguine, dignetur vos a poenis liberare, etc. that
is, All hail, all faithful souls, whose bodies do here, and every where
rest in the dust: The Lord Jesus Christ, who has redeemed both you, and us
with his most precious blood, vouchsafe to deliver you from pains, etc Horae
B. Virg. Mariae secundum vsum Sar.
.

They have ratified the doctrine of purging souls after this life in the
Council of Trent Council. Trid. decr. de Purg. Ses. 25. and ses. 6. can. 30.
.

It is further to be noted, how the same Papists, sliding back from the truth
of God, have fallen into many noisome, and diverse opinions in the matter of
Purgatory, agreeing among themselves,

Neither about the place, where purgatory should be, some placing the same in
the bottom of the sea Eckius in Enchirid.
: some near unto the mount Hecla in Ireland; some upon the mount Etna in Sicil
Bernard de Buslis Rosar. par. 3. ser. 2.
, others in the Center of the earth Spec. peregr. quaest. dec. 1. c. 3. q. 5.
, others, in Hell, whereof they make four rooms, the first of the damned: the
second of Infants dying unbaptized; the third, Purgatory; the fourth Limbus
patrum, whereinto Christ descended Position. Ing. de Purgat.
, and others in a mind tossed, and troubled betwixt hope and fear Lorich.
instit. Cathol. de 12. Fidei art.
.

Neither about the Tormentors there, who are thought of some to be holy Angels
Albertus, and Roffensis.
, of others to be very devils S. Th. More.
.

Neither about the torments. For some dream how they are tormented there with
fire only, as Sir Thomas More; some with water and fire, as Roffensis; and
some neither with fire, nor water, but with troublesome affections of Hope, and
Fear, as Lorichius Instit. cathol. vt supra.
.

Neither about the causes of Purgatory torments: because that some do think
that only venial sins Greg. dial. l. 4. cap. 39. Spec. peregr. quaest. dec.
1. c. 3. q. 4.
, others, that venial, and mortal sins too Eckius, posit. 6
, for which in this life men have donn no penance, are there purged.

Nor about the time, which they that be tormented, shall abide in Purgatory.
For some have given out how the poor souls there be continually in torments,
till the day of Judgment, as Dionis. Carthusianus De 4. Hom. noviss.
: others as Durandus De officio mort. l. 7.
, do think they have rest sometimes, as upon Sundaies, and holy days, others
are of mind, that in time they shallbe set free and at liberty, because their
punishment is but temporary Spec. pereg. quaest. vt supra quaest. 5.
, and others that at any time they may be delivered, if either their friends
will buy out their pains; or the priests will pray or say any Mass for them;
or the Pope will but say the word.

Nor finally about the state of souls in purgatory. For

Our English Papists at Rhemes do think the souls in purgatory to be in a
more happy, and blessed condition then any men that live in this world Test.
Rhem. an. Apoc. 14 13.
, and yet say the same Rhemists that purgatory fire passes all the pains of
this life Ibid. an. marg. p. 431.
.

Thomas Aquinas holds how the pains of hell fire, and of purgatory are all
one, and in nothing differ, but that the one is but temporal, and the other
not so. And others, put in choice either to tarry in Purgatory one day, or to
endure the miseries of this world an 100. years, have chosen to suffer the
troubles of this life an hundred years together, rather then to abide the
pains of purgatory but on short winters day Cap. Quid, in aliud. did. 25.
.

Therefore in this contrariety of opinions some of them, the Papists
themselves cannot deny, must be; we say all of them are fond, and contrary to
the word of God.

Besides they nourish most cursed, and damnable errors, as

That all the souls of the faithful, separated from their bodies, are not at
rest.

That all sins in their own nature, be not mortal, or deadly, and that some
deserve not everlasting torments. They are purged in purgatory.

That one sinful man may save, and satisfy the wrath of God for another, and
that easily by praying, saying, or doing some thing for them.

That, if friends in this word will do nothing for the poor soul in
purgatory pains: yet may the said souls come at length unto happiness, by
abiding their deserved torments until the last hour, or day of judgment, in
Purgatory.

Finally, that the Pope is God, in that he can at his pleasure, discharge
guilty souls both from the guilt of sin; and from the punishments due for
the same.

2. Proposition. The Romish doctrine concerning pardons, is fond, and not
warranted by the holy Scripture, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.
The proof from Gods word.
Such has bin the exceeding mercy, and love of God toward mankind, that as
he has purged us from all guiltines of sin by the blood: so has he
pardoned us from the everlasting punishment due for sin by the pains of
Jesus Christ. For

There is salvation in none other. For among men there is given none other name
under heaven, whereby they must be saved Act. 4.12.
.

Through his name all that believe shall receive remission of sins Act. 10.43.
.

He has purchased the Church by his own blood Act. 20.28.
.

With his stripes we are healed Isa. 53.5.
.

He that believes in him shall neither be condemned Ioh. 3.18.
, nor ashamed Romans 10.11.
.

Therefore: Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease
you, etc. and ye shall find rest for your souls: says our Savior Christ
Matt. 11.28, 26
.

If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with
thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, says S.
Paul Romans 10.9.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
This being the doctrine even of God himself whereof see more Art. 2. pr. 4.
ar. 11. pr. ^. ar. 22. pr. 1.
, we may evidently perceive, how not only vain, but besides; not only
besides, but against the word of God, the Romish doctrine concerning pardons
is, For that does teach us.

1. To seek salvation not at God alone, but at the hands of sinful men. For
would we have a pardon for the sins of 40. days? A Bishop may give it, For
the sins of 100. days? A Cardinal may grant. For all our sins committed,
or to be committed? From the pope we may have it. Hence be his pardons if you
respect time, for 40.50.100.1000.10000.50000. etc. years; if offenses,
Homicide, Parcide, Per^urie, Sodomitrie, Treason and what not, vide Taxa^^
poenit.
etc.

2. That we may be our own Saviors. So did that of Purgatory.

3. How the precious blood of Christ was shed in vain. For corruptible gold,
and silver, with our own deeds, and works, may and will save us, if we will.

4. That repentance is not of necessity unto the salvation of man. For without
the same a popish pardon may save. But without either a Pardon from the Pope,
or such like, or Absolution of a Priest, there is no salvation, by the doctrine
of the Church of Rome Sec ar. 25. pr. 6.
.

A further manifestation of the vanity, and impieties of the Romish pardons,
from a book of the Papists, entitled, Horae beatissimae virginis Mariae,
secundum vsum Sarum.
Quicunque in statu gratiae existens, dixerit deuote septem orationes sequentes
cum septem Pater noster, and totidem Aue Maria, ante imaginem pietatis,
merebitur 56 millia annorum Indulgentiarum.

Johannes Papa 12. concessit omnibus dicentibus orationem seque^tem, transeundo
per caemiterium, tot annos indulgentiarum, quet fuerunt ibi corpora iuhumata a
constitutione ipsius caemiterij.

Oration pro defunctis.

Auete omnes animae fideles quarum corpora hic, and vbique requiescunt in
puluere. Dominus Jesus Christus, qui vos and nos redemit suo pretiosissimo
sanguine, dignetur vos a paenis liberare, and inter choros suorum sanctorum
angelorum collocare, ibique nostri memores suppliciter exorare, vt vobis
associemur and vobiscum in coelis coronemur.

Innocentius Papa 2. concessit cuilibet qui hanc oratione^ sequentem deuote
dixerit 4000. millia annorum indulgentiarum. Aue vulnus lateris nostri
saluatoris, etc.

Quicunque deuote dixerit istam orationem habebit 3000. dierum indulgentiarum
criminalium peccatorum, and 20000. millia dierum, venialium, a Domino Iohanne
papa 22. concessarum, vt in Autidatorio an^^ae habetur.

Quicunque orationem sequentem deuote d^^cerit, premerebitur 11000. annorum
indulgentiarum etc. Aue Domina sancta Maria, matter dei, regina coeli, porta
paridisi, Domina mundi, lux sempiterna, imperatrix inferni, etc. Ora pro me
Iesum Christum dilectum filium t^^um, and lib^ra me ab omnibus malis, ora pro
peccatis meis. Amen.

Whosoever being in the state of grace, shall devoutly say the seven prayers
ensuing, with seven Our Fathers, and as many Hail Mary's, before the image of
Piety, shall thereby merit 56. thousand years of Pardons.

Pope John the 12. has granted to all persons, which going through the
churchyard, do say the prayer following, so many yeeares of pardons, as there
have bin bodies buried, since it was a Churchyard.

The prayer for the dead.
Hail all faithful souls, whose bodies here, and every where do rest in the
dust. The Lord Jesus who has redeemed you, and us with his most precious
blood, vouchsafe to deliver you from pains, and to place you in the company
of his holy Angels, and there being mindful of us meekely to pray, that we
may both be joined unto you, and crowned with you in the heavens.

Pope Innocent the 2. has granted to every one which devoutly shall say this
prayer following 4000. years of pardons: Hail wound of our Saviors side, etc.

Whosoever devoutly shall say this prayer shall have 3000. days pardons of
criminal sins, and 20000. days, of venial, (offenses) granted by the Lord
Pope John the 22. as it is to be read in the Antidatorie of the soul

Whosoever deuotly will say the prayer following, shall merit (thereby) 11000.
years of pardons, Hail Lady saint Mary, mother of God, Queen of heaven, the
Gate of paradise, the Lady of the world, the Light eternal, the Empress of
hell, etc. Pray unto thy belooued son Jesus Christ for me, and deliver me
from all evils, pray for my sins. Amen.

3. Proposition. The Romish doctrine concerning Images, is fond, and not
warranted by the holy Scriptures, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.
The proof from the word of God.
Images are such an abomination to the Lord, as to make them among all men
odious, he describes the vanity of them by his Prophets, as that, they are
the doctrine of vanity, The work of Errors Ierem. 10.15.
, the teachers of lies Hab. 2.18.
, silver and gold, the work of men's hands Psalm. 135.25.
, Vanity Esa. 44.10. etc
: they have a mouth, and speak not; eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not
Psalm. 135.16.
: hands, and touch not; feet, and walk not Psalm. 115.7.
.

2. He gives a strait commandment, Not to bow down to them, nor worship
them Exodus 20.5. 1. Cor. 10.7.14.
: nor to make them Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 4 15. etc.
, to fly from them 1. Ioh. 5.21. 1. Cor. 10.14.
, yea to destroy both the images themselves Deuteronomy. 7.5.12.2, 3.
; the Idolaters Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3.
, and the Enticers unto Idolattie Deuteronomy. 13.5.
.

3. He commends greatly, and praises such men as have destroyed Images 2.
king. 18.3, 4. 2. Chr. 14.2, 3.
, and not bowed unto Idols 1. king. 19.18. Dan. 3.
.

4. He finally curses the Images Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. Ierem. 51.
, the Image makers Deuteronomy. 27.15. Esa. 44.
, and the Image seruers, or worshippers Deuteronomy. 27.26. Psalm. 97.7. Esa. 42.17.
.

Hereunto with us the Protestant Churches every where do subscribe Confess.
Helvet. 2. cap. 3, 4. Basil. ar. 10 6.3. Bohem. c. 3.17. Gal. ar. 1. August.
ar. 1. Sax. ar. 22. VVittemb. c. 1.23. Suev. ar. 22.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The Romish church most fondly, and contrary to the word of God, does allow;
and not, only allow, but publicly erect; and not only erect but adore Dele,
statuas venerari, potius quam statuari^s, stolidum est, Index expurg. page 31.
, and not only adore Images, but does accurse, and more then so, condemn to
the fire, yea to hell fire as heretics, such persons as will not worship
Images, and the Images to (which is most abominable.)

Of God himself* even of God the Father, and that in the likeness of an old man
with a long white Beard; of the Son, in the Similitude of a man, hanging on
the Cross; of the holy Ghost, in the shape of a Dove, of the wholly, holy and
incomprehensible Trinity, with three Faces in one head In hoc plerisque
Christianis Ethnicus philosophus religiosior, qui etiam Trinitalis, quae mente
vir comprehend^tur, figuras ocul^^ corporis spectibilis (Petri Rami verba in
scholis physicis,) deleantur. Jndex expurg. page 146. Atque haec absurditas
Pa^rem, Filium, and Sp. S. effigiantium Iacobilis a Nicephor^ tribuitur. G.
Cassand. consul. p. 1^^.
.

Also of God his creatures, as of Angels always with wings, sometimes with a
pair of balance, as S. Michael; of men, as of Moses (as it were) with horns;
the Apostles with round orbs on their heads like Trenchers; the blessed
virgin with frisled hair, and costly garments.

And of other base things, as Agnus deis of wax; wafer cakes of flower;
Crosses of gold, silver, stone, wood, paper, copper, etc. Non inficiamur hac
nos latriae adoratione Christi praeclarissimam Cruce colere and venerari.
Andrad. orthodox. expl. lib. 9. p. 284.
.

4. Proposition. The Romish doctrine concerning Relics is fond, and not
warranted by the holy Scriptures, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.
The proof from Gods word.
Of all the erroneous opinions among the Papists (which are infinite) none is
more to the illusion of well meaning Christians then their doctrine concerning
worshipping, and adoration of the relics of Saints. A doctrine, which is so
far from being found as it is forbidden, in the holy Scripture Thou shall
worship the Lord thy god, and him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4.10
, and a doctrine in the purer times, and writers of the Chureh no where to be
found; and in all the best Churches at this day utterly condemned. Confess.
Helv. 1 ar. 11. and 2. c. 5. Basil. ar. 10. Bohem. c. 17. Gal. ar. 24.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Such notwithstanding is the Satanicall boldness of the Antichristian synagogue
of Rome, that as they will delude men with the relics of Saints, which are
not such: so likewise they teach the people (which is most offensive and
execrable) to give divine adoration, and honor unto them Praedicatio autem
ecclesiastica hoc semper tenuit, Sanctorum ^eliq^ias esse ex fide venerandas:
Staplet. antidot. euang. in Matt. 8.21. p. 30. The Catholic affirms
worshipping of saints, prayer unto them, feasts of them, ^doration of their
relics, and Im^ges: the Protestant denies all. Hills q^artron. 14. reas. p.
71.
.

Hence is it that some do pray unto S. Benet, whose Relics they had stolen,
O Benedict, after God our only hope, leave us not orphans, who art come
hither, not through our merits, but for the salvation of many souls Vinc. Li^.
^. 23. cap. 155.
.

Others have published, that the Bodies of Saints, and specially the Relics
of the blessed Martyrs, are with all sincerity to be honored, as the members
of Christ, etc. If any deny this conclusion he is to be thought, not a
christian, but an Eunomian, and Vigilantian Raban. l. 4. c. 10. de Sec.
propriet.
.

The Council of Trent also has decreed; that they are to be taken for damned
which affirm, how worship, and honor is not to be given unto the Relics of
Saints Council. Trid. sess. 25. decr. de Jnuoc. etc.
.

Of this preposterous devotion, they have appointed a certain, and common
service for the holy Cross, whereon Christ was hanged Missa de S. Cruce: and
Officium de S. Cruce.
, they have made a feast for the spear, and Nails, wherewith Christ was
fastened to the Cross Bee-hiu^, lib. 4. cap. 3.
, they have canonized for a Saint the chains which bound S. Peter's Gratian.
did. 38. Null. volat.
. To say nothing of the adoration they give unto the Hair, Milk, Smock of
the blessed virgin; unto the Head, Hair, Thombe, Coat of S. Ihon Baptist,
unto the breeches of Joseph; the sword, and Handkercheife of S. Paul; the Keys
of S. Peter; and unto many other things which of modesty I will not mention,
but do over pass.

5. Proposition. Invocation of Saints is a fond thing, not warranted by the
holy Scriptures, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.
The proof from Gods word.
The Christian exercise of Prayer is a duty which may not be either securely
omitted, or vainly abused. And though many things in prayer be necessarily to
be observed, yet a special point is it that in our supplications and prayers,
we do call only upon God. For so to do we are both commanded, even by God
himself Call upon me in the time of trouble. Psalm. 50.15. After this manner
pray, Our Father, which art in heaven, etc. Matthew. 6.9. When ye pray, say, Our
Father, which art in heaven. Luke 11.2.
; and thereunto also allured, by manifold as well promises of large blessings
Psalm. 50.15. Matthew. 7.11. Luke 11.13.18.7, 8. Ioh. 16.23, 24.
, as by the examples of godly men in all ages, Patriarchs, Abraham Genesis 13.4.
, Isaac Genesis 26.25.
, Iaakob Genesis 32.9. etc
; Prophets, as Daniel Dan. 9.16. etc.
, Elias 1. king. 18.36, 37, etc.
, Jeremy Ier. 14.7. etc.
; Centurions Act. 10.2.
, Publicans Luke 18.13.
; Apostles, as Paul Act. 16.25. and through his Epistles.
, Peter Act. 1.24.
etc. yea of all the Elect of God in this world Luke 18.7.
.

On the other side to pray unto any creature that is out of this world besides
Jesus Christ, there is in the Scripture neither Law to command; nor promise of
blessing, nor any example of godly men, or women, to provoke.

Finally, as all Gods people in the purer and former times have; so in these
days the Protestant Churches utterly condemn the inuocating of, or praying
unto creatures whatsoever Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 11. and 2. c. 5.23. Basil. ar.
10. Bohem. c. 2.17. Gal. ar. 14.24. Belg. ar. 20. August. ar. 21. VVittemb. c.
23. Sue. ar. 11.21
.

The Adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore the Romish doctrine, that Saints are to be prayed unto Test. Rhem.
page 187. Grationem Dominicam fundimus Sanctis. Censura Colon. fol. 208.
; and their daily praying, as occasion serves, unto S* Agatha, that have sore
breasts; unto S. Benedict, that either be, or fear to be poisoned; unto S.
Clare, for them that have sore eyes; S. Damian, that be sick, for health; S.
Erasmus, for help in the intrals; S. Feriol, for Geese; S. Giles; for women
that would have children; S Hubberts, for dogs; S. Job, for them which have
the pox; S. Katherine, for knowledge; S. Loys, for horses; S. Margaret, for
women in travail; S. Nicholas, for little children; S. Otilia, for the
headache; S. Petronil for the Ague; S. Quintin for the cough; S. Ruffin, for
lunacie, or madness; S. Sebastian for the plague; S. Thomas Becker for sinners;
S. Valentine for the falling sickness; S. Winefield for virginity; S., or
Cross, for all things; it is vain, not warrantable by Gods word, but
altogether repugnant to the holy scriptures.

The vanity and idolatry of the Popish Invocation further demonstrated from
that book of theirs entitled, Horae beatissimae virginis, etc.
Oremus. Maiestatem tuam Domine suppliciter exoramus, vt sicut Ecclesiae tuae
beatus Andraeas Apostolus tuus extitit praedicator, and rector: ita apud^^ sit
pro nobis perpotuus intercestor, per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Oremus Deus, pro cuius Ecclesia gloriosus martyr, and Rontifex Thomas, gladiis
impiorum occubuit, praesta quae sumus, (...) omnes quiaius impl^rant auxilium,
prae petitionis eius salutarem cause quantur effectum, per Dominum nostrum.

Versus. Ora pro nobis beata Katherina. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur
promissionibus Christi.

Versus. Ora pro nobis beat Martyr Sebastiana. Resp. Vt mereamur pestem
epidimiae illaesi transire, and promissionem Christi obtinere.

Virgo Christi egregia, pro nobis Apollonia,
Funde preces ad Dominum, vt tollat omne noxium,
Ne proreatu criminum, morbo vexemur dentium.
Let us pray. O Lord, we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as thy blessed
Apostle Andreas was a preacher, and ruler of thy Church; so he may be a
perpetual intercessor for us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let us pray. O God, for whose Churches sake the glorious Martyr, and Bishop
Thomas was slain by the sword of the ungodly, grant we beseech thee, that
such as call unto him for help, may obtain a good effect of his godly prayer,
through our Lord.

The verse. O blessed Katharine pray for us. Thans. That we may be made worthy
of the promises of Christ.

The verse. O blessed Martyr, Sebastian, pray for us. The Ans. That we deserve
to escape the plague without hurt, and obtain the promises of Christ.

Christ his noble virgin, Apollonia, pray unto the Lord to remove whatsoeur is
hurtful, least for the guiltines of our sins, we be vexed with the tooth ach.

Whosoever says this prayer following in the worship of God, and S. Roche (the
very words in the said book) shall not die of the pestilence by the grace of
God, etc.
Oremus Omnipotens, sempiterne Deus, qui precibus and meritis beatissimi Rochi
confessoris tui quondam pestem generalem reuocasti, presta supplicibus tuis and
qui pro simili peste reuocanda sub tua confidunt fiducia, ipsius gloriesi
Confessoris tui pr^camine, ab ipsa peste epidi^^ae, and ab omni perturbatione
liberemur, per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Oration ad tres Reges. Rex Jasper, rex Melchior, rex Balthazar, rogo vos per
singula nomina, rogo vos per sanctam Trinitatem, rogo vos per regem regum, quem
vagiente^^ in cunis vider^ meruistis, and compatiamini tribulationum mearum
hodie, and intercedatis pro me ad dominum cuius desiderio exules factiestis.

Crux Christi protege me; Crux Christi, salua me; Crux Christi defend me ab
omni malo,

Let us pray O almighty, and everlasting God, who by the prayers and merits of
thy most blessed Confessor, Roche, did revoke a certain general plague,
grant unto thy suppliants who for the reuocatio^ of the like plague do trust
in thy faithfullnes, by the prayer of that thy glorious Confessor, we may be
delivered from the plague, and from all adversity, through Christ our Lord.

A prayer unto the 3. kings. O King Iaspar, king Melchior, king Balthazar, I
beseech you by every of yournames, I beseech you by the holy Trinity, I
beseech you by the king of kings, whom ye deserved to see even in his swaddling
clothes, that you would take pity on my troubles this day, and make
intercession for me unto the Lord, for whose desire ye made your selves
exiles.

O Christ's cross, protect me; o Christ's cross, save me; o Christ's cross
defend me from all evil.

23. Article. Of ministering in the Congregation.
1 It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching 2 or ministering the Sacraments in the congregation, 3 before he be
lawfully called and sent to execute the same. 4 And those we ought to judge
lawfully called, and sent, which be 5 chosen, and called to this work 6 by men
who have public authority given unto them in the congregation, to call, and
send ministers into the Lords vineyard.

The propositions.
1. None publicly may preach, but such as thereunto are authorized.

2. They must not be silent, who by office are bound to preach.

3. The Sacraments may not be administered in the Congregation but by a lawful
Minister.

4. There is a lawful Ministry in the Church.

5. They are lawful Ministers, which be ordained by men lawfully appointed to
the calling, and sending forth of Ministers.

6. Before Ministers are to be ordained, they are to be chosen, and called.

1. Proposition. None publicly may preach, but such as thereunto are
authorized.
The proof from Gods word.
THis truth in the holy Scripture is evident. For there we find, how

^ The godly men were both called by God, and commanded to preach, before they
would, or durst so do. So was Samuel 1. Sam. 3.3, 4. etc. 20.
, Jeremy Ierem. 1.4, 5.
, John Baptist Ioh. 1.6.
, Christ Jesus himself Ioh. 20.21.
, who also to preach did send the twelve Apostles Matthew. 10.5.
, and the seventy Disciples. Luke 10.1.
.

2 The wicked and false Prophets for preaching before their time, are blamed
Ierem. 14.14.23.21.27.14, 15.29.8, 9.
.

3 A commandment is given us to pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would
send forth laborers into his harvest Matthew. 9.38.
.

4 Lastly we do read, that God has ordained in the Church some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some teachers, some to be workers of miracles 1. Cor.
12.28.
, and Christ being ascended into heaven, gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers Ephesians. 4.11.
.

And all this is acknowledged by the reformed Churches Confess. Helv. 2. cap.
18. Bohe. cap. 9. Gal. ar. 31. Belg. ar. 31. August. ar. 14. VVittemb. ar. 10.
Suev. ar. 13.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
And so are we against them,

Which to their power do seek the abolishment of public preaching in the
reformed Churches, as do first the Papists, who phrase the Preachers to be
uncircumcised Philistines Ans. to the execut. of Just. cap. 3. p. 44.
, sacrilegious ministers Ibid. c. 9. p. 211
, Hieroboams priests, inordinate Ibid. c. 5. p. 91.
, and unordered Apostataes Ibid. c. 3. p. 41.
, and next the Barrowists, who say how the said Preachers are sent of God in
his anger to deceive the people with lies R.A. confut. of Brown. p. 113
.

Who publish how the word is not taught by the Sermons of ministers, but only
by the Revelation of the Spirit: so did Muncer, the Anabaptist Sleiden. com.
lib. 5.
, and so does H. N. H. N. euang. c. 13. 6. and Spir. land. c. 48. 5.
, and his Family of Love Letter to the B. of Roch.
.

Who run before they be sent, as do many both Anabaptists, and Puritanes, as
Penrie, Greenewood, Barrow, etc. or which hold, how they which are able to
teach, and instruct the people, may, and must so do; and that not privately
only, but publicly too, though they be not ordinarily sent, and authorized
thereunto; which was the doctrine of R.H. R.H. on Psalm. 122.
.

Who teach, that Laymen may teach to get faith R.A. confut. of Brovvnisme. p.
113.
, and that every particular member of the Church has power, yea and ought to
examine the manner of administering the Sacraments, etc. and to call the people
to repentance: so teaches Barrow Bar. disco. p. 36.
.

2. Proposition. They must not be silent, who by office are bound to preach.
The proof from Gods word.
As publicly to preach, before men are sent, is a grievous fault: so not to
preach being sent is a great sin. Hereunto bear witness.

1. Our S. Christ, whose words are these, Surely, I must also preach the
Kingdom of God. For therefore am I sent Luke 4.43.
.

2. Peter. and John, who being charged to speak no more in the Name of Jesus,
said, We cannot but speak that which we have heard, and seen Act. 4.17. etc.
.

3. S. Paul. For he writes, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me if I
preach not the Gospel 1. Cor. 9.16, 17.
.

4. The apostles of Christ. For though they were beaten for so doing: yet
ceased they not to teach, and preach Jesus Christ Act. 5.42.
.

5. All the Churches of God which be purged from superstion, and errors
Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 15. and 2. c. 9 18. Bohem. cap. 9. Gal. ar. 25. Aagust.
ar. 7. VVittemb. ar. 20. Sue. ar. 13.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Then, as in glass they may see their faults.

Who maintain, how there ought to be no public preaching at all, as do the
Anabaptists Bulling. cont. Anabap. c. 12.
.

Which deprave the office of Preaching, as do the Libertines, saying that
preaching is none ordinary means to come unto the knowledge of the word
VVilkins. against the Fam. of Love, ar. 14. p. 66.
, and especially the Family of Love, who term the public preachers in
derision, Scripture learned Theophil. against VVilk.
, Licentious scripture learned Pat. of the pr^s. Temp.
, good-thinking-wise H.N. proph. of the Sp. c. 2. 7.
, Ceremonial, and letter Doctors Fam. let. to the B. of Roch.
, Teaching masters H.N. Spir. l. c. 25.
. and further say, It is a great presumption that any man, out of the
learnednesse of the letter; takes upon him to be a Teacher, or Preacher:
Again, It becomes not any man to busy himself about preaching of the word*
so, and more too, the Family Idem 1. exh. c. 16. 15, 16.
.

Which take upon them the office of public preaching, without performance of
their duty, either through ignorance, that they cannot; worldly emploiments,
that they may not; negligence, that they will not; or fear of troubles, that
they dare not preach the word of God.

Yet think we not (which our Sabbatatians let not to publish,) that

Every minister, necessarily and under pain of damnation, is to preach at
least once every Sunday D.B. doct. of the Sabbath, 2. book. p. 174.
. and

Unless a minister preach every Sunday, he does not hallow the Sabbath day in
the least measure of that which the Lord requires of us. Ibid. p. 277.


3. Proposition. The Sacraments may not be administered in the Congregation but
by a lawful minister.
The proof from Gods word.
In the holy Scripture we read that the public ministers of the word, are to
be the Administers of the Sacraments. For both our S. Christ commanded his
disciples, as to preach: so to Baptize Matthew. 28.19
, and celebrate the supper of the Lord Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24, 25
, and the Apostles, and other ministers in the purest times (whom the godly
Ministers* and Preachers in these days do succeed) not only did preach, but
also Baptize Act. 2.38.41.8.12, 13.10.47.16.32, 33. Ioh. 1.25. 1. Cor. 1.14.16.
, and Minister the Lords Supper Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 10.16.
.

And hereunto do the Churches of God subscribe Confess. Helv. 2. c. 18. Bohem.
c. 9. Gal. ar. 25.31. August. ar. 7. VVittem. ar. 20. Sue. ar. 13.
.

In saying that none may administer the Sacraments in the Congregation before
he be lawfully called, and sent thereunto, we think not (as some do) that
the very being of the Sacraments depends upon this point. viz. whether the
Baptizer, or giver of the Bread, and wine be a minister, or no.

Neither is it the meaning of this article that privately in houses, either
lawful ministers, upon just occasion, may not; or others, not of the
ministry, upon any occasion (in the peace of the Church) may administer the
Sacraments. T.C. 1. rep. p. 113.


The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby we declare our selves not to favor the opinion, that publicly.

Some may minister the Sacraments, which are not merely, and full ministers of
the word, and Sacraments; and so think both the Anabaptists, among whom,
their king (when it was) after Supper took bread, and reaching it among the
Communicants did say, Take, eat, and show forth the Lords death; their Queen
also reaching the Cup, said, Drink ye, and show forth the Lords death
Suri^s com. p. 237.
, and the Presbyterians at Geneua, where the Elder (a Lay man) ministereth the
Cup ordinarily at the Communion Survay of dis. cap. 15. out of the Geneva
laws.
. Some ministers (and namely the Puritan Doctors) may not minister the
Sacraments. For (say the disciplinarians) the office of Doctors is only to
teach true doctrine Lear. discourse. p. 17.
, but in our Church (of England) the Doctor encroacheth upon the office of the
Pastor. For both indifferently does teach, exhort, and minister the Sacraments
Fruct. Ser. on Romans 12. p. 40.
.

None though a lawful Minister, may administer, the Sacraments, which either
is no preacher The administration of the Sacraments ought to be committed to
none, but such as are preachers of the word. Lear. disco. p. 60. It is
sacrilege to separate the word (viz. Preaching) from the Sacram. Ibid. The
preaching of the word is the life of the Sacraments. T.C. 1. rep. p. 125
, or when he ministers them does not preach The unchangeable laws of God be
(says T.C.) that none minister the Sacraments, which do not preach. T.C. 1.
repl. p. 104. 3. Where there is no Preacher of the word, there ought to be no
minister of the Sacraments. Lear. disc. p. 62.
, which be the errors of the Disciplinarians, or Puritanes.

Publicly, and privately too the Sacrament of Baptism may be administered by
any man, yea by women, if necessity do urge. So hold the Papist. For says
Iauell Iauel. phil. Cor. par. 5. fol. 559.
, in the time of necessity the minister of Baptism is every man, both male
and female. A woman, be she young or old, sacred or wicked, Every male that
has his wits, and is neither dumb, nor so drunken, that he can utter the the
words, as well Paga^, Infidel, and heretik: the bad as the good; the schismatik,
as the Catholic, may baptize. And yet usually in the civil wars both in
France, and in Netherland, the Papists did rebaptize such children, as of the
Protestant not lai-me^, but ministers, had before bin baptized So in Netherland
were children rebaptized, when the Duke of Alva there tyranized. Trag. hist. of
Antwerp. The like Repabtization was used by the Papists at Toulouse, Troys,
and other cities in France, especially an. 1562. See the Chron. of France.
.

This private Baptism by private persons was also taught long since both by
the Marcionites D. August. ad Quodv^^t. c. ^7.
, and Pepuzians Epiphan. h^res* 42.
.

4. Proposition. There is a lawful ministry in the Church.
The proof from Gods word.
God, for the gathering, or erecting to himself a Church out of mankind; and
for the well governing of the same, from time to time has used, yea, and also
does and to the end of the world will use the ministry of men lawfully called
thereunto by men. A truth most evident in the holy Scripture.

Jesus said unto his Apostles, Go, and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.
and lo, I am with you always, unto the end of the world Matthew. 28.20.
.

Christ gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering together of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we
all meet together (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God)
unto a perfect man Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
.

A truth also approved by the Churches Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 15. and 2. c. 18.
Bohem. c. 8.9.14. Gal. ar. 25.29.30.31. Belg. ar. 30.31. August. ar. 7. Sax.
ar. 11. VVittemb. ar. 20. Sue. ar. 13.15
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Oppugners of this truth, are

First the Anabaptisticall Swermers, who both term all Ecclesiastical men,
The Devils ministers; and also, as very wicked do utterly condemn the
outward ministry of the word, and Sacraments Althemar. conciliat. Loc.
pugnan. lo. 191.
.

And next the Brownists, who divulge that in these days: No ministers have the
calling, sending or authority pertaining to a minister; and that, It will
hardly be found in all the world, that any minister, is, or shall be lawfully
called R.H. on Psalm. 122.
, such also be the Barrowists which say, there is no ministry of the Gospel
in all Europe Bar. disco. p. 104.
.

5. Proposition. They are lawful Ministers, which be ordained by Men lawfully
appointed for the calling, and sending forth of Ministers.
The proof from Gods word.
S. Paul in the beginning of his epistle unto the Galathians, gives us to
observe the diverse sendeth-forth of men into the holy ministry: whereof

Some are sent immediately from God himself. So sent, was by God the Father,
both Jesus Christ Ioh. 20.21.
, and John Baptist Ioh. 1.6.
, by God the Son, in his state mortal the twelve Apostles Matthew. 10.5.
, in his state immortal, and glorious, S. Paul Acts 9.15.
.

This calling is special, and extraordinary: and the men so called were
adorned with the gift of miracles commonly, as were Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles; but not always, for John Baptist wrought none.

And they were also enjoined, for the most part, as the Apostles, to preach
throughout the world Matthew. 28.20.
, howbeit our Savior was limited Matthew. 15.24.
.

Some again were sent of men: as they be, who are sent of men not authorized
thereunto by the word of God, and that to the disturbance of the peace of the
Church: such in the Apostles time, were the false Apostles; in our days be the
Anabaptists, Family Elders, and law despising Brownists.

And some lastly are by men sent: so in the primitive Church by the Apostles,
were Pastors, and Elders ordained Act. 14.23. 1. Tim. 4.14.
, who by the same authority ordained other Pastors, and teachers 1. Tim. 22.5.
. Whence it is that the Church, as it has bin: so it shall till the end of the
world be provided for. They who are thus called have power neither to work
miracles, as the Apostles had; nor to preach, and minister the Sacraments where
they will, as the Apostles might, but they are tied every man to his charge,
which they must faithfully attend upon; except urgent occasion do enforce the
contrary.

The calling of these men is termed a general calling, and it is the
ordinary, and in these days the lawful calling, allowed by the word of God.

So testify with us the true Churches else where in the world Confess. Helv.
1. ar. 17. and 2. c. 18. Bohem. c. 9. Ga^. ar. 31. Belg. ar. 31. August. ar.
14. VVittem. ar. 21. S^ov. ar. 13.


Adversaries unto this truth.
This truth has many ways bin resisted. For there ^e which think, how in
these days there is no calling, but the extraordinary, or immediate calling
from God, and not by men, as the Anabaptists, Familists and Brownists: of whom
before.

The Papists albeit they allow the assertion: yet take they all ministers to be
wolves, Hirelings, Lay men, and Intruders, who are not sacrificing Priests,
anointed by some Antichristian Bishop of the Romish synagogue Council. Trid.
sess. 7. ^an. 7.
.

Either all, or the most part of the ministers of England, says Howlet Hovvl.
7. rea^.
, be mere Lay men, and no Priests, and consequently have noe authority in
these things. It is evident, etc. because they are not ordained by such a
Bishop, and Priest, as the Catholic Church has put in authority.

6. Proposition. Before Ministers are to be ordained, they are to be chosen,
and called.
The proof from Gods word.
Though it be in the power of them which have authority in the Church, to
appoint Ministers for Gods people: yet may they admit neither whom they will,
nor as they will themselves: But they are both deliberately to choose, and
orderly to call such as they have chosen.

This made the Apostles and Elders in the primitive Church straightly to
charge, that suddenly hands should be laid on no man 1. Tim. 5.22.
.

To make a special choice of twain, whereof one was to be elected into the
place of Judas Acts 1.23.
.

By election to ordain Elders in every church, and by prayer and fasting, to
commend them to the Lord Acts 14.23.
, and by laying on of hands to consecrate them 1. Tim. 4.14.
.

To describe who who were to be chosen, and called. For they are to be Men, not
Boys nor women 1. Tim. 2.12.
, Men of good behavior, not incontinent, not given to wine, not strikers, not
covetous 1. Tim. 3.2.
, not proud 1. Pet. 5.3.
, not froward nor irefull Titus 1.7.
, nor giuers of offense 2. Cor. 6.3.
, finally men of special gifts, apt to teach 1. Tim. 3.2.
, able to exhort Tit. 1.9.
, wise, to divide the word of God aright 2. Tim. 2.15.
, bold, to reprove 1. Tim. 5.20. Tit. 1.9.
, willing to take pains Matthew. 9.38. 2. Tim. 4.2.
, watchful, to ouersee Acts 20.28.
, patient to suffer Act. 5.41. 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.
, and constant, to endure all manner of afflictions 2. Cor. 11.23.
.

And this do the Churches Protestant by their Confessions approve Confess.
Helv. 1. ar. 25. and 2. c. 18. Bo^em. c. 9. Gal. artic. 13. Belg. ar. 31.
August. ar. 14. VVittemb. ar. ^0. Sue. ar. 13.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
In error they remain, who are of opinion, that

The due election, and calling of Ministers according to the word of God, is of
no such necessity to the making of Ministers: an erroneous fancy of the
Anabaptists, and Family of Love.

That women may be Deacons Sigebert.
, Elders, and Bishops: the former, the Acephalians; the latter, the Pepuzians
did maintain.

A special care is not to be had both of the life and the learning of men; or
that wicked men, of evil life; ignorant men, without learning; Asses, of no
gifts; loiterers which do no good; or favorers of superstition, and
idolatry, which do great hurt, are to be admitted into the ministry.

They are causes, which indeed are none, to debar men from the
ecclesiastical function, as if men have bin twice married (an error of the
Russeis Liberus rerum Moscov. p. 30. b
, be married Coster. Ench. controv. c. 15. de c^l. sacerd.
, have had certain wives Test. Rhem. an. 1. Tim. 5.2.
, have not received the Sacrament of Confirmation Council. Trid. sess. 23. c. 4.
, have bin baptized of Heretics 1. quaest. 1. ventum.
, these may not be Priests, say the Papists; or if either they have not bin
trained up in the Family; or be not Elders in the said Family of Love Such
ought not to busy themselves about the word. H.N. document. sent. c. 3. 1.
and 1. Exhort. c. 16. 16.
.

24. Article. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue as the people
understand not.
It is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God, and the custom of the
primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a tongue not understood of the people.

The proposition. Public prayer, and the Sacraments, must be ministered in a
tongue understood of the common people.
The proof from Gods word.
THis assertion needs small proof. For who so is persuaded (as all true
Christians of understanding, are) that what is done publicly in the Church by
a strange language, not understood of the people, profits not the
Congregation 1. Cor. 14.6.9.14.
; edifieth not the weak Ib. 17.26.
; instructs not the ignorant Ib. 14 19.
; inflameth not the zeal Ib. v. 9.
, offends the hearers Ib. 7.11.
, abuses the people Ib. 11.16.
, dipleaseth God Matthew. 15.8.
, brings religion into contempt 1. Cor. 14.23.
, easily will think, that where the prayers be said, or the Sacraments
administered in a tongue not understood of the vulgar sort, neither is the word
of God regarded, nor the custom of the purer, and primitive Church observed.

This article no church does doubt of, and very many by their extant
Confessions do allow Confess. Helv. 2. c. 22. Wit. c. 27. August. de Miss^,
ar. 3. Suev. c. 21.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
But their is nothing either so true, or apparent, which has by all men at any
time bin acknowledged. So contrary to this truth.

In old time the Ossens made their prayers unto God always in a strange
language, which they learned of Elxeus their founder Epiph. haer. 19.
, and the Marcosians, at the ministration of Baptism, used certain Hebrew
words, not to edify, but to terrify, and astonish the minds of the weak,
and ignorant people D. Iren. l. 1. c. 18.
.

In these days, the Turks perform all their superstitions in the Arabian
language, thinking it not only unmeet, but also an unlawful thing for the
common sort of persons, to understand their Mahometane mysteries An. Geufraeus
a^lae Tur. l. 2.
.

The Iacobite priests do use a tongue at their church ministrations, and
meetings, which the vulgar people cannot comprehend Magd. eccles. hist. Cen.
12. c. 5.
.

The divine Lyturgie among the Russians is compounded partly of the Greek, and
partly of the Sclavonian language Alex. Guag. de relig. Mosc. page 230.
.

The Papists will have all divine Service, Prayers, and Sacraments, and that
throughout the world, ministered only in the Latin tongue, which but few men
of the common people do understand: some of them holding, that It is not
necessary that we understand our prayers Test. Rhem. annot. p. 463.
, and that prayers, not understood of the people, are acceptable to God Test.
Rhem. an. Matthew. 21.6.
, and all of them maintaining that he is accursed, whosoever does affirm, how
the Mass ought to be celebrate only in a vulgar tongue Si quis dixeril,
lingua tantum vulgari Missam celebrari debere, anathema sit. Council. Trid.
sess. 22. can. 9.
.

25. Article. Of the Sacraments.
Sacraments ordained of Christ 1 be not only badges, or tokens of Christian
men's profession: but rather they be 2 certain sure witnesses and effectual
signs of grace, and Gods good will toward us, by which he does work inuisibly
in us, 3 and not only quicken but also strengthen and confirm our faith in
him. 4 There be two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that
is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called
Sacraments, that is to say, 5 Confirmation, 6 Penance, 7 Orders, 8 Matrimony,
and 9 extreme unction, are not to be compted for Sacraments of the Gospel,
being such as have grown partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles,
partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not like
nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have not
any visible sign, or ceremony ordained of God.

10 The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be
carried about, but that we should duly use them. 11 And in such only, as
worthily receive the same, they have a wholesome effect, or operation: but they
that receive them unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as Saint Paul
says.

The propositions.
1. The Sacraments ordained of Christ, be badges, or tokens of our profession
which be Christians.

2. The Sacraments be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs of grace,
and God his good will toward us.

3. By the Sacraments God does quicken, strengthen, and confirm, our faith in
him.

4. Christ has ordained but two Sacraments in his holy Gospel.

5. Confirmation. is no Sacrament.

6. Penance. is no Sacrament.

7. Orders. is no Sacrament.

8. Matrimony. is no Sacrament.

9. Extreme unction. is no Sacrament.

10. The Sacraments are not to be abused, but rightly to be used of us all.

11. All which receive the Sacrament, receive not therewithal the things
signified by the Sacraments.

1. Proposition. The Sacraments ordained of Christ, be badges or tokens of our
profession, which be Christians.
The proof from Gods word.
THe Sacraments are badges or tokens both of Christians, and of Christianity.

Of Christians. For by them are visibly discerned, the faithful, from Pagans:
and Christians, Jews, Turks, and all profane Atheists.

Of Christianity. For, as Circumcision in the old Law, was a token how the
corrupt, and carnal affections of the mind should be subdued; and that the
Lord required not so much an outward of the Body, as an inward circumcision of
the heart Deuteronomy. 10.16.30.6. Ier. 4.4. Act. 7.51. Romans 12.28. Phil. 3.3. Coloss.
2.11.
, so Baptism tells us, that being once dead unto sin, we are to live unto
righteousness; that all we which have bin baptized unto Jesus Christ, have bin
baptized into his death, etc. and must walk in newness of life, etc. Romans
6.3. etc.
, for we have put on Christ Gal. 3.26.
, by Baptism.

And as the Paschall Lamb was to the Jews a token that the flight of sin
should always be fresh in memory; and that it should be celebrated, not with
old Leaven, neither in the Leaven of maliciousnes, but with the unleavened
bread of synceritie and truth 1. Cor. 5.8.
: so the participation of one Loaf, and of one Cup in the Lord his Supper,
does commend unto our consideration a sweet concord; a brotherly unanimity;
and a constant continuance in the true worship of God, without favoring of
Idolatry in ay respect 1. Cor. 10.17.
.

This do the godly in all their Churches, and throughout the word both teach,
and testify Confess. Helv. 1. c. 29. and 2. ar. 20. August. ar. 13. Sax. ar.
12.
.

The Adversaries unto this truth.
Ungodly therefore and in a cursed state are they, which equal other things
with the Sacraments to discern Christians from Pagans. So the Iacobites
imprint the sign of the Cross on their Arms, Foreheades, etc. to be known
for Christians Magdeburg. ec. hist. Cen. 12. c. 3.
. which contemn the Sacraments as of none account. So do the Anabaptists
Bulling. contr. Anab. l. 2. c. 4. Althamar. council. Lo. page lo. 191.
.

There be (says D. Sarania) which hold how the Sacraments were to be
administered only at the first pla^ting of the Church by the Apostles, and
Evangelists: but do not appear unto us in these days D. Sarania def. tract.
de diverse. minist. grad. c. 14.
. It was also one of Matthew Hamants heresies that the Sacraments are not
necessary in the Church of God Holinsh. chr. fol. 1299.
.

Which think the Sacraments are but only civil, and ceremonial badges of an
outward Church; such generally be all Atheists, and hypocrites; particulary,
the Mes^alians Theodor. lib. c. 9. c. 11.
, and Family of Love, who think that for obedience sake to magistrates the
sacraments are to be received Pa^^^rne of the pres. Temp.
, but are to none effect to the perfect ones in the Family Ramseis confess.
.

2. Proposition. The Sacraments be certain sure witnesses, and effectual
signs of grace, and God his Goodwill toward us.
The proof from the word of God.
Infinitely does God declare his unspeakable, and incomprehensible good will to
man ward; yet in these days by none outward things more notably, and
effectually, than by the Sacraments, For.

Of Baptism says Christ: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved
Mark 16.16.
, and Peter, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one, etc. for the
remission of sins Act. 2.38.
, and Paul, Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word, etc Ephesians. 5.25. etc.
.

And of the Lords supper says our Savior Christ, touching the Bread, this is
my body, which is given Luke 22.19.
, and broken for you 1. Cor. 11.24.
, and of the Cup, this is my blood of the new Testament, that is shed for many
for the remission of sins Matthew. 26.28. Luke 22.20.
.

This truth do the purer Churches of these days every where acknowledge
Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 20.22. and 2. cap. 19.20.21. Bohem. c. 11.12.13. Gal. ar.
34.38. Belg. ar. 33.35. August. ar. 9.13. VVillem. ar. 10.19. Suev. ar. 16.18.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrary hereunto the Papists erroneously do hold, that

The Sacraments of the new Law do confer grace ex opere operato Council.
Trid, sess. 7. can. 8.
.

The Sacraments of the old, and new Testament in this do differ, for that the
Sacraments of the old Testament did only shadow forth salvation, but the
Sacraments of the new do confer, and work salvation Council. Flor.
, and do justify (not only signify God his good will toward us) by reason
of the work done, which is the outward Sacraments Bonavent. l. 4. did. 1. q.
5. Gab. Biel l. 4. did. 1. q. 3.
.

3. Proposition. By the Sacraments God does quicken, strengthen, and confirm
our faith in him.
The proof from Gods word.
Be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, says S. Peter
Act. 2.38.
.

Christ he gave himself for the Church, that he might sanctify it, and
cleanse it by the washing of water through the word Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
.

The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? says Saint Paul i. Cor. 10.16.
.

The same is affirmed by the reformed Churches Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 21. and 2.
c. 19.20.21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c. 11.12. Gal. ar. 34. Belg. ar. 33.34.
August. ar. 13. Saxon. ar. 13. Suev. c. 17.
.

Howbeit this Faith is not necessarily tied unto the visible signs, and
Sacraments. For

Without the Sacraments many have lived, and died, who pleased God, and are no
doubt saved, either in respect of their own faith (as we are to think of all
the godly, both men who were borne, and died before the institution of
Circumcision, in the wilderness, and in the time of grace, and yet by some
extremity, could not receive the seal of the covenant) and women, who before,
and under the law, for many years, were partakers of no Sacrament, and never
of one Sacrament; or that they be heirs of the promise.

Some have faith before they receive any of the Sacraments.

So had Abraham Romans 4.9, 10*
, the Jews, unto whom Peter preached Acts 2.41.
, the Samaritanes Act. 8.12.
, the Eunuch Act. 8.37.
; Cornelius the Centurion Act. 10.47.
: and have the godly of discretion wheresouer not yet baptized.

Some neither before, nor at the instant, nor yet afterward, though daily they
receive the Sacraments, will have faith; such are like unto Judas Ioh. 13.26.
, Ananias and Sapphira Acts 5.
Simon Magus Act. 8.13.
, the old Israelites 1. Cor. 10.5.
, and the wicked Corinthians 1. Cor. 11.27.
.

In some the Sacraments do effectually work in process of time, by the help
of Gods word read or preached, which engenders faith Romans 10.14.
, such is the estate principally of Infants elected unto life, and salvation,
an increasing in years.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore do they err, which teach or hold, that

They never go to heaven which die without the seals of the covenant: so
think the Papists of Infants which die unbaptized Jauel. Phil. Chr. tract. 4.
de felicit. Chr. c. 3. and Vigner. institut. Theol. c. 16. 4. and Spec. peregr.
quaest. dec. 1. c. 3. q. 5.
.

They are damned (though they receive the Sacraments), that will not receive
them after the received, and approved manner of the Church of Rome Council.
Trid. sess. 7. c. 13.
.

There is no way of salvation but by faith Lear. disc.
, herby excluding infinite souls from the kingdom of heaven, which depart
from this world before they do believe.

None believe but such as are baptized, say the Papists Test. Rhem. an. Gal.
5.27.
, as hear the word of God preached, say the Puritanes Lear. disc. p. 36.
.

The Sacraments give grace ex opere operato, Test. Rhem. an. marg. p. 357.
, and bring faith ex opere operato Ibid. an. mar. p. 391.
.

The Sacrament of Baptism is cause of the salvation of Infants Ibid. an. 1.
Pet. v. 21.
.

4. Proposition. Christ has ordained but two Sacraments in his Gospel.
The proof from Gods word.
A Sacrament, according to the etymology of the word (as the Schoolmen do
write) is a sign of an holy thing, which being true, then have their bin, and
still are, by so many above either two, or seven Sacraments, as there be, and
have bin, above two or seven things, which are signs of sacred and holy things.

But according to the nature thereof, a Sacrament is a covenant of God his
favor to man-ward, confirmed by some outward sign, or seal instituted by
himself: which also has bin sometimes special either to some men, and that
extraordinarily by things natural sometimes, as the tree of life was to Adam
Genesis 3.3.
, and the Rainebowe to Noah Genesis 9.9.13.
, and sometimes by things supernatural, as the smoking furnace was to Abraham
Genesis 15.17, 18.
, the Fleece of wool, to Gedeon Judge. 6.37.
, and the Dial, to Ezekiah 2. king. 20.8.11. Isa. 38.8.
, or to some Nation, as the Sacrifices, Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb
was to the Jews.

And sometimes general to the whole Church militant, and ordinary, as in the
time of the Gospel. And then a Sacrament is defined to be a ceremony ordained
immediately by Christ himself, who by some earthly, and outward element, does
promise everlasting favor, and felicity to such, as with true faith, and
repentance, do receive the same. And such Sacraments in the new Testament we
find only to be Baptism Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.16. Ioh. 3.5. Act. 2.38.
, and the Lords supper Luke 22.19. Ioh. 6.53. 1. Cor. 11.24.
.

This is the judgment also of the Churches Protestant.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth. Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 20. and 2.
c. 19. Basil. ar. 5. 2. Gal. ar. 35. Belg. ar. 33. Saxon. ar. 12. Su^. ar. 16.

In a contrary opinion are diverse, and namely

The Jews, and Turks: for they deny all the Sacraments of the Church, as we
do hold them.

The Euchytes. who say that prayer only, and not the Sacraments, are to be
used Theodoret.
.

The Schwenkfeldians, who contemn not only the word preached, but the
Sacraments also, as superfluous, depending wholly upon revelations.

The Bannisterians, who think there will be a time, and that in this world,
when we shall need no Saraments Unfold. of untruths.
.

The Papists, who publish

That we leave out no less then six of the seven Sacraments Hovvlet reas. 7.
.

How there be seven Sacraments of the new Testament Catech. Canis. Vaux.
.

That he is accursed that shall say there be either more, or fewer then seven
Sacraments: or that any of them is not verily, and properly a Sacrament; or
that they be not all seven instituted of Christ himself Test. Rhem. an. James
5.24. Council. Trid. sess. 7. cap. 1.
.

That there are seven Sacraments, whereof two are voluntary, and at the
discretion of men to be taken, or not, as Matrimony, and holy orders; and five
are necessary, and must be taken; and of these five, three to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, and Orders, are but once to be taken, because they imprint an
indeleble character in the soul of the receivers: and four be reiterable, and
may often be received, as the Sacrament eucharisticall, Matrimony, Penance,
and of extreme Unction, because at their first ministration they leave in the
soul no indeleble character Stella Clericorum.
.

5. Proposition. Confirmation is no Sacrament.
Touching Confirmation, the sentence, and judgment of the true Church is that
rightly used, as it was in the primitive Churh, it is no Sacrament; but a part
of Christian discipline, profitable for the whole Church of God. For the
ancient Confirmation was nothing else then an examination of such as in their
infancy had received the Sacrament of Baptism, and were then, being of good
discretion, able to yield an account of their beleeife, and to testify with
their own mouths what their suerties in their names had promised at their
Baptism: which confession being made, and a promise of perseueranc in the
Faith by them given, the Bishop by sound doctrine, grave advise, and godly
exhortations, confirmed them in that good profession: and laying his hands upon
them, prayed for the increase of God his gifts, and graces in their minds.

The Popish confirmation all Churches of God with us utterly do dislike, as no
Sacrament at all, instituted by Christ Confess. Saxon. ar. 19. VVittemb. c. 11.
See the Prop. immediately precedent.


Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Contrariwise the sinagogue of Rome teaches that Confirmatio^is a Sacrament,
whereby the grace that was given in Baptism is confirmed, and made strong by
the seven gifts of the holy Ghost.

Of which their Confirmation they give us four things principally to obsetue,
viz.

1. The substance, or matter, which is holy Chrisme confect, (as they say) and
made of Oil olive, and Bawlme consecrated by a Bishop.

See Canis. catech. chap. 4.
2. The form, and manner of ministering the same, consisting of the words of
the Bishop, which are, I sign the with the sign of the Cross, and confirm
thee with the Chrisme of salvation, in the name of the Father, etc. and of the
actions both of a Godfather, or Godmother, already confirmed, holding up the
child to the Bishop: and of the Bishop, first crossing him which is to be
confirmed on the forehead, with oil; and next, striking the party confirmed,
on the ear.

3. The minister, who must be a Bishop, and none inferior Minister Nunquam
erit Christianus, nisi in Confirmatione Episcopali fuerit confirmatus. De
consecra. Did. 5. cap. et Ie^^ni.
.

4. The effect, or effects rather. For by Confirmation they say that

Sins are pardoned, and remitted.

The grace of Baptism is made perfect.

Such become men in Christ, who before were children.

Grace is given boldly to confess the name of Christ, and all things belonging
to a Christian man.

The holy Ghost is given to the full.

And perfect strength of the mind is attained.

But in so teaching, dangerous and very damnable doctrine do they deliver. For

It is an error that confirmation is a Sacrament; because it has no
institution from God, which is necessary to all, and every Sacrament; inasmuch
as a Sacrament cannot be ordained but by God only, even as the Papists
themselves do confess Catech. Triden. tit. de Confir.
.

To say that popish Confirmation is grounded upon Gods word, is to speak foul
untruths. For in the Scripture there is mention, neither of the matter, that
it must be Chrisme, and that made of oil olive, and Bawlme, and the same
consecrated of a Bishop; nor of the form that either a Bishop must sign the
party to be baptized, with the sign of the Cross; or that a Godfather, etc.
must be thereat; nor of the minister, that of necessity he must be a Bishop,
that is to confirm: nor of the effects, that thereby sins are pardoned, and
released, and Baptism consummated, and made perfect.

It is an error to say, there is any other ointment given to the strengthening
of the Church militant, besides the holy Ghost. 1, Ier. 2.27.

It is an error to maintain that any Bishop can give heavenly graces to any
creature.

It is an error to ascribe salvation unto Chrisme, and not only unto Christ.

It sauoureth of donatisme to measure the dignity of the Sacraments by the
worthiness of the ministers.

It is an error to say, that men cannot be perfect Christians without Popish
Confirmation.

It is an error that by Confirmation the holy Ghost is given to the full.

6. Proposition. Penance is no Sacrament.
Touching penance the Papists do publish four things to be noted, whereof
none of them is truly grounded upon the word of God. Canis. Catech. cap. 4
Catech. Trid. de poenit.


First the matter, which they do say is partly the actions of the person
penitent, which are sufficient contrition of his heart: perfect Confession of
all his sins, and that in particular, with all the circumstances, as of time,
place, etc. and satisfaction by deeds, which makes an amends for all his
offenses: and partly the absolution of the Priest.

Secondly, the Form, which in the Priest is the words of Absolution, which he
utters over the sinner: in the person penitent, it is his kneeling down at
the Priests feet; his making the sign of the Cross upon hts breast; and his
saying, Benedicite, to his ghostly Father. The Priest (say they) bears the
person of God, and is the lawful Judge over the penitent; and may both absolve
from the guilt of sin, and inflict a punishment according to the offense.

Thirdly, the minister, who ordinarily is the curate of every parish; but
extraordinarily, and in the time of extreme necessity, or by license, is any
Priest. And yet some sins are so grievous, as none may absolve but either the
Bishop, or his Penitentiarie, as the crime of Incest, breaking of vows, Church
robbing, Heresy, adultery: and some again none remit, or pardon but the Pope
only, or his Legate, as Burning of Churches: violent striking a Priest;
counterfaiting of the Popes Bulls, etc.

Fourthly, and last of all, the effect. Hereby they say the penitent sinner is
purged, absolved, and made as clean from all sin, as when he was newly
baptized, and besides enriched with spiritual gifts, and graces.

The consideration hereof has moved besides the Church of England all other
Churches reformed to show their detestation of this new Sacrament, as having
no warrant from Gods word Confess. Heluet. 2. cap. 14.19. Bohem. c. 4. August
ar. 3.11.12. Saxon. ar. 16.17. VVittemb. ar. 13.15. Sue. c. 20.


The blasphemies are outrageous, and the errors many, and monstrous comprised
in this doctrine of Popish Penance. For neither can the matter of this their
Sacrament, nor the form, nor the minister, nor the effect be drawn from the
word of God.

They say Penance is a Sacrament, and yet can they show no element it has to
make it a Sacrament.

Their Contrition is against the truth: For no man is, or can be sufficiently
contrite for his sins.

To confess all sins, and that one after another with all circumstances unto
a Priest, as it is impossible: so is it never enjoined by God, nor has ever
bin practiced by any of God his Saints.

That any man in any measure can satisfy for his sins, it is blasphemy to
say, and against the merits of Christ. Test. Rhem. an. Colos. 1.24.
And yet do the Papists teach it, as also that one man may satisfy for
another.

An untruth is it, that any priest, Bishop or Pope has power at his will to
forgive sins; or can enjoin any punishment that can make an amends unto God
for the least offense.

If penance purge men, and make them clean from all sin, then is there a time
and that very often in this life, when men in this life be perfect; which
tends greatly to the error of the Catharans, Donatists, and Pelagians.

The doctrine of the Papists, that such persons as willingly depart out of this
world without their Shrift, are damned, is damnable doctrine, and to be
eschewed: and yet is it dispersed every where in their books. Vaux catech. c.
4 Catech. Triden. de poenit. Test. Rhem. annot. Matthew. 12.31. Hills quartron.
13. reas. p. 65. Pel. de Solometh. confess. par. 4. p. 159. a.


7. Proposition. Orders is no Sacrament.
The Church of England, and of other places reformed do acknowledge an order
of making ministers in the Church of God, where all things are to be done by
order. But that Order is a Sacrament, none but disordered Papists will say: and
yet they observe none order in speaking of the same. For among them. Canis.
Catech.


Some do make seven orders: whereof some they call inferior, and some
superior* the inferior be be the order first of Porters, whose office is to
keep the door: to expel the wicked and to let in the faithful: next,
Exocristes, or Coniurers, which have power to expel the devils: thirdly*
Lectors, or Readers, who are to read Lessons, and books in the Church: and
Fourthly, Acolytes, or Candle bearers, whose office is to bear Cruels to the
altar, with wine and water; and to carry about Candles and Tapers.

The superior is the order of Subdeacons; Deacons, and of Priests, The
Subdeacons are to read the Epistle at service time to prepare necessaries for
mistration; and to assist the Priest in ministration. The Deacons duty is to
read the Gospel, and also to assist the Priest in ministration. The Priest his
part, and office is, to minister Sacraments, that is to say, Baptism, Penance
the eucharist, and to sacrifice for the quick and the dead: Annoiling of the
sick: and Matrimony.

Others, numbering the seven Sacraments, do quite ouerpasse in silence, the
Sacrament of order, and in place thereof mention the Sacrament of Preisthood,
as Vaux; of Bishopdome, as Hugh Cardinals; of Archbishopdome, as W. Paris.

These seven Orders, say some Papists, as Lombard Lib. 4. did. 24. cap. 1.
, are seven Sacraments: which added to the other six, make 13. Sacraments: and
are from Christ, and his Apostles time Test. Rhem. annot. marg. p. 572.
, yea were instituted even by Christ himself Jbid. annot. Luk^. 2^.19.
.

Which their assertions are besides the word of God. For in the holy Scripture.

Where can it be seen that either orders, as some can make one, or seven
Sacraments; or Preisthood, as others think, is a Sacrament? what element has
it? what form? what promise! what institution from Christ?

Where can any of those hideous titles of Porter, Exorcist, etc. be found
ascribed to any minister of the new Testament? or the manner of their creation,
or offices established?

Some Papists themselves do write, that all inferior orders are not grounded
upon Scripture, but some of them come by tradition Maioran. clyp. milit.
eccles. lib. 1. cap. 9.
. And Peter Lombard says plainly, that five of the seven orders, neither can
be read in the word of God; nor yet were heard of in the primitive Church Lomb.
lib. 4. did. 24.
.

Where is it appointed to the ministers of the new Testament only to minister
Sacraments? or to minister more then two, viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper?

By what one place of Scripture have Priests authority to offer Sacrifice, and
that for the quick, and the dead also?

Where without extreme blasphemy can they show that our S. Christ was a
Porter, an Exorcist, an Acolyst, etc. and always in his Chruch a King, a
Prophet, and a Priest?

8. Proposition. Matrimony is no Sacrament.
Matrimony is a state of life, holy, and honorable among all men Heb. 12.4.
. Howbeit to say that the same is a Sacrament, instituted and that by Christ,
as the Papists do Council. Trid. Ses. 7. cap. 1. Test. Rhem. annot. Ephesians.
5.32. Catech. Vaux. Canis.
, we cannot be enduced, and that for diverse reasons^

For marriage or the wedded state, was never commanded by God to be taken for a
Sacrament.

Again, it has neither outward element; nor prescribed form; nor promise of
salvation, and a Sacrament should, and Baptism, and the Lords Supper have.

Besides, matrimony may be entered into, or not, at our discretion. But it is
not at our choice to be partakers, or not to participate of the sacraments, if
we may come by them,

Moreover Matrimony was ordained even by God himself in the time of man's
innocence Genesis 24. Math. 19.4.5.6.
, but the Sacraments of the new Testament were institued by Christ.

Finally it was no Sacrament to the Fathers before and in the time of the law;
and therefore is no Sacrament to us.

Hereunto subscribe the Churches of God elsewhere Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 20.37.
and 2. cap. 19.29. Basil. ar. 5. Bohem. c. 9. Gal. ar. 24.35. Belg. ar. 33.
August. ar. 2.5.6. Saxon. ar. 12.18. VVittemb. c. 21.26. Sue. c. 12.15.
, all of us opposing our selves against the manifold adversaries of this truth,
whereof

Some have too highly conceived of the wedded state; such are the Papists, when
they will have it to be a Sacrament, as has bin said; and such were the
Vigilantian Bishops, who would take no men into the Clergy, except they would
be married first D. Heron. aduers. Vigil. c. 1.
.

Others again too basely, and badly think of Matrimony, defending (some of
them), how it is not meet that any man, or woman should marry at all; such
were the Gnostickes Epiphan.
, the Marcionites Tertul. contra Mar. lib. 4.
, the Tatians Epiphan. Eusebius.
, the Montanists i, the Manichies D. August. de haeres.
, the Hieracites Ibid. August.
, and the Apostolikes Epiphan.
.

That any man, or woman should twice marry, the husband or wife being dead; of
this mind were the Catharans D. August. de haeres.
, Origin D. Origin. in Luke. hom. 19.
, and Tertullian Tertul. lib. de m^nog.
.

That some kind of persons should ever marry as namely those which have taken
holy orders Test. Rhem. annot. 1 Timothy 3.2.

See more afterward art. 32.


, or be of spiritual kindred Pet. Lombard. lib. 4. did. 42.

By spiritual kindred, which is between the party that is baptized, or
confirmed, and his Godfathers, and Godmothers, and also between the Godfather,
or Godmother, and the parents of the child so baptized, or confirmed
(matrimony may not be either contracted, or continued.) Canis. catech. c. 4.


, these errors the Papists do hold.

Lastly, that any persons, should be married but by Popish priests; thinking
all those men and women not lawfully married, which are coupled together by
Protestant ministers: and therefore have new married such persons. So did the
Papists both in the Low countries Supplic. of the Pr. of Orange unto K. Philip.
, and in France Calvin epist. fol. 266. and Chron. of France.
.

9. Proposition. Extreme unction is no Sacrament.
The Papists do take Anoiling of the sick (which they call extreme Unction)
for a Sacrament, whereof (as they write.)

The matter is oil hallowed by a Bishop; wherewith the sick person is annoiled
upon the Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Nose, Hands, and Feet.

The Form is the words, which the Priest, speaks, when he does anoint the
sick person in the foresaid places, saying: By this Oil God forgive thee thy
sins, which thou have committed by thine Eyes, Nose, Ears, and Mouth, by
thine Hands, and by thy feet: all the Angels, Archangells, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Eua^gelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Widows,
Infants, heal thee.

The Minister thereof usually is a priest; but may be any other Christian.

The effect of annoiling is to purge, and put away venial sins, committed by
mispending of our senses; as also sins forgotten.

In this antichristian doctrine many errors be contained. For

In respect of the matter, the Papists make of greasy matter, a spiritual
ointment; whereas there is none ointment spiritual but the holy Ghost.

In respect of the form, the only propitiator, and mediator between God,
and man, Christ Jesus is blasphemed; and the merit, and power of his death,
ascribed unto greasy oil. Besides, Christ is not acknowledged for the only
Savior of mankind, and Physician of our souls; but other Physicians be
called upon besides him.

In respect of the minister, they hold how any man has power to forgive sins
which belongs unto God alone: also, that other men, yea women (and not the
minsters of the word only) may be minsters of the Sacraments.

In respect of the effect, they teach us (which is utterly untrue, that neither
all sins be mortal; nor that Christ has cleansed such as be his from all
their sins, by his precious blood.

10. Proposition. The Sacraments are not to be abused, but rightly to be used
of us all.
The proof from Gods word.
In the word of God the right use of the Sacraments, and the ends of their
institution are evidently set down. For

Concerning Baptism, Christ he says, Teach all nations, baptizing them, etc
Matthew. 28.29.
. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved Mar. 16.16.
.

Touching the Lord his Supper, says our Savior, of the Bread, take eat, etc.
and of the Cup, Drink ye all of it Matthew. 26.26.27.
, and S. Paul, The cup of blessing, which we bless, is not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is not the communion of the
body of Christ 1. Cor. 10.16.
?

This truth do the Chruches reformed by their Confessions subscribe unto
Confess. Hell. ^et. 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 20.21.. Bohem. c. 11.13. Gal. ar.
35.38. Belg. ar. 34 35. August. ar^ 2.9. Sax. ar. 13^^15. VVittemb. c. 10.19.
Sue. ^.13.18.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Then greatly do they sin who either do not use the Sacraments either at
all, as do the Schwenfeldias See in this art. prop. 1.
, or minister them but unto whom they list: so is Baptism of the Seruetians
Calvin. epist. pl. 118.
, and Anabaptists Sleidan. commen. lib. 6.
, ministered only unto elder persons, and denied unto Infants; and so is the
same Sacrament, of the Marcionites, ministered unto single persons, but denied
unto married folks Tertul. cotra Marcion. lib. 1. and 4.
: or do abuse them.

So abused is baptism by them who baptize things without reason, yea some
times without life, or sense: so have the Papists baptized both Bells, and
Babels, as the greater Bell of S. John de Lateran at Rome, by Pope John the 14.
who named it John after his own name Cypr. Valera of the Pope etc. p. 55.
, and the great Bell of Christ church in Oxford, which D. Tr^sham the Vice
chancellor, named Mary D. Humfre. in vita Iuelli. p. 81.
, Babells, as the Duke of Aluar chief Standare which he used in the Low
countries, was baptized by Pius Quintus An. 156^. and called Margaret, by the
said Pope D. Morison. de deprau. Rel. orig. page 24.
. and so the Cataphrygians baptized the dead bodies of men Philastrius.
.

Again Baptism was Baptized by the Marcionites, when they baptized the living
for the dead Tertul. contra Mar. lib. 4.
, also by the No^uatian D. Cypr. ad Julian.
, and Papists Sue ar. 23. prop. 3.
, when they rebaptized infants before baptized as they termed them, by Heretics

And so abused was the Lords Supper by certain Heretics, condemned in a
Council at Carthage, whose manner was to thurst the Sacrament into the mouths
of dead men Council. Carthag. 3. can. 6.
, and is by the Papists, whose gift is to use it magically, as a salve against
bodily si^knes, and adversity: also to carry the same about pompously, and
superstitiously in the open streets, to be adored of the beholders Art. of the
peace between Spain, and Eng. ar. 1604. ar. 2. concer. a mother. See more in
the Art. of Bap. the L. Supper, also ar. 28. prop. 5.
.

11. Proposition. All which receive the Sacraments, receive not therewithal
the things signified by the Sacraments.
The proof from Gods word.
We read in the holy Scripture, that.

Some persons do receive the Sacraments and the things signified by the
Sacraments, which are the remission of sins, and other spiritual graces from
God: and so received was the Sacrament of Baptism, of Cornelius Act. 10.47.
, and the Lords Supper, of the good disciples Matthew. 28.26. etc. John. 13.22.
, and the godly Corinthians.

Some again receive the sacraments, but not the things by them signified; so
received was Baptism of Sunon Magus Act. 8.13.
, and the Lords Supper of Judas John. 13.26.
, and so receive the Atheists, Libertines, and impenitent persons 1. Cor.
11.27. etc.
.

And some receive not the Sacraments at all, and yet are partakers of the
things by the Sacraments signified: such a communicant was the Theife upon the
Cross Luke. 23.43.44.
.

This makes us to conceive well both of those men, and women, which would, and
yet cannot communicate in the public, and Christian assemblies; and of the
children of Christian parents, which depart this world unbaptized.

Furthermore it is apparent, how.

Salvation is promised to such as are baptized, yet not simply in respect of
their baptism, but if they do believe Mar. 16.16.
.

Again, S. Paul faith, whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of
the Lord

Unworthily, shallbe guilty of the body, and blood of Christ 1. Cor. 11.27.
.

And this the purer Churches every where do acknowledge Confess. Heluet. 1.
ar. 20. and 2. cap. 19.21. Basil. ar. 3.6. Bohem. c. 11.13. Gal. ar. 34.36.37.
Belg. ar. 33.35. August. ar. 3.13. Saxon. ar. 13.14. VVittemb. c. 10. Sue. c.
17.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The Papists therefore be in a wrong opinion, which deliver that.

The Sacraments are not only Seals, but also causes of grace Test. Rhem.
annot. ^. pet. 3.21.
, and

The Sacraments do give grace, even because they be delivered, and received,
ex opere operato Ibid. annot. marg. page 357.
.

26. Article. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the
effect of the Sacraments.
Although in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the word, and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name but in
Christ's, and do minister by his commission, and authority 1 we may use their
ministry, both in hearing the of God, and in the receiving the Sacraments.
Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their wickedness: nor
the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith and rightly, do
receive the Sacraments m^nistred unto them, which are effectual, because of
Christ's institution: and promise, although they be ministered by evil men.

Nevertheless it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that 2 inquiry
be made of evil ministers: and that they be accused by those that have
knowledge of their offenses, and finally, being found guilty, by just
judgment be deposed,

The propositions.
1. The effect of the word, and Sacraments, is not hindered by the badnes of
ministers.

2. Evil Ministers are to be searched out, convicted, and deposed, but
orderly, and by the discipline of the Church.

1. Proposition. The effect of the word, and Sacraments, is not hindered by the
badnes of Ministers.
The proof from Gods word.
OF the ministers ecclesiastical the Church is to conceive neither to
sinisterly, as though their unworthiness could make the word, and Sacraments the
less effectual to such as worthily do hear, and receive them: nor on the
otherside too highly, as if the dignity of their calling were cause good
enough, that what they do, or say ex opere operato, take happy effects.

These things from the Scriptures are manifest, which teach us, that wicked
ministers, even the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair Matthew. 23.1.
, and preaching Christ, though through envy, strife, and contention Phil. 1.15.
, are to be heard; and may administer the Sacraments; as did the ordinary
Priests among the Jews, whereof very many, both before, and after that our
Savior came into the world, were most wicked men: and the best which be are
the ministers of God 1. Cor. 4.1.
, and Gods laborers 1. Cor. 3.9.
.

Also the purer Churches bear witness hereunto Confess. Hel^et. 1. ar.
15.20.22. Hel^et. 2. c. 18.21.

Bohem. c. 11.12. Gal. ar. 33-35. August. ar. 8. Saxon. ar. 11.13. VVittemb.
ar. 31. Suc. ar. 13.


.

Neither is he (whosoever) that planteth any thing, neither he that waters,
but God that gives the increase, says S Paul 1. Cor. 3.7.
. And a sign of a good Spirit is it, to regard not so much who speaks, or
ministers, as what is uttered, and offered from God.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
The due consideration of the praemises will both settle us the more firmly in
the truth; and make us the more carefully to abhor all adversaries thereof,
as in old time were the donatists, and the Petilians, who taught that the
Sacraments are holy, D. August. in Psalm. 100. and 32. Idem contra petil. l. 1.
c. 4.
when they be administered by holy men, but not else; also the Apostolikes, or
Henricans, who had a fancy that he was no Bishop, which was a wicked man
Magdeburg, eccles. host. Cant. 1^. cap. 5. fol. 844.
.

Among the Fathers also Cyprian, and Origin were not ^ound in this point. For
Cyprian, published, that no minister could rightly baptize, who was not
himself endued with the holy Ghost D. ^yprian. epist. lib. 1. lib. ad M^g. ep.
6.
, he further delivered, that whosoever do communicate with a wicked minister,
do sin Ibid. ep. 4.
.

Origin held that in vain did any minister either bind, or lose, who was
himself bound with the chains of ^inne, and wickedness D. Orig. in Matthew.
tract. 1.
.

Such adversaries in our time be, the Anabaptists, the Family of Love, the
disciplinarians (usually termed Puritants); the Sabbatarians; the Brownists;
and the Papists. For

The Anabaptists will not have the people to use the ministry of evil
ministers; VVilk. against the Fa. ar. 24. p. 66.
and think the service of wicked Ministers unprofitable, and not effectual:
affirming that no man* who is himself faulty, can preach the truth to others.

The Family of Love do say, that no man can minister the upright service, or
ceremonies of Christ, but the regenerate H.N. euang. c. 23.9.2.
, also that wicked men cannot teach the truth ^am. 1. epist. to M. Rogers.
.

The disciplinarian Puritans do bring all ministers which cannot preach, and
their services into detestation. For their doctrine is, that

Where there is no Preacher, there ought to be no minister of the Sacraments
Lear. disc. p. 62.
.

None must minister the Sacraments which do not preach ^.C. ^. cap. p. 104.
.

The Sacrament is not a Sacrament if it be not joined to the word of God
preached Ber. de Loque reas. of the Church. cap. 10.
.

It is sacrilege to separate the ministration of the word preached from the
Sacraments Lear. disc. p. 60.
.

Of these men's opinions be the Sabbatarians among us. For their doctrine is to
the common people, that unless they leave their unpreaching ministers every
Sabbath day, and go to some place where the word is preached they do profane
the Sabbath, and subject themselves unto the curse of God D.B. doc. of the Sab.
2. book. p. 173.
.

So the Brownists; No man is to communicate (say they) where there is a blind,
or dumme ministry R. H. on Psalm. 122.
.

The Papist do cross this truth, but after another sort. For

Pope Hildebrand decreed, and commanded, that no man should hear Mass from
the mouth of a priest which has a wife.

The Rhemists do publish how. B. Jewel. o^ Ag. 1. ser.


The Sermons of heretics (and so term they all Protestant ministers) Test.
Rhem. annot. tit. 3.10.
must not be heard, though they preach the truth. Their prayers, and Sacraments
are not acceptable to God, but are the howling of wolves. Jbid. an. Mar. 3.13.


2. Proposition. Evil ministers are to be searched out, convicted, and
deposed, but orderly, and by the discipline of the Church.
The wicked, and evil ministers must not always be endured in the Church of
God. For they are, the evil and unprofitable servants Matthew. 25.26.
, the Eyes, which do offend Matthew. 18.9.
, the unsavory salt Matthew. 5.13.
, which are carefully to be seen unto; and if admonitions will not serve,
deposed: yet orderly, and by the discipline of the Churh. For that God which
appointed a government for the civil state, has also given authority unto
his Church to punish offenders, according to the quality of their
transgressions. And so may we read in the word of God.

Tell the Church says our Savior Matthew. 18.17.


Let such a one, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered unto
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus, says S. Paul 1 Cor. 5.4.5.
.

So the neighbor Churches Heluet. 2. c. 18. Bohem. c. 9. Sax ar. 11. Sue. ar.
13.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Then deceived, and out of the way, are the Brownists, and Barrowists, which
are of mind, that

Private persons in themselves have authority, to depose unmeet ministers;
and to punish malefactors R.H. on psalm. 122. p. 117.


Every particular member of a Church in himself has power to examine the
manner of administering the Sacraments, etc. to call men unto repentance, etc
Bar. disco. p. 96.
. to reprove the faults of the church; and to forsake that church, which will
not reform her faults upon any private admonition Giff. repl. unto Bar. and
Gr. in thend.
.

For want of the due execution of discipline against persons offending, and
malefactors, both women may leave their husbands (as some have done), and
husbands their wives, and go where it is in force Brown tract. of the life,
and man. Bred. detect. p. 122.
. See more in Art. 33. Prop. 1.

27. Article. Of Baptism.
1 Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
christian men are discerned from other that be not Christened, but 2 it is also
a sign of regeneration, or newe-birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are graffed into the Church, the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the Sons of God, by the holy
Ghost, are visiblie signed, and sealed: Faith is confirmed, and grace increased
by virtue of prayer unto God.

3 The Baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the Church,
as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.

The Propositions.
1. Baptism is a sign of Profession, and mark of difference whereby
Christians are discerned from other men, that be no Christians.

2. Baptism is a sign or seal of the regeneration, or new birth of
Christians.

3. Infants, and young children, by the word of God, are to be baptized.

1. Proposition. Baptism is a sign of Profession, and mark of difference,
whereby Christians are discerned from other men, that be no Christians.
The proof from Gods word.
HOw the Sacraments are tokens: and therefore that Baptism is a sign of the
true Church, which be Christians, it is apparent from Gods word in the 5.
proposit. of the 19. article before going; and the same do the Churches of God
acknowledge Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 20. and 2. c. 19.20. Basil. ar. 5. 2. Gal.
ar. 35. Belg. ar. 34. August. ar. 13. Saxon. ar. 12.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This declares us to be sound Christians, and.

Not Nazarens, who were with the Jews circumcised, and baptized with
Christians, and so (as Hierome writes of them) were neither Jews, nor
Christians D. Heron. in epist. ad August. de haeres.
.

Mot Manichians, which baptize not any D. Aug.
.

Not false christians 1. Cor. 15.
, or Marcionites Tertul. contra Mar. lib. 4.
, which did baptize the living for the dead. Which Marcionites also denied
Baptism unto all married persons, and baptized none but persons single,
virgins, widows, and women divorced from their husbands Tertul. Ibid.
.

Not Originists, who maintain a Baptism by fire; as also that after the
resurrection of our bodies, we shall have need of Baptism Origin. in Luke.
hom. 14.
.

Not of Matthewe Hamants opinion, (that Norfolk Heretic) which stood in it to
the death, that Baptism is not necessary in the Church Holinsh. chro. fol.
1299.
.

Not Anabaptists, which number Baptism among things indifferent, and so to be
used, or refused, at our discretion ^ulling. contra Anabap. lib. 2. cap. 4.
.

Not Familists, which say there is no true Baptism but only among themselves
H. N. 1. exho. cap. 7.
.

Nor Papists, who both baptize Bells, and Babels, as before has bin showen, art.
25. prop. 10, and also make the vow, and profession of the monachall, or life
of a Monch, as good a token of Christians, as Baptism T. Aquinas. 2.21. de
ingres. relig. p. 119.
.

2. Proposition. Baptism is a sign or seal of the regeneration, or new
birth of Christians.
The proof from Gods word.
Baptism, of S. Paul is called the washing of the new Birth Tit. 3.5.
, of others the Sacrament of the new birth, to signify how they which rightly
(as all do not) receive they the same See before. ar. 25. pr. 11.
, are ingrafted into the body of Christ 1. Cor. 12.13.
, as by a seal be assured from God, that their sins be pardoned, and
forgiven Act 2.38.
, and themselves adopted for the children of God Tit 3.5.
, confirmed in the faith Mar. 16.16.
, and do increase in grace, by virtue of prayer unto God Act 2.41.42.
.

And this is the constant doctrine of all Churches protestant, and reformed
Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 21. and 2. c. 20. Bohem. c. 12. Gal. ar. 35. Belg. ar.
34. August. ar. 9. Saxon. ar. 13. VVittemb. c. 10. Sue. c. 19.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
But no part of the true Church thinks as did many old haeretickes, viz. that

The baptized of the orthodoxall ministers, are to be rebaptized, as said the
Nouatians Cyp. ad Iobai.
.

Original sin is not pardoned in Infants, as said the Pelagians, because
they have no such sin in them at all D. August. de p^c. mer. lib. ^.20.
.

Only sins past, and not sins future, or not yet committed, are by
Baptism cleansed, as the Messalians held Theodo. dimi. der. cap. de Bap.
.

Being once Baptized we can no more be tempted, as thought the Iouians; which
was the error also of the Pelagians Mag. ce. hist. Cen. 4. c. 5. fol. 381.
.

The Baptsme of water is now ceased: and the Baptism of voluntary blood by
whipping is come in place thereof, without which none can be saved, as the
Flagelliferians published Gerson tract. contra Flagel.
.

We also condemn the opinion.

Of the Russeis, that there is such a necessity of Baptism, as that all that
die without the same are damned Russi^ Commonvveale, cap. 23. page 98. b.
.

Also of the Bannisterians, which say that the water at Baptism is not holy in
respect that it is applied to an holy use; and that the ordinary, and common
washings among the Turks, and Jews, is the same to them that Baptism is to
us Bannist. errors printed by T. Man.
.

Likewise of the Family of Love, which conceive basely of this Sacrament,
calling it in derision, Elementish water; and of no better validity, or virtue
then common water H. N. euang. c. 19.. 5.6.
.

Also of the Anabaptists, who ascribe no more unto Baptism, then unto any
other thing, ciuilly discerning one man from another; and say that the
Sacraments of the new Testament are no instruments to raise, or confirm faith
Althemar. council. lo. pugnan: Lo. 131.
.

And lastly of the Papists, who maintain that

Baptism serves to the putting away of original sin only D. Tho. de sac.
Altari.
.

Baptism brings grace, even ex opere operato Test. Rhem. an. Gal. 3.27.
.

3. Proposition. Infants, and young children, by the word of God, are to be
baptized.
The proof from Gods word.
Although by express terms we be not commanded to baptize young children:
yet we believe they are to be baptized, and that for these, among other
reasons.

1. The grace of God is universal, and pertains unto all: Therefore the
sign, or Seal of grace is universal, and belongs unto all, so well young
as old.

2. Baptism is unto us, as Circumcision was unto the Jews. But the Infants of
the Jews were circumcised. Therefore the children of Christians are to be
baptized.

3. Children belong unto the kingdom of heaven Matthew. 13.14.
, and are in the covenant therefore the sign of the covenant is not to be
denied them.

4. Christ gave in commandment that all should be baptized Matthew. 28.19.
, Therefore young children are not to be exempted.

5. Christ has shed his blood as well for the washing away the sins of
children, as of the elder sort. Therefore it is very necessary that they
should be partakers of the Sacrament thereof.

All Christian churches allow of the Baptism of infants Confess. Heluet. 1.
ar. 21. and 2. cap. 20. Bohem. cap. 12. ar. 35. Belg. ar. 34. August. ar. 9.
Sa^on. ar. 13. VVittem^. c. 10. Sue. c. 17.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
The premises declare, that

They slander us which say, That all Protestants, deny the Baptism of
children to be necessary, and this is Runnagate Hills report Hills quart. reas.
14.
.

They err which oppugn this truth, as do many persons, but not after one,
and the same sort. For.

Some utterly deny that Infants, or young children are to be baptized, so did
the Pelagians D. August. de Ver. Apost. ser. de Bap. par.
. the Heracleons; and the Henricians Mag. eccles. hist. cent. 12. c. 5.
, and so do the Anabaptists, whereof said some, how baptism is the invention
of Pope Nicholas, and therefore naught Bulling. contra Anabap. lib. 1.
, others that Baptism is of the devil. So thought Melchior Hoffeman Ibid.
lib. 2. c. 13.
, so also do the Swermerians (a set among the said Anabaptists Althemar. lo.
pug. co. 131.
, the Seruetians Epist. minist. Bern. in Call. epist. fol. 118.
, and the Family of Love which does hold that none should be baptized until
he be thirty years old Displaie. H. 7. a.
.

Others refuse to baptize not all, but some Infants. So denied is Baptism by
the Barrowists unto the seed of whores, and witches Bar. disco. p. 9.
, by the Brownists, unto the children of open sinners Giffords reply.
, by the the Disciplinarians unto their children which subject not themselves
(as Dud. Fenner says) unto the discipline of the Church, or obey not the
Presbyteriall decrees Sacramentorum autem primum pro natural sua administrari
debet vel infantibus, vel adultis. Infantibus autem iis qui sunt liberi eorum
^u^ sunt intra. Intra autem qui ecclesiae (...) e subiciu^^. D. Fen^er 5.
Theol. l. 5. cap. vlt.
.

Others allow the Baptism of Infants, yet think those Infants not lawfully
baptized, which are baptized either by the new ministers of the Church of
England, as the Brownists do think R. A. confut. of Brovv. p. 113.
, or by Protestant ministers, as the Papists are of mind, witness their
rebaptizing of Infants in France, and in Netherland See before ar. 25. pr. 8.
, or by unpreaching ministers, as the disciplinarian Puritanes do hold See ar.
26. pr. ^. Declar^^t vbinam legeri^^, tam necessario esse copulandam coelestis
verbi praedicationem cum administratione Sacramenti, vt nisi concio habeatur,
renascentium lauacro infans aspergi non possit? Querim. ec. p. 80.
.

And others are of opinion that none are to be baptized which believe not first.

Hence the Anabaptists, Infants believe not therefore be not to be baptized.
Hence the Lutherans: Infants do believe Hesh^^. de 600. ar. Pontif. lo. 16.
: Therefore to be baptized.

28. Article. Of the Supper of the Lord.
The Supper of the Lord, is not only 1 a sign of the love that Christians
ought to have among themselves one to another, but rather 2 it is a Sacrament
of our redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as worthily, and with
Faith receive the same the Bread which we break, is a partaking of the Body of
Christ, and likewise the Cup of blessing, is a partaking of the Blood of
Christ. 3 transubstantion (or the change of the substance of Bread, and wine)
in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ: but is repugnant to
the plain words of Scripture: overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many superstitions 4 The Body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly, and spiritual manner: and the
mean whereby the Body of Christ is received, and eaten in the Supper, is Faith
5 The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance, reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.

The Propositions.
1. The supper of the Lord is a sign of the love that Christians ought to have
among themselves.

2. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death, and to
them which receive the same worthily, by Faith, a partaking of the Body, and
Blood of Christ.

3. The Bread, and Wine in the Lords Supper, be not changed into another
substance.

4. The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten after an heavenly, and
spiritual, not after a carnal sort.

5. To reserve, carry about, lift up, or worship the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, is contrary to the ordinance of Christ.

The Propositions.
1. Proposition. The Supper of the Lord is a sign of the love that Christians
ought to have among themselves.
The proof from Gods word.
THe Supper of the Lord is a token of the love that Christians ought to have
among themselves. For which cause it is called, the Lords table 1. Cor. 10.21.
, the Lords Supper 1. Cor. ^1.20.
, a communion of the body of Christ, and they that partake thereof, though they
be many, yet are but one bread, and one body 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
.

This is the doctrine of all Christian Churches Confess. Heluet. 2. cap. 21.
Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13. Belg. ar. 35. Saxon. ar. 14. Sue. c. 18.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
So think not those men, who either with heretic Hamant, deny the use of the
Lords Supper to be necessary Hol. chron. fol. 1299.
, or with the Rhemists rail on it, and the Protestants that use the same,
calling it, a profane, and detestable Table, the Cup of devils Test. Rhem.
an. 1. Cor. 10.21.
.

2. Proposition. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is Sacrament of our
redemption by Christ's death, and to them which receive the same worthily, by
Faith, a partaking of the Body, and blood of Christ.
The proof from Gods word.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to all Christians, a Sacrament of our
redemption by Jesus Christ. For.

This is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins Matthew. 26.28
, this is my body, which is given for you etc. This cup is the new Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you, says our Savior Luke 22.19.20. Mark
14.24. 1. Cor. 11.24.
.

And to such as receive the same worthily 1. Cor. 11.28. etc.
, and by Faith 2. Cor. 13.5. John 6.35.
, it is the partaking of the Body, and Blood of Christ 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
.

This is a truth openly both maintained, and testified by the neighbor
Churches Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 22. and 2. cap. 21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c.
13. Gal. ar. 37. Belg. ar. 35. August. touch. the Mass. ar. 1.3. Saxon. ar.
14. VVittemb. c. 19. Sue. c. 19.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Diversely has this proposition bin oppugned. For

Some either denying or not acknowledging the benefit of so heavenly a
Sacrament do say, how

It is to be received only for obedience sake to the princes commandment, but
is of none effect to the perfect ones. An opinion of the Families Leon. Ram.
Confess. an. 1580.
.

It does neither good, nor hurt to the receivers. The Messalians error
Theodores. eccles. hist.
.

It does much hurt, and no good, to participate the Lords Supper among
Protestants, say the Papists What can the Protestant churches afford you? etc.
the comunio? O poisoned Cup: better it were for you to eat so much Ra^sbaine,
then that pulluted bread, and to drink, so much Dragons gall, or Vipers blood,
then that sacralegious wine. Garnish of the soul. etc. printed at Autu. an.
1596. by Ioach. Tro.
.

It is no sign assuring us that all our sins through Christ are pardoned.
For only venial, and mortal sins, are thereby remitted, Catech. Trid.
and we must always doubt of the forgiveness of our sins council. Trid. ses.
6. cap. 9.
, say the same Papists.

Others do teach that.

It can profit such as have no faith, as Babes, and Infants, in which error be
the Russians Al. Guag. de relig. Moscouit. p. 268.
; yea the dead bodies of men Council. Carthage. 3. can. 6.
.

It can benefit such as receive it not at all, if on there behalf it be
administered, as persons absent, upon the Seas, in the wars, yea and dead; and
present too when yet they participate not, but the Priest for them. These
errors the Papists defend.

3. Proposition. The bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, be not changed into
another substance.
The proof of Gods word.
Transsubstantiation, or the change of the substance of Bread, and Wine in the
Supper of the Lord, we do utterly deny; and the reasons, moving us thereunto,
are for that it is repugnant to the plain words of the Scripture. For

I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, says our Savior
Christ Matthew. 26.29 Mark 14.25.
. Which fruit had it really bin either the Blood, or by way of concomitance,
the very Body and blood of Jesus Christ, then our Lord had eaten himself,
which is not only blasphemous to be spoken, but also impossible to be done, and
directly against the word of God, where commandment is often given, that the
blood with flesh (not of Beast, much less of man) must not be eaten Genesis 9.4.
Leuit. 17.14.
.

The heaven must contain Jesus Christ until the time that all things be
restored, says S. Peter Act. 3.21.
. If Christ therefore corporally, according to his humanity be in heaven, then
is he not in the Sacrament.

As often as ye shall eat this Bread (not Christ his real Body); and drink
this Cup (not the real Blood of Christ), you show the Lords death till he
come, says S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.20.
. Therefore he is not come; which he must be, being under the forms of Bread,
and Wine.

Transubsta^tiatio^ besides overthrows the nature of the Sacrament. For where
there is no Element, there can be no Sacrament. Because Gods word coming unto
the element, makes. a Sacrament.

Finally it has bin the occasion of much superstition, and Idolatry. For from
hence proceeded, the Reservation of the Transubstantiated bread for sundry
superstitious purposes: hence the adoration of the Bread, even as God himself,
and that both of Priest and people: hence the carrying about in pompous
procession, of the wafer-God; and hence the Popish feast called Corpus
Christi-day.

The right consideration hereof has moved all the Churches reformed to show
their detestation hereof both by their Sermons, and wrightings Confess. Heluet.
1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13. VVittemb c. 19.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Abominable therefore be the Popish errors, viz. that

In the Eucharist there is not the substance of Bread, and wine, but only the
mere accidents, and qualities Council. Trid. ses. 3. c. 3.
.

Substantially, and really the Body, and Blood, together with the soul, and
divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore Christ is contained in the
Sacrament Eucharisticall Test. Rhem. annot. Matthew. 26.26.
.

Under each kind, and under every part of each kind severally, whole Christ is
comprised Council. Trid. ses. 3. c. 3 Vaux. Catech. c. 4.
.

After the consecration in the wonderful Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is; and that not only in the use, while it
is taken, but before also, and after in the Hosts, or consecrated pieces,
reserved, or remaining after the Communion Council. Trid. ses. 3. c. 4.
,

In the holy Sacrament, Christ, the only begotten Son of God, is to be
adored with the very worship of Latria Council. Trid. ses. 3. c. 5.
.

Marcus also that detestable heretic, held that the wine of the Lords Supper
was converted into blood Epiphan. hoeres. 34.
.

4. Proposition. The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten after an
heavenly, and spiritual, not after a carnal sort.
The proof from Gods word.
The regenerate have in them a double life, one carnal the other spiritual.

The life carnal and temporary, they brought with them into this world. The
spiritual was given unto them afterward in their second birth through the word
1. Pet. 1.23.
.

The life carnal and corporal is common to all men, good and badde, and is
maintained, and preserved by earthly, and corruptible Bread common also to all
and every man.

The life spiritual is peculiar only to Gods elect; and is cherished by the
bread of life, which came down from heaven, which is Jesus Christ John. 6.51.
who norisheth, and susteineth the spiritual life of Christians, being
received of them by Faith John. 6.35.
.

Which spiritual Bread that he might the better represent, he has instituted
earthly, and visible Bread, and wine, for a Sacrament of his Body, and Blood.
Whereby he does testify, that as verily as we receive the Bread with the
hands, and chewe the same with the teeth, and tongue, to the nourishing of this
life temporal: even so by faith (which is in place of hands and mouth to the
soul) we verily receive the true Body, and the true blood of Christ, our
only Savior, to the cherishing of the spiritual life in our souls.

And herein there is a goodly consent with the most of the reformed Churches,
and us Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13.
Gal. ar. 36. Belg. ar. 35.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Jointly we withstand the adversaries thereof whosoever, as

The Capernaites, which thought the flesh of our Lord might be eaten with
corporal mouths.

The Synusiastes, or Vbiquitaries Aliqui (...) fugimus, sed in cognatum
delabimur (...) pani, et vino substantiam equidem relinquendo, sed corporale
Christi corpus ita co^duniendo, at substantia substantiam vel localiter, vel
definitive, vel repletiue, vel omnibus istis modis simul contineat, quod ipsum
Profect^ milest aliud, quam Transsubstantiationis quoddam quasi inuoluctus etc.
Iezler. de diutur. belli Euchar. p. 18. a.
, which think the Body of Christ so is present in the supper, as his said Body
with bread and Wine, by one and the same mouth, at one and the same time, of
all, and every communicant, is eaten corporally, and received into the Belly.

The Metusiastes, and Papists, which believe the substance of bread and Wine,
is so changed into the substance of Christ his body, as nothing remains but
the real Body of Christ, besides the accidents of Bread, and wine After
Consecration there is neither bread, no^ wine left in this Sacrament, says
Vaux in his catech.

By virtue of the words of Consecration the substance of bread, is turned and
changed into the very body of Christ: and the substance of wine is turned
into the blood of Christ, the holy Ghost working by a divine power. So that
Christ is wholly under the form of bread, and in every part of the Host, being
broken, Christ is wholly. Also under the form of wine, and every part thereof,
being separated, Christ is wholly. Canis* catech. c. 4.

Romanenses (...) sororem, and plurimorun error^m matrem, (...), Iezl^^,
^edi^tior* belli (...)* p. 31.


.

The Symbolists, Figurists, and Significatists, who are of opinion that the
faithful at the Lords supper, do receive nothing but naked, and bare signs.

5. Proposition. To reserve, carry about, lift up, or worship the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, is contrary to the ordinance of Christ.
The proof from Gods word.
The true, and lawful use of this Sacrament has bin before set down, And
there it may suffice us to be remembered, how the Lords Supper was ordained,
that the bread should not only be broken, and eaten Matthew 26.28 Mark 14.22.
Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 10.16.11.2.
, the cup should only be given, and drunken, Matthew. 26.27 Mark 14 23. Luke
22.17. 1. Cor. 11.25.
, and all this done in remembrance of Christ Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.25.
.

And so also testify the Churches reformed. Confess. Heluet. 2. c. 21. Basil.
ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13. August. de Missa. ar. 1. Sax. ar. 14. VVittemb. c. 19


Adversaries unto this truth.
But contrary to the institution of Christ, the Papists abuse this holy
Sacrament. For

They reserve the same; and not only so, but take it to be a Catholic, a
pious, and a necessary custom, so to reserve it Council. Tri^. ses. 3. c. 6.
, and besides they think every piece, and particle of the Sacrament so
reserved, is the very Body of Christ Jbid. can. 4.
.

They carry it about, both unto sick folks. Hence, says the Festival
Festiual, 4. Sermons, fell. 169. b:
.

As often as any man sees that Body at Mass, or some other good prayer in
worship of his sovereign Lord. And also thorough cities, and towns. For
whenever the Pope goes any journey, the Sacramental bread is carried before
him on an ambling Iennet, as the Persian kings have before them carried their
Orsmada, or holy fire See cerem. Pontif. lib. 1. When the Pope goes from one
people to another, he sends before him, yea, and sometime a day, or two
days journey, his Sacrament upon an Horse, carrying at his neck a little
Bell, accompanied with the scum and baggage of the Roman Court.

Thither go the dishes, and spits, old shoes, caldrous, and kettles, and all
the scullerie of the Court, whores and Iesters. Thus the Sacrament arriueth
with this honorable train, at the place whether the Pope is to come, it there
awaiteth his coming. And when the master is known to approach near the
people, it goes forth to receive him. So Cyp. Valera, a Spaniard, in his
treat. of the Pope, and his a^ct. p. 17.


.

In Spain even at this day in the time of the peace between the two mighty
Kings of great Britain, and Spain, those English men, as meeting the
Sacrament in the streets, will neither do reverence thereunto; nor go aside;
nor turn into some house, do fall into the danger of the not holy, but bloody
Inquisition Act of the peace etc. an. 1604. ^r. 2. to the end touching a
Moderation. etc.
.

They worship it, and for the same have ordained a certain set, and solemn
Feast, called Corpus-Christi-day, on which the Sacrament is borne about, lifted
up, and most idolatrously adored Council. Trid. ses. 3. c. 3.
.

29. Article. Of the wicked, which do not eat the Body, and blood of Christ
in the use of the Lords Supper.
The wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do
carnally, and visibly press with their teeth (as S. Augustine says) the
Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers
of Christ, but rather to their condemnation, do eat, and drink the siigne,
or Sacrament of so great a thing.

The proposition. The wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, do not
eat the Body, nor drink the Blod of Jesus Christ, in the use of the Lords
Supper.
The proof from Gods word.
S. Paul does show, how the Supper of the Lord is received of some worthily,
which do examine, and judge themselves 1. Cor. ii.28.
, and discern the Lords Body Ibid. 29.
, as also do abstain from the table of devils Cor. 10.21.
. How these do participate of the Body, and blood of Christ, it has already
bin shown in the last mentioned article, prop. 4.

Again, of others the same is unworthily received 1. Co. 1138.39
, that is to say which themselves do not examine, nor judge Ibid. 38.31.
, neither discern the Lords body Ibid. 29.
, and do communicate at the Table of the Lord, and at the Table of devils 1.
Cor. 10.21.
. These may receive the Sacrament, but not the true Body of Christ. The reasons
be, for that

They lack the wedding garment Matthew. 22.11.21.
, which is Faith, and the righteousness of Christ.

They are no members of the true Church, the Head whereof is Jesus Christ
Ephesians. 4.15. etc.
.

They have no promise of heavenly refreshing, because they are without a lively
faith John. 6.35.
.

Therefore they procure unto themselves most heavy punishements 1. Cor. 11.27.
, as, diseases, death, guiltines of the Body, and Blood of Christ, and
therewith damnation.

Of this judgment be other Churches Christian, and reformed besides Confess.
Heluet. 1^ in the declar. of the L. Supper; Heluet, 2. c. 21. Basil. ar. 6.
Bohem. c. 13. Gal. ar. 37. Belg ar. 37.
^

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
The adversaries of this dorine are

The Vbiquitaries, both Lutheran, and Popish; they saing the very Body of
Christ at the Lords Supper, is eaten as well of the wicked as of the godly S^ur.
Antip. 4. par. 1. p. 58.
, these affirming, that al Communicants badde and good, do eat the very, and
natural Body of Christ Jesus Test. Rhem. annot. 1. Cor. 11.27.
: they saying, that the true, and real Body of Christ, In With, Under the
bread, and wine, may be eaten, chewed, Alex. Hales. par. 4. q. 45. and D. Thom.
par. 3. q. 8. ar. 3.
and digested even of Turks, which never were of the Church So reports
Sturmius in his Antipap. 4. par. 2. page 106.
, and these maintaining that under the form of Bread, the same true and real
body of Christ, may be devoured of Dogs, Hogs, Cats, and Rats.

30. Article. Of both kinds.
The cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people. For both the
parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance, and commandment ought to
be ministered to al Christian men.

The Proposition. The people must be partakers not only of the Bread, but also
of the Wine, when they approach unto the Lords Table.
The proof from Gods word.
Our Lord, and Savior Christ has instituted his Supper, as he will have not
only the Bread, but also the Cup to be delivered unto all Communicants. So find
we in the word of God, namely

That the Bread must be given to All, and eaten of All Matthew. 26.26. Mark
14.22. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 10 16.1^.25.
;

The Cup is to be given to All, and to be drunken of All Matthew. 26.27 Mark
22.17. 1. Cor. 10.16.11.25.
.

Heereunto subscribe the Churches Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 21.
Bohem. c. 13. Gal. ar. 36.38. Belg. ar. 35. August. de Missa, ar. 1.2. Saxon.
ar. 15. VVittemb. c. 19. Suc. c. 18.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Though it be a man's covenant, yet when it is confirmed no man does abrogate,
or adds any thing thereunto Gal. 3.15.
. What impudency then, yea, what impiety do they show, which alter this
ordinance of God?

Some, by adding thereto: So added was unto the Bread, Cheese by the Autotarits
Epiphan.
: Blood, by the Cataphrygians Philastrius.
; the Seed of man, by the Manichies August. de hares.
; unto the Wine, warm Water by the Moscouits ^. Faber de relig. Moseo.
.

Some, by taking there from: so the Eutratits Epiphan.
, the Tatians Theodores.
, the Seuerians Epiphan.
, use no wine at all; the Manichies do minister only the Bread Leo scr. 4.
quadrages.
; the Papists, though they use both kinds; yet they always deny the Cup unto
the people, and unto Priests also when they say not Mass Council. Trid. ses. 5.
cap. 1. and ses. 21. can. 1.2.3
, affirming that

The people, participating of the Cup, thereby perceive no fruit of spiritual
comfort; but receive to themselves damnation Censura. Colon. page 289.
.

It is not by Gods, but Man's law, that Lay persons communicate, either in both
kinds, or in one Jbid. page 283.
.

Notwithstanding that Christ instituted the Sacrament to be received under both
kinds, and the primitive Church accordingly did so administer the same: Hoc
tamen non obstante, yet this notwithstanding, it is to be taken of the Laity,
but under one kind Council. Constan. ses. 13.
.

Some, by confounding the elements? So the Moscouites do mingle Bread, and
Wine together Surius co. meant. an. 1501. page 31.
; and the Papists make a mixture of Wine and Water, maintaining that Water
must be mixed with Wine at the consecration of the blood Catech. Trid.
; and that the mixture of Water with Wine, without sin cannot be omitted Ibid.
.

Some, by changing the Elements? So the Aquarians, and the Hydroparastites, for
Wine administered, and gave Water unto the people Theodores.
.

31. Article. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
The offering of Christ once made, 1 is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original, and
actual: and there is none other satisfaction for sin but that alone.
Wherefore 2 the sacrifice of masses, in the which it was commonly said that
the Priests did offer Christ for the quick, and the dead, to have remission of
pain, and guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceipts.

The Propositions.
1. The blood of Jesus Christ once shed for mankind upon the Cross, is a
perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world.

2. Sacrifices of the Mass, are most blasphemous Fables, and dangerous
deceipts.

1. Proposition. The Blood of Jesus Christ once shed for mankind upon the
Cross, is a perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the
sins of the whole world.
The proof from Gods word.
OF the benefits redounding unto mankind by Christ his offering up of himself
upon the Cross, we have in sundry places before See Ar. 2. pr. 4.22. pr.
1.2.28. pr. 2.
spoken, and by the word of God proved him to be the perfect Redemption Act
20.28. Romans 5.6. etc. Gal. 3.13 1. Cor. 6.28. 1. Pet. 1.18.19.
, propitiation Acts 10.43. Romans 3.25. Heb. 9 12. etc. 28. 1. John. 2.2. 1.
John. 4.10.
, and satisfaction John. 1.29.4. Pet. 3.18. 1. John. 1.7.
, for all the sins of the whole world, both original, and actual.

Heereunto the Churches of God bear witness Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 11. and
2. cap. 11.15. Basil. ar. 4. Bohem. c. 6. Gal. ar. 13.16.17. Belg. ^r. 20.22.
August. ar. 34. Saxon. ar. 3. VVi^^emb. c. 2.5. Sue. c. 2.3.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby it is evident to the eyes of all godly persons that most accursed be
the errors of them which do affirm, that

From the beginning of the world, until the 15. year of the Emperor
Tiberius, none at al were ^aued. The error of Manes the heretic Epiphan.
.

Man's body is not capable of happiness, but the soul only; and yet no souls
shall be saved, but there own said the Marcionites D. ^ren. ^1. c. 29.
.

All men, and women, that sin after Baptism, are undoubtedly damned. In this
error were the Montanists D. Hieron. ad Marcel. l. 2.
, and the Nouatians D. Cipr. l. b. 4. epist. 2.
.

Our salvation is of our selves; so said Melchior Hoffeman, an arch Heretic
Bulling. contra Anabap. l. 2. c. 13.
.

Man is restored to grace of Gods mere mercy, without the means of Christ's
blood, death, and passion. One of Matthew Hamants blaspemous assertions Holins.
chron. fol. 1299.
.

The Savior of Men, is Jesus Christ, a man, and no woman, who came into the
world to save no women but men, say some Papists Dial. of Dives, and Pauper. 6.
com.
, and redeemed the superior world only, which is man, said Postellus the
Jesuit Jesuits catec. 1. B. c. 10. p. 28.6.
; and yet not all men neither for S. Francis has redeemed so many as are saved
since his days, say the Franciscan Friars Confor. S. Fr.
.

The Savior of women from her time till the end of the world, is S. Clare,
affirm some p. Mornaeus tract. de eccles. c. 9.
, other papists, as Postellus says it it one mother Jane Jesuits catec. 1.8.
c. 10.
.

The Savior of men, and women, is S. Mary through her virginity say some
Dial. of Dives, and pauper 6. com. c. 10.
, is S. Christina, by her passion, say other Papists Dionis. Carth. d^ 4. hom.
Nouis. ar. 50.
.

There is no sufficient sacrifice yet offered for the sins of the world. One
of F. Kets errors.

Christ has satisfied, and was offered only for original sin, an error of
Thomas Aquinas.

Sins actual, and venial, are taken away by sacred Ceremonies Jest. Rhem.
annot. marg. p. p. 258.
, by a Bishops blessing Ibid. annot. Matthew. 10.12.
, by a priests absolution Vaux. catech. c. 4.
.

Sins actual, and Mortal, be remised by a Pardon from some Bishop, or from
the Pope of Rome See ^r 22. pr. 2.
.

2. Proposition. The sacrifices of the Mass are most blasphemous Fables, and
dangerous deceipts.
The papists deliver how the the Mass is a sacrifice Test. Rhem. ann. Mat.
24.15
, a sacrifice propitiatory Council. Trid. ses. 22. can. 3. Cat. ^rid. Euch. s.
, a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick, and the dead Council. Trid. ibid.
, the same propitiatory sacrifice that was offered by Christ himself upon the
Cross Catech. Trid. ibid.
.

A sacrifice in which, by virtue of a few, even five words (mumbled by a
Priest), Christ, even that Christ, which hung upon the Cross, is contained
Council. Trid. ses. 3. can. 4.
.

A sacrifice, serving for all persons, quick and dead, to purge them from their
sins, to ease them of their pains; to satisfy for their punishment Council.
Trid. ses. 22. can. 3.
, and for all necessities corporal, and spiritual Hovvl. 7. reas.
.

A sacrifice propitiatory of Jesus Christ really offered, to God the Father,
and that often, in the honor of dead Saints Council. Trid. ses. 21. c. 3. ses.
22. can. 5.
.

A sacrifice, wherein Christ is so gloriously, as it is to be adored, even with
divine worship, both of Priest, and people Ibid. ses. 3. c. 5.
.

A sacrifice meritorious to all them for whom it is offered, although they be
not living but dead; not present but absent; not endued either with zeal or
knowledge, but quite destitute of faith, and that ex opere, operato Albert.
Mag. de sacr Euchar. Hovvlets 7. reas.
.

Hereby are we to note, first blasphemous Fables. For

It is a fable, that the Mass is a sacrifice, and that propitiatory; a fable,
that a few words of a Priest, can change Bread into a living Body: yea many
Bodies with their souls; and that of Jesus Christ, God and man: a fable, that
one, and the same sacrifice is offered in the Mass, which was offered on the
Cross: a fable that the said Mass is any whit profitable for the quick; much
less for the dead.

Next dangerous deceipts. For hereby men are to believe, that

Creatures may be adored, contrary to Gods word Thou shall not bow to them nor
serve them. Exodus 20.5.
.

Christ is often offered: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 9.12. etc By his own
blood entered he in once unto the holy place, etc. He was once offered Jbi^. 28.
.

The Priest offers up Christ: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 7.27. he
offered up himself.
.

Sins be forgiven without blood, contrary to the Scripture Heb. 9.22. without
shedding of blood is no remission.
.

Christ died not once, but dies daily: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto men that they shall once die.
.

Faith is not necessary in communicants: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God.
.

We are to adore Christ as always present, contrary to the Scripture, where
we are taught to remember him absent Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.25.
.

The favor of God by money may be purchased from a priest; contrary to the
Scripture 1. Pet. 1.18, 19.
.

All which their fables, and deceipts do tend to the utter abolishing of true
relion. Therefore justly have we, and our godly brethren abandoned the mass
Confess. Heluet 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 10.21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13. Belg.
ar. 35. Aug. de Missa. ar. 13. Saxo. ar. 14. VVittemb. c. 19. Sue. c. 19.
.

Accursed then stand those Papists before God, which take the Mass to be the
Sacrifice of Christ his body, and Blood Council. Trid. ses. 6. c. 2. and catech.
Trid. de Euchar. s.
, and the only sovereign worship due to God in his Church Test. Rhem. annot.
Mat. 24.15.
.

32. Article. Of the Marriage of Priests.
Bishops priests, and Deacons 1 are not commanded by Gods law, either to vow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage. Therefore it is
lawful also for them 2 as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

The Propositions.
1. By the word of God it is lawful for Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical
Ministers, to marry at their own discretion.

2. It is lawful by the word of God for all Christian men, and women to marry
at their own discretion in the fear of God.

1. Proposition. By the word of God it is lawful for Bishops, and all other
ecclesiastical ministers, to marry, at their own discretion.
The proof from Gods word.
NEither the single, nor the wedded life is enioined any man, much less any
calling of men by the word of God. And that ecclesiastical ministers in
particular may marry, it is evident both from the old, and the new Testament.

From the old Testament, both by the Commandments given unto the Priests for
the choice of their wives Leuit. 21.7.
, and by the examples also of the religious Priests, as Aaron Leuit. 22.1.
, Eli 1. Sam. 3.13.
, Zacharias Luke 1.5.
, etc. and Prophets, which were all married, as it is thought except Jeremy.

From the new Testament, by the words of S. Paul, who says, A Bishop must be
the husband of one wife; one that has children under obedience 1. Tim. 3.
. An Elder must be unreprovable: the husband of one wife; having faithful
children Tit. 1.5.6.
. Deacons must be the husbands of one wife; and have wives that be honest, not
evil speakers etc. 1. Tim. 2.11.12.
. and by the example of Peter Matthew. 8.14.
, Paul, Phil. 4.3.
, yea of the Apostles 1. Cor. 9.5.
, who were all married men, John the Evangelist only except, as some think.

All sincere Churches, and professors subscribe hereunto Confess. Helue. 1. ar.
37. and 2. c. 29. Basil. ar. 10.. 1.2. Bohem. c. 9.19. Gal. ar. 24. Aug. de
abus. Saxon. ar. 18.21. Vittemb. c. 21.26. Sue. c. 12.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
And none of Gods churches, or people be of the mind.

Either of the vigilantians, that all, and every one of the Clerge, is
necessarily to marry, or not to be admitted for a Minister D. Hiero. advers.
Vigil. c. 1.
.

Or of the Iouinians, whose Elect, or Priests might not marry D. Aug. epist.
74.
.

Or of the Papists who teach, that.

From the Apostles time it was never lawful for Priests to marry Maioran.
cly. milit. eccles.
.

The three orders of Deacons, Subdeacons, and Priests are bound not to marry
Test. Rhem. annot. m.p. 571.
.

After Orders to marry it is not lawful Ibid. an. 1. Tim. 3.2.
; it is to turn back unto Satan, and Apostacy Ibid. an. 1. Tim. 5.15.
.

None may be a priest, though he will vow a single life, if he have bin a
married man Ib^d. an. 1. Tim. 3.2.
.

For a priest to play the whore-maister it is less offense then to take a
wife. This was the speech of Cardinal Campeius Sicida^ com. 1. Tim. 5.9. l. 4.
And most infamous is the Romish Clergy for their unclean, and vncontinent.
Hence written is it Of Pope Paul the 2. Anxia testiculos Pauli, ne Roma
requiras,
Filia huic nata est; haec docet esse m^rem
Of Pope Innocent the 8: Bis quattuor Nocens genuit puellulos,
Totidem sed et Nocens genuit puellulas.
OF Roma, possis hunc merito dicere Patrem.
Of Pope Alex. the 6: Non spado Alexander fuerat, Lucretia nempe
Illius coniux nata nurusque fuit:
Of the Priests: Multi vos sanctos, multi vos dicere Patres
Gaudent, et vobis nomina tanta placent,
Ast ego vos sanctos non possum dicere, Patres
Possum, cum natos vos genuisse sciam.
Of the Jesuits: With women ye lie not, but with Males rather,
Speak Jesuit, how can thou be a Father? etc. Jesuits catech. 2. B. cap. 15.
p. 114. b.
.


2. Proposition. It is lawful by the word of God for all Christian men, and
women, to marry at their own discretion, in the fear of God.
The proof from Gods word.
The Spirit of God says unto men, and women in all ages,

Bring forth fruit, and multiply, and fill the earth Genesis 1.27.28
.

Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled Heb. 13.4.
.

To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife; and every woman have her
husband 1. Cor. 7.2.
.

If they cannot abstain, let them marry Ibid. 9.
.

Notwithstanding, in saying that Christians may marry at their discretion, the
meaning is not, that any may marry, if they think good, either within the
degrees of kindred, and affinity, prohibited by wholesome laws; or without the
consent of parents, or of others in the room of parents if they be under
tuition; or to other ends then God has praefixed.

So testify with us the reformed Churches Confess. Helue. 1. ar. 37. and 2. c.
29. Bohem. c. 19. Gal. ar. 24. August. de abus. ar. 4.5. Saxon. ar. 18.
VVittemb. c. 21.26. Sue. c. 22.
.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Greatly has this truth bin crossed, and contradicted. For

Some, leave it not to men, and women's discretions, but compel them whether
they will, or no to marry: so did the Ossenes Heyde. discrip vrbis Hicrusal.
l. 3.
.

Some utterly do condemn marriage; as did the Gnostikes D. J^en.
; the Hieracites August. de haeres.
; the Priscillianistes Leg. epist. 93. c. 7.
; the Montanistes Eusebius.
; the Saturnians Epiphan.
; the Aerians Philastr.
; the Apostolikes Epiphan.
.

Some allow of the wedded life: yet not in all sorts of persons. For

The Papists forbid all Clergy men to marry Test. Rhem. annot. 1. Tim. 5.9.
: as also all Godfathers, Godmothers, and whosoever be of spiritual kindred See
above ar. 25. pr. 8.
.

Some will have none to marry but Virgins, and single persons; as the
Henricians Magde. ec. hist. Cen. 12. c. 5
.

Some condemn all alteration of marriage, or twice marrying, the husband or
wife being dead; such haeretickes were the Catharans D. August. de haeres.
. etc.

Some would have women, though married, to be all common, as the Nicolaitans D.
Iren.
, and Daui-georgians Hist. D. Georgii.
.

Some will nor marry according to Gods ordinance, but think that one man, at
one, and the same time, may have many wives. In which were the Hermogenians
Tertul. adu^. Hermog.
; and are the Ohinites Beza epist. 5.0.11.
.

33. Article. Of excommunicate persons, how they are to be avoided.
That person, 1 which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off
from the unity of the Church, and excommunicate, ought to be taken of the
whole multitude of the faithful as an Heathen, and Publican, 2 until he be
openly reconciled by penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereto.

The propositions.
1. The person that is rightly by the Church excommunicate, is of all the
faithful to be taken for an Heathen, and Publican.

2. An excommunicate person, truly repenting, is to be received, into the
Church again.

1. Proposition. The person, that is rightly by the Church excommunicate, is of
all the faithful, to be taken for an Heathen, and Publican.
The proof from Gods word.
THe most severe, and uttermost punishment, that the visible Church can inflict
upon the wicked, and ungodly of this world, is Excommunication: which is a part
of discipline to be exercised, and that upon urgent occasions, and it is
commended unto the Church, even by God himself, who in his word has
prescribed.

1. Who are to excommunicate, namely such as have authority in the Church
Matthew. ^8.17. 1. Cor. 5.4.5. 2. Cor. 3.13.14 2. The. 3.6.
.

2. Who are to be excommunicate, even two sorts of men, whereof the one pervert
the sound doctrine of the truth 1. Tim. 1.20.
, as did Hymeneus, and Alexander: the other be defiled with notorious
wickedness, as that inces^uous person as Corinth, was 1. Cor. 5.1.
.

3. The manner of proceeding in Excommunication, namely first by gentle
admonition, and that once, or twice given Tit. 3.10. Matthew. 18.15.
, with the spirit of meekness Gal. 6.1.
, even as to a brother 2. These. 3.15.
, if the fault be not notoriously known: and next, by open reprehension 1.
Tim. 5.20.
, afterward by the public sentence of the Church, to put him from the
company of the faithful 1. Cor. 5.13.
, to deliver him unto Satan Ibid. 5.
, and to denounce him an Heathen, and a Publican Matthew. 18.16
, if none admonitions will serve, and the crime, and person be very offensive.

A man so cut off from the Congregation, and Excommunicated, is of every godly
professor to be avoided Romans 16.17.
: and not to be eaten with all 1. Cor. 5.11.
, not to be companied with all Ibid. 8.
, nor to be received into house 2. John. 10.


This censure is had in great reverence, and estimation among the faithful
servants of God Confess. Helue^. 1. ar. 19. and 2. c. 18. Bohem. c. 9.14. Gal.
ar. 29.33. Belg. ar. 30. Saxon. ar. 11.17. August. de abus. ar. 7. VVittemb.
ar. 32. Suc. ar. 1^.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
1. Adversaries unto this doctrine be they,

Who utterly condemn all censures ecclesiastical, and so Excommunication,
saying how the wicked are not excommunicable, so did the Paulicians Pan. Diaco.
.

Haeretickes, holding other points of religion soundly, for their private, and
singular opinions, are not to be excommunicate: so the Pelagians Prosper de
ingratis.
.

Christians, cleaving unto the foundation, which is Christ, are not by
excommunication to be thrust out of the Church for any other errors, or
misdemeanors whatsoever. Of which opinion be sundry Divines, of good regard
Wolf. Mus. carm. p. 63. Iezler. lib. de diutur. bell. Euchar. p. 73. b.
.

2. Which allow the censure of Excommunication, so it be done.

Not (as with us it is) by Commissaries, Chancelars Sold. of Bar.
, or Bishopes Assert. polit. an. 1604. Bishopes are to be obeyed, neither when
there cite, nor when they inhibite, nor when they Excommunicate, says the
Marprel. these. 46.82.83.
: but in every Parrish Demon. of dis. c. 12.
, and that either

By the whole Congregation Hunt. of the Fox, E. 1.
; or by the Eldership, and the whole Church T.C. 1. rep. p. 146.
; or by every Minister Aus. to M. Car. let. p. 30.
, yea every member Bar. disco. p. 20.
of the Church; or finally if not by, yet not without the consent of his
Pastor, who is to be excommunicate Petit. of the 1000.
.

3. Which rightly use not, but abuse the censure of Excommunication, drawing
the same forth.

Against what they list, even against dead bodies, dumb Fishes, Flies, and
Vermie, when they have avoided them. For this the Papists are famous, or
infamous rather. The dead bodies of Wicliefe, Bucer, P. Fagius, were
excomunicated after they were dead, and buried, Acts and Mo.
.

The Bishop of Can^^^^on anno D. 1593. very Catholickely accursed the mute
Fishes Mer. Gallo. lib. 6. p. 592.
.

S. Bernard denounced the sentence of Excommunication against Flies Pet. de
Natal. in vita. Ber.
.

And against whom they please: so the Apostolikes excommunicated all that were
married, only for that they were married Epiphan.
: Diotrephes thrust the Brethren out of the Church 3. John. 10.
: The Brownists excommunicate whole cities, and churches Au. to. M. Car. let.
p. 30.
: the Papists excommunicate eue^ Kings, and Emperors. Queen Elizabeth, of
blessed memory, was excommunicate by three Popes, Pius quintus; Gregory the
13, and sixtus quintus. The Puritanes mislike, and find great fault that
excommunication is not exercised against Kings, and Princes T.C. 2. rep. 2.
part.
: Barrowe says that a Prince contemning the censures of the Church, is to be
disfranchised out of the Church, and delivered over unto Satan Bar. disco. p.
14.
.

Also for what things they list, even for May-games, and Robbin-hoode matters;
as sometime it was denounced in Scotland by the new Presbytery Sur. of disci.
c. 25. p. 284.
: and for all crimes, which by Gods law deserve death; and for all things that
to Gods people be scandalous; yea not only for all matters criminal, but also
for the very suspicion of avarice, Pride etc. Knox. order of Excom. in Scot. A.
2.
.

4. Lastly, which favor the right, and true excommunication, but exercise it
not, being bound thereunto.

2. Proposition. An excommunicate person, truly repenting, is to be received
into the Church again.
The proof from Gods word.
Sundry be the reasons, and ends, why Excommunication is used, as

That a wicked liver, to the reproach of the Gospel, be not suffered among the
godly, and Christian professors of true religion;

That many good men be not evil spoken of, for a few bad;

That good and virtuous persons may not be infected through the continual, 1.
Cor. 2.7. etc.
or much familiarity of the wicked. For, as S. Paul says, a little leaven
leaueneth the whole lump 1. Cor. 5.6.
.

And that he which has fallen, through shame of the world, may at the length
Learn to blaspheme no more 1. Tim. 1.20.
; and through repentance be saved 1. Cor. 5.5.
.

Among all other causes therefore of Excommunication, one is, and not the
least, that the person Excommunicate may not be condemned utterly, but return
unto the Lord by repentance, and so be received again into the visible Church,
as S. Paul willed the Incestuous man should be Cor. 2.7. etc.
.

The Adversaries unto this truth.
Contrariwise the Montanistes D. Hieron. ad Marc. l. 2.
, and the Nouatians D. Cyprian. l. 4. epist. 2.
are of opinion that so many as after Baptism do fall into sin, be utterly
damned of God, and therefore be not to find favor at the Churches hands.

34. Article. Of the traditions of the Church.
1 It is not necessary that traditions, and ceremonies be in all places one or
utterly like: for at all times they have bin diverse, and changed, according to
the diversity of countries, times, and men's manners, so that nothing be
ordained against Gods word 2 whosoever through his private judgment willingly,
and purposely does openly break the traditions, and ceremonies of the Church,
3 which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained, and approved by
common authority ought to be rebuked openly (that other may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church, and wounds
the consciences of the weak brethren. 4 Every particular, or national Church
has authority to ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies, or rites of the
church, ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done to
edifying.

The Propositions.
1. Traditions, or ceremonies are not necessary to be like, and the same in
all places.

2. No private man, of a self will, and purposely, may in public violate the
traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which by common authority be allowed,
and are not repugnant to the word of God.

3. Ceremonies, and traditions, ordained by authority of man, if they be
repugnant to Gods word, are not to be kept, and observed of any man.

4. Every particular, or national Church, may ordain, change, and abolish
ceremonies or rites, ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be
done to edifying.

1. Proposition. Trad^tions, or ceremonies, are not necessarily to be like, or
the same in all places.
The proof from Gods word.
IF a necessity were laid upon the Church of God to observe the same
traditions* and ceremonies at all times, and in all places, assuredly neither
had the ceremonies of the old law bin, as they are now Act. 6.14.10.13. and
15: 1. etc. Gal. 2.3. etc. Ephesians. 2.14. Col. 2.16.
, abolished; neither would the apostles ever have given such presidents of
altering them, upon special reasons, as they have done,

For the said Apostles changed the times, and places of their assembling
together, the people of God meeting, and the Apostles preaching, sometimes on
the week Act. 2.46.5.24.
, sometime on the Sabbath days Act. 13.14.17.2.^8.4.
, sometimes publicly, in the Temple Act. 2.46.3.1.5.26.
, in the synagogues Act. 9.20 14.1.17.10.18.4.
, and in the Schools Act. 19.9.
, sometimes privately, in house after house Act. 5.42.
, and in chambers Act. 1.13.20.8.28.30.31.
, sometimes in the day time Act. 2.46.3.1.
sometimes in the night Act. 20.7.
,

Neither kept they the same course in the ministration of the Sacraments.

For as occasion was offered, they both baptized in public assemblies Act.
2.46.
, and in private houses Act. 16.33.10.27.48.
, before many Act. 8.12.10 27.48.
, and when none of the faithful, but the minister only, and the party to be
baptized, were present Act. 8.36.
, and ministered likewise the Supper of the Lord, in the day time Act. 2.46.
, and at midnight Act. 20.11.
, in the open Churches 1. Cor. 11.17.
, and in private houses Act. 20.7.2.46.
.

So nothing therefore be done against the word of God, traditions, and
ceremonies, according to the diversity of countries, and men's manners, may be
changed and diverse.

Of this judgment with us be all reformed Churches Confess. Helv. 2. c. 17.27.
Bohem. c. 15. Gal. ar. 32. Belg. ar. 32. Aug. ar. 15. and ar. 7. ^o^. h.
abuses. Saxo. ar. 20. VVittemb. ar. 35. Sue. c. 14.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
They are greatly deceived therefore which think that

The Jewish ceremonies, prescribed by God himself for a time unto the Jews,
are to be observed of us Christians. Such were the old Heretics, the false
Apostles Act. 15.
, the Cerdonites Tertul. contra Mar. l. 4^
, the Cerinthians Philaster.
and the Nazarites D. Hieron. in epist. ad Aug.
, and are the Familists H.N. euang. c. 13.. 5.
.

The traditions, and namely the tradition, and ceremony of the seventh day for
the Sabbath; and the manner of sanctifying thereof, must necessarily be one,
and the same always, and in all places. Hence the demi-Iewes, our English
Sabbatarians, affirm, first touching the sanctification of the seventh day,
how

It is not lawful for us to use the seventh day to any other end, but to the
holy, and sanctified end, for which God in the beginning created it D.B. Sub.
do 1. B. p. 4.
.

So soon as the 7. day was, so soon was it sanctified, that we might know,
that as it came in with the first man, so must it not go out, but with the
last Ibid. p. 6.
.

The Sabbath (or seventh day of Rest), which has that commendation of
antiquity, ought to stand still in force Jbid. p. 9.
.

All the Judicial days, and Feasts being taken away, only the Sabbath
remains Ibid. p. 128.
.

And next concerning the form, and manner of keeping the day, they deliver
that.

We are bound unto the same Rest with the Jews on the Sabbath day Ibid. p 125.
.

As the first seventh day was sanctified: so must the last be Ibid. p. 6.
.

We be restrained upon the Sabbath from work, both hand and foot, as the
Jews were Jbid. p. 127.
.

Every ecclesiastical minister in his charge necessarily must preach, and make
a sermon every Sabbath day Jbid. p. 174.
, every man or woman, under pain of utter condemnation, must here a Sermon
every Sabbath day Ibid. p. 173.
.

Every pastor in his charge must execute the discipline, and (Presbyteriall)
government in his parish every Sabbath day Ibid. p. 165.
.

Last of all, deceived by be the Roman Catholics, which are of opinion how
the ceremonies of their Church, are universally, and under the pain of the
great curse, necessarily to be used in all places, and countries Council. Trid.
s^s. 7. can. 13.
.

2. Proposition. No private man, of a self will, and purposely, may in public
violate the traditions, and ceremonies of the Church which by common authority
be allowed, and are not repugnant to the word of God.
The proof from Gods word.
Great is the privilege, great also the liberty and freedom of Gods Church,
and people.

For they are delivered,

From the curse of the Law Gal. 3.23.
.

From the Law of sin, and of death Romans 8.2.
.

From all Jewish rites, and ceremonies Act. 15.24.
.

And from all humane ordinances, and traditions whatsoever, when they are
imposed upon the consciences of men, to be observed under pain of eternal
condemnation Col. 2.8.
. 1. Cor. 4.46.26.


Notwithstanding the Church, and every member thereof in his place, is bound to
the observation of al Traditions, and Ceremonies which are allowed by lawful
authority, and are not repugnant to the word of God. For he that violateth
them, contemns not man, but God who has given power to his Church to
establish whatsoever things shall make unto comenesse, Order, and Edification
Conf. Helvet. 1. ar. 25. and 2. c. 24. Bohem. c. 15.18. Aug. ar. 4.15. Sax. ar.
20. Sue. c. 14.
.

This, of our godly brethren in their published writings, is approved.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Notwithstanding, say the Anabaptists Bulling. contra Anabap. lib. 2. c. 2.
, The people of God are free from all laws, and owe obedience to no man, are
not to be bound with the bands of any jurisdiction of this world, say the
Brownistes ^.H. on Psalm. 122.
; are freed from the observation of all rights, and eccles. ceremonies, say
certain ministers of the praecise faction both in Scotland, and England D.
Bar. c^f^r. a^ Hamp. p. 70.71.
.

Again, there be of the Clergy, who rather then they will use, or observe any
rights, ceremonies, or orders, though lawfully ratified, which please them not,
will disquiet the whole Church, forsake their charges, leave their vocations,
raise stirs, and cause divisions in the Church; as did many, when it was, in
Germany about the Rheme, Frankeland, and Sneauland, whereby most lamentable
effects did ensue Phil. Mel. epist. ad pastores and in comitatu Mansfeldi.
: and do the refractorie ministers in the Church of England at this day Burges
in his letter unto K. James, anno 1604, says the number of those ministers so
refusing conformity, were 6 or 700. viz. (as it is in the Lincolneshire
ministers Apology) in Oxfordshire 9; St^ffordshire 14; Dorset shire 17;
Hartfordshire 17; Northampton shire, ^0; Suny 21; Norfolk 28; Wilshire 31;
Buckinghamshire 33, Sussex 47; Lecestershire 57; Essex 57; Cheshire 12;
Bedfordshire 16, Somersetshire 17, Darbieshire 20, Lancashire 21, Kent, 23:
London. 30, Lincolnshire, 33: Warwickshire, 44: Devonshire, and Comwell, 51:
Northamptonshire, 57: Suffolk. 71.
, the more is the pity.

The principal author of all these tragical suries about ceremonial matters
was Flacius Illyricus, whose preachings were, that rather the^ ministers should
yield unto the servitude of ceremonies, they should aba^do^ their calling, and
give over the ministry to the end that Princes and magistrates eue^ for fear
of vprores, and popular tumults, might be forced at the length to set their
ministers free from the observation of all ceremonies, more then they were
willing to use themselves Fat^or me suasisse and Francis, and aliis, ne
discrerent Ecclesias propter scr^itatem, quae sine impietate sustineri posset.
Nam quod Jllyricus vociseratur, poti^s ^a itatem fuisse faciendam in templis,
et meta seditionum terrendos Principes, ego ne nunc quidem (...) sententiae
author esse velim, inqu^^ Phil. Melancion epist. ad pium Lectorem. inter epist.
Theolog s^as Page 455.
.

3. Proposition. Ceremonies, and traditions, ordained by the authority of man,
if they be repugnant to Gods word, are not to be kept, and observed of any man.
The proof from Gods word.
Of ceremonies, and traditions repugnant to the word of God, there be two
sorts; whereof some are of things merely impious, and wicked; such was the
Israelites calfe Exodus 30.4. etc.
, and Nebuchadnezars idol Dan. 3.1. etc.
; and be the Papisticall Images, Relics, Agnus-deis, and Crosses, to which
they do give divine adoration See before Art. 22. prop. 3.4.5.
. These, and such like be all flatly forbidden Thou shall make thee no graven
Image, neither any similitude of things etc. Thou shall not bow down to them,
neither serve them etc. Exodus 20.4.5.
. Others are of things, by God in his word neither commanded, nor forbidden;
as of eating, or not eating Flesh; of wearing, or not wearing some Apparel;
of keeping, or not keeping some days holy by abstinence from bodily labor,
etc: the which are not to be observed of any Christian, when for sound Doctrine
it is delivered, that such works either do merit remission of sins; or be
the acceptable service of God; or do more please then the observation of the
laws praescribed by God himself; or be necessarily to be done, insomuch as
they are damned, who do them not.

We must therefore have always in mind, that we are bought with a price, and
therefore may not be the servants of men 1. Cor. 7.23.
; and that none humane constitution in the Church, does bind any man to break
the least commandment of God Acts 5.29.
.

The consideration hereof has caused other Churches also, with a sweet
consent to condemn such wicked ceremonies, and traditions of men Confess.
Heluet. 1 ^ar. 4. and 2. c. 124.27. Basil. ar.. 3. ar. ^0. Bohem. c. 15. Gal.
ar. 24.33. Belg. ar. 7.29.32. August. ar. 15. VVil^emb. ar. 28.29.32.33
Sue^ica. c. ^.14.15.
,

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Such ungodly traditions, and ceremonies, are all the ceremonies and traditions
in a manner of the Antichristian synagogue of Rome.

Such also be the Sabbatarian traditions, and ceremonies, lately broached:
because they be imposed upon the Church, Necessarily, and perpetually to be
observed of all, and every Christian, under pain of damnation both of soul
and body. For say they (speaking yet of their private, and Classical
Iniunction about the Sabbath day). The Lord has commanded so praecise a Rest
unto all sorts of men, that it may not by any fraud, deceit, or circumvention
whatsoever be broken, but that he will most severely require it at our hands,
under the pain of his everlasting displeasure D.B. Sab. doct. 1. book. p. 98.
.

This (viz. the manner of keeping the Sabbath praescribed by themselves) the
Lord requires of all, and every one continually, from the beginning to the end
of our lives, without any interruption, Under the pain of everlasting
condemnation Ibid. page. 146.
.

Another sort of people there is among us, which will observe, and use all
Ceremonies whatsoever, as the temporizing Familistes, who at Rome, and such
like places of Superstition, will go unto idolatrous services, and do
adoration unto Idols Pattern of the praes. Temp. ^
; and no where will they strive; or vary with any one about Religion, but
keep all external orders Ibid.
, albeit in their hearts they scorn all professions, and Services but their
own; tearming all Temples, and Churches, in derision Common houses H.N. spir.
land. cap. 5.. 1.
; and all Gods services, or religions besides their own* Foolishnes Ibid.
.

To the Christian Reader.
Christian, and beloved Reader, let me request thee to observe well the first
section of the proof of this present proposition; and therein how I speak of
ceremonies, and traditions apparently impious, among which I do reckon
papisticall Crosses, whereunto the Romanistes do attribute divine adoration,
as elsewhere in this book, and subscription of mine, I have declared, and
could more copiouslie; but the relics of a Libell of theirs, left in the
parrish church of Euborne in Barkshire an. 1604, sufficiently shall express the
thoughts of Papists touching their Cross, and Crossing: whose words be these:
Now Ma. Parson, for your welcome home,
Read these few lines, you know not from whom.
You hold Cross for an outward token, and sign,
And remembrance only, in religion thine;
And of the profession the people do make.
For more then this comes to, thou do is not take.
Yet holy Church tells us, of holy Cross much more Vide Coster. Jesuit.
enchirid. Controuers. c. 11. de S. Cruce. page 358. etc.
.
Of power, and virtue to heal sick, and sore;
Of holiness to bless us, and keep us from evil,
From foul feend to fend us, and save us from Devil;
And of many miracles, which holy Cross has wrought,
All which by tradition, to light Church has brought.
Wherefore holy worship, holy Church does it give;
And surely so will we, so long as we live.
Though thou say Idolatry, and vilde superstition,
Yet we know it is holy Churches tradition.
Holy Cross then disgrace not, but bring it in renown.
For up shall the Cross go, and you shall go down.


Of this Cross I spoke, and mean^, and of none other, when I number it among
things merely impious, and unlawful. And therefore have I not a little
woundred at those my Brethren, which draw these words of mine in this section
unto the Cross used in our church at Baptism Abrid. of the Lincoln* minist
Apolog. unto K. James, an. 1605. pa. 30.
, which I never thought, nor take to be either papisticall, or impious, because
none adoration, not so much as civil, much less divine, is given thereunto,
either by our church in general, or of any minister, or member thereof in
particular. If they have no other Patrons for their not using, or refusing the
ceremony of the Cross then my self, they are in an ill case. For both in my
judgment, and practice I do allow thereof. This their perverting of my
words, contrary to their sense, and my meaning, tells me that other men's
words, and names are but too much abused by them in that book, to the backing
of schism, and faction in the Church, and State, which from our souls we do
abhor.

4. Proposition. Every particular, or national Church, may ordain, change,
and abolish ceremonies, or rites, ordained only by man's authority, so that
all things be done to edifying.
It has pleased our most merciful Lord, and Savior Christ, for the
maintenance of his Church militant, that two sorts of rites, or ceremonies
should be used, whereof

Some, God his most excellent majesty has himself ordained, as the ceremony
of Baptism, and the Lords Supper: which are till the end of the world, without
all addition, diminution, and alteration, with all zeal, and religion to be
observed.

Others be ordained by the authority of each prouintiall, or national Church,
and that partly for comeliness, that is to say, that by those helps, the
people of God the better may be inflamed with a godly zeal; and that sobernes,
and gravity may appear in the handling of ecclesiastical matters: and partly
for order sake, even that governors may have rules and directions how to
govern by; Auditors, and inferiors may know how to prepare, and behave
themselves in sacred assemblies; and a joyful peace may be continued, by the
well ordering of Church affairs.

We have already proved In this art. prop. 1.
, that these latter sort of ceremonies may be made, and changed, augmented or
diminished, as fit opportunity, and occasions shall be ministered, and that by
particular or national Churches: which thing is also affirmed by our
neighbors Confess. Helue. 2. c. 27. Bohem. c. 15. Gal. ar. 32. Belg. ar. 32.
Aug. de abu. ar. 7. VVittem. ar. 35. Sue. c. 14.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
This manifests to the world the intolerable both arrogancy of the Romish
church, which dare take upon her to alter, and apply to wrong uses, the very
Sacraments instituted even by Christ himself See a^. 25. pr. 10.
, and to prescribe ceremonies, and rites not to some particular, but to all
Churches in all times, and places Trid. Council. ses. 7. c. 13.
.

It shows also the boldness of our home-adversaries, the Puritan
dominicanes, which say that the Church, nor no man can take away the liberty
(of working six days in the week) from men, and drive them to a necessary
rest of the body (upon any day saving the seventh T.C. 1. rep. p. 120.
.)

Again say these men, the Church has none authority, ordinarily, and
perpetually to sanctify any day, but the seventh day, which the Lord has
sanctified D.B. doct. of Sab. 1. B.p. 31.
, nor to set up any day like to the Sabbath day Jbid. p. 47.
.

The latter sort, what in them is, quench the peoples devotion, and hinder them
from frequenting of Churches upon all holydaies falling on the week days, and
ordained by the lawful authority of the Church.

35. Article. Of Homilies.
The second book of Homilies, the several titles whereof, we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understood of the
people.

Of the names of the Homilies.
1. Of the right use of the Church. 2. against peril of Idolatry. 3. Of the
repairing, and keeping clean of Churches. 4. Of good works, first of Fasting.
5. Against Gluttony, and drunkenes. 6. Against excess of apparel. 7. Of
prayer. 8. Of the place, and time of prayer. 9. That common prayers, and
Sacraments ought to be ministered in a known tongue. 10. Of the reverend
estimation of Gods word. 11. Of Alms doing. 12. Of the Nativity of Christ.
13. Of the Passion of Christ. 14. Of the Resurrection of Christ. 15. Of the
worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ. 16. Of the
gifts of the holy Ghost. 17. For the Rogation days. 18. Of the state of
Matrimony. 19. Of Repentance. 20. Against Idleness. 21. Against Rebellion.
Touching this Article the greatest matter is, not whether these Homilies
meant, and mentioned do contain doctrine both godly, wholesome, and
necessary, but whether Homilies, or any Apocrypha wrightings at all may be
read in the open Church, and before the congregation, which I think they may,
and prove thus.

Great is the excellency, great also the vtility of Gods word preached.
Therefore says S. Paul, None can believe without a preacher Romans 10.
, and, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel 1. Tim. 4.16.
. Howbeit the manner of preaching is not always one, and the same. For the
Apostles were to teach as well by the pen, as by the lively voice D. Whitaker.
contra. Bell. con. 1. q. 6. p. 335.
.

Paul did preach the Gospel by writing D. Fulke athe Rhem. an. Romans 1.15.
, we owe in a manner more to the bonds of Paul (for his books,) than to his
liberty for preaching Pauli vinculis plura pen^ quam libertati debemu^. Beza
epist. ded. Olevian. com. in. epist. ad Galat.
.

Calvin's writings will edify all men continually in the time to come The
Ministers of Geneuas epist. before Calvin on Deuteron.
, Protestants books are witnesses of sound doctrine, and sincere Christianity
Soiter de Vinda de bello Pa. l. 2.
.

For my part, I cannot but magnify the goodness of God for all good means to
bring us unto Faith, and so unto salvation, but especially for the written
labors of holy, and learned men; whose doings in all ages not only have bin
approved, but also used, and read many of them in the most sacred assemblies.
So

In the primitive church was publicly read the Epistle of the Laodicians in
the Church of the Colossians D. Chris. and Mascul. in ad Col. 4
, the Epistle of Clemens unto the Corinthians Eus. l. 4. c. 23.
,

Hermes his pastor Idem l. 3. c. 3.
, and the Homilies of the Fathers T.C. 2. rep. p. 110.
.

In the reformed Churches in Flanders D. Su^clif. ^n. to the Petit. c. 1. p. 23.
, and France Editae suntigitur iam pridem Gallicae istae conciones (Caluini in
Iobum) etc. Neque. id vero temer^ factum fuisse res ipsa mox ostendit, maximo
cum remotissimarum etiam Gallicarum ecclesiarum f^uctu, quibus vsque adeo
priuatim and pub^ic^ placuerunt, and plurimis in locis, quibus quotidiani
Pastores decrant, pastorum vice fuerint, etc. Beza. praef. Concionu^ 1. Ca^. in
Iobum.
, read are M. Calvin's sermons upon Job; and in the Italian, French, Dutch, and
Scottish churches, the said Calvin his Catechism is both read, and expounded
publicly, and that before the whole Congregation Sueton. contra Hamilton. p.
106.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Deceived then, and out of the way of truth, are they which of Preaching by the
mouth conceive either too basely, or too highly: too basely, as do the
anabaptists, and Family of Love; they affirming there ought to be no preaching
at all Wilkinson against the Fa. of Love. p. 75.
, and that Preachers are not sent of God, neither do preach Gods word but the
dead letter of the Scripture ^ul^ing. (...) Anabap.
, these, with the said Anabaptists, tearming them letter Doctors H.N. lament.
C^mplaint.
, preaching the letter, and imagination of their own knowledge, but not the
word of the living God ^
.

Too highly, as do the Puritanes of all sorts. For say they Except God work
miraculously, and extraordinarily (which is not to be looked for of us) the
bare Reading (yea not) of the Scriptures, without Preaching, cannot deliver so
much as one poor soul from destruction T.C. 1. rep. p. 173.
, Reading (of whatsoever in the Church) without preaching, is not feeding, but
as ill as playing upon a stage, and worse too 1. Admon. to the Parliam.
.

Without Preaching of the word ( viz. by the lively voice of a minister, and,
without the book) the Sabbath cannot be hallowed either of a minister, or
people in the least measure, which the Lord requires of us D.B. Sab. doc. 2.
B. p. 277.
.

Next, err do they which set their wits, and learning either against all
books in general, except the sacred Bible, or against the public reading of
any learned men's writings, be they never so divine, and godly in the open, and
sacred assemblies.

Of the former sort are the Anabaptists; who as Sleidan records did burn the
books, writings, and monuments of learned men, reserving and preserving only,
the holy Scriptures from the fire Sl^^dan. com. l. 10.
.

Of the latter be the Brownists, Disciplinatians, and Sabbatarians,

The Brownists do say, that No Apocrypha must be brought into the Christian
assemblies Gifford against the B 1. p. 15.
, so the disciplinarians, Ministers ought not to read openly in the
congregation any writings, but only the Canonical scriptures Fruct. ser. on
Romans 12. p. 60.
, they complain that humane writings are brought into the church Def. of the
god. Min. p. 116.
, they cry out, Remove Homilies 1. Admon. to the Parliam.
, and they supplicate unto K. James, that the Canonical scriptures only, may
be read in the Church The Petit. of the thousand.
.

And so, but much more bitterly, and erroneously the Sabbatarians: we damn our
selves (say they) if we go not from those ministers and Churches, where the
Scriptures, and Homilies only be read; and seek not unto the prophets when
(and so often) as we have them not at home D.B. Sab. do^. 2. book ^.173.


36. Article. Of consecration of Bishops, and ministers.
The book of Consecration 1 of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of
priests, and Deacons, set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed
at the same time by authority of Parliament, does contain all things
necessary to such consecration, and ordering: neither has it any thing, that
of it self is superstitious, or ungodly. And therefore 2 whosoever are
consecrated, or ordered according to the rites of that book, since the second
year of the aforesaid K. Edward unto this time, or hereafter shall be
consecrated, or ordered, according to the same rites, we decree all such to be
rightly, and orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

The Propositions.
1. It is agreeable to the word of God, and practice of the primitive church,
that there should be Archbishops, Bishops, and such like differences, and
inequalities of ecclesiastical ministers.

2. Whosoever be or shall be consecrated, or ordered, according to the rites of
the book of Consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, and ordering of Priests, and
Deacons, they be rightly, orderly and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

1. Proposition. It is agreeable to the word of God, and practice of the (...)
church, that there should be Archbishops, Bishops, and such like differences,
and inequalities of ecclesiastical ministers.
The proof from Gods word.
ALbeit the terms, and titles of Archbishops we find not: yet the
superiority which they enjoy, and authority which Bishops and Archbishops do
exercise, in ordering, and consecrating of Bishops, and ecclesiastical
ministers, is grounded upon the word of God. For we find, that.

In the Apostles days, how themselves both were in dignity above the
evangelists, and the 70. disciples, and for authority both in and over the
Church, as twelve Patriarchs, says Beza, Beza in Acta Apost. 1.2.
and also established an ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Hence came it, that Bishop
was of Jerusalem, James D. Christ. in Act. hom. 33.
.

Of Antioch, Peter D. Hie. in Gal.
, of the Asian Churches, John Eus.
, of Alexandria, Mark D. Hier. ad Euagr.
, of Ephesus D. Hier. in 2. Tim. 1.
, yea and all Asia D. Christ^ in ^. Tim. 5.
, Timothy; Of all Creete, Titus Theod. arg. in epist. ad Tit.
, of Philippos, Epaphroditus Theo. in. epist. ad Phil.
, of Corinth and Achaia, Apollos: of Athens, Dionisius; of France, Crescens
Eus^. l. 2.
, of Brittane, Aristobulus Dorotheus in Apost. synop.
.

In the purer times succeeding the Apostles, so approved was the
administration of the Church affairs by these kind of men, as

They ordained Patriarchs, and Corepiscopie Heming. syn tag. tit. de guber. Ec.
.

They ratified the degrees of ecclesiastical supereminencie, at the first, and
most famous Council at Nice Beza epist. 1.
.

They gloried much, and greatly, that they had received the apostles doctrine
by a succession of Bishops D. Jren. l. 3. c. 3.
, that they were the successors in the Apostles doctrine, of the godly Bishops
Sadcel de leg. voc. p. 20.
, and that Bishops succeeded in the room of Apostles D. Aug. in Psalm. 44.
.

Their godly monuments, and worthy labors, and books yet extant, do show
that Bishop was of Lions, Irenaeus; of of Antioch, Ignatius; of Carthage,
Cyprian: of Jerusalem, Cyrill, of Alexandria, Athanasius; Basil, of Cesarea,
of all Thracia, Asia, and Pontus; Chrysostom, Hilarie of Potiers; Augustine of
Hippo, Ambrose of Millane: all of these most notable instruments for the
advancement of Gods honor, and glory in their days.

Finally, from the Apostles days hitherto there never wanted a succession of
Bishops, neither in the East, nor Western Churches, albeit there have bin from
time to time both Marprelates, and Mockprelates to supplant their states, and
Ilprelates, abusing their functions, and places, to the discredit of their
calling and profession. So provident has the Almighty bin for the
augmentation of his glory, and people by this kind, and calling of men.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This manifests the erroneous and evil minds.

1. Of the Anabaptists, who condemn all superiority among men, saying that
every man should be equal for calling; and that there should be no difference
of persons among Christians Steidan. com. lib. 5.
.

2. Of the old haeretickes, viz. the Contobaptites, which allowed of no
Bishopes Niceph. lib. 18. c. 49.
;

The Acephalians, who would not be at the command, or yield obedience unto
Bishops Mag. eccles. hist. Cen. 7. c. 5. et Niceph.
;

The Aerians, that equalled Bishops, and Priests, making them all one August.
de haeres. cap. 53.
;

The Apostolikes, which condemned Prelacie D. Bernard. in Cant. ser. 66.
.

3. Of the late Scismatikes, namely

The Jesuits, who cannot brook Episcopal praeheminence Declar. motuum etc.
p. 30.
; and in their high court of Reformation have made a Law, for the utter
abrogation of all Episcopal iuresdiction Quodlibets. p. 142.
.

The disciplinarians, or Puritans among our selves. For

They abhor, and altogether do loath the callings of Archbishops, Bishops,
etc, as the author of the Fruitful Sermon does Fruit. Ser. on Romans 12. p. 37.
; and say, that by the praelaticall Discipline, the liberty of the Church is
taken away Asser. polit. p. 29.
; and that in steed of Archbishops, and Bishops, an equality must be made of
ministers 1. Admon. ^o the Par.
.

They term the differences of Ministers, A proud ambitious superiority of
one minister above another Disco. of D. Ban. ser. p. 37.
; and Archbishops, and Bishops, they call the supposed Governors of the Church
of England Demon. of Dis. epist. ded.
.

Some of them will not have Bishops to be obeyed either when they cite, or
when they inhibite, or when they excommunicate Mar. these. 46.82.83.
.

Some of them have not only Archbishopes, and Bishops, but also Parsons, and
Vicars in detestation. For

Miles Monopodios numbreth Parsons, and Vicars among the hundred points of
Popery, yet remaining in our Church Sold. of Bar. in the end.
.

Others say that Birds of the same feather, viz. with Archb. and Bishops, are
Parsons and Vicars 1. Admon. to the Parliam.
,

Barrow publishes that Parsonages, and Vicarages be in name, office, and
function, as Popish, and Antichristian, as any of the other Bar. disco. p. 54.
.

It is therefore an egregious untruth that Puritans (or which is equivalent:
The good men, the Faithful, and Innocent ministers, for so do they style
themselves) affect not any popularitie, or paritie in the Church of God, as
some of them would make his majesty believe Burges let. to K. James before his
Apolog.
.

2. Proposition. Whosoever be, or shall be confirmed, or ordered, according to
the rites of the book of Consceration of Archb. and Bishops, and ordering of
Priests and Deacons, they be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated, and
ordered.
Archbishops, Bishops, and ministers, which according to the book of
Consecration, be, or shalll be consecrated, or ordered, they are consecrated,
and ordained rightly, orderly, and lawfully, because before their Consecration,
and ordination they be rightly tried, or examined; by imposition of hands,
needful and seasonable prayers, they be consecrated, and ordained; and all
this is performed by those persons, that is by Bishops to whom the Ordination
and Consecration of Bishops, and ministers, was always principally committed
D. Fulke against the Rhem. fol. 3^1.
, and also after the same form, and fashion (corruptions being before taken
away, and removed) as Bishops, and Priests before the reign of K. Edward the
sixth, formerly were.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Well therefore may they disgorge their stomaches, but trouble our consciences
they shall never, which condemn, or deprave our callings; as do

1. The Family of Love which dislike, and labor to make contemptible the
outward admission of ministers H.N. euang. c. 13.. 2.
.

2. The Papists; who say their pleasure of the Bishops, and ministers of the
Church of England, and of other reformed Churches.

None is to be admitted for a Bishop, (say they) which is not ordained by
imposition of three or four (Romish) Catholic Bishops at the least, of which
none are to be found among the Protestants Houletsy. reas.
.

Whosoever takes upon him to preach, to minister Sacraments etc, and is not
ordered by a true Catholic (that is a Popish) Bishop, to be a (urate of
souls, Parson, Bishop etc, he is a thief, and a murderer Test. Rhem. an.
John. 10.1.
.

Our Bishops, and ministers they are not come in by the door (says Stapleton)
they have stolen in like Thieves Staple. fort. ^. part. cap. 8. p. 141.
; they be unordered Apostataes Art. to the execut. c. 3. p. 41.
, pretended Ibid. c. 7. p. 148.
, and sacrilegious ministers Ibid. c. 9. p. 211.
, Intruders Jbid. c. 8. p. 171.
; Mere lay men, and not Priests, because first they have received none under
Orders, and next they are not ordained by such a Bishop, and Priest, as the
Catholic (Roman) church has put in authority Howl. 7. reas.
.

3. The Puritanes. For they write, that

The Bishops of our Church have none ordinary calling of God, and function in
the scriptures, for to exercise T.C. des. p. 21.. 1.
; they are not sent of God, they be not the ministers of Jesus Christ, by whom
he will advance his Gospel Dial. of the strife. praef.
.

Inferior ministers they are not (say they) according to Gods word, either
proved, elected, called, or ordained 1. Admo. to the Parliam.
. Hence, the Church of England wants (say they) her Pastors and teachers
Fruct. ser. on Romans 12. p. 36.
, and hence they urge diverse before ordained to seek at their Classis, a new
approbation, which they term the Lords ordinance Eng. Scottiz. 3. B. c. 14.
p. 113. ^. Jbid.
, and to take new callings from classical ministers, renouncing their calling
from Bishops.

37. Article. Of the civil Magistrate.
1 The Kings majesty has the chief power in this realm of England, and
other his dominions, 2 unto whom the chief government of all estates of this
realm whether they be ecclesiastical, or civil, in all causes does
appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction,
where we attribute to the Kings majesty the chife government, by which titles
we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended, 3 we give
not to our Prince the ministering either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments: the
which thing the Injunctions also sometime set forth by Elizabeth our (late)
queen, do most plainly testify, but that only prerogative, which we see
to have bin given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God
himself that is, that they should rule all estates, and degrees committed to
their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, 4 and
restrain with the civil sword the stubburne, and evil doers.

5 The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this realm of England,

6 The laws of the realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous,
and grievous offenses.

7 It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to
wear weapons, and serve in the wars.

The Propositions.
1. The kings majesty has the chief power in this realm of England, and
other his dominions.

2. The kings majesty has the chief government of all estates,
ecclesiastical and civil, in all causes within his dominions.

3. His Highness may not execute the ecclesiastical duties of preaching, and
ministering the Sacraments, and yet is to prescribe laws, and directions unto
all estates, both ecclesiastical and Temporal.

4. The King by his authority is to restrain with the material sword, and to
punish malefactors.

5. The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this realm of England (nor
other of this kings dominions).

6. By the laws of this realm Christian men, for heinous and greiuous
offenses, may be put to death.

7. It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the magistrate, to
wear weapons, and serve in wars.

2. Proposition. The Kings majesty has the chief power in this realm of
England, and other his dominions.
The proof from Gods word.
Diverse, and sundry be the forms of Commonweals, and magistracy. For some
where many, and they of the inferior people bear the sway, as in a democratie;
some where a few, and that of choice, and the best men do govern, as in an
Aristocratie, and some where one man, or woman, has the pre-eminence, as in a
Monarchy; such is the government of this Kingdom.

Notwithstanding whatsoever the government is, either democraticall,
Aristocraticall, or Monarchical, Gods word does teach us, that

There is no power but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God; and
that whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God Romans 13.12.
.

We must be subject to the principalities, and powers, and obedient, and ready
to every good work Tit. 3.1.
.

We must submit our selves unto all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords
sake 1. Pet. 2.13.
.

We must pray for Kings, and for all that be in authority 1. Tim. 2.1.2.
.

Finally, we must give to all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute;
custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; and honor, to whom honor is due
Romans 13.7.
.

But of the Monarchiall government special mention is made in the wrightings
of the Prophets, and Apostles.

Kings shall be their nourcing fathers, and Queens shall be thy nources,
says Esaias Esa. 43.23.
.

The Apostle Peter calls the King, the superior (or him that has the chief
power, as our King James has in his dominions 1. Pet 2.13.
.

All Churches Protestant, and reformed subscribe unto this doctrine Confess.
Heluet. 1. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30. Basil. ar. 7. Bohem. c. 16. and in the Concl.
Belg. ar. 36. August. ar. 16.17. Saxon. ar. 23. Sue. in peror.
as both Apostolical and orthodoxall.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
These Churches with us, and we with them utterly condemn the opinions,

Of the dreamers, whereof the Apostle speaks, which despice government, and
speak evil of them which are in authority Epist. of Ju. 8.
;

Of the Manichies D. August. contra. Faust. l. 22. c. 74.
, Fratricellians VV. ^ho. discrip. of Italy. p. 5.9.
, Flagelliferies ^rateol. haeres de Flagell.
, Anabaptists Alth^. concii. lo. page lo. 191.
, and Family of Love H.N. calls a King, The skome of ignorance. Spir. land.
c. 6.. 5.
, all which rail upon, and condemn magistracy.

Of them who allow not of the government by women, but utterly detest the
same: such were they in Italy, which said,

In^^ritus mundi est a muliere regi VV. Tho. descrip. of Italy p. 129. a.
again, speaking unto women; Abu^de magna ciuitas vobis sit domus, publicum
neque noscatis, neque vos noscat Lud. Viues de institut. faem. Chr. lib. 2.
* such in France, who think how the law of God, and nature is violated, where
a woman is suffered to reign, and govern Nez solum naturae iura conuelluntur,
sed etiam omnium gentium, quae nunquam faeminas regnare permis^ru^t. etc.
Bodin. meth. hist. c. 6. p. 257.
; such in Scotland, or Scottish men rather from Geneua, which wrote that

A woman's government is a monstriferous Empire, most detestable, and damnable
Against The regim. of women. 1. Blast. praef.
.

Again: I am assured that God has revealed to some in this age, that it is
more then a monster in nature, that a woman shall reign, and have Empire above
man, etc Ibid.
.

And little differing from these men are they in England, which termed the
harborough for faithful subjects, a carnal, and unlearned book, smelling
altogether of earth, without rhyme, and without reason, for defending the
regiment of women over men (when it falls unto them by inhaeritance to
govern) to be lawful, and good Martin Marprell. epist. epist. of D. Bridges.
. He which so censureth the said Harborough, was the Marprelate; and this his
Censure declares that he was the Mar-prince, as well as the Marprelate.

2. Proposition. The Kings majesty has the chief government of all estates,
ecclesiastical, and civil, in all causes, within his dominions.
The proof from Gods word.
We ascribe that unto our King by this assertion, which is given to every
King, or Queen in their own dominions by the word of God. For

They are for titles, gracious Lords Luke 22.25.
, Princes Romans 13.3.
, the ministers of God Ib. 4.
, the Nourses of the Church Isa. 49.23.
, Gods Psalm. 82.1.
; For authority the chief 1. Pet. 2.13.
. Which moves S. Paul to exhort that supplications be made for all men, but
first for Kings, as the chief 1. Tim. 2.1.
.

Again, every soul is commanded to be subject to the higher power, etc
Romans 13.1.
.

Finally, the examples are manifold and pregnant showing the principallity of
kings over all persons, and causes. For

Aaron the high priest, called Moses, the chief Prince, his Lord Exodus 32.22.
, so did Abimelech, term Saul his Lord 1. Sam. 22.12.
.

K. Iehosaphat, as chief in Judah, appointed Judges, Levites,, and priests 2.
Chr. 19.5. etc. 8.


K. Ezekias there also as chief, sent unto all Israel, and Judah, that they
should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover 2.
Chr. 30.1.
, also, he appointed the course of Priests, and Levites by their turns 2. Chr.
31.2.
, and commanded all the priests to offer sacrifice, etc. and they obeyed him
Ibid. c. 29.21.22.
, and enjoined all the congregation to bring offerings, and they brought them
31 Confe. Helvet. 1. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30. Basil. ar. 7. Bohem. c. 16. Belg.
ar. 36. Aug. ar. 16.17. Sax. ar. 23. Sue. pecoret.
.

Which we do unto ours, the very same do the churches of God ascribe unto
Christian magistrates in their principalities.

Errors and Adversaries to this truth.
Which being true, then false is it which the Papists deliver, viz, that

The kings excellency of power is in respect of the Nobility, and
Lay-magistrates under him, and not of Popes, Bishops, or Priests, as they have
cure of souls Test. Rhem. annot. 1. Pet. 2.13.
, kings, and Princes, be they never so great, must be subject unto some Bishop,
Priest, or Prelate Ibid. an. Heb. Heb. 13.17.
.

The whole Clergy ought to be free from paying Tribute Ibid. an., M^t. 17.26.
.

Sacerdotes etiam Principibus iure diuino subditi deleatur, say the
expurgators, Priests are not by Gods law subject unto Princes Iudex expurg. p.
26.
.

No man is to be subject unto his temporal prince, and superior in matters of
religion, or regiment of his soul, but in such things only as concern the
public peace and policy Test. Rhem. an. Romans 13.1.
.

False also is it which the Puritanes do hold, namely, that

Princes must be servants unto the Church; be subject unto the Church; submit
their scepters unto the Curch; and throw down their Crowns before the Church
T.C. 1. rep. p. 144.
.

Magistrates as well as other men, must submit themselves, and be obedient to the
just and lawful authorite of the church Ec. dis. p. 185.
, that is of the Presbytery That which our Savior calls the Church, S. Paul
calls Presbyterian, and so does Luke Lear. disc. p. 89.
.

Quis tandem reges, and principes, who can exempt even kings and princes, from
this, Non humana, sed diuina Dominatione, Not humane but divine Domination
(meaning of the Presbytery)? says Beza Beza d^ presb. p. 124.
, which Presbytery they would have to be in every parish There ought to be in
every Church a Consistory or seignory of Elders, or governors. Lear. disc. p.
84. Every Congregation ought to have Elders, and an Eldership. Demon of dis. c.
12. p. 55. c. 14. p. 69.

In stead of Chancellors, Archdeacons, Offi^ials, Commissaries, Proctors,
^ummoners, Churchwardens, and such like, you (Parliament men) have to plant in
every Congregation a lawful and godly Seignory. 1. Admon. to the Parliam.

I would that every little parish should have seven such (Elders) at the least,
and every mean Church 13, and every great church 23. Hunt of the Fox etc. E.
2. ^.


.

Quotquot ecclesiae Christi, as many as be members of Christ, and of the
Church, they must subject themselves to the consistorian discipline Non hic
excipitur Episcopus, aut Imperator. Neither Bishop, or Emperor is excepted
here. Nulla hic acceptio, aut exceptio est personarum, Here is no acception, or
exception of persons S^cc^n. d^ dis^^^. e^cles. r. 456.
.

3. Proposition. His Highness may not execute the ecclesiastical duties of
Preaching, and ministering the Sactaments, and yet is to prescribe Laws, and
directions unto all estates, both ecclesiastical, and Temporal.
The proof from Gods word.
K. Ezekiah said unto the Priests, and Levites of his time.

My sons, be not deceived. For the Lord has chosen you to stand before him,
and to serve him, and to be his ministers, and to burn incense 2. Chr 29.11.
.

So do we say, the Lord has appointed a company, and calling of men to teach
the people, to expound the Scriptures, to celebrate the Sacraments, to handle
the keys of the celestial kingdom: insomuch as he whosoever that shall
presume to do these things, not called thereunto, and that lawfully See before.
ar.
, though he be a King, or Prince, he may fear that punishment which fell upon
Vzzah 2. Chr. 26.19.
.

Notwithstanding all Kings, Queens, and Princes in their places, may, yea and
must as occasion serves, with K. Solomon build an house for the Lord 2. Chro.
2.1.
, and set the courses of priests to their office 2. Chron. 8.14.
, with K. Ezekiah break the Images, cut down the Groaues, take away the high
places 2. Kings 8.4.
, appoint the courses of the Priests, and Levites, and enjoin all the people
to minister sustenance unto the Priests 2. Chro. 31.4. Thus did Ezekiah
throughout all Judah, and did well and uprightly and truly before the Lord his
God 2. Chr. 31.20.
, with K. Josiah, put down, and burn the horses of the Sun 2. King. 23.11.
, break down the houses of the Sodomites Ib. 7.
, Purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, Groaues, carved, and molten
Images 2. Chr. 34.3.
, appoint the Priests to their charges Ib. 35.2.
, and compel all that are found in Israel to serve the Lord their God Ib. c.
34.33.
, and with the K. of Nineveh proclaim a fast, and command every man to turn
from his evil way, etc. Jonas 3.7.
.

Of the same judgment be other Churches Confess. Hell. 1. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30.
Basil. ar. 7. Bohem. c. 16. Gal. ar. 39. Belg. ar. 39. Sax. ar. 23. Wittem. c.
35.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Much therefore out of the way are, and offend greatly, do first the Papists,
who publish that,

The care of religion pertains not unto kings. Religionis curam semper
pertinuisse ad Reges, dele, say the Expugators, Blot it out Iudex. expur. p.
145.
.

Queens may not have, or give voice either deliberatiue, or definitive in
Counsels, and public assemblies, concerning matters of religion, nor make
ecclesiastical laws concerning religion; nor give any man right to rule,
preach, or execute any spiritual function, as under them: and by their
authority Test. The. an. ^ Cor. 1.14.34.
.

In matters of religion and of their spiritual charge, neither Heathen, nor
Christian kings ought to direct Clergy men, but rather to take direction from
them Ans. to. the execut. of Just.
.

The Emperor of the whole world, if he take upon him to prescribe laws of
religion to the Bishops, and priests, etc. he shall be damned assuredly except
he repent.3. p. 56. 1 Test. The. an. Heb. 13.17.
.

Next, the Anabaptists, who being private men, and no princes will take upon
them the ordering, and reformation of the Church; as did Monearius Carranz.
sum. Council. p. 365.
, and Muncer Bullin. contra Anabap.
, in Germany.

And thirdly the disciplinarian Puritanes, whose doctrine is, that

1. The making of Ecclesiastical constitutions, and ceremonies belongs unto
the ministers of the Church, and ecclesiastical governors T.C. 1. rep. p. 163.
unto the Elders, who are to consult, admonish, correct, and order all things
pertaining to the congregation 1. Admon. to the Parl.
.

2. Civil magistrates have no power to ordain ceremonies pertaining unto the
Church T.C. 1. rep. p. 153.
, but are to ordain civil discipline only Idem. 2. rep. 2. par. p. 4.
, as being no Church officers at all.

3. The ecclesiastical Officers be Doctors, Pastors, Elders, and Deacons the
only officers instituted of God Leaa. disc. p. 10.
, or at the most, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, and widows. These are
all, no mo, eno fewer; and are only sufficient; and we are to content our
selves with these, and rest in them, says the Preacher Fruct. ser. on Romans 12.
p. 35.7^.
. In which number unless the King be included, he cannot possibly have any
thing to do in Church affairs, in these men's opinions.

4. Without the prince, the people may reform the Church and must not tarry
for the magistrate: so thought Barrow, Greenewood Bar. refut. p. 196.
, and Wigginton Conspir. for pretend. p. 34.
. Hence Hackets, Coppingers, and Arthingtons insurrection at London, an. 1591.

Without the Prince also, the Lords and Burgesses of the Parliament have power
of themselves to reform the abuses, and take away the corruptions of the
Church Hence their manifold petitions, Supplications, politic Assertions
exhibited unto the Parliament from time to time. In one of which their
supplications, says one (speaking unto the parliament.)

You must enioine every one, according to his place, to have a hand in this
work.

You must encourage, and countenance the Gentlemen, and people, that shallbe
found forward, etc.

And, you (of the Parliament) must not suffer an uncircumcised mouth, to bring
a slander upon that land, etc. sciz. upon their discipline. This has Penrie
Penrie supp. p. 60.
.

4. Proposition. The king by his authority is to restrain with the material
sword, and to punnish malefacters, whosoever ^hey be.
The proof from Gods word.
The office of the civil magistrate is to restrain; and if need be to
punnish, according to the quality of their offenses, the disturbers of the
quiet, and peace of the Commonweal; and that as occasion shall require,
sometime by force of arms, if the enemies of his State, be either foreign,
or domestical, and they gathered together, be many and mighty. Romans 13.3.4.
To this end Kings and Princes have both men, munition, Subsidies, Confess.
Heluet ^. ar. 24.26. and 2. cap. 30. Basil. ar. 7. Bohem. c. 16. Gal. ar. 33.
Belg. ar. 36. Au. 16. Sa. ar. ar. 23.
and Tributes. So against the enemies of God, and good men, went of Israel,
and Judah, the valiant Judges, and the noble, and puissant Princes.

And sometimes they execute their wholesome, and penal Statuts upon the goods,
cartell, Lands, and Bodies of their disorderly, and rebellious subjects.

For the King is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil.
Therefore Princes are to be feared, not of them which do well, but of such as
do wickedly Romans 13.3.4
.

And this do the people of God acknowledge to be true Confess. Helu. ar.
24.26. and. 2. c. 30. Basil. ar. 7 Bonem. c. 16. Gal. ar. 33. Belg. ar. 36.
Aug. ar. 16. Sax. ar. 23.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Contrarily heereunto,

The Cresconians were of opinion, that Magistrates were to punnish no
malefactors D. August. contra Cres^on. Gram. l. 3. c. 51.
.

One Rabanus maintained that magistrates were not Gods ordinance for the good,
but an humane institution for the hurt of men Mag. eccles. hist. Cen. 9. c. 4.
fol. 216.
.

Many have a fancy that before the general Resurrection there shall be no
magistrates at all: because, as they dream, all the wicked shall be rooted
out. Of this mind are the Anabaptists Confess. Aug. ar. 17.
, and Family of Love H.N. 1. exh. c. 12.. 39.40. Ramseis confess
.

5. Proposition. The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this realm of
England (nor other of the kings dominions).
The proof from Gods word.
The Bishope of Rome did he according to the will of God preach the Gospel;
labor in the Lords harvest; divide the word of God aright; minister the
Sacraments instituted by Christ, and that sincerely; and show by his life and
conversation the good fruits of a godly Bishop, doubtless he were worthy of
double 1. Tim. 5.17.
, yea of triple honor.

Yet will not the word of God, were he never so holy, and religious, warrant
him any Jurisdiction out of his Diocese, especially not within this Reamle;
much less when he does perform no part of a christian, but every part of an
antichristian Bishop, in corrupting the doctrine of the truth with errors, and
cursed opinions; in polluting the Sacraments of Christ by superstitious
ceremonies; in persecuting the Church, and Saints with fire, and sword; in
making merchandise of the souls of men through covetousness 2. Pet. 2.3.
; in playing the Lord over Gods haeritage 1. ^et. 5.3.
; in sitting in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself that he is God 2.
These. 2.4.
; and in exalting himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped Ibid.
.

In respect of which fruits of impieties the said Bishop of Rome, in the holy
Scripture is described to be very Antichrist, that wicked man, the man of
sin, the son of perdition, and the adversary of God Ibid.
.

He was openly proclaimed Antichrist by a Counsel in France in the reign of
Hugh. He is termed by the truly, and godly learned: The Basiliske of the
Church Luther. prae. epist. L. Husse.
; neither the Head, nor the Tail of the Church Heming. in 5. c. ^ac. epist.
.

His jurisdiction has bin, and is justly renounced, and bannished out of
England by many Kings, and Parliaments, as by K. Edward the 1.3. and 6; by K*
Richard the second; by K. Henry the 4.6* and 8; by Q. Elizabeth; and by our
most Noble K. James.

His pride, and intolerable supremacy over all Christian people is renounced,
and condemned as well by the mouths, as wrightings of all the purer Churches
Confess. Heluet. 1. ar. 18. and ^. c. 17.18. Bohem. c. 8.9. Belg. ar. 28.31.
VVittemb. ar. 3^. August. de Ab^s* ar. 7.
; and that deservedly.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
But with the Papists, the Bishop of Rome, he is forsooth for supremacy,
Abell; for gouering the Arc, Noah; for patriarchship, Abraham; for order,
Melchisedecke; for dignity, Aaron; for authority, Moses; for justice, Samuel;
for zeal, Helias; for humility, David; for power, Peter, for his unction,
Christ Maioran. c^yp. milit. Ec. lib. 3. c. 35.
, the general Pastor, the common Father of all Christians: the high Pastor of
Gods universal Church, the Prince of Gods people Aus. to the execut. of Just.
, for title, God, even the Lord God, the Pope ^anorm^^. de transl. prae^. cap.
Q^^nto.
, for power, God. For

By him Kings reign Cer^. lib. 1. c. 2.
, he may judge all men, but must of none be judged Distinct. 4^. c. 5. Papa.
, he can do what him list as well as God* except sin Extrauag. de trans^.
Episc. cap. Quanto.
.

His jurisdiction is universal, even over the whole world Test. Rhem. annot.
^^rg. p. 280.
.

Him, upon pain of eternal damnation, all Christians are to obey Bonif. 8.
can. de mayor. et obed* in Extrauag.
.

And by his sovereign authority both all Papists in England were discharged
from their obedience and subjection unto Q. Elizabeth, and the same Queen
disabled to govern her own people, and dominions Bris^ovv^ moti^e 40.
.

6. Proposition. By the laws of this Realm Christian men, for heinous, and
grievous offenses, may be put to death.
The proof from Gods word.
As the natures of men be diverse; and some sins in some countries more abound
then in others: so are the punnishments to be imposed upon malefactors
according to the quantity, and quality of their offenses, and any country,
and Kingdom may punnish offenders, even with death, if the Laws thereof, and
their offense do require it. For

All that take the sword, shall perish with the sword Math* 25.52.
.

Governors be sent of the King, for the punnishment of evil doers 1. Pet.
2.14.
.

A wise King scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them
Pro. 20.^6.
.

The magistrate bears not the sword for naught, and is the minister of God to
take vengeance on them that do evil Romans 13*4.
.

Which punishments testify to the world, that

God is just, which will have some sins more severely punnished then others;
and the magistrates to cut off dangerous, and ungodly members.

God is merciful, and ^^th care both of his seruan^s, and of humane society.

God is all wise, and holy, in that he will have it known who are just, who
wicked; who holy, and who profane, by cherishing, and preserving of the one,
and by punishing, and rooting out of the other.

Our Godly, and Christian brethren in other countries approve this doctrine
Confess. Heluet. ^. ar. 24.26. and 2. c. 30. Basil. ar. 7. Bohem. c. 16. Gal.
ar. 39. Belg. ar. 36. August. ar. 16. Sax. ar. 23.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The adversaries of this doctrine be diverse. For

Some are of opinion that no man for any offense should be put to death. Such
in old time were the Manichies, and the Donatistes D. August. in Johan. 11.
; and such in our days be the Anabaptists Confess. Helu. 2. cap. 30.
.

And some do think that howsoever for other offenses against the second Table
malefactors may be put to death: yet for haereticall, and erroneous opinions
in points of religion, none are so to suffer. Of this mind are the Familistes.
For

They hold that no man should be put to death for his opinions Displ^y J.a.
.

They blame M. Cramner, and Ridley for burning Ioane of Kent, for an haereticke
Jbid.
.

It is not christianlike that one man should persecute another for any cause
touching conscience Fam. 2. letre unto M. To.
. Is not that punnishmen^ sufficient (say they) which God has ordained, but
that one Christian must vex, torment, belie, and persecute another Ibid.
?

7. Proposition. It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the
Magistrate, to wear weapons, and serve in wars.
The proof from Gods word.
There is (says K. Solomon) Eccles. 2.8.
a time of war, and a time of peace Eccles. 2.8.
: and Princes are by war and weapons, to repress the power of enemies,
whether foreign, or intestine. For they are in authority placed for the
defense of quiet, and harmless subjects; as also to remove the violence of
oppressors, and enemies whatsoever they be. For these causes have they Horses,
prepared for the battle Pro. 2.31.
; Tributes paid them as well of Christians Romans 13.6.7.
, as others; and Subjects to serve them in their wars, of what nature soever.

Cornelius being a Christian Acts 10.
was not forbidden to play the Centurion, or bidden to forsake his profession;
nor the Soldiers that came unto John's baptism willed to leave the wars, but
to offer no violence unto any man Luke. 3.14.
.

This truth is granted by the Churches Confess. Helu. 2. cap. 30. Bo^e. c. 16.
Sax. ar. 23.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Many are against this assertion, whereof some doubt of the truth thereof, as
Ludouicus Viues Arm^ Chris^^anu^ virum tractare nescio an fas sit. Lud. Viues
institut. fam Chr. lib. 1.
.

Others deny it altogether as untrue. So did in ancient time the Manichies,
whose doctrine was that no man might go to war D. Aug. contra Manich. l. 22.
c. 74.
.

Lactantius thought it altogether unlawful for a good man, or a Christian,
either to go to war, or to bring any man to a violent death, though by law
he were adjudged to die Lactan. de vero cultu: c. 20.
.

In these days the Anabaptists think it to be a thing most exetrable for
Christians to take weapons or to go to war Conf. Helv. 2. c. 30.
.

The Familio of Love also do so condemn all wars, as the time was when they
would not bear, or wear a weapon Display. H. 5. b.
, and they write first of themselves how all their nature is Love, and peace
H.N. spir. lan. c. 37.. 2.
, and that they are a people peaceable, concordable, amiable, loving, and
living peaceably Jbid. prae.. 31.
, but all other men in the world besides, they do wage war, (...) and
destroy, for which ends they have diverse sorts of swords, Halberds, spears,
bows and arrows, Gunnes, pellets, and Gunpowder, armor, Harnes, and Gorgets
Ibi. c. 4.. 9.
, none of which the Familists do use or allow of.

38. Article. Of Christian men's goods, which are not common.
The riches, and goodness of Christians 1 are not common, as touching the right,
title, and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding 2 every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give alms to the poor according to his ability.

The Propositions.
1, The riches, and goods, of Christians, as touching the right, title, and
possession of the same, are not common.

2. Every man is to give liberal alms to the poor, of that which he
possesses, according to his ability.

1. Proposition. The riches, and goods of Christians, as touching the right,
title, and possession of the same, are not common.
The proof from Gods word.
AGainst community of goods, and riches, be all those places (which are
infinite) of holy Scripture, that either condemn the unlawful getting,
keeping, or desiring of riches, which by Covetousness If any one that is
called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous etc. with such one eat not.
Covetousness let it not be once named among you, as it becomes Saints. Ephesians.
5.3.
, Theeuerie Let none of you suffer as a Thief, etc. 1. Pet. 4.15.
, Extortion With a brother that is an Extortioner, eat not, 1. Cor. 5.11.
Neither thieves, nor Covetous (persons), not Extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6.10.
, and the like wicked means many do attain; or do commend, Liberality It
is a blessed thing to Give, rather then to receive. Acts 20.35. yea, and that
thing ye do unto all the Brethren throughout all Macedonia 1. These 4.10. If a
brother, or a sister be naked and destitute of daily food etc. notwithstanding
ye Give them not these things which are needful to the body what helps it?
James 2.15.16.
, Frugalitie If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for
them of his household, he denies the forth, and is worse then an Infidel, 1.
Tim. 5.8.
, free and freindly Lending From him that would borrow of thee, turn not away,
Matthew. 5.42. And lend, looking for nothing again. Luke 6.35.
honest labor Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor,
etc. that he may have to give unto him that needs. Ephesians. 4.28. We wa^^ed
you, that if there were any which would not work* that he should not eat. 2.
These. 3.8.
, and lawful vocations to live, and thrive by Ye know that these hands have
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me, Acts 20, 34. we
labored day and night, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you. 1.
These. 2.9. We took not bread of any man for naught, etc. 2. These 3.8.
. All which do show, that Christians are to have goods of their own, and
that riches ought not to be common,

Of this judgment be the reformed Churches Confess Helv. 3. c. 29. Gal ar 40.
Belg. ar. 36. Aug. ar. 16. Wittemb. c. 21.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Of another mind were the Esseis Heyden. (...). vrbis Hierosolym. l. 3. c. 3.
, the Manichies D. Aug. de mor. eccles. Call. l. 1.
, the Pelagia^s Magdeb. eccles. hist. Cen. 5. fol. 586.
, the Apostolikes D. Humfre de Romanae curiae praxi. p. 39. ex. Epiphan.
, and Fratricellians VV. Tho. desc. of Italy. p. 59.
, and are the Anabaptists Sleidan. com. l. 6.
, and Family of Love Display. H. 3. b.
.

Among the Famists (says H.N.) none claims any thing proper to himself for
to possess the same to any owednes, or priuatenesse. For no man, etc. can
desire to appropriate, or challenge any thing to himself, either yet to make
any private use unto himself from the rest ward, but what is there, is Free,
and is also left free in his upright form H.N. Spir. land. ^: 35.. 34.
.

2. Proposition. Every man is to give liberal Alms to the poor of that which
he possesses, according to his ability.
The proof from Gods word.
Unto liberality toward the poor, according to our ability, we are in the
holy Scriptures provoked.

1. By the commandments, from God, by his servants the Prophets Deuteronomy. 15.11.
Prou. 5.15.16. Eccles. 11.12.
, by his Son, our Savior Matthew. 5.42. etc. 6.2.3. etc. Luke 6.30. etc.
, and by his Apostles Romans 12.13. 1. Cor. 16.2.
.

2. By sweet promises of ample blessings Eccles. 11.1. The liberal person
shall. have plenty: and he that wateresh, shall also have rain. Prou. 11.24.
.

3. By threatenings of punishments to the covetous, and stony hearted He that
stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall cry, and not be heard.
Prou. 21.13.

He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack; but he that hides his eyes,
(shall have) many curses. Prou. 28.27.


.

4. By the examples of the best men, viz. the apostles, and primitive Church
Acts 11.29.30. Romans 15.25. 2. Cor. 8.1.2.3. etc. 2. Cor. 9.2. etc.
.

So the Churches Conf. Helv. 2. c. 23.28.29. Sax. ar. 21. VVittemb. c. 18.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Of strange minds therefore, and impious are

First the Anabaptists, which would have no man either to give, or receive. For
all things in their opinion, should be common (as before also has bin said),
and none among them be either poor to receive or wealthy to minister any
alms Bale mist. of Iniqu. p. 53.
.

Secondly the hypocritical Sectaries, who are bountiful only to those which
side with them. Such were first the publicans in our Savior his days Mat.
5.46.47.
, and after them the Manichies, who would minister neither bread, nor water
unto any hungry, and pyning beggar, unless he were a Manichean Homini mendico
esu^ienti. nisi Manichaeus, sit panem aut aquam non porrigunt* Manich. D. Au.
de mor. Manic. l. 2.
.

And such are the Family of Love; who say they are not bound to give alms but
to their own sect: and if they do, they give the fame to the devil Displ. H.
7. b.
.

39. Article. Of a Christian man's oath.
As we confess that 1 vain, and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge that 2 Christian
religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear, when the magistrate
requires, in a cause of faith, and charity, so it be done according to the
Prophets teaching, injustice, judgment, and truth.

The Propositions.
1. We may not swear vainly, and rashly.

2. A lawful oath may be given, and taken, according to the word of God in
justice, judgment, and truth.

1. Proposition. We may not swear vainly, and rashly.
The proof from Gods word.
THe better to avoid vain, and rash oaths, and swearing, it is good to have
in remembrance that which is said by our S. Christ, and his Apostle James.

Our Savior says, swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is the throne
of God: nor by the Earth, for it is his footestoole, nor by Jerusalem, for it
is the city of the great King; nor by thine head, because thou can not make
one hair, white or black, but let your communication be, yea yea, nay nay
Matthew. 5.34.
.

So the apostle S. James, Before all things, my brethren (says he) swear
not, either by the heaven, or by the earth, or by any other oath, but let your
yea be yea and your Nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation James 5.12.
.

All Churches do, and some in their public writings, condemn vain, rash,
and idle oaths Confess. Helv. 2. c. 5. Basil. ar. 11.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This declares many sorts of men to be very impious, as

The Wantons, which for pleasure, and the covetous worldlings, who for gain,
and profit, blush not to take the name of God in vain, by idle, rash, and
usual oaths. Next the Basilidians Philast.
, Helchisaites Eusebius. ex Ori. l. 8. c. 38.
, Priscillianites Bullin. contra Anabap. l. 2* c. 4.
, and Family of Love Rams^is con^^*
, who for ease, and to avoid troubles, and persecution dread not to swear, and
forswear themselves.

Thirdly, the papists; whose common guise is to swear, either by Saints, or
Idols or by God, and creatures together Pe^. de soto Meth. conf. s.p. 40. a.
.

Fourthly, the Puritanes who use to swear, though not by God, etc. yet, as
wickedly using horrible imprecations, as I renounce God, God damn me, or, as
Hackets manner was, God confound me Conspir. f^r pretend. refor. p. 5.
.

Lastly, the Banisterians who deem it hypocrisy for one Christian to reprove
another for common, and rash swearing, which are but Trifles in their opinions
Unfold of Banist. errors.
.

2. Proposition. A lawful Oath may be given, and taken, according to the word
of God, in justice, judgment, and truth.
The proof from Gods word.
The truth of this doctrine appears plentifully in the holy Scriptures. For
in the same there be both commandments, that we must, and may; and forms
prescribed how we shall swear.

For the first: Thou shall fear the L. thy God, and serve him; And shall
swear by his Name, says Moses Deuteronomy. 6.13.22.11.
; Again, thou shall swear, the Lord lives, and thou shall cleave unto him,
and shall swear by his Name Ib. 10.20.
.

And touching the other, swear may we not, either by Baal Ierem. 12.16.
; or by strange Gods Josh. 27.7.
; or by the Lord, and by Melchom (that is by Idols Zeph. 1.7.
); or by any creatures Matthew. 5.34.
.

But our Oaths must be made in the Name of the Lord Deuteronomy. 6.13.
; as the Lord lives Ie^. 12.16.
; and all is to be done in truth, judgment, and righteousness Jer. 4.2.
; and when the magistrate calls us thereunto Exodus 22.8. 1. King. 8.31.
.

All Churches join with us in this assertion, and some testify the same in
their public wrightings Confess. Helv. i. ar. 16. and 1. c. 30. Gal. ar. 40.
Basil. ar. 11.. 1. Aug. ar. 16.
.

The errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Many be the adversaries one way, or other crossing this truth. For

1. Some condemn all swearing, as did the Esseis, who deem all swearing as
bad as forswearing Fard. of fashions 2. part.
; and do the Anabaptists, which will not swear, albeit thereby both the
glory of God may be much promoted, and the Church of Christ* or Commonweal,
furthered Confess. Basil. ar. 11.. 1.
.

2. Others condemn some kind of Oaths, and will not swear, though urged by
the magistrate, but when themselves think good. So the Papists, no man (say
they) ought to take an Oath to accuse a Catholic (a Papist) for his religion
Test. The. an. Act. 23.12.
; and such as by Oaths accuse Catholics (that is Papists) are damned Ibid.
.

So the Puritans, oftentimes either will take none oath at all when it is
ministered unto them by authority, if it may turn to the molestation of their
Brethren Hooker of eccles. pol. praef.
, or if they swear (finding their testimony will be hurtful to their cause)
they will not deliver their minds after they be sworn D. Sutcliff. ans. to
Job. Throck. p. 46. b.
.

3. Others, having taken the Oath do fowlie abuse the same, as the Knights of
the post, like the Turkish Seiti, and Chagi Pol. of the Turk. emp. c. 24. p. 74.
, who for a Ducket will take a thousand false Oaths before the magistrate; as
also the Jesuits, who in swearing (which is little better then forswearing) do
vti scientia, that is cunning, and equivocations Quodlib. p. 34.68. Garnets
arraign.
; as also do they, who conscionablie, and religiously keep not their faith,
such are the forenamed Papists. For (say they) An Oath taken for the
furtherance of false religion (as they take the profession of all Protestants
to be Test. Rhem. an. Act. 20.1^.
) binds not Iuram^^ (...) propter falsam religione^ praestitum non obligat
Bap. ^ickler. de iure magist* p. 11.
. Again, Faith is not to be kept with Haeritickes Council* Cons^a.
. Which assertion little differs from the opinion of some Puritanes, who
teach* that promise (or Faith) is not to be kept, when (as perhaps by the not
erecting of Presbyteries in every parish) Gods honor, and preaching of his
word, is hindered Geneva an. Matthew. ^.12. One of them has delivered that if
the Prince do hinder the building of the Church, the people may by force of
arms* resist him. Ans. to the* Abstract. p. 94.
.

Subjects be discharged from their Oath of allegiance, and may gather forces
against their liege Sovereign, if he eterprise any thing to the hurt of his
Realm, or of (the Romish) religion, was a determination of the Sorbonistes in
a certain conventicle of theirs at Paris Mercur. Gallobelg. l. 2. p. 86.
. And that magistrates, by their Subjects, may be brought under the obedience
of Laws, was a conclusion of certain Scottish ministers in a private
Conventicle of Edinburgh Bucchan. rerum Scotic. l. 17. p. 202. b.
.

Seditiosi non sunt qui resistunt principibus, politicum, aut ecclesiasticu^
statu^ perturbantibus. Na^ qui resistit Principi seditioso, seditiosus non est,
sed seditionem tollit, says a Frenchman Eusebius. Philadelph. dial. 2. p. 57.
: yea (says an Englishman, whose works by T. C. are highly approved, and
commended, Hunc tollant uel pacifice, vel cum bello, qui ea potestate donati
sunt, vt regni Ephori, vel omnium ordinum conuentus publicus Dud. Fen. S.
Theol. l. 5. c. 13.
: Subjects may not respect their oaths made unto such Princes, which trouble
the state of the Church, or Commonweal.

Finally, whatsoever Princes be (good, or bad) if they be Women (say some),
oaths of allegiance unto them, are not to be kept. Their words be these.

First, (as well the States of the kingdom, as the common people) they ought to
remove from honor, and authority, that monster in nature: so call I woman in
the habit of man, yea a woman against nature reigning above man. Secondly, if
any presume to defend that impiety, they ought not to fear, first to
prononce, and then after to execute against the^ (that is to say against women
governors) the sentence of death. If any man be afraid to violate the oath of
obedience, which they have made to such monsters, let them be most assuredly
persuaded, that as the beginning of their oaths, proceeding from ignorance,
was sin: so is the obstinate purpose to keep the same, nothing but plain
rebellion against God Against the regim. of women 2. blas. p. 53. b.
.

Last of all, whereas every minister of the word, and Sacraments at his
ordination does swear to obey his Diocesan in all lawful matters, certain
Gentlemen of the Puritan faction, write thus unto the Bishops of the Church of
England, and printed the same, viz. The Canon law is utterly void within the
realm; and therefore your Oath of Canonical obedience is of no force, and all
your Canonical admonitions not worth a rush The Gentlemen's dema^ds unto the
Bishops (printed an. 1605.) p. 46.
.

D. Hilar. contra Constantium August. Non recipit mendacium veritas, nec
patitur religio impietatem. The truth admits no lie; neither can religion abide
impiety.

1. Tim. 1. v. 17. Unto the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God
only wise (be) honor, (and) glory for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader. Gentle Reader many faults escaped the Author being
absent, and the coppie somewhat dark, which if it please thee to correct take
this direction. The former number shows the page: the latter the line. m. the
margen. d. dele. certain figures are twice printed and so both in the table
and here twice quoted.
Page 2. lin. 30. who flatly. 3.5. the inhabitants. 8. liniaments. 23. horae b.
4.36. Saturninus, Menander, Cerin. 6.28. Eunome us 29. Tretheites. 7.2. These
did. 6. Seruetus. 19. Priscilianists. 9.4. d. the. 10.32. Harmon. 11.20.
Vale^tinia^s p, 16.11, As man; and. 20.4. d were. 13. Him God. 22.8. tures
teach. 23.9. assumed. 29.14. precepts, offends no less then if he contemned
Gods express commandments k. And. 22. adversaries. 30.24. Castellio. 31.6.
Barcobas and Barcolf. 24. all the. 34.16. Bethlehem 35.16. the red sea.
37.12. sacrifices. 39.10. Antinomies. 6. d. 0.40.11. d. in. 17. for his. 46.1.
m. Carranza 47.15. may do. 48.22. natural. 49.22. d and the mind. 23. the
body. 29. reveal. 52.10. or Loves. 53.1. m. Horae. 8. scandere. 9. for thee.
54.17. the profit. 55.3. as the. 8. Villauincentio. 22. destitute. 53.33. and
violating. 35. them, by the papists. 58.19 they do. 61.7. as not. 65.10. and
fall. 66.20. Hieracites 67.15. d. by. 68.25. ye. 33. up. 35. Onesimus. 69.5.
d. as. 14. d. most. 71.12. d. his. 72.24. Hieracites. 73.24. whom he. 74.24.
Catabaptists. 25. misery. 32. Bolseck. 77.36. Antinomies. m. execut. of just.
79.7. Hieracites. 80 5. can away. 81.12. or which are. 84.3. be held. 4. The
obs. 85.5. they revolted. 19. Desider. Burdegal. 9217. Viguerius. m. Theol.
95.18. because 96.21. d. a 97.30. Pius 5.100.31. they. 103.11. embrace. 104.6
interpretation. 14. Villauincence. 21 examinent, vt. 27. fetched. m. Hervaeus.
106 m. next. im. 13. Festivalls 16. in the 107.29. the odd. 108.3. Cusan. 16.
Hear. 18 d. the 22. d. the. 110.34. disciplin^ 111.5. Iobelaea of the Sci. 35.
Cyrillus. 112.8. to summon. 23. Turon. 114.24 Selneccerus. 115.17. Paphnutius.
27. d. h. 31. err. a m. ^ Test. 117.19. Epicurus 126. m. 35. vix. 130.17. we
may 131.25.3 or 26.^ before. ibid. be 6 chosen. 27. work.5 132.21. d. the.
136.26. but that. 41. m. Towers. 141.30. But there. 144.12. Christians from
the. 31. in any. 145.9. Saravia. 11. appertain. 147.12. Sacrament); 149.8.
Eutychites. 14. Sacraments. 30. d. of. 154.10. d. be. 12. Exorcists 29. the
Cardinal. 155.19. Acolyte. 20. not always in his Church. 30. as a. 158.31.
great. 159.4. Alva. 8. abused by. 15. guise is. 162.7. are but 20. He^ricia^s
166.13. Not Manicheans. 167.8. d. they. 26. Iouinians. 169.21. a sect a. 29. d.
the 34. (...) se sub ii.38. now. 172.8. the Lords supper is a sacrament. 173.
m. 5. communion 19. sacrilegious. 21. Antwerp. an. 17428. whole christ is. 176.
m. 14. vt substan. 23. nil est. 177.3. and therefore. 17. at. Mass. or borne
about to the sick, he shall kneel down devoutly and say his pater noster or
178.3. in the. 12. sign 179.14. doctrine. 180.6. has so 20. the Artotarites
23. Eucratites. 183.8. d. and no woman 9. and came 185.4. religion 187.9.
vncontinent life 188.30. alliteration 189.3. which error. 4. Ochinites 191.21.
ve^mine when they have annoyed. 195. m. 23. Sab. do. 196.9. d. by. 197.17.
Rhene, Frankeland, and S^e^uland* 36. (...)* do it. 191.24. the well. 192.3.
d. both. 194.24. vt plurimis. 25. Smeton. 199.22. consecration. 26. d. l.
202.16. of the. 204.15. d. there. 208.16. Monet^rius. 211.13. Hugh. Capet.
215.4. and goods.


