TWO DIALOGVES, OR CONFERENCES (ABOUT an old question lately renewed, and by the
Schismatic company, both by printed Pamphlets, and otherwise to the
disturbance of the Churches quiet, and of peaceable minds, very hotly pursued.)

Concerning Kneeling in the very act of receiving the Sacramental bread and
wine, in the Supper of the Lord.

The former Between two Ministers of the word, the one refractarie, and
deprived; the other not so.

The latter Between an humorous Schismatike and a settled professor.

1. COR. 1. 20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer
of this world? 1. COR. 11. 16. If any man lust to be contentious, we have no
such custom, nor the Churches of GOD. Printed by HENRY BALLARD. 1608.

The points in the first Dialogue discussed.
Whether in the ministering, and receiving the Communion, we are necessarily to
imitate Christ. Objection 1. Whether Kneeling at the receiving the holy
Communion, has an appearance of evil. Object. 2. Whether Kneeling at the
Sacrament be a monument of Idolatry. Object. 3. Whether Kneeling etc. be a
just offense given to the weak. Object. 4. Whether Kneeling etc. do strengthen
the Papists in their bread-worship. Object. 5. Whether Kneeling etc. be a
mere institution of man. Object. 6. Whether Kneeling etc. be a breach of the
second Commandment. Object. 7. Whether Kneeling etc. be urged above the
commandment of God. Object. 8. Whether no man that Kneeleth can have faith.
Object. 9.
TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, Thomas, by the divine providence, Bishop
of London, his very honorable good Lord.
Right reverend:
IT is a most true and memorable saying of that ancient, eloquent and learned
Father, Saluianus, B. of Massilia, that to fall into the error of a false
opinion (though ignorantly) before a man does know the truth, is a token of a
mind rude and simple: but to persevere in error after one has bin told and
admonished of the same, is an argument of a pertinacious and froward
disposition. So S. Augustine: Aliquid aliter sapere, to relish a thing
otherwise then it is, is an humane tentation (and infirmity,) but for a man
too much to be inamored with his own conceit, or envying his betters to come
unto the sacrilege even of renting asunder the communion (of the Church) and
of erecting of schism, or heresy, it is diabolical presumption. And yet this
frowardnes or pertinacy, or devilish pride and presumption is so ingraffed in
the hearts of most men (as Erasmus has observed, and experience does prove
unto us) as what once they have apprehended, they will ever hold; and what they
have published, they will not revoke, be it never so offensive, and in their
own conscience, erroneous, and untrue. Erasmus does well note, how most
natures be stiff in maintenance of their singular and self conceited
fantasies. God be thanked, all men be not so. For of all professions, sects,
and sorts of men (even from the beginning, since learning, and wisdom by
writing or books has bin made known and obuious) there have never bin
wanting some, who have bin inspired with such grace and good motions, as that
they have very ingenuously acknowledged their scapes, and willingly submitted
unto the truth, when it has bin revealed unto them, howsoever before they were
otherwise minded, and adversaries thereunto. So did Quintilian, yea and Tullie
too before him change their judgments in points of Rhetoric; so did
Hippocrates, that so renowned Physician in matters of Physic; so Cornelius
Agrippa about his hidden Philosophy. Orpheus, that Polytheian sang a palinodie,
acknowledging one God at the length, who defended a multitude of Gods at the
first: and S. Augustine too, when his gray hairs were grown, most
conscionably, and to his eternal fame and honor, very wisely corrected, and
retracted, what in his green years in considerately he had broched.

Neither in the times long past only, but in this latter age also of the
world, wherein we live, have such good spirits appeared. Theodorus Gaza (for
learning a rare man, and almost peerless) had his proper and peculiar errors,
which when he saw, he was not ashamed to revoke them, and to alter his
judgment upon the admonition of Trapezuntius. Yea, and Theodorus Beza (no
mean man neither in his time) as he was not without his faults, so had he not
the face to justify, or stand stiff in them, but very Christianly, and as one
studious to keep a good conscience both before God and man, grew into an
utter detestation of, and amended them, ( Quiquid offendere potuit, damnaui,
sustuli, iugulaui* says Beza himself in his def* against Genebrards accus.
) with points too of doctrine that gave offense, as our Whitakers does say. Of
whose mind had Heliodorus, Bishop sometime of Trice, bin when it was, he had
comfortably enjoyed still a fair and fat Bishopric, which fondly he did
forgo, because he would not consent to the burning of certain amorous and
profane inventions, penned by the said Heliodorus in his youth, but for their
vileness, by an whole Synod, or Convocation of Bishops, and other clergy men
condemned to the fire, as Nicephorus does record. I spare to speak of Luther,
Melancton, Calvin, and other learned men neither few, nor of mean account
among all reformed Churches, and people, who preferring Gods glory before
popular praise, have satisfied good men, and made public amends for some
things unadvisedly published.

Neither have there bin wanting some such among our selves, God be thanked. Ah
gentlemen (says a late writer in this kingdom) that live to read my broken
and confused lines, look not that I should (as I was wont) delight you with
vain fantasies; but gather my follies together, and, as you would deal with
so many paricides, cast them into the fire; call them Telegones, for now they
kill their Father, and every line in them written is a deep piercing wound to
mine heart: every idle hour spent by any in reading them; brings a million of
sorrows to my soul. O that the tears of a miserable man (for never man was
more miserable) might wash their memory out with my death! But since they
cannot, let this my last work witness against them with me, how I detest
them. Black is the remembrance of my black works, blacker then night,
blacker then death, blacker then hell. So he; and even in these very words:
which would both Gentle, and all men well consider of and ponder, neither
should the Press, and Stationers shops be abused as they are, inuenting such
books (to the high dishonor of God, and discredit of our Churches
discipline:) nor men and women, leaving better things, addict themselves so
greedily to the perusal, if not study of vanities, which bring no good, but
woeful repentance in the end. The man which this uttered was himself a good
Scholar, but (even as his very words do import) a very vain and vicious man:
yet even such persons with Publicans and Harlots sometimes do repent, and to
the great joy of the holy Angels enter into the kingdom of heaven, as do
Schismatikes also now and then, but rarely yet, and as hardly as do rich men
into the celestial paradise.

Bolton (that first broched among us those opinions, which Brown afterward and
his followers embraced as heavenly Oracles) he saw his error at the last, was
ashamed of them and repented: but how? wanting grace to confess so much before
God and his Church, like another Judas he hung himself, and so desperately
finished his days.

Coppinger (that new prophet, and copartner in Hackets conspiracy for
pretended reformation) he had a sight too of his errors and follies at the
length, and an insight also into the truth, yea and after a sort repented; but
being destitute of grace to retract his errors, and not able to abide the
terrors of a troubled and guilty conscience, he famished himself to death, as
the story of him does report.

On the other side, Arthington his example is memorable, he was vexed and
pursued with the inward and most heavy judgments of God upon his soul, so
long as he took Hacket (cursed Hacket) to be his sovereign King and Savior:
but he no sooner saw his errors, fell into a loathing of them, and made his
recantation and reuocation of them, but he found much peace and comfort in his
soul, to his everlasting welfare (as himself confesses in his book thereof
unto the Lords of the late Queens Counsel)

Clapham (that out of England went first into the Low Countries; afterward
into Scotland; after that again into ihe Lowcountries; then again into
Scotland; and once more into the Lowcountries, and all about the controversies
between the Brownists and us) had a restless and perplexed mind, and could
never be quiet till he fell into a detestation of Brownisme, and their founders
the disciplinarians, whom before he highly accounted of, and had both returned
home, and reconciled himself wholly unto the Church of England, from which he
had estraied, as his Antidotum does witness.

Such another was Pet. Faire-lambe (as arrant a Brownist as ever lived, and one
that for the propagating of that cursed sect, had travailed Sea and Land,
tossed in body, troubled in mind) never quiet and at rest til God opened his
eyes, as he did Saul's, that he might see, and given him power to embrace the
truth; yea, and to testify the same by his public Recantation, extant and in
Print, before God and the world.

I am of mind (my good Lord) that there be among us not a few of the Sectaries
of al sorts, which with Bolton and Coppinger do see their gross ouer-sights
and errors in the points controuerted between them and us; but few there be
which with Arthington, Clapham, and Faire-lambe have the face and grace to
confess them to the world, deeming diabolical pertinacy to be godly
constancy. Therefore that this their frowardnes may appear, even as it is, both
devilish and hellish, I have set down (best known to your wisdom) the
examples premised of persons, whereof all and every of them have both openly
retracted, yea and by permanent monuments commended unto the ages succeeding
the reuocation of their slips, and consent unto the truth, in which their doing
they have purchased to themselves no discredit at all, but a very honest
reputation among all good and wise men.

But all men have not grace, yea of them which have it, few have the power
openly, and under their own hands to reclame and retract that which
erroneously they once have held. And surely though it be necessary that all and
every one which goes astray from the truth, do repent, and leave his wicked
opinions: yet that men should testify their conversion and coming home
again, after one and the same fashion, it is not necessary and vrgeable.

And therefore do I commend mine Antagonist sometime, M. Seffray, who though
he disliked, yea and depraved our Kneeling at the holy Communion, as much as any
man could do (witness his objections following) choosing rather both to abide
the censure of authority, yea and to be without the comforts, which they
participate that with one heart and mind, brotherly and orderly come unto the
table of the Lord, then so much as to bend his knees at the receiving that most
blessed and heavenly Sacrament: yet notwithstanding after friendly and
brotherly conference had with him thereabout, altered his mind, allowing that
which before he condemned. He has not the power (weak man) either to thank
him, who after God has opened his eyes, or publicly to disclaim his errors:
but he has the grace for to abhor them as monsters: and so much has
testified by his late orderly, and submissiue kneeling in the very act of
receiving the sacred bread and wine at the Communion the last Easter, in the
place of his now most usual abiding. A worthy recantation not verbal to be
heard, but real to be seen, or heard of: which I praise God for, and pray that
he may do the like in other things ceremonial; which had he performed, he had
still enjoyed a sweet and competent living (to the singular refreshing of many
a Christian soul, having a very good gift in preaching: and to the temporal
benefiting of himself and his) which he has forgone, (as the forementioned
Heliodorus did his Bishopric) choosing rather to leave it, then to condemn
his vanities.

Whose example (not in obstinate maintaining that which is erroneous and ill,
but in yielding unto the truth discovered) if the other man (whose printed
Pamphlet, or Proposition (accompanied, as himself thinks, with arguments
impregnable; as will appear with untruths, blasphemies, and impieties
intolerable) about the foresaid Kneeling at the Communion, I have here
answered, and confuted) will follow, I shall think my pains very well
employed; if not, yet shall the world see and perceive the difference between
a man simply and ignorantly erring, and a perverted and froward Schismatike;
they being willing to hear and learn; the other stopping his ears, and
hardening his heart against the truth: the one flexible, the other incorrgible:
the one of ill becoming good; the other of bad proving worse, of a Schismatike
at the first, an Heretic at the last. For no better shall I esteem him if he
hold on; and the end of Schism is Heresy, if not Atheism. His cause is the
very same, and none other then M. Seffrais was; his reasons the same too in
effect, though more for number, yet not stronger in force. If therefore the said
Seffray does find in his judgment the truth to be with me (which is stronger
then both, and what either they have broched, or any man can object against the
same,) and thereupon has yielded, and resigned himself thereunto, there is no
cause the other man, whosoever he be, should frowardly and fondly standout.
Reasons ought, but if they will not, let this example move him to conform.

The former of these Conferences has been performed (as the truth is) both by
mouth and pen: by mouth, authority nominating me thereunto, and M. Seffray
calling for the same at my hands; and was had at mine own dwelling house in
Suffolk the last Harvest: by pen, at the desire of the said Seffray immediately
after our speeches, and that not only for himself (and peradventure for
others too of the Brotherhood) better to consider of, but also for the
satisfaction of him besides, who both motioned the same at the first, and
desired it might be written for a further good.

And being committed to writing had so continued private in few men's hands (for
any thing that was in my thought (God he knows) touching the publication of
the same) had not some persons (near and dear unto your Lordshippe: and for
their virtues, learning, and judgment, of more then ordinary account in our
Church and State) upon reasons both special and urgent, very earnestly moved
me to make the same more common.

The other was occasioned by a certain printed Libell, of not above two
sheets of paper (of which bulk, or thereabouts, myself have seen diverse
treatises published by the Sectaries, An. 1605. and so made purposely, they
knowing, and foreseeing, that books of that size, and of small price, are both
more readily bought up on all hands, especially of the common people, whose
favor they hunt and hawke after; and more greedily read, and more easily
understood, then large, tedious, and dear discourses) published I wot not by
whom, Neither must any enquire after him, or guess who he was* Pref. to the
propos.
and printed I know not where, but doubtless beyond the Sea (for the Printer
wanted an English Corrector:) but wheresoever, and by whomsoever printed and
published (which for my part I shall not be curious to inquire after, as the
publisher would not have any man to be,) I have thought it my bounden duty to
answer and confute the same, both because it is of the same very subject
which the former is, namely, against kneeling at the communion, as against flat
Idolatry; as also for that the same is purposely diuulged, both to harden such
persons among us (whereof the number is but too great) in their folly, as
embrace and hold that error, and to allure so many of our Church as possibly
may be, to be of that opinion.

And therefore both for the further and fuller manifestation of the truth by
answering what the adversaries hitherto have devised, and dispersed as well in
papers privately, as publicly in print, against the said Kneeling, for the
upholding of Schism, and faction in that point; and likewise for the
preservation of many in the peace and unity of our Church, and delivery of
others (so far as in me lies) from this foul, and loathsome opinion; I have
thought it expedient, yea very necessary, the times considered, to undertake
this labor.

Whereby whatsoever the author of the said Libel has objected, is both
answered and confuted; and what he has written, verbally, and syllabicallie,
(the order of a dialogue only considered, and observed) yea and without
omitting so much as a letter, set down. This I speak of the book it self.
For as touching the Preface, it being partly slanderous and reproachful,
partly enticing all sorts of people unto an open rupture, schism, and
forsaking of our Communions, because of the said Kneeling, I have not meddled
therewithal, being for my part of all other men both most unwilling to spend
good and precious hours about such matter, as cannot be stirred without
offending the ears and stomachs of good men; and most heartily sorry that any
men, pretending sincerity (as all Schismatikes do) should either employ their
pens, or think that even their cause can be blessed of the highest, which
has no better means then lies, slanders, diffamations, and abandoning the
Union and Communion of Gods people, to uphold and support itself withal.

Now these my labors I very humbly desire your Lordship to accept at the
hands of an old Oxford, and Christ-church man (to whom it is no small joy and
comfort, that he lives to see that University equal at least with any other
place of Learning in the word, famouslie, and admirablie to flourish; and of
that University to observe men of Christ-church, for their rare and singular
endowments, to be of such note and regard with the King, and State, as that the
government of four chief and eminent places, and Dioceses in this land, is at
this present, committed to their trust and inspection, as most worthy Patrons
and pillars for the supporting both of the vncorrupt doctrine, and holy
discipline in this Church established.) And though I doubt not, but I am known
unto all your Honors in some sort, being sometime a poor member with you all,
at one and the same time, of one and the same College, or Cathedral Church:
yet do I acknowledge this, and what else I am able to perform due unto your
Lordship more then unto any other man, partly for that which it has pleased
you of late to write both unto me, and touching me in your letters unto that
all worthy, M. D. Tinley, Archdeacon of Elie (my right worshipful good
friend) which I have both seen, and read, and with a thankful mind
recognize; partly for that which it has pleased your Lordship to say and utter
unto my self, since my coming unto London; and especially because you have
vouchsafed to testify your well liking of what I have done, both by a more
then ordinary approbation, and desire that it might come abroad, and also by
commending of the same unto the press, for the furtherance of the work, and
better publishing it unto the world. Acknowledging therefore these your
manifold undeserved favors with a very thankful heart, and promising my best
to deserve them, I erst and again very humbly desire your good Lordship to
accept these treatises with the former, and same affections at my poor hands,
in respect of my own handling, simple and slender be they I confess, but for
their subject, and these times of Schism (wherein many writers, and spreaders
of new and false doctrines may be seen, but few confuters of them; many
disturbers of our Church, and underminers of the peace, and prosperity thereof
by factious and Schismatic discourses, but few counterminers, or that stand
in the breach, to keep these adversaries out of the City of God, and from the
sheepfold of Christ) very necessary, and worthy your Lordships patronage and
protection: and so very humbly takes his leave, the fourth of May, Anno. 1608.

Your Lordships always to command, THOMAS ROGERS.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE or conference for the finding out of the truth, touching
kneeling in the act of receiving the Supper of the Lord.
THE SPEAKERS.
Seffray. Rogers.
S. WE ought herein to imitate Christ.


R. That is not simply and absolutely true. For in the administration of the
Lords Supper we are to imitate Christ, but only in things necessary, not
accessorie; and substantial, not circumstantiall, and accidental.

Christ is to be followed of us, not as he was God, but as he was man; and as
man in his Moral ever, not always in his Ministerial actions.

Our Savior wills us in the celebration of this Sacrament, and the delivery
of bread, and wine, to renew the memory of his death and passion till he
return again Luke 22. 19.
, but not to use his, or the Apostles gestures at the delivery of the
elements. Hence the Apostle Paul did alter some things which our Savior did,
in the administration of the Lords Supper, promising also at his return to set
other things in order 1. Cor. 11. 34.
, which Saint Augustine understands of the same form, and manner of
ministering the same, which is now observed in our Churches reformed D. August.
Epist. 118.
.

Lastly, if herein we be necessarily tied to the example of Christ, then are we
to minister this Sacrament, not (as we do now) in the public Church, but in
a private house, not in the morning, but in the night: not after dinner, but
after supper: not unto women, but only unto men, and those Ministers too of
the word. For all this did Christ, and we do not, and yet herein do nothing
against the will of God.


S. Christ performed this action sitting. Mat. 26. 20. Mar. 14. 18. Luke 22.
14. John. 13. 12.


R. Mean you that the people should stand, and the Minister sit, because
Christ performed this action sitting? Or would you have both Minister and
people to sit, when the Sacrament is to be administered, because Christ
performed this action sitting? What your meaning may be, when you say, Christ
performed this action sitting, is very doubtful and uncertain.

If you would have the people to stand, and the Minister to sit, because Christ
performed this action sitting, you ask more then I ever yet heard demanded. If
you would have the people to sit, and the Minister to stand, you swerve from
the imitation of Christ, who performed this action sitting. If you would that
both Minister and people should sit, because Christ performed this action
sitting, though you have some few Churches concurring with you in your desires:
yet are you nothing near the example of Christ, which you would bind us unto.
For Christ did not perform this action (after our manner) sitting. If you will
imitate Christ in this action, then must you lie down on little pillowes at
the table, as he and his Disciples did See Calvin, Beza, Vileriua, yea and the
Geneua Bible annot^* on Ioh. 13. 23.
, and not sit, as you would have the Church.


S. That is no good consequent, no more then this, that we must in the supper
use thin broad unleavened cakes, or loaves, because Christ did so.


R. If Christ did so, and yet we may use in place thereof usual and not
unleavened bread at the Communion: then by this your own reason, you may
further see the insoundnesse of your first position, which was, that in the
administration of the Lords Supper, we ought to imitate Christ.


S. It suffices that we sit, according to the usual manner of our Country, as
he did after the manner of his.


R. The manner of our Country is to receive our corporal food sitting; the
order of our Church, that we receive the spiritual food of our souls at the
Communion kneeling. It is as indecent a thing in mine eye, in the public
Church, to receive the food of our souls at the Lords table, sitting; as it is
in our own hall and houses to take our corporal meat, kneeling.

It was in our Savior his choice, to administer it lying, sitting, kneeling,
and how he thought good: but it is not in our election (that be either
Ministers or people) how we will minister, or take the same. For it ought by our
Laws, and orders to be received kneeling; neither does it suffice (in respect
of Church policy) that we sit.

The usual manner of our Country is, not only to sit, but to be covered also,
when we are at our meat: ought we therefore to have our heads covered, when
we are at the Lords Table? you may as well say this, as affirm the other.

Wherefore I deny not your consequent (as perhaps you deem I will) but say
(as erst I did) that we are no more bound to our Savior his Sitting (if he
did sit, as he did not) then we are tied to celebrate the Lords Supper in the
Evening in a private house, to Men, and those Ecclesiastical Ministers, and
neither to women, nor to the laity.


S. There is a reason of the change of those circumstances, as those which were
incident properly to the first institution, which was immediately to succeed the
last Passover, which Passover was to be eaten in the Evening, in a private
family, being sufficient for a Lamb, Exodus 12. 3, 4, 5. 6, 7, 8. Now it
tends to edification to celebrate the Supper in the day, and openly in the
Congregation, consisting of believers, both men and women; and therefore the
Church has done well in changing these circumstances, according to the precept
of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 14. 26.


R. You cross not me at al, but display still the unsoundness of your first
assertion. The Church after Christ both well might, and lawfully did, both add
and alter many things in the form, and manner of administration of the Lords
Supper, which our Savior either purposely omitted, or left to her
determination.


S. But there can no reason be rendered of changing Sitting into Kneeling.


R. Changing of sitting? You cannot say, and prove, that Christ sat as we
do, at his last supper, but otherwise you have said.

But did he sit, why may not the same his sitting, by his Church be changed
into kneeling, as well as other circumstances by you repeated? And what
pre-eminence has Sitting above Kneeling, that it may, and must be used at the
Communion, and not that? what reason have you to the contrary?


S. Sitting is the most usual gesture in eating and drinking.


R. Think you we are to carry our selves none otherwise in the Church of God
then in our own houses; at the Lords Table, then at our usual, and daily
refeshings? when our refections be diverse, be our actions to be the same?


S. Sitting is fittest for the ease of the body, best for signification of
communion and fellowship both with Christ the head, and with Christians, the
fellow members, and safest to prevent artolatrie or Bread-worship, which Christ
in his wisdom foresaw, and (it is likely) by the gesture of Sitting did
meet withal, and prevent.


R. O ( M. S). let it suffice us poor inferior persons, and Ministers that we
know (o yet that we knew so much!) what is fit, and fittest; good, and best
for our selves, and ours: as for what is fittest, best, and safest to be done
in the public assemblies of Gods people, leave we that unto our betters to
determine, unto whom it does belong.

Would we not so quickly resolve and conclude what is better and best; fitter,
and fittest in these matters, it would go better with us, and the whole Church
too, then alas it does.

Yet to tell you what I think, though Sitting as we use to sit at our common
feastings, is both comely, and commen dable: yet so to Sit at the Communion,
carries not that show of humble reverence unto the al-holy God, as Kneeling
does. But to Lie, or Lean, or (if you will) to Sit at the Lords Table, as our
Savior, and his Disciples did, were very unseemly, and indecent among us.


S. This charge Christ and his Apostles with want of reverence, which is
absurd.


R. Not a whit. For Christ, and his Apostles did that which the custom both of
those times, and of their country made common, and usual (your self has
confessed.) And therefore both he and they did that which was both civil and
comely.

Again, our Savior might do that surpassingly well, which we cannot. Any
action beseemed his person, because without sin. He graced all his gestures, no
gesture graced him. But we (alas!) we are sinful wretches, repairing unto the
Lords board, partly like supplicants, humbly suing for the remission of our
sins; and partly to show our thankfulness for the comforts and benefits we
have received, and hope to be partakers of through Christ. And therefore have
just cause even most humbly to kneel, as we do.


THE SECOND OBJECTION.
S. KNeeling in the receiving the Lords Supper, has an appearance of evil.


R. From the commendation of Sitting, how quickly are you come to the open
condemnation of Kneeling at the L. table? And a wonder it is, if he that once
falls into a debasing of holy and established orders in a church, come not to
an utter detestation of them in the end. Take heed in time.

If I should reason thus:

Sitting in the receiving the Lords Supper has an appearance of evil; therefore
to be avoided: would you allow this argument for good? No more do I approve
your kind of reasoning. And yet sooner will I justify mine, then you shall
prove your Antecedent.

M. Beza says, that Kneeling in receiving the signs has a show (not of
evil, as you say, but) of godly and Christian veneration Epist* 12.
. And this saying is true.

Did but an earthly King or Prince offer us pardon for our transgressing his
temporal statutes, would it become us, or carried it a show of reverence to
his Majesty, to receive it Sitting? And when grace and pardon for all our
sins in the Sacrament of Christ his Supper, is offered unto us by the seals
of bread and wine, carries it a show of evil to receive it kneeling? It is
called the Sacrament of thanksgiving, even for most heavenly benefits unto
Almighty God; and with what better action of the body can we testify our
thankfulness, then on bended knees?

We offer up our selves, even our souls and bodies, an holy and lively
sacrifice unto our God; and is there any gesture that better becomes such
Priests then Kneeling?

Is this mystery of so great weight, as the open contempt thereof brings
damnation 1. Cor. 11. v. 29. and^.
; and shall the receiving thereof with the greatest show of reverence be
counted, if not an apparent evil, yet an appearance of evil?

May the knee be bent at the name of Jesus Phil. 2. 10.
; and may we not kneel at the receiving the holy Sacrament of his body and
blood, but we either do ill, or seem so to do? Must we humble our hearts,
which is the greater, and not bend our knees which is the less? Must we humble
our hearts, and not express our inward humiliation by outward Kneeling?


S. We may not.


R. Why so?


S. For it carries an appearance of Bread-worship. Therefore to be avoided. 1.
These. 5. 12.


R. You must judge of our Kneeling by our doctrine, as we judge of the Papists
kneeling by their doctrine: we would not, neither could we justly condemn the
Papists for their kneeling, were not their doctrine most heretical and
blasphemous. Neither ought you to condemn our kneeling at the Communion,
except you can show the doctrine of the church of England, is for the adoration
of bread and wine.

Suscipitur ab artolatris Eucharistiae Sacramentum flexis poplitibus: The
Bread-worshippers receive the Sacrament Eucharisticall on bended knees, and
here in England the faithful take it with the same gesture of body, whereat
some are offended, Sed meo iudicio nulla de causa, but in my judgment without
cause (says a learned man a stranger.) For both of them adore, they (that is,
the Papists) the bread: these ( viz. the faithful in England, not bread, but)
Christ, sitting at the right hand of the Father in the heavens D. Serauia de
diuersi. minist. grad. p. 582
.

I am sure there is not a syllable in the Communion book that imports any
show of this evil you speak of; and our doctrine is, (as all the world does
know) how to reserve, carry about, lift up, or worship the Sacrament of the
Lords Sup. Supper, is contrary to the ordinance of Christ Art. of Religion.
Art. 28.
.


S. Doctrine and practice must go together, otherwise we pull down with one
hand, that we build with the other. As he that teaches that an Idol is
nothing in the world, and yet sits at Table in an Idols Temple, destroieth
with his act, that he built with his speech. 1. Cor. 8. 4. 10.


R. That the practice of our church concurreth not with her doctrine is a
reproach laid very unjustly upon a most religious nation; and should much vex
your heart that ever you had such a thought of a Church most famous and
renowned thorowout the world, for the purity of doctrine, which she does
profess, and accordingly practice. And therefore either make your words good,
or confess your great ouerslip.


THE THIRD OBIEGTION.
S. IT is a monument of Idolatry devised by man, of no necessary use in the
service of God. Therefore to be removed. Deuteronomy. 7. 25, 26. and 12. 3. 2. King.
18. 4. Isa. 30. 32. 2. Cor. 6. 17. Jude 23.


R. Be entreated, I pray you, to mark whither your affections, not guided by
discretion, have carried you. At the first you said not, that Kneeling at the
Communion, was an evil action, but not the best; nor after that, how it was in
it self evil, but An appearance of evil: But now forsooth, it is a monument
of Idolatry, which is evil indeed. Thus one evil thought brings another.
Take heed of them in time, else bring you to worse.

Besides, this assertion is as void of reason among men, as it is of truth in
religion. For as to Kneel at the holy Communion is no Idolatry, nor so much
as appearance thereof in sound Divinity: so is Kneeling not in the predicament
of substance, but of Site. And therefore no Monument by the rule of reason.

But be it a Momument, is our kneeling a Monument of Idolatry? Kneeling at the
Mass is gross, and palpable Idolatry. Is therefore kneeling also at the
Communion a Monument of Idolatry?

Last of al, let Kneeling be of never so impious and detestable use among
Papists: yet is the same gesture of good and necessary use in our church. For
hereby (as by the seemliest behauior for so religious a service,) we testify
the earnest, and most zealous devotion of our souls, when we do either pray, or
praise God, as we do both at the receiving the sacrament.

So that, were it a Monument of Idolatry (as it is nothing less) devised by
man: yet because it is of so good and necessary use in our service of God,
even in your own judgment, and conscience, and that from these your words, it
is not to be removed.

And so the consequent in this your Enthymeme, viz. Kneeling is to be removed
from the supper of the Lord, is of no validity; both because it follows not
from the premises, and is forced and inferred against your conscience.


THE FOVRTH OBJECTION.
S. IT is an offense to the weak. Ergo. etc. Mat. 18. 6. and seq. Romans 14. 20
21. 1. Cor. 8. 12, 13, and 10. 28, 29, 30.


R. It is an offense to the weak. Ergo, etc. What?

Till I know your consequent, this shall be my answer unto the Antecedent; how
our Savior speaks ( Mat. 18, and seq.) of such defaults, as whereby other
men, either by erroneous doctrine, or vicious conversation, be offended, or
hindered from their proceedings, either in godliness, or good manners: now Saint
Paul in all the places by you quoted, speaks of not offending in matters and
things in their own nature indifferent, neither prohibited by God in his word,
nor by any lawful ordinance of man.

He that openly any thing either does or says, forbidden of God, both sins
against God, and gives offense to man: and may expect, without repentance, a
fearful and double punishment, both for his fact, which is ill, and for the
example he thereby gives, which is worse.

Again, he that in things indifferent, and at man's liberty to do, or leave
undone, has not a tender care of weak Christians in his doing, shows that
there is not that charity in him, nor regard of his brethren which God
requires. But though God does not; yet if his deputies, the Gods terrestrial,
do enjoin any thing to be done, not opposite to Gods word, and tending unto
concord among men, order and comeliness, and we will not obey, nor fulfill
their directions, for offending some persons, pretending themselves to be weak,
then are we so far from doing well, as we do sin both against God, and man, in
not fulfilling their commandments.

If therefore charity, by the texts of Saint Paul, binds us in things
uncommanded, or not forbidden, to respect the weak; much more piety and duty
toward our governors should incite us to do the things enioined by just laws.
Disobedience to the lawful ordinances of godly governors, is not only
scandalous for the present, but may prove very dangerous in the consequent.
Wherefore a wise man should not regard these lesser scandals of little and weak
ones, in comparison of the inconveniences, and great offenses that arise and
may follow through the manifest contempt of laws established.

And in cases (such as this Kneeling is) wherein we cannot choose but offend,
either by doing, or not doing that which is commanded, better is it to offend
the less then the greater; a few private persons, then a whole State: and
better barely to offend, then to offend and sin too, by fact and example, as by
wilful, and open disobedience we do.

In this point touching Kneeling, I know no weak ones that justly may be
offended; and if there be, they are not much to be regarded, considering the
long, and constant preaching of the truth in this land, touching these, and the
like points in controversy.

It is a notable saying of Zanchius, and approved by all learned and judicious
Divines, that for a time some thing is to be yielded unto these weak ones
(which you speak of) even till the truth may be taught them. But after that
the truth (about these matters in question, and the like) has bin set forth,
and laid open, so as nothing can justly be objected against the same, and yet
purposely they will abide doubtful (and unresolved,) then is not their
infirmity any longer, either by simulation or dissimulation to be nourished.
Est enim pertinacia potius quam infirmitas: For it is rather to be counted
frowardness then weakness. So Zanchius Zanch. de leg^. fol 493.
.


S. As there have been, so there is, and will be always weak ones in the
Church of God, both because it is Gods blessing (which he bestows when, and
where he lists) that makes strong; and for that there be always some newborn babes succeeding one another.


R. Weak or strong; simple, or wise; young or old, whosoever, al must yield
obedience to the orders of that church, whereof they are members, in all such
matters as be indifferent, and not repugnant to the word of God.


S. Kneeling in the act of receiving, is not yet proved to be a thing
indifferent.


R. I think your self will not say, that Kneeling in it own nature, is either
good, or evil; then must it needs be indifferent, even as Sitting is.

Ista per se non sunt Idolatrica, (speaking among other things of this Kneeling
now in question;) These are not things of themselves idolatrous, says Beza
Epist. 12.
. Therefore indifferent.


S. In things indifferent, those in authority must limit their precepts by the
word of God, which wills that the weak be not offended by any brother
whatsoever.


R. Authority in making laws, must respect always the common and public
good: not what will please this or that man

If the Church should stay from making of Constitutions, til she can be assured
that all her children will be pleased with her doings, hardly, if ever, shall
she make any laws, and so would brawles and disorders without end or number
increase and abound. And having once made them, to abrogate, or not to execute
them for fear of displeasing the weak, what were it but either childish
leuitie, or ridiculous lenity?


THE FIFTH OBJECTION.
S IT strengthens the superstitious and idolatrous Papists in their
Bread-worship. Ergo. 1. Cor. 10. 32.


R. The Papists they term the Table of the Lord, profane, and detestable, and
deem of our Communion, as of Idolatrous and sacrilegious superstition Test.
Rhem: an. 1. Cor. 10. v. 31.
; they think it better to eat Ratsbane, then to participate of our bread, and
to drink Dragons gall, and Vipers blood, then our wine; this they
termesacrilegious, that poisoned Epist. to the Cath. Protest: at Antwerp. An.
1596. printed by Iouch Trogny.
. When they take offense at the very substance, are they strengthened at the
accidents? When they abhor the matter, take they comfort at our form and manner
of receiving the same? And be they strengthened thereby in their Bread-worship?

Assure your self it is all one to the Papists, whether we kneel, or sit, or
walk, or amble, the whole action or ministration thereof, whatsoever it be,
is to them a like vile and abominable.

You cannot prove our Kneeling in the receiving the Supper of the Lord, to be a
strengthening of the Papists in their Bread-worship: but our not Kneeling does
strengthen the licentious and lawless Brownists in their irreligious
contemning of our Communions.


S. That Kneeling does strengthen the Papists in their Bread-worship, may be
proved both by reason and experience.


R. By reason? how?


S. For that superstition and idolatry being planted in our nature, as a most
fertile soil, will not be destroyed if there be left behind so much as a
string thereof.


R. You cannot think of, sure I am, you cannot name a Church wherein there be
not, if not some branches, yet some sprigs, or at least strings of superstition
and idolatry; will those strings in time prove springs of idolatry, and
superstition, if utterly and altogether they be not rooted out? These are the
thoughts of the brainsicke Brownists; God forbid they should continue in your
mind. For what have we al-most in, and about our public service, which has
not served to some idolatrous and superstitious purpose or other in former
days? must all such things therefore utterly be abolished and taken away? Is
it necessary they should? is it possible they can be removed?

But what makes all this for the proof, that either our Kneeling is
superstitious, or the Papists to be strengthened thereby in their Bread-worship,
and Idolatry? when by reason you cannot, prove it if you can by experience.


S. Since this Kneeling and other things devised or abused by the Papists have
been so strictly urged, they have grown exceedingly in number, and in boldness,
affirming that we are now come to sup of their broth, and ere it be long we
will eat of their meat.


R. Lamentable experience does tell us, how the Papists have but too
exceedingly increased (the more is the pity:) but to ascribe the cause thereof
so peremptorily unto the strict urging of conformity, and obedience unto our
Churches orders, is more then he should do which is not of the counsel of God.

I should rather, and peradventure do, think, that the obstinate refusing to
Kneel, and keep the customs and manners of our Church, does not only hold
back many papists from joining with us, but also cause the number of Recusants
to increase. For is it likely that they, being naturally but too strict and
precise obseruers of outward ceremonies themselves, will ever brook that Church
and people, where wilful and refractarie men, either be not punished at all,
or but lightly and loosely censured?

Whefore, though we cannot let them to increase, (which is the just punishment
of God for our abusing the inestimable treasure of his word:) yet would, yet
should they less abound, did either private persons yield more obedience to
the lawful Injunctions of authority; or, (others being froward and
incortigible) public officers more strictly urge them thereunto.

And would you (which I wish you would) by your self note and consider how
these Papists do laugh in their sleeves to hear of the hot and eager
contention that is among us about this kneeling, and such other matters, it
would make you to weep, and does cause me to sigh when I think thereof, as not
seldom I do.

Away therefore (brother S.) with this conceit, that the strict urging of
conformity encourages the Papists: this preconceit has done much hurt, and
not only keeps back many from concurring with their brethren in due
obedience, but also encourages and increases the dangerous faction of our
home Brownists. But this you will never put away, so long as you are of mind
(which I pray God to alter) that this Kneeling of ours was either devised at
the first, or abused afterward by the Papists; and that nothing abused, though
not devised by them, may either be well used of inferiors, or strictly urged by
the superior power, when they are established.

No Papists, I think, will affirm which you say, that in Kneeling at the holy
Communion, we sup of their broth. Our Kneeling has as much resemblance of
their adoring, as our Communion affinity with their Mass. We sup not of their
broth at our Communion, no more then they drink of the Lords cup at their
Mass. There is as little hope (God be thanked) that we shall eat of their
meat, as that they will feed of our Banquets.


THE SIXTH OBJECTION.
S. IT is a worship of God devised by man. Ergo. Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 22. 23.


R. So is Sitting, so is Standing at the Communion a worshipping of God.
Howbeit none can truly say of Kneeling at the Lords table, that it is a mere
device of man, as Sitting among us, is. For it is so an humane, as withal it
is a divine institution.

This gesture is of God (because it belongs unto religious prayer unto God,
and thanksgiving) though appointed by man, and from men; yet not from the idle
sconce of man, but from men illuminated by the holy Ghost, and from men of God.


S. If you deny it to be a worship of God, I could prove it.


R. I do not deny it to be a worshipping, or that in kneeling we do worship
God: yet how prove you so much?


S. Thus. It is a bowing of the knee for a religious use, namely, to show our
inward reverence toward Christ, whose body and blood are represented by bread
and wine. Ergo.


R. Ergo? What? Ergo no adoration is it, or show of adoration of bread and
wine, (which before you affirmed) say I.


S. That is not my meaning: but, Ergo unlawful, and not to be done, say I.


R. Unlawful? Prove that.


S. The places of Scripture to that purpose are many.


R. Cite some of them.


S. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. Exodus 20. 5.


R. By this kind of gesture all kind of service and worship unto idols is
forbidden, Geneua annot. Exodus 20. 5.
which being so, unless you can prove, (which you shall never do) the bread
and wine at our Communions to be idol; and also that in kneeling we do
service and worship unto bread and wine, you shall never make our kneeling at
the receiving of those creatures, to be unlawful. What is the next place of
Scripture to this purpose?


S. It is out of the 95. Psalm, where the Psalmist does say: Come, let us
worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker. Psalm. 95. 6.


R. This makes for our kneeling, but proves not the same unlawful. The
Papists do say: that

As often as any man seeeth that body (viz. of their Lord and maker) at the
Mass, or borne about to the sick, he shall kneel down devoutly, and say his
Paternoster, or some other good prayer in worship of his sovereign Lord
Quatuor ser. fol. 169. b
.

Kneeled we down when we take the bread and wine with Popish thoughts, and
devotion, imagining our Lord and Maker under the forms of bread and wine,
reallie and locallie to be there present: we then did against the express
words of the Psalmist, who does exhort us to worship, and fall down before
the Lord our maker, and not before the works of our own hands: but coming
thereunto with religious and Christian meditations, we worship, fall down, and
kneel before the Lord our maker, even when kneeling we receive the Sacrament.


S. Yet will I leave seven thousand in Israel, even all the knees that have not
bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him, says the Lord. 1.
Kings 19. 18.


R. Why mention you this place? To prove us who at the Communion do kneel to
be like the Baalites? Or why mention you this place? To prove your selves that
refuse to kneel, to be the seven thousand pure ones in England free from all
contagion of idolatry and superstition?

If to the former end, then judge you most badly of the whole State, as of
Idolaters, Baalites, or Hypocrites; and very uncharitably of your brethren as
of men-pleasers, Temporizers, and I know not what. For which I doubt not but
your own conscience does chide you, or will one time or other.

If to the latter end, know you, etc. you shall never prove, either us that
kneel to be Time-seruers, Men-pleasers, and idolaters; or those that will not
stoop, or bow their knees, no not at the Lords table and Communion, to be the
purest and best worshippers of God.

Have you any more to say?


S. Yes, Mark what Naaman said unto the Prophet: Herein the Lord be merciful
unto me (says he) that when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to
worship there, and leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of
Rimmon, when I do bow down (I say) in the house of Rimmon, the Lord be
merciful unto thy servant in this point. 2. Kin. 5. 8.


R. What likeness between the house of Rimmon and our Churches; between the
idol Rimmon, and the holy Communion; between Naamans bowing unto, or before an
idol, and our bending the knee at the Lords table? because the one was cursed
and unlawful, must needs the other be so?


S. When Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, and worshipped him, accepted
Peter of that adoration, or rather did he not reprove Cornelius for so doing?
Acts 10. 25. 26.


R. Cornelius showed too much reverence, and far passing decent order, as
though Peter had bin a God. Geneua annot. 10. 25.
When we give such adoration unto the bread and wine, blame us for committing
idolatry, as Peter did Cornelius: you should prove that in worshipping God
when we kneel at the Lords table, we do that which is unlawful; and to
that end you beat your brains and try your wits, but to no purpose.

And though you see it a very difficult thing, yea impossible for you to
effect; and know besides that our Church has protested and published, that the
Sacrament of the Lords supper is not by Christ's institution to be worshipped;
Art of Reli. 28.
and neither directly nor indirectly imboldeneth any Communicant in Idolatry,
or breadworshippe, but in adoring the Maker and Redeemer of us all: yet no
remedy, in kneeling we are either Idolaters, Baalites, or Temporizing
Naamites in your judgment. O hard and heavy censure! Repent, repent, and
change your uncharitable conceits.


THE SEVENTH OBJECTION.
S. IT is a breach of the second commandment.


R. Whither now!

No marvel that you liken us to Idolaters, Baalites, and Hypocrites, when you
dare affirm our kneeling to be a breach of the second commandment. M. Calvin
having perused our Leiturgie, used in K. Edwards days; says, that he therein
spied multas tolerabiles ineptias, many tolerable imperfections: Calvin.
epist. ad Anglos Francofurt. fol. 158.
but none intolerable impiety at all.

M. Cartwright (that pried into that book for all advantages to bring it into
dislike) does ingenuously confess how the gross errors and manifest impieties
are taken away T. C. 1. rep. 102.
.

And M. Gifford (writing against Barrow and Greenwood) says directly, Reply
to Bar. and Gr. p. 19.
I stand to justify by the word of God, that indeed there is neither idolatry,
heresy, nor blasphemy in the same book. All these learned men (against whom
I know you will not accept, though I could wish they had thought better of our
Church) do show that what you here say, is slanderous and untrue.

But why is it a breach of the second commandment?


S. In that kneeling is a worshipping of God, at or before a creature; namely,
bread and wine.


R. May we not worship God at or before a creature? Then may we not in our
private houses with our family; nor in Gods house, with our even Christians,
worship God any way, but it is a breach of the second commandment. For who can
any where, or at any time worship God, but it is either at, or before some
creature?

Had you said it had been a breach of the second commandment to worship God
at, or before an idol, I had gone with you. (For it is a worshipping of the
true God after a wicked and false manner:) but saying it is a breach of the
second commandment to worship God at, or before a creature (without exception
of any) who can join with you that has his right wits?


S. It is a breach of the second commandment, not only to worship an idol,
but also God at, or before any thing not appointed by himself for such an use.


R. Then is it no breach of the second commandment to worship God at the
participation of bread and wine at the holy Communion. For he has appointed
them for such an use: for who can receive them, or how can they be received
otherwise?

If what you say here be true, (as it is most false) you also that do sit when
ye do participate of that heavenly repast, as well as we that kneel, are
violaters of the second commandment. For ye, even in sitting worship God as
well as we in receiving of the Sacrament, and that before bread and wine too,
which are apppointed of God for such an use. And he eats and drinks
unworthily (whether he kneel or sit) who at the Lords table, and when he
receives bread and wine adoreth not God.

Joshua fell down prostrate before the Ark of God; Josh. 7. 8.
the Shunamite at the Prophet Elisha his feet; 2. King. 4. 37.
the Priests and people of Israel bowed themselves, and fell down on their
faces to the earth upon the pauement, and worshipped and praised the Lord: 2.
Chron. 7. ver. 2, 3.
and yet was neither Joshua nor the Shunamite, nor those holy Priests and
people hitherto charged in these their actions to have broken the second
commandment of the Decalogue.

Cast your eyes, I pray you, upon the Communion book; and mark not only what
every one at the receiving of the sacrament does, but what the Minister also,
at the delivery of the bread and wine says; and you shall find (which you know
well enough) that it well beseems all Communicants to kneel at the hearing
and consideration of such holy and heavenly words. The body of our L. Jesus
Christ, etc. preserve thy body and soul, etc.



S. That prayer is not according to Christ's institution.


R. Prove that, and our controversy shall be quickly at an end.


S. Christ prayed only in the consecration of bread and wine, and not in the
delivery of them.


R. Though he did well in praying at the consecration: yet do we not ill in
praying at the delivery of the Elements. Neither can you show a commandment
from God, either forbidding that we do, or enioining the imitation of his
example.

It has before been proved by me, and acknowledged by you, that we are not
necessarily, and precisely bound to follow the doings of Christ in all things,
when we administer the Sacraments.


S. The prayer is ended before the receiving of bread and wine, and that some
distance of time in great congregations, where the Minister makes the prayer
but once but to some 40. or 50. Communicants, who usually sit all the time of
prayer, and after that fall down on their knees, when the bread and wine are
offered unto them.


R. Impute not the disorders of some Ministers to the whole Church of England.
And if some Communicants do sit all the time of prayer, and after fall down on
their knees, when the bread and wine is offered them, such Communicants would
be taught, and told, that as in this their Kneeling, they do that, which both
the laws of our Church does require, and also pleases God: so their not
Kneling all the time of prayer, is a most evident argument, how they neither
approach unto the Supper of the Lord with such preparation as is requisite; nor
being come, do be have themselves as they should.

For sure I am, and you cannot deny (if advisedly you mark the order of our
Communion book) that albeit the Minister is directed sometimes to Kneel,
sometimes to Stand, and never to Sit: yet the people are by the said book to
Sit never, but always to Kneel from the first to the last.


THE EIGHT OBJECTION.
S. IT is urged, being an humane invention, above the commandment of God.


R. Our Kneeling in the receiving of the Lords Supper, is not an invention
proceeding merely from the wit and invention of man, but (as before has been
said) is so from man, as withal it is the invention, and institution of God.

Quaeritar (says master Calvin, writing about Kneeling at solemn prayers, and
may as well be referred to Kneeling at the solemn receiving of the supper of
the Lord) it is demanded whether it be a tradition of man, which every man may
lawfully refuse or neglect? Now mark his answer.

I say (says he) that it is so of man, as it is also of God. It is of God in
respect that it is a part of that comeliness, the care and keeping whereof is
commanded unto us by the Apostle. It is of man in regard that it specially
betokens that which had in generality rather been pointed to, then
declared. So Calvin Institut. l. 4. c 11.. 30.
.

And this the Church both lawfully may, and commendably does urge and call for
at our hands.


S. It is urged above the commandment of God. Ergo Math. 15. 3, 4, 5. 6.


R. How prove you the Antecedent?


S. I prove it thus: The Minister is to be suspended for giving the bread and
wine to a communicant not Kneeling, but not for giving them to a Communicant,
that neither can, nor will examine himself, before he eats and drinks at
the Lords table. Ergo.


R. Your Antecedent is true in part, and in part not so.

True it is, that the Minister is to be suspended for giving the bread and
wine to a Communicant that can and will not kneel: and his punishment is
deserved. For unworthy is he to minister, that refuses to observe the orders
of that Church whereof he is a Minister. Calvin himself was not only
suspended, but also expulsed from the ministry at Geneua, and that for his
stubborn refusing to administer the Lords Supper, according to the order of
that Church Beza in vita Caluini.
.

There is no Church under the Sun, but will have the rites and ceremonies
there established, to be inuiolably kept, both of Minister and people.

Again, the Antecedent is untrue. For though Ministers be not suspendable,
for giving the Sacrament unto many that will not examine themselves before hand
(and why should they?) seeing neither Gods word, nor man's law, does impose such
a charge upon any Minister, namely, to examine all Communicants, who are to
examine themselves Probet se vnusquisque. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
: yet some that will not themselves examine, as notorious offenders,
Schismatikes, and the like Can. and Constitut. 26. 27. and Rubricke before the
Communion.
, they are not to admit unto the holy Communion, no more then they are to
receive the profane Sitters; and if they do admit such, they are to be
inquired after, and punished by the laws of our Church Archb. Ban. in his
visitatio^ an. 1605. Art. 18.
.

Besides, Ministers be to admit neither ignorant idiots, nor, young Infants, or
children that cannot examine themselves. For if they do, there is punishment by
our laws appointed for them, as well as for those that allow the refractarie
Sitters to participate at the holy table, though the punishment be neither the
same, nor so soon inflicted.


S. You will say peradventure, that the breach of the peace of the Church, is
to be punished severely.


R. You know that where the offense is not small, the punishment should not be
light; and where the disobedience is great, the correction should not be small.


S. They break not the peace of the Church, which cleave fast to Gods word in
every thing, with a meek and quiet spirit.


R. You shall never be able to prove either your Sitting to be a cleaning fast
to Gods word; or our Kneeling to be a swaruing from the same. But I have shown
(which me thinks you should see,) how the same Kneeling is the lawful and
laudable ordinance both of God and man, even of men of God, or good men.

And therefore in mine opinion, it can be no token either of meek spirits,
highly to Sit when their brethren lowly do Kneel; or of quiet minds
obstinately to deny obedience to the orders and constitutions of a most
renowned, and reformed Church.


S. The peace of the Church is more broken by transgressing a manifest and
substantial precept of God, then by not observing a ceremony, whose
lawfulness is questionable; and therefore that should be punished more then
this.


R. You that will not be censured by the Church, will, and here do censure the
doings of a right Christian Church: but from what spirit this does proceed, be
your self judge.

What manifest and substantial precept of God there is, which you say here is
transgressed, you have not yet shown, and I would feign see. And though you
can name (as you cannot) any such commandment broken: yet let me put you in
mind, how the violating even of the moral and substantial precepts of God,
have sometimes, and that by God himself (in man's eyes and before the world)
with less rigor and severity been punished, then the contemptuous breach
even of ceremonial ordinances.

For what, I pray you, was Adams eating the forbidden fruit Gen 3.
: the Bethshemites prying into the Ark of God 1. Sam. 6. 19.
: Vzza his touching of the same 2. Sam. 6. ver. 6. 7.
: Vzziah his offering of incense 2. Chron. 26. ver. 19, 20.
: the man's gathering of sticks upon the Sabbath day Number. 15. 35
: but violations, or breaches of laws not absolutely moral in themselves, but
either typical or ceremonial, and yet what sins were ever so punished as some
of them? what more horrible in Gods eyes then all of them?

In the new testament, touching the Supper of the Lord (which we have now in
hand) the Apostle says, That whosoever shall eat this bread, etc. unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, eats and drinks his own
damnation, etc. and procures weakness, sickness and bodily death 1. Cor. 11. v.
27, 29, 30.
: Now who were they in that Church, and at that time, which did eat
unworthily, and therefore were so chastised? were they not such as
transgressed, and would not obey, nor keep the received orders of Gods people,
and despised his Church Ibid. v. 21.
, even the public place appointed for Gods worship? Like unto those that will
receive Sitting, when by order established they should take the Communion
Kneeling.

Wilful and open Schismatikes do more offend the church, then either privy
heretics which secretly undermine the truth; or close malefactors, whatsoever
their transgressions be: and therefore deserve the sharper castigation. Before
Kneeling by authority was enioined, it was lawful for us, and all men, to
question about the lawfulness thereof: but being once appointed, now to resuse
to bow, sauoureth not of his spirit, which said: If any man be contentious, we
have no such custom, nor the Church of God 1 Cor. 11. 16
.

And therefore he that shall say, how that should be more punished then this;
(being no Prince, nor called to counsel) passes the limits both of
discretion, and modesty, finding fault with that which he cannot justly
mislike, and ought rather with a meek and ready mind to perform, then
masterly to control. For what are you, or I that we should condemn the
public and allowed orders of our Church in matters indifferent, and
ceremonial; and whose lawfulness, even by your last words is questionable?


OBJECTION 9.
S. IT is so doubtful and disputable (to say no more) that a man can not have
faith in the doing of it. Ergo. Romans 14. 22, 23.


R. He that shall mark your words considerately, will hardly think that you
are of mind, how it is a thing questionable, doubtful, and disputable, whether
to Kneel in the receiving the Supper of the Lord, be lawful or no. For you
say expressly, that a man for his Kneeling cannot have faith, and so in Kneeling
sins: which is the worst that can be said thereof.

Besides, you insinuate, that having said your worst, you could yet say more
against the same, which would be known.

But whatsoever you either think, or have said, or can say, we would ye should
know, that we are of mind, that our Governors do well, and have Gods word for
their warrant, ^n commanding us to Kneel; and that we do not ill, neither
sin, in obeying their commandments. For we are verily persuaded in our
consciences, that we please God in kneeling; and should sin, did we Sit, and
not Kneel, as many do. For Gods word is both for the approbation of all things
making for order, comelines, and edification in the Church (of which nature we
are out of doubt, and have proved our Kneeling is;) and against all disorders,
and indecent gestures, tending to the decay of godly devotion in Christian
people, as the inreuerent, I say not irreligious, Sitting at the Lords table,
as at a common and profane banquet seems to be and is.

Wherefore I do thus argue against you:

That, for the doing whereof a man may have faith, is to be done.

But for his Kneeling in the receiving the holy Supper, a man may have faith:
Therefore it is to be done, (or we are to Kneel in the receiving the Supper of
the Lord.)

And against your Sitting, I do thus reason, and cut you with your own knife:

That, for the doing whereof no man among us can have faith, is not to be done:
but for his Sitting in the receiving the holy Supper of the Lord no man among
us can have faith:

Therefore it is not to be done or used.

The proposition is your own, or rather S. Paul's. The Assumption is
justifiable, for you have no warrant from Gods word, nor man's law for Sitting,
as we have for Kneeling; yea by this your Sitting a triple fault is committed.
For first, Sitting at the receiving the Lords Supper is without ground of
Scripture, yea, is flat against Gods word, because it is against public
order, indecent, and tends both to the nourishing of strife among brethren,
and engenders confusion among us all.

Next, it is directly opposite to the public ordinance of our Church.

And lastly, it is very offensive both to the whole State, and to millions of
Gods people, who like well and allow of Kneeling, and mislike of Sitting at the
Supper of the Lord.


S. They which mislike of Kneeling in the act of receiving, both in England,
and in other reformed Churches, are neither few, nor unlearned, nor ungodly.


R. Now reason you from examples, which kind of reasoning is of no validity.
Be it you have ten thousand in this land; and of them a thousand, neither
unlearned nor ungodly Ministers; yet are they but private men against an whole
State.

One singular man, bringing only the Scriptures of God for the maintenance of
his opinion, is of regard, when all these are not, without Gods word,
conflicting with a whole Church.

And as for Churches reformed in other places, I know there be, that like
better of their own Sitting, or Standing (according to the fashions of their
several countries: Sta^s communicate Lugdunensis, and sedens forte qui est
Cracouij. ( Iezler. de diutur. belli Euchar. p. 97.) In other places they go
and receive it for the more expedition. (T. C. admon. p. 84.)
) yet cannot you name any one of them all that mislikes of our Kneeling.


S. Your argument from the authority of the Church is only probable, not
demonstratiue, and so unable to breed faith.


R. I have proved the lawfulnes of our Kneeling, by arguments more then
probable, drawn and derived from the word of God, and so most forceable to
engender faith: whereunto I will add (because examples do so pierce and
prevail with you) the examples of D. Rainolds, Sparks, M. Chaderton, and
Knewstubs, who were not so wedded to their own opinions, and other men's
examples at the first, but they afterward upon better aduisement, and
conference with most godly and worthy men, altered their minds and promised
conformity, even to all things required, Con^er. at Hamp. p. 98. 103.
and so to this our Kneeling, whereof some of them have left most famous and
public monuments both to their own high praise, and credit: and the singular
benefit of Gods people: to the serious and conscionable perusal whereof, and
of the premises, I do very friendly refer you.


S. God reveal the truth in this controversy, and grant it may be embraced
to his glory, and the peace of his Church, Amen.


R. A good conclusion, whereunto from my heart and soul I likewise do say,
Amen. So be it.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE about Kneeling in the very act of receiving the holy
Communion.

Between an humorous Schismatike, and a settled Professor.

Confess. Sueuic. Cap. 14. Ciuilibus legibus, quae cum pietate non pugnant, eo
quisque Christianus paret pomptius, quo fide Christi est imbutus before. That
is: The more faith that any Christian is endued with, the more obedient is he
unto all civil ordinances, which be not contrary unto godliness.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Ballard dwelling on Adling-hill. 1608.

The contents of the second Dialogue.
Whether Kneeling at the Communion be an institution of man, or no. Sectio 1.
Whether Kneeling be used without all respect of reverence unto God, in the
Church of England. Sect. 2. Whether Kneeling at the Communion be a
wil-worshippe. Sect. 3. Whether Christ his example in every thing at the
ministration of the Communion is necessary to be followed. Sect. 4. Whether our
Kneeling be Popish and Idolatrous. Sect. 5. Whether Kneeling hinders the
sweet familiarity between Christ and his Church. Sect. 6. Whether Christ sat
of purpose. Sect. 7. Whether Christ prescribed a special gesture for the
Communion. Sect. 8. Whether the prayer at the delivery of the bread and wine be
justifiable. Sect. 9. Whether Kneeling at the Communion be a gesture
indifferent. Sect. 10. Whether Kneeling at the Communion as much is to be
abhorred as the worshipping of Images. Sect. 11. Whether Kneeling at the
Communion be a show of evil, and the greatest scandal. Sect. 12. Whether the
Kings commandment to Kneel, makes Kneeling to be no sin. Sect. 13.
THE SECOND DIAlogue about kneeling at the holy Communion.
BETWEEN AN HVMEROVS Schismaticke, and a settled Professor.

Schis. THE proposition which I hold, and will maintain, is this: namely, that
kneeling in the very act of taking, eating, and drinking the Sacramental bread
and wine in the holy Communion, cannot be without sin.


Pro. What hear I? Cannot kneeling, no not in the very act, I say not of
eating and drinking, but of taking, eating, and drinking the Sacramental bread
and wine; and that not privately, but publicly; nor profanely, but in the
holy Communion, be without sin? what uncouth, what horrible, what hellish
assertion do I hear?

Had you said how many both men and women, may, and some do sin, even in
kneeling at the Lords table, and when they take, eat, and drink the
Sacramental bread and wine in the holy Communion, you had said that which by
lamentable experience we find to be too true: but that all persons whatsoever
which receive that holy Sacrament Kneeling, do sin, yea even in kneeling
cannot but sin; or that their said Kneeling cannot be without sin, who can
so much as think this without great sin? who can speak it without offense?
who can hear it without horror, and detestation? From what Afric came this
monster? From what hell this error? Name the brocher, show the Auctor? If thou
can do neither of them, tell yet thy suggestions, Schismatike, which make
thee to be of this mind.


SECT. 1.
Whether Kneeling at the Communion be an institution of man, and how.

Schis. IT is to be understood, that howsoever Kneeling may (in itself
considered) be esteemed a natural gesture of the body, as Standing, Sitting,
etc: yet in this case it is by institution of man. For neither nature, nor
custom does teach us ordinarily to kneel when we eat and drink; neither does
the word require Kneeling in this case.


Pro. Indeed Nature teaches us, whether we eat, drink, or whatsoever we do,
to do all things decently, and with good manners, but prescribes no certain
form and manner in eating and drinking, how we are to eat, or drink, judging
all drinking and eating to be commendably, which is ciuilly done. And the God
of Nature will have all things in his church decently, and in order performed,
not setting down a manner how, but leaving the determination of forms to the
discretion of his people; as deeming all things to be commendably, which are
comely and orderly done in his Church.

As then whatsoever the manner is of our eating and drinking commonly in private
houses, and taking our corporal repast, if it be ciuilly taken, is by the
direction of Nature her self: even so whatsoever the form and manner of our
taking, eating and receiving the Sacramental bread and wine in the holy
Communion, is, if it be orderly taken and decently done, is from God and his
word.

Albeit therefore neither Nature enioineth us to Kneel, no more then to Sit or
Stand, when we eat and drink; nor the word or holy Scripture, to Kneel, no
more then to Stand or Sit when we receive the Sacrament: yet, as our common
eating and drinking according to the laudable customs of our country where we
live, is from Nature though instituted by man, or made usual by custom; even
so our Kneeling in eating and drinking the sacramental bread and wine in the
holy Communion, is from the word of God originally, though instituted by man,
inasmuch as God is the fountain of all decent orders in his Church, as after
God Nature is the author of all civility and good manners among men in the
world.

Think not then how Kneeling at the Communion is by Institution of man, or
merely from man, not required by the word. For both man appoints, and God
approves; and by authority from God man appoints, and by the ministry of
man God approves our Kneeling. And so our said Kneeling is not so much the
institution of man, as of God, and required in his word.

So that in Kneeling, though sometimes, and some people may, yet always, and
all persons do not sin, yea all Communicants, if otherwise they offend not,
do serve and please God by kneeling.


SECT. 2.
Whether Kneeling be used without all respect of reverence unto God, in the
Church of England.

Schis. IF it be by institution, it must be either in respect of a more
reverend receiving, or not.


Pro. Of all reverend manners of receiving the holy Sacrament, Kneeling is the
most reverend; and so, and none otherwise instituted, and used by us of the
reformed Church in England.


Schis. But if the most solemn sign of reverence (used in these parts of the
world) be without al respect of reverence, and that by institution of authority
in so high a part of Gods service, may not such Kneeling be judged, if not a
gross Mat. 27. 29.
mocking of Christ, as was the soldiers bowing of Knees before him, yet a
taking of the name of God in vain, seeing all significations of honor in Gods
service, ought to be to the honor of his name; and an oath not religiously
intended (as in Mal. 1. 6. 7.
the nature thereof it ought to be) to the houour of God, is Iere. 4. 2.
the taking of Gods name in vain?


Pro. Is kneeling at the communion a sign, a solemn, yea the most solemn
sign of reverence used in these parts of the world, by your own confession;
and may not, yea cannot that solemn, that most solemn sign of reverence at
the receiving of bread and wine at the Communion be expressed without sin?
which is your proposition?

Who observing and believing these your words, which are most true, but will
fall into a loathing of the said assertion.

But your said proposition is not more odious, then your saying (that the most
solemn kind of reverence used in these parts of the world, is without all
respect of reverence, and that by institution of authority) is false and
slanderous. For neither do all Churches in these parts of the world, either use
to kneel, or kneel without all respect of reverence, by institution of
authority; neither if some do kneel without such respect, and that by
institution of authority, be all churches to be charged, and blamed for this
fault, but least of all the Church of England, where this sign, this solemn,
this most solmne sign, with all possible respect of reverence is given to God,
and that by institution of authority.

Where therefore this sign of reverence is without all respect of reverence
given, and that by institution of authority in so high a part of Gods service,
Kneeling there may rightly be judged both a gross mocking of Christ, as was
the soldiers their bowing of Knees before him; and is the taking of the name
God in vain.

But what is this to our Kneeling here in England at the participation of the
blessed Sacrament, where all things are by authority enioined to be done, both
respectively, reverently, and with due devotion, void of superstition?


Schis. Did Naaman newly brought to the knowledge of 2. Kin. 6. 11.
God, attribute so much to the bowing in the house of Rimmon, when his master
leaned on him, so that it was not his voluntary action; and shall we, who have
had the Gospel long, Kneeling by institution, and determination, in a principal
part of Gods service, make no account whether we honor God, or no, by Kneeling?


Pro. Naaman the Assyrian, neither voluntarily would, nor forcible could be
drawn to commit Idolatry: whose example may teach us all, (whether old
Professors, or new Conuerts) to keep our selves free from all Idolatrous
pollutions.

Naaman after his conversion came (if he did come) into the house of Rimmon,
and bowed (as we come into our Churches and Kneel,) but yet neither be our
Churches as the house of Rimmon, neither bow we so much as before Idols, much
less idolatrously, when we participate of the sacred mysteries.

And though by institution and determination of the Church when we take, eat,
and drink, we Kneel: yet by our said kneeling we do honor God in this
principal part of his service; your self has acknowledged the gesture of
Kneeling to be the most solemn sign of reverence, we do say the same.


SECT. 3.
Whether Kneeling at the Communion be a will worship.

Schis. IF Kneeling be instituted for a more reverent receiving, then it must
be either in regard of God, or of bread and wine.


Pro. Not of bread and wine.


Sch. If in regard of God, then must we be well persuaded that such kneeling is
an acceptable service unto his majesty.


Pro. We are so persuaded, or ought so to be, else in Kneelieg Romans 14. 23.
we sin, yea, as you say, it cannot be without sin. For whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin.


Schis. That this may be, we must consider, whether such Kneeling be a will
worship, or a service reasonable, and according Romans 12. 2. and 14. 5. 23. Isa.
29. 13. Mat. 15. 9. Leuit. 10. 2, 3 1. Chr. 13. 10. and 15. 12, 13,
to Gods will, lest otherwise we find ourselves so far from honoring God, as
that we provoke him: as did Nadab and Abihu, who offered incense, but not the
very fire which God appointed, and were therefore devoured with fire. And as
did king David, and the Priests, who carried the Arc otherwise then it ought to
have been, and therefore Vzza died for it with a sudden death. For God will
be sanctified (if not by, yet) in all them that come near him.


Pro. Our kneeling is no will worship, but a service reasonble, and according
to Gods will, as be all the ecclesiastical ordinances whatsoever, not besides
or contrary to the revealed will of God.

Such constitutions I call not humane tradition (says Bullinger) Bulling. Dec.
2. Ser. 1.
because they are derived from the divine Scripture, not devised in the brain
of man, and used of her ( viz. the Church) which hearkneth unto the voice of
her only shepherd, acknowledging not the voice of others. For example, the
Church comes together to hear Gods word, and unto public prayers, both in
the morning and evening at appointed hours, as is commodious for every place
and people: and that is in stead of a law (Again) the Church has
supplications, holy days, and (publque) fasts under certain laws. The Church
(moreover) at certain times, in a certain place, and prescribed manner
celebrateth the sacraments, and that according to the laws, and received
custom of the Church. The Chuch (likewise) baptizeth infants, remoueth not
women from the Lords Supper: and this she has for a law. By her deputed Judges
the Church determines in causes matrimonial, and in these things has
certain laws. But all these and other like these she draws from the
(general) scriptures, and for edification sake applies them to places, times,
and persons, whereby we may indeed behold in sundry Churches a diversity (of
forms) but no discord at all. So that worthy man.

And agreeably hereunto the Church of Sweathland: Quae cum Scriptura co^sonant:
those constitutions which agree with Confess S^^uica, in Har. confess.. 17. p.
290.
the Scripture, and be ordained for the bettering of manners and benefit of
mankind, albeit according to the very word, they be not expressed in the
Scriptures: yet in as much as they proceed from the (general) precept of
Love, which has ordained all things in most comely order, they deserve to be
esteemed divine, rather then humane constitutions, etc. Many such truly the
Church does lawfully observe at this day, and as occasion also is ministered
appoints new, which whosoever shall reject (the words are memorable,) he does
despise the authority not of men, but of God, whose tradition it is, whatsoever
is commodious* And so they (whose words have passed uncensured by the
publishers of the Harmony of the Churches confessions.)

If you then can show no word of God to the contrary, we cannot but hold the
order for Kneeling to be the ordinance of God.

And therefore the example by you cited of Nadab, Abihu, and Vzza, trouble not
us, who conscionably do Kneel, and keep the orders of a most reformed Church:
but may pierce your heart, and the rest of our new Recusants, the separated
brotherhood, who obstinately despise, and violate the ordinances of our Church;
allowed, because no where disallowed in the book of God.


SECT. 4.
Whether Christ his example in every thing at the ministration of the
Communion, is necessarily to be followed.

Schis. But Kneeling is contrary to the example of Christ and his Apostles.


Pro. Well may kneeling differ, but surely it is contrary to none example of
theirs.


Schis. They ministered, and received Sitting, or in such a Luke 22* 14. 1. Cor.
11. 1.
gesture, as in those Countries was most used at eating.


Pro. The truth is, you cannot directly say, how the Lords supper was ministered
or received in Christ and his Apostles days, and therefore you say how by them
it was ministered and received Sitting.


Schis. From his example to differ without warrant from Gods word, cannot be
without fault.


Pro. Nay rather to bind us necessarily to the example of Christ in all
ceremonial matters, without warrant from Gods word, cannot be without great
offense.


Schis. Examples of holy men, much more of Christ, are to be followed, except
there be some reasonable cause to the contrary.


Pro. True.


Schis. The Apostle to reform an abuse which crept (even in their times) into
Love feasts, which were immediately before, or after the Lords Supper, did
banish them thence, and reduced the manner of administering the Lords Supper to
the first institution, saying, Shall I praise you in this? I praise 1. Cor. 11.
22. 23.
you not. For I have received of the Lord, which I have also delivered unto you.


Pro. The Loue-feasts, abused by the Corinthians, were spoken against by the
Apostle, not because they were feasts, or feasts of Love, made after, or before
the receiving the Communion, but for that they were abused; neither for their
abuse were they quite banished out of the Church, as you untruly say, but only
blamed, and yet continued in the Church of God.

A fitter example could you not bring forth then this of Love feasts. For never
did Christ (to whose example in celebrating of his Supper you would precisely
bind us) institute, and minister the said Supper, either after, or before such
a feast, as did the Churches in the Apostles times, and that commendably.

This shows how things of themselves indifferent, and tending unto
edification, may be added without sin unto the sacred Supper; and being
added, through man's corruption abused, may be reduced notwithstanding to their
first and laudable institution, and continued in Gods church, as were the Love
feasts.


Schis. Nay hereby it is apparent, that that form of administration which
differs from the first institution, is worthy no praise, and therefore no
acceptable service of God.


Pro. Not so apparent as you ween.

The Apostle blamed the Corinthians (as I have told you) not for their Love
feasts (a form among them of administering the Lords Supper) but for their
abusing them to the dishonor of God, and offense of the world. Which feasts
before they were abused were well allowed, and counted both worthy of praise,
and an acceptable service of God, differing but not contrary to his will*
Which may tell and teach you: First, how the Church is not always and strictly
bound to one and the same form of administering the holy Supper.

Next, that what Christ did, and what he said, and instituted is to be
considered: and that what he instituted is always and necessarily to be
done, but not what he did. For his actions serve for our instruction always,
but not for our imitation ever: his institutions be injunctions: his deeds
personal, and circumstantiall: his precepts substantial: his actions for a
great part accessorie, and arbitrarie; his injunctions evermore necessary.
Hence blame we the Papists for denying the Cup unto the common people; and the
Artotorites for adding Cheese to the Lords Supper, contrary to the institution
of Christ: but we blame neither the Corinthians, and primitive Church of old,
nor the reformed Churches in these days, for swaruing from the form of
Christ's ministering the Sacrament in certain ceremonial, indifferent,
accidental, and circumstantiall points, whom we should and would blame, were
their administering (how differing soever from the form of Christ his
celebrating) the holy Supper, a service displeasing, and not acceptable to God.

And here the wisdom of our Lord and Savior shows it self most admirable,
who having prescribed and instituted what he would have done; has not
prescribed yet the form and manner how he would have the Sacraments
administered, enioyning general things, as Take, Eat, Drink, etc. but leaving
the special manner of taking and receiving the bread and wine unto the liberty
and discretion of his elected spouse; thinking that praise* worthy, and
acceptable unto his holiness, whatsoever in this matter is formally, decently,
and to the edification of his church and children, done and performed.


Schis. If the Apostle would not tolerate an indifferent thing (as was a Love
feast till then) to continue so near the Lords Supper when it was abused, how
would they allow the change of Sitting into Kneeling, especially in these two
considerations?


Pro. Saint Paul was not of your mind, who cannot brook but do condemn
whatsoever unto Idolatry, or sin has been abused. Therefore did he and
his brethren the Apostles continue these Love feasts, whose reformation they
sought after they were abused, never counting them because they were abused by
some persons, to be utterly, and ever afterward to be unlawful, and for no
use in Gods Church. Hence the Apostles, Peter, and 2. Pet. 2. 13. Jude ver. 12.
Jude, speak of Love feasts in use in their time, without condemning them for
their abuse; and Tertullian reports how they were frequent in his days; and
yet ever abused by some ill disposed persons or other. In Aprlog. ^^9.


And therefore that the said Apostle would both less allow of, and more
condemn Kneeling, which never was so abused in our Church as were the Love
feasts in the primitive Church, and especially at Corinth, is very improbable,
I may say impossible to be true. But because you are of mind that for two
considerations the Apostles would condemn them, conceal not your reasons,
that they may be considered of.


SECT. 5.
Whether our Kneeling be Popish and Idolatrous.

Schis. FIrst the abuse of Love feasts ( viz. superfluity) was never so great,
and scandalous in the Apostles times, as the abuse of Kneeling ( viz.
Idolatry) was, and is in the Synagogue of Rome.


Pro. It is well that you grant Love feasts, and Kneeling to be of one and the
same nature, and of themselves indifferent. For you confess they have all
been abused; and so implie that good use was made both of Kneeling, and of
Love feasts before they were abused: but neither could they be used well at the
first, or abused afterward, had they or either of them simply been ill, and
so unlawful.

That as Love feasts, so Kneeling at the receiving the holy Communion and
blessed Sacrament has bin abused, the whole world does know, and may not be
denied.

Let it also be granted (which is most true) that the abuse of Love feasts was
never so great, and scandalous in the Apostles times, as the abuse of Kneeling
was, and is in the Synagogue of Rome: But what make you of all this? May we
not therefore Kneel at any time, or in any reformed Church when we receive the
Communion, because there was, and is such abuse of Kneeling in the Synagogue of
Rome? And if we in our Churches do Kneel, is our offense greater then the
abuse of Love feasts? or cannot that same thing be used without sin or
offense at one time and place, which is abused in another? or well used, and to
Gods glory by some persons, which impiously and to the high dishonor of God is
profaned by others?

Kneeling in the very act of receiving, I confess, of some hypocrites in our
reformed Churches may be abused, as were the Love feasts in the Apostles days;
but so grossly; generally, and scandalously, as were either the Love feasts in
the primitive Church, or is Kneeling in the Synagogue of Rome, me thinks you
should blush to say, sure I am, you shall never prove.

You say Love feasts were by superfluity (I add by sursetting also,
drunkenness, pride, vain-glorie, contempt of the poor Christians:) Kneeling
also among the Papists unto Idolatry (a most horrible sin) and superstition
is abused: but so many ways, in so open sort, so impiously is Kneeling abused
in no Church reformed.

Love feasts by many, and that openly were abused by bad 2. Pet. 2. 13. Iud.
ver. 8.
Christians, who at those Love feasts were as blots and spots, but was not the
fault of the whole Church Christian; Kneeling at the Mass is the sin of all
Caco-catholiques, yea and of their whole Church: but if Kneeling among us in or
any other Church is abused, the blame is to be laid neither upon the whole
Church, but upon some particular professors; neither is it an open and public
scandal, at least not always, nor every where, but an hidden sin of some
few hypocrites.


Schis. Love feasts were either before, or after the Supper, whereas Kneeling is
in the principal part of the holy Communion.


Pro. Whether these feasts of Love were celebrated before or after the holy
Communion it is uncertain, and not material. The most Divines notwithstanding
do think, that after; but whether before or after, they went together, the
Love feasts with the holy Sacrament, the Sacrament not without the Love feasts.

It is generally held, that among the Jews there was a yearly Beza in Luc. 22.
20. Calvin* in 1. Cor. 11. 21.
custom, when they did eat their Paschal Lamb, to adioine unto that Sacrament a
ceremonial eating of bread, and drinking of wine. In imitation of these Jews,
and Banquets, Beza in Act. 2. 42.
the first Christians at the administration of the holy Sacrament, made feasts
called Agaps, or banquets of charity.

The Jews for their feasting after the Passover, had neither the president of
Moses, nor the precept of God: nor the Christians any either president, or
commandment of Christ for the Love feasts. Calvin. in Math. 26. 26. Conference
at Hampt. p. 68. Beza in 2. Pet 2. 13. and in lud. 12. Tertul. in Apolog. c. 39.


Those Suppers and feasts of the Jews notwithstanding were so liked of Christ,
as he made of those Suppers the Sacrament of his body and blood. And
Christians in the Primitive Church termed their Agapas their feasts of
charity, the Supper of the Lord, Sacra conuiuia, sacra ecclesiastici coetus
conuiuia, yea the Supper of the Lord.

Who observing this, but must confess that God does not, as you Schimatike
do, condemn all Rites and Ceremonies about the Sacrament, which himself has
not instituted; and they therefore are much out of the way, which condemn
every thing instituted by man about the worship of God, though never so
orderly established, and decent, even for none other cause but for that God
has not expressedly appointed the form in his holy word. Whence our kneeling
is so condemned, and that the more because it is to be done in the principal
part of the holy Communion.

But, sir, if Kneeling be as it is, and you have truly confessed, the most
solemn sign of reverence, when I pray you, is it better to show this sign
then at the receite of the Sacrament of our redemption by the body and blood
of Christ, signified by bread and wine, and the most principal of all outward
worship which we can perform unto God?


Schis. If the Apostle banished Love feasts from the Lords Supper, and brought
the Church to the simplicity of the first institution, is it not a tempting
sin to retain the Idolatrous Kneeling of Papists, and reject the exemplarie
Sitting of our master Christ?


Pro. Not too fast. It is not granted that the Apostles Love feasts, either
because they were of man's institution, or by ungodly persons abused unto sin,
were banished.

Those feasts growing to abuse, the Apostle seeks to amend, Calvin in 1. Cor.
11. 21. Beza in 2. Pet. 2. 13. and in Iud. v. 12.
says Calvin, to correct, says Beza: but neither Calvin, nor Beza, nor any
other Divine ancient or neotericall does say, that the Apostle for their abuse,
did either banish or abolish them.

But were they banished: yet were they afterward and soon called home again
from banishment, and received into grace: Antiquity bears witness of the
use, even the good use of them in, and after the Apostles days, which before
had been abused.

Whence learn we either not to banish things for their abuse, but to amend
them; or if we banish, to take them into favor again when they be reformed,
but never utterly to condemn them as unlawful, only because they have been
abused.

In imitation therefore of the Apostles, and other holy Fathers of the first,
and best Churches, by using such things well (and namely Kneeling at the receipt
of the sacred bread and wine) which had been abused, if you judge us to do il,
your sin is great; and the more if you suppose the reforming of the said
Kneeling, and applying it to good and holy use, to be a retaining of the
Idolatrous Kneeling of the Papists, and a tempting sin.

And though we follow not the special gesture of our Savior, and his
Disciples in taking the sacramental signs: yet reject we not his example as
ill, but like of ours, as in our judgment more meet and convenient for the
times and country wherein we do live and reside.

When you do prove our Communion to be a Mass, I will confess our said
Kneeling to be Popish, yea, Idolatry: and so we in Kneeling to commit a
tempting sin: which you know, and I dare say, you shall never do.


Schis. How can we imagine Christ to be honored by Kneeling, we kneeling in
that Sacrament, and in that part of 1. Cor. 10. 17.
the Sacrament, which especially sets forth our Communion with Christ and
his Church, and is therefore called the Communion?


Pro. I had almost gathered from your speech, that baptism is no Sacrament of
our Communion with Christ, and his Church, but marking the word, Especially, I
see that Baptism is acknowledged to be a Sacrament thereof as well as the
Lords Supper.

But, I pray you, is it a sin, yea, atempting sin for any Math. 3. 6. Acts
8. 12. 10. 47. 48. 16. 33.
to be baptized Kneeling? When John baptized in Jordan; Philip at Samaria:
Peter at Cesarea: Paul at Philippos: these and the rest of the Apostles in
other places, did none which received the Sacrament, Kneel? Can you say they
did not; dare you affirm they might not without sin? Or in these days, in
no Church and place, may no converted Jew, Turk, or Pagan, renouncing his or
their impieties, and false worshippings, embracing the Gospel, and desirous to
be incorporated and baptized into the same body with us, may not these, I say,
nor any of these without sin, yea a tempting sin receive these favors from
God, and his Church, and be baptized Kneeling? And if some that can, may
receive that Sacrament Kneeling, may none yet participate of the heavenly
graces offered especially in the Lords Supper to all worthy Communicants,
Kneeling? And if in the special Sacrament of our Communion they may: yet may
they not Kneel in that part of the Sacrament, which especially sets forth
our Communion with Christ? And if they so do, thereby tempt they and provoke
they God to plague them, even for their very Kneeling, though never so
reverently, and with all possible Faith, charity, and piety done, and
performed? O strange divinity!

No Sacrament, yea nothing so places before the eyes of our souls, either the
wrath and justice of God upon man for sin, or his Philanthropie, his tender
and incomprehensible love toward makind in his Son Christ Jesus, as the
external elements of bread and wine consecrated at the holy Supper do; nor
does any part of the same Supper so affect the minds of the truly zealous and
Christian, as the exhibiting before their eyes, and putting into their hands
the pledges of Gods pacification through Christ, the tokens of our atonement
with God. And therefore is no Sacrament so reverently to be received as the
Lords supper on our part; nor any part of the same Supper to be performed with
like ceremonies of zeal and devotion, as the very taking and receiving the
bread and wine, neither can we so express and testify the same reverence, as
by Kneeling. Your self before said (then which you never spoke truer words)
how the most solemn sign of reverence is Kneeling.

The Sacrament is called, you say, The Communion; be Luke 22. 29. 1. Cor. 11.
26.
it so. It is likewise called, The new Testament, and of the Fathers, The
Sacrament Eucharisticall, or of Thanksgiving: and can we better manifest our
thankful hearts unto our heavenly father, then on bended knees? And can there
be no Communion, even at the Communion, if we Kneel? Does the external either
Kneeling, Sitting, or Standing, further or hinder our Communion between Christ
and his Church?

These things duly considered, we ought not to imagine, but that Christ as well
is honored and better, by Kneeling in the act of receiving, then by any other
site or gesture of body whatsoever.


Schis. That cannot be, seeing it swarueth not only from his example, but also
from the practice of all reformed churches, Concert. eccles. Cathol. in Arg.
except in England, which the Papists themselves call Puritano-papisticall, by
retaining this, and other Popish corruptions.


Pro. The swaruing from the example of Christ is no strong and true Argument
that we dishonor God in so doing. For if that were true, no Curch should be
pure from dishonouring God. You cannot name a Church or company of Christians
in the whole world, which in the ministering and receiving the Supper of the
Lord, varieth not from Christ his example, and that manifoldly; which yet in
their ministrations do honor God.

If England herein do swerve from all reformed Churches, will you therefore
conclude that the Church of England only does dishonor God?

We condemn not other Churches for their not Kneeling; neither does any
Church, nor should you Schismatikes condemn ours for our Kneeling.

And yet false is it that we Christians in England only, T. C. admon. to the
Peo. of England, p. 84 M. Couerdale of the order of administration the Lords
supper, E. 8. ^.
when we communicate, do Kneel. For all the Churches in Basil, Saxony,
Denmark, and many in Germany, by the orders of their several Churches at the
Communion, as well as we in England, do kneel. Either therefore those
Churches be not in the number of Churches reformed in your judgment; or they
dishonor God by their said Kneeling, so well as we: the former of which you
will not, I think, say, and if you should, all Gods faithful servants
thorowout the world will condemn you for your headie and uncharitable
judgment; the latter you should not without blushing affirm, and we are so
far from imagining that thereby we dishonor God, as we are of mind that
God is by no external site or gesture of body, at the Communion, so honored
as by Kneeling.

What the Papists think of, and term the Church of England, we are not
ignorant, neither do regard. But how Popish they think our Kneeling at the
holy W. Rainolds of the Sacrament, c. 3. p. 100. c. 10. p. 233. c. 3. p. 103.
Communion to be, judge by their words, expressing their thoughts of the holy
Supper, which they term A peevish Supper, fitter for Pagans than Christians,
more meet for dogs then men, proceeding directly from the Devil. Can any
man think our kneeling to be a Popish corruption, either hearing these
things, or reading them either in Popish writings, or truly cited out of Popish
books?

They abhor our bread and wine, as Schismatic, as heretical, as leading
the high way to Gods wrath and indignation, ^bid. c. 11. p. 242.
to hell and damnation. It is no Popish corruption which they so abhor, much
less abhor they our Kneeling as Popish; yea, they abhor it because it is
not Popish. They are simple and very strangers from the Papists opinions of
our Church, and her ceremonies, which so think and speak.


Schis. Such Kneeling may be an argument (especially to a Papist, not
understanding our tongue) that we have Communion with Antichrist, and his
Synagogue, at least in the Idolatry of bread-worship, which our failng, or
carelessness to auow our Communion with Christ and his Church, and not
abhorring all Communion with Antichrist, and his Synagogue, cannot be without
grievous sin.


Pro. If what last I said be true, as no right Papist (whether he understand
our tongue, or not) cannot be doubtful of, our Kneeling cannot possibly be
any Argument of Communion with Antichrist and his Synagogue in Idolatry.

Besides, what Papist is there but knows that the bread and wine at the Altar
once consecrated, by their doctrine, are Council. Trid. ses. 13. can. 2. 6.
transubstantiated forthwith into the very body and blood of Christ; and
being so transubstantiated, by and by, as the only begotten Son of God, both
of Priest and people, under the pain of the Pope his curse, with divine honor
and worship, to be adored?

To have these thoughts, and to exhibit this adoration unto the elements, this
is to communicate with Antichrist, and his Synagogue; but our reverend and
humble Kneeling at the taking and receiving the bread and wine in a thankful
remembrance of the death of Christ, and of all the benefits we are partakers of
by his passion, and that without althought or show of adoring the bread and
wine: this is no communicating with Antichrist, and his Synagogue. Having these
cogitations, though we Kneel, we have Communion with Christ and his Church,
and having not these thoughts, we have no Communion at all with his Church,
though we Sit and Kneel not.

As therefore it is not the Kneeling, but the impious conceits wherewith their
hearts be possessed and replenished, when they approach to the Sacrament, that
makes the Papists to be Idolaters: so neither does our Kneeling exclude us
from all Communion with Christ, and his Church; nor your Sitting, that joins
you in fellowship with the same.

As gross Idolatry may you commit in not Kneeling, as any persons ever did,
or as the Papists now do in Kneeling. But we charge not you, as you do us (yet
very uncharitably) whose part were rather to conceive better of them, whose
doctrine in the most principal points of Religion, about the Sacrament
especially, is one and the same with yours (light being not more contrary to
darkness, nor heaven to hell* then what both ye which Sit, and we which
Kneel, do hold therein, is opposite and contrary to the doctrine of the
Synagogue of Rome.

Wherefore as we say not that ye, differing from us that Kneel, have no
Communion with Christ and his church, because ye Sit; and do commit a grievous
sin (did ye not offend against public order) for that with us ye Kneel
not: no more should ye have so much as an imagination, that we have Communion
with Antichrist and his Synagogue, because we Kneel, and do commit a
grievous sin, for that with you we Sit not when we do receive, especially
seeing God does not forbid, and Christian authority commands us to Kneel.

Sittng and kneeling are but outward ceremonies, nothing to the substance of
Religion, concerning the true communion with Christ and his Church at all, and
of themselves indifferent, did not the godly Magistrate enioine the one, and
prohibit the other.

Finally, as you which Sit, and we which Kneel differ in ceremonies, but not
in the maine points of doctrine, and in this latter respect hold communion all
of us with Christ, and his Church, at least in external profession: so we
which agree with the Church of Rome in some Ceremonies, disagree from the same
in most material points of doctrine, and substance of true religion, have no
fellowship at all, or communion with the Synagogue of Antichrist. For it is not
the same Ceremonies, but the same profession of faith and doctrine that causes
the communion.


Schis. If we may Kneel, then did Paul sin, when he Gal. 2. 11, 12.
rebuked Peter for not holding Communion with the Gentiles converted.


Pro. This is no good consequent: If we sin not in Kneeling, Paul must sin
in rebuking Peter for not holding communion with the Gentiles converted.

No, sir, neither do we sin in kneeling, nor did Paul sin Act. 10.
in rebuking Peter.

For that Paul had just cause, and performed the part of a faithful and
worthy Apostle of Christ in rebuking Peter, the Scripture bears witness,
which tells us, first that to Peter it was revealed, as to a man so notable,
that he might converse with the Gentiles converted unto Christ: next that
Peter had consented unto the ordinances of the Acts 15.
Apostles at Jerusalem, namely, in discharging the Gentiles from the yoke of
Jewish Ceremonies: Thirdly, that Peter notwithstanding (contrary to the
vision of the Lord, and decrees of the Apostles) not only sequestered himself
suddenly from the fellowship of the Gentiles professing Christ; but also
joined with the Jews, thereby, against his conscience, both confirming the
blind Jews in their erroneous conceits touching the law of Moses, and making
the Gentiles to stand in doubt what they should do; so offending both God and
good men, and drawing other Christians into the same sins through his halting
and dissimulation. And therefore well might, and both rightly was Peter blamed
of the Apostle Saint Paul.

But what Communion have we that Kneel with Peter's sin, or ye with Paul's
virtues that reprove us for kneeling?

Have we either by revelation been told, that we may not Kneel, as Peter was
that he might converse with the Gentiles? or have we at any Synod, or lawful
Council, set Gods people free from the observation of all ecclefiastical
constitutions, especially used, or abused rather in the Church of Rome, as in
the Council at Jerusalem with other Peter discharged the Gentiles from the
bondage of the Mosaicall ceremonies? Or finally, have we abandoned at any
time all Communion, even in Ceremonies, with the Synagogue of Rome, and yet to
gratify, or rather to harden them in their superstition, entertained them
again, and against our certain knowledge, and conscience, as Peter did the
laws of Ceremonies by leaving the society of the Gentiles, to the hie offense
of Paul, and such as ^uly feared God?

If these nor any of these faults appear in us, which were not obscurely in
Peter, surely though Paul did not sin in reproving Peter, yet do you and the
like Censurers very ill in reproving us like Paul's, seeing in us* there be
none of the vices, and visible faults of Peter.

Paul therefore might well blame Peter for halting, when you cannot without
blame, and shame too reprove us for kneeling.


Schis. If we sin not in kneeling, Paul wrote without warrant, when he said,
If any lust to be contentious, we have no 1. Cor. 11. 16.
such custom neither the Churches of God.


Pro. These words of S. Paul when I consider, me thinks I see the holy Apostle
looking sowrly, and speaking sharply; but against whom? Against peaceable men?
No, but against Vt quisque est vir optimus, ita est m^xim^ amans ordinis: The
best man loves order best.
contentious persons. And whom deeming contentious? Orderly men, conforming
themselves to the lawful and approved constitutions of the Church? No, but
against such as would not yield obedience unto such decrees, but thought
themselves free from all obedience unto public orders of the Church: which
kind of men the Apostle loathed even from his soul; and others inspired with
the holy spirit, have termed such persons men unmeet to live, or have (...).
society with men in this life. The Anabaptists were such kind of men, says
Peter Martyr; and we know the same to Pet. Martyr. in 1. Cor. 11. 16.
be the fault both of our home or exiled Brownists, and of all you Sectaries,
who will give none obedience to the impositions and institutions of the church,
at least but to what you list (how orderly soever established, and making never
so well to edification and order.)

As therefore, hearing that some men in the Church, even of mere frowardness,
and for none other cause, would not yield that either their wives, daughters,
or other women should be covered, or themselves uncovered, though the Church
had decreed they should; because to be covered, or not covered, was a thing
indifferent, and they would not be brought into bondage about such matters by
any power of the Church, when God had given no such express and particular
commandment, the Apostle does very roundly and angerly here take up such men.

So me thinks you, and all others, walking in the very steps of those
ancient perturbers of the Churches quiet, should take these words as truly,
and severely to be spoken against you, as ever they were against the contemners
of Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical authority in Saint Paul's time.

Sure I am the meditation of these things adds both comfort and encouragement
unto us, which orderly do Kneel, and in Kneeling keep orders; but how they
should alter our minds from performing this obedience, being uttered even by
the chief masters and makers of order, and for continuance of good orders in
the Church, he must be sharp sighted that can perceive.

Wherefore the words touch not us at all that kneel, but you that will not
kneel: neither sinned the Apostle in writing, but you in wresting those words
to the nourishment of contention, which he penned for the continuance and
increase of peace among the people of God.


Schis. The same Apostle to the same effect: What Communion (says he) has
Christ with Belial? either must Saint Paul utter this without warrant, or in
kneeling we do 2. Cor. 6. 16.
grievously sin.


Pro. But if neither we sin in kneeling, nor the Apostle in writing of those
words, what is to be thought of you that so charge the Apostle and us?

That we sin not in Kneeling has been demonstrated sufficiently before,
by our not communicating thereby with Antichrist, though we do kneel. And
therefore your fault must be heinous in an high degree, in charging the Apostle
to have written without warrant, then with a greater reproach was never, nor
could ever be laid upon the writings of S. Paul.

What communion has Christ with Belial, says Saint Paul; the same, what
communion has Christ with Belial, says Gods Church? What is Belial, but one
without Belial.
yoke, without law? meant principally of Satan, the author, (...).
and father of all disobedience, misrule, and disorders. Hence is sin named
anomie, as who says, a thing lawless, 1. Tim. 1. 9. Judge. 19. 22.
without rule: and sinners in Gods ^ies be as disordered, and lawless men,
whom neither Gods word nor man's law can rule or make obedient. Hence the
Beniamites 1. Sam. 2. 12.
which defloured the Leuits wife, and the Prophet Helies children are called
the Sons, or men of Belial. Hence the Papists abroad, whose chiefest religon
is, man's tradition, and Schismatikes at home, the authors, and abettors of
confusion in the Church, be Belials sons.

Christ has no communion with Belial; nor Christians with the sons of
Belial, either the idolatrous Papists, or the lawless Schismatikes: these
having separated themselves from us, because of our orderly Kneeling, and
obedience: we having severed our selves from the other, for their manifest
impieties.


Schis. Come out, and touch no unclean thing, are the 2. Cor. 6. 16. 17.
words of the Apostle, which either he wrote without warrant, or we must sin
in Kneeling.


Pro. God be thanked, we have fulfiled the Apostles words, we are come out,
we have left Babylon: and next, we do as little touch, taste, or see any
idolatrous pollutions, or have communion with that which is unclean, in our
Kneeling, as you or any others (in your own opinion never so pure, and
reformed) have either in Sitting, bowing or Standing, by which sites of body,
idolatry has been, and is committed, as well as by Kneeling.

They which only, and always commit idolatry, be not they which Kneel, for
then never should we Kneel but we commit idolatry: and never should any
commit idolatry, but such as Kneel: both which to be false, our experience
does tell us, who find that both the most religious, Relat. of the west
Churches.
most deuo^t do Kneel when they serve their God; and the most idolatrous and
superstitious (the Papists only excepted) do never Kneel at their chiefest
exercises of their devotions.

Think therefore iudiciously of our Kneeling as it deserves, and neither
condemn any men for Kneeling, if they so do, not idolatrouslie, or
superstitiouslie; nor appooue them which Kneel, if thereby they dishonor God.
Blame the Papists, who by their Kneeling, do the greatest idolatry that can
be: but blame not us, which most sincerely thereby do serve God; Christ not
being more opposite to Belial, than is the Popish mass to our Communion, and
the manner of administration of the same; albeit both the Papists, and we of
the Church of England in receiving; they of their Mass, we of the Communion,
in kneeling be like.


Schis. Does not God straightly forbid us to serve him, as idolaters do their
Gods?


Pro. You know, or should not be ignorant, how God had Deuteronomy. 11. 30. 31.
prescribed unto his people the Israelites, a certain form, and manner, how
he would of them be worshipped, whereunto whosoever should add, or any thing
take, or vary from the same, he was liable to Gods heavy wrath and Deuteronomy. 4.
14. 15. etc. 12. 32.
displeasure. The Israelites were faulty herein: and therefore great and most
grievous were the punishments not only threatened, but inflicted also by God
upon the people of Israel Deuteronomy. 27. 15, 26. 1. Cor. 10. 7.
for their disobedience.

But we Christians have only general rules; no special form of service
given us by Christ, as the Israelites had: an assertion so true, as some of you
Sectaries have a fancy, that Brownists 3. petit. posit. 7. as. 3. reas. 2.
because God has set down none such in his word, the Church therefore should
be bound to none at all, no not so much as to a form of prayer, and have even
made prayers against ordinary and common prayers.

When God therefore has left us free, blame us not as Idolaters, God grant
that in stead of ordinary forms of prayers, we may have preaching in all
places. Lear. disc. p. 69.
if differing from Papists in their Idolatry, we be like unto them in some
indifferent ceremony or other: and rather think though we be like them, and
they like us in kneeling: yet as they cannot be said to be good Christians, and
to serve God, though they kneel: so are not we to be counted Papists, and to
be Idolatrous, though we kneel. For by one and the same gesture both they do
worship their Idol, and we our Savior: like in action, most unlike in
affection; neither they by Gods word justified because they are like us; nor we
condemned, being in that ceremony like unto them:


Schis. These things considered, can kneeling wherewith Papists do honor
their breaden God, be honorable to Christ, in his holy Sacrament?


Pro. Yea, these things rightly considered, even kneeling, wherewith the
Papists do honor their breaden God, may be to the honor of Christ in his holy
Sacrament. For by that gesture of body, whereby they do worship their false
God, an idol, by the same do we worship the true God, our Savior, sitting at
the right hand of the Father in the heavens.

Now let us know at the length what the other consideration is, why this
kneeling is, or should be so hateful unto God and men.


SECT. 6.
Whether Kneeling hinders the sweet familiarity between Christ and his Church.

Schis. SEcondly, whereas the end of a Sacrament is to inform the outward man
by sensible demonstration, it pleases our M. Christ to use such gesture as
agreeably with bread and wine, sets out our Communion, and spiritual
familiarity with him, and rejoicing in him. And therefore as he says: If any
hear my voice, and open the door, Revel. 3. 20.
I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me: so he says, Many
shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit with Mat. 8. 11.
Abraham, etc. By which places it appears that as by Supper, so by Sitting,
familiar rejoicing, or rejoicing familiarity is expressed. In which respect the
Communion is called the 1. Cor. 11. 20. and 10. 21.
Lords Supper, and not a sacrifice; and we are said to be partakers of the
Lords table, and not of an Altar. And therefore not Kneeling, but Sitting is
for receiving.


Pro. The end of all Sacraments is to inform not the outward only, but the
inward man also by sensible demonstrations; and therefore be they called Gods
visible word, and seen, engendring and confirming Faith, and edifying the
Soul as well as the Word audible and heard.

And as the word heard and believed diversely does affect the soul, and to
diverse blessed and good purposes: so does the visible word, the sacraments,
especially of the body and blood of Christ.

For as Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Romans 4.
Faith, that is, a testimony confirming the Faith of Abraham: so to every one
which worthily does partake of the body, and blood of Christ, his very
receiving is a sealing to his faith, that of Christ the body was given, and the
blood shed for his sins.

Next it teaches them, how the Son of God took on him the nature of man,
that by the oblation of his body and blood, he might take away the sins of
the world.

Besides, the memory of that sacrifice propitiatory is made perpetual, and
thanks ascribed from time to time at the participating of those mysteries,
unto the blessed duty.

By communicating at this holy Sacrament, we learn moreover, and do believe,
that as the benefits of Christ are ours, and do appertain unto us, in so much
as neither the members to the body, nor the branches to the vine, are more
inseparably conjoined, than we to him, he communicating unto us his vigor, and
virtue.

Furthermore we testify, and make it known to the world, how we are members
of that Church, which professes, and acknowledges how the Son of God, by
the Sacrifice of his humane body, has pacified God for the sins of man.

It admonishes us in like sort, of the mutual love, and communion which is,
and ought to be between the members of so sacred, and sanctified a body.

Many other causes, and reasons may be alleged why this Sacrament was
instituted at the first, and is frequented still of Gods people; whereof though
the setting out of our Communion, and spiritual familiarity with him, and
rejoicing in him, be one; yet it is not the only end, but many being besides,
many gestures in diverse respects, and not one only, is required for the more
seemly receiving the same externallie.

Again, there being many causes, and ends of our receiving the holy Supper,
one, and the same site of body neither does remember us, nor can present, and
represent all those ends unto us and others. And therefore as sitting may note
our communion, and familiarity: so kneeling our thankfulness unto God.

But if this spiritual Communion, and comfort only be 1. Cor. 12.
thereby signified (as nothing is more untrue) yet is the same expressed by the
other Sacrament of Baptism, as well as by this; and represented as well by
water, consisting of many drops, as either of wine, effected of many grapes, or
of bread, made of many grains. Which Baptism yet is neither ministered, nor
urged so to be, by Sitting, as the Supper is.

Neither is our corporal food always, and every where, to the greatest
comfort, and token of sweetest familiarity, received Sitting; but sundry
writers have their several fashions in their friendly, and comfortable
refreshings; some taking the same one way, some another, not all Sitting,
especially in the Eastern parts of the world. The ancient Fathers, some of
them called this sacrament, as the Lords Supper; so a Sacrifice: and that which
the bread and wine were set upon; as the Lords Table, so an Altar. Whereof
says reverent, and most learned Zanchie, although that Zanch. de lege dei.
fol. 444.
Altars serve rather, and be more meet for the offering, then for the
ministration of the Supper: yet seeing neither Christ, nor his Apostles either
prohibited Altars, or commended unto us the use of wooden tables, therefore is
this also of (altars) to be numbered among things indifferent; and free for
all, and every man to use tables either of wood, or stone at his discretion,
provided that all superstition be removed. For what is an Altar (says that
holy and peaceable man) what is an altar but a table made of stones? about
which would not I contend (says he,) if so be otherwise there is a consent in
the true doctrine and worship of God. All this has Zanchie, which we say of
Kneeling, and the like.

And would to God you would so think of our Kneeing, and others Altars, and of
all things else in good use in reformed Churches, that be indifferent. Then
would, then could you never say, that not Kneeling, and Sitting is for
receiving.

It had bin too much for you to have said, how not kneeling, but auerring that
Sitting is for receiving (as if none other gesture were for the commodious and
meet receiving thereof, but Sitting) is very bad.

The first admonitioners which so disliked Kneeling at the Communion, never
urged their Sitting, as a thing necessary, as you do, saying, not Kneeling,
but Sitting is for receiving. For, say they, we make not Sitting a thing of
necessity Admon in the addit.
belonging to the Sacrament, neither affirm we that it may not be received
otherwise.

Therefore better judge they of these than you do, but they best of all, who
take them as they are, things of themselves indifferent, and so except
authority determine otherwise, like to be deemed, and that as good Communion
and society they have with Christ and his Church (having on them the wedding
garment of Faith) which receive Kneeling, as they which Sit, so as no man for
the very act of kneeling, no more then of Sitting, sins.


Schis. We read not of any gesture of body prescribed or observed in
Circumcision and Baptism, as in the Passover and Supper.


Pro. Or observed? Had you not added these words I should have thought that by
your reading you had found how thereis a form of gesture prescribed unto
Christians at their taking the holy Communion. And though I shreudly conjecture
you are of that mind: yet being not willing to take you at the worst, let us
know the reason why a gesture was observed, though not prescribed at the holy
Supper, which was neither prescribed nor observed at Baptism and Circumcision.


Schis. Because there needs no natural regard to be had of any certain
gesture in the two former Sacraments, so the foreskin were cut off, and water
be used: but in the other two, a gesture answerable to the action is requisite.


Pro. It is requisite and necessary that we take, and eat bread and wine at the
supper of the Lord, as it was requisite that the foreskin should be cut off at
Circumcision, and water used, and none other liquor at Baptism: but that a
certain gesture was either observed or requisite at the Communion, this reason
shows not.


Schis. God prescribed to his people, when they were to Exodus 12. 11.
fly out of Egypt, the gesture of loins girded, and staves in their hands,
because the eating then of the Passover was Numb. 9. 3.
in have. But the gesture being but for that time, as may appear by the
omission thereof, when the observation of Mat. 5. 17.
the Passover was established, our Master Christ, who Mat. 26. 20.
came not to break, but fulfill the Law, and knew what was fittest to be done,
did eat the Passover Sitting, a gesture more answerable to eating in peace,
than the former used in Egypt.


Pro. Because God prescribed to the Jews a form of taking, and eating the
Passover, has he therefore prescribed a form to Christians of taking, and
receiving the Lords Supper? The one you manifest, the other I would see proved.

But had our God set down, (as he has not) the manner how Christians should
receive the Supper, as he ordained how the Passover should be taken, and
eaten of the Jews: yet because you here confess, that this form of eating
the Passover, in process of time was altered, the Jews now eating the same
Sacrament for substance, but after a new manner, sitting in Christ's time, (for
so you say) standing before, and yet without sin: why may not we Christians,
upon as good reasons, retaining the substance, change the manner after which
the holy Supper was ministered, and received in the days of Christ?

Before Christ his time, there were additions unto, (you heard before) in Christ
his time there were alterations of the manner of taking the Passe-ouer (your
self do say) yet all well liked and allowed of the Lord. Had the Jews more
liberty to add forms, even of admimistring the Sacraments, then Christians
have? Or be Christians in more bondage this way, and restrained than the Jews?
And might the Jews upon good considerations do these things, and may not
Christians without sin do as they did?

We take therefore what you acknowledge (though we will not acknowledge it to
be true) namely, that the manner of taking, and receiving the Passe-ouer, was
altered: the Jews taking it at the first standing, in process of time,
sitting.

What gather you thereof?


Schis. Hereby kneeling is convinced as being a gesture altogether
vnanswereable to eating.


Pro. Whereof is Kneeling convinced? Show: you have not yet declared. Or what
makes the Jews sitting at the last, or standing at the first, to our Kneeling
at the Communion?

Kneeling differs from Sitting, Standing, Walking, and the like; but
answers to eating, and drinking well enough. For we may eat to our mutual
comfort (if the common guise were not otherwise) as well Kneeling, as Sitting,
Standing, or any other way: which you cannot truly deny. If ciuilly we may so
do at our common refreshings, why not much more Ecclesiasticallie, and
sacramentallie at the Supper of the Lord?


Schis. Because (such Kneeling) it darkeneth the counsel Job 38. 2. 1. Cor.
11. 25. 26.
of God, and being a sign of the greatest submission, obscureth the rejoicing
familiarity, which the Lords Supper signifies, and seals.


Pro. Kneeling at the Communion darkeneth (say you) the counsel of God, and
obscureth the Rejoicing familiarity, which the Lords Supper signifies, and
seals.

For the ratifying of these your assertions you quote Scripture, and bring a
reason. The places of Scripture which you quote be two, the former out of Job;
the latter from S. Paul.

Out of the book of Job the place is this, Who is this that Job. 38. 2.
darkeneth the counsel by words without knowledge? alleged only for the
phrase sake, but concerns the point in controversy not a whit. S. Paul's
words be these: After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had
supped, saying, this cup is the new Testament in my blood, This do 1. Cor.
11. 25. 26.
as often as you shall drink it in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall
eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Now
what is this also against our Kneeling: They which worthily participate of the
bread and wine, though they Kneel, do as comfortably, and familiarly
Communicate in the blessings of God, as they which in any other sort receive
the Sacraments.

Your reason that it obscureth the rejoicing familiarity which the Lords
Supper signifies and seals, because it is a sign of the greatest
submission, is so far from obscuring, that it furthereth the same rejoicing
familiarity nothing more.

For who can receive either to Gods glory more notably, or to their own souls
joy more comfortably, then they which with the greatest sign of submission,
and that unto the divine Majesty, repair unto the holy Supper?

Before you said, and truly, how kneeling was a sign of the greatest
reverence; here you say, It is the greatest sign of submission. These are no
reasons to drive us from it, but very forcible motives to make us with
cheerefulnes and alacrity to continue our Kneeling.

Besides, you argue (me thinks) but from a particular, as though spiritual
familiarity only, and not other things besides, and namely and especially a
grateful remembrance, and thankful acknowledgement of all Gods mercies and
favors, which is best expressed by Kneeling, were to be in our thoughts.

When there be many causes inducing us to receive the Sacrament; if we choose
that gesture we above all may testify our true humiliation, and thankfulness
unto God, rather then our rejoicing familiarity one with another; blame us
not. And yet is this corporal submission, and submissiue thankefulnes at no
time without much spiritituall joy; and it may be, more increases godly joy in
them which Kneel, and in them too before whom they Kneel, then your
acknowledged less reverent Sitting, as at a common feast.


Schis. Doewe not condemn the Papists for ministering the Communion in one
kind, because such an administration is against Christ his example, and does
not lively demonstrate the Lords death?


Pro. The condemnation of the Papists is just for their such ministering. And
therefore the Scripture which you point unto, serves very aptly to displaie
their impiety, which swerve from Christ his institution by ministering the
Communion in one kind, but not against us for Kneeling.

And their blame is the iuster, and the more, not so much because they swerve
by their said ministering from his example, (which in some cases, as before has
been shown, is lawful to be done,) as for that very disobediently they
transgress the manifest Commandment of God, which has enioined the said
Sacrament to be administered in both kinds.


Schis. Hear a caveat is to be given, that none take occasion by this
discourse (of mine) to justify the childish pedagogy of signifying ceremonies
devised by man, seeing Sitting was used by Christ, and the signification
thereof is found in Scripture. And therefore that childish pedagogie is not
justified by that worthy servant of Christ, M. Cartwright his judgment, viz.
that Sitting does signify our rest in Christ Jesus.


Pro. Those children which allow and like of significant ceremonies, may be
your Fathers in sound Divinity.

How, and by whom such ceremonies are justified, it is needless to set down;
but that they are justified by most godly, and learned men, their judgment
touching some ceremonies used even at the Communion, bear witness. Greet ye
one another with an holy kiss, 1. Cor. 16. 26.
says Saint Paul. Erat elegans admonitio in osculo, There was an elegant
admonition in the kiss. Nam coiunctionem intimam declarabat, for it signified
a most inward conjunction. Also not only a consent, sed communionem sanctorum,
but the communion of Saints which they Arctius in. 1. Cor. 10. ver. 10.
professed in doctrine and sacred ceremonies, says Arctius.

And of the same kiss, Nec est dubitandum (says Peter Martyr) it is not to
be doubted, how in the primitive P. Mart. in 1. Cor. 16.
Church, Christians gave one another the mutual kiss of peace and consent,
before they went unto the holy communion, by which token their purpose was to
admonish themselves of the communion of Saints celebrated in the mysteries. The
marginall annotation from Geneua upon Geneua annota. on 1. Cor. 26. 20.
these words of the Apostle is: (How the Christians did so kiss) in token of
mutual love, which thing was observed in the primitive Church when the Lords
Supper was ministered.

Mark these things advisedly, and you shall see,

First, that to the administration of the Supper, ceremonies, as kissing (more
then ever Christ, that we know, practiced, sure I am, then he ever
prescribed) were added.

Secondly, how the said ceremonies were very elegant, and significant:

And lastly, that the said addition, and ceremonies (no not for their mystical
signification) were never deemed either unlawful or childish (as you
childishlie do call them) but very highly commended both by the Apostle, and
worthy interpretors in the Church of Christ.

But to proceed still in the sacred Supper still in hand. There be actions of
the minister, and of the people, and yet all ceremonial, and significant.

The action of the minister giving the bread and wine, represents Gods action
in giving Christ, with his benefits to the particular communicants. Again, the
action (whether by sitting, kneeling, or by whatsoever done) of receiving the
bread and wine severally, resembles another special action of the believing
heart, which applies That. of conscience. cap. 3.. 3.
Christ unto it self for the pardon of sin, and life everlasting. This is M.
Perkins judgment.

Finally, among the actions of the Communicants, sitting (the ceremony which
you so stand for, condemning all other sites, especialle Kneeling) does it not
in the opinion of the admonishioners, signify rest, that is, a full finishing
1. Admon.
through Christ of all the ceremonial law, and a perfect work of redemption
wrought, that gives rest for ever? But that is a childish pedagogie, say you,
not justified by that worthy servant of Christ, Master Cartwright. And yet,
even you his disciple, Schismatike, which give us here a caveat not to take
sitting to signify such arest, even you take your sitting to be as childish a
pedagogie, as significant a ceremony, maintaining the said sitting to be a
sign and token of the rejoicing familiarity, and familiar rejoicing between
Christ, and his Church; for to this end tends this whole section and
discourse.


SECT. 7.
Whether Christ sat of purpose.

Schis. THat kneeling may be more soundly convinced as a will worship,
objections are to be answered.


Pro. Convicted hitherto you have not, much less soundly convinced Kneeling to
be a will worship; and therefore more soundly you cannot, yea never soundly
shall ye convince the same to be a wil-worshippe, though your will be good.
But do your endeavor, invent objections, and set down your answers, that we
may see how well you can effect that which you have in purpose.


Schis. Therefore where it is supposed that Christ and his Apostles ministered
and received Sitting but by occasion, and not of purpose, because they were
Sitting before in eating the Passover, whereas if Christ had Sitten down of
purpose to administer the Communion, then all that is said is granted to be to
some purpose.


Pro. Indeed that Christ did Sit at his holy Communion, is but a supposall.
There is a marginall annotation in the Geneua Bible, which speaks thus: Their
fashion was Geneua annot. John 13. 23.
not to Sit at table, but having their shoes off, and cushions under their
elbowes, leaned on their sides, as it were half lying.

If Christ did not Sit, as these men say: and again, if half lying be not to
Sit, surely it must be more then half a lie, without all supposals to affirm
our Savior (as often as you have done) to have sat at the Sacred board. Your
self also at the first did but suppose our Savior Supra sect. 4 P. 37.
to have Sitten, when you said, He ministered Sitting, or in such a gesture as
in those countries was most used.

But without supposals, grant he did sit, and of purpose too when he
administered the Communion: yet what by you hitherto has been said to this
purpose, ought not; sure I am will never be acknowledged by me to be spoken to
any purpose, but idly.

What say you hereto?


Schis. The answer is short, yet full.


Pro. Express it.


Schis. Christ did sit of purpose when he ministered his last Supper. For after
the Passover he rose, washed his disciples feet, and sat down again.


Pro. Surely what Christ did was purposely done.

The original is (...) translated Rursum discumbens, he lying down again.
For Notum est (says Beza) it is Beza and Viler. in Ioh. 13. v. 13
well known how men in old time (the Jews especially) were wont at the table,
Non sedere, sed recumbere, notto sit, but to lie, or lean themselves down.

Besides, the example you bring of our Savior Christ is of good regard. For, as
the Evangelist has described, Christ before this holy supper, and after the
Passover, laid aside his Ioh. 13. v. 4. 5.
upper garment, and took a towell, and girded himself. After that, he powered
water into a Basin, and began to wash the disciples feet, and to wipe them
with the towell wherewith he was girded. And after he had washed their feet,
and had taken his garments, and was set (or laid) down again, he said unto
them: Know you what I have done to you, etc. If I then your Lord and master,
have washed your feet, ye also ought towash one another feet.

So did, and so spoke our Savior Christ, thereby not only moving by his
example, but also enioyning them by strong reason to do that which himself had
done: yet is there not one among you (the most earnest vrgers of this Sitting,
and that after the example of Christ) that either do as our Savior did before
he administered this Sacrament, or regard his motion. Wherein if you do well,
you may further see, that Christ his actions are not necessarily to be followed
always in matters ceremonial especially, as before has been said.


SECT. 8.
Whether Christ prescribed a special gesture for the Communion.

Schis. IT may be demanded, why the church is not bound to the time of Evening,
as well as to the gesture of John 13. 12.
Sitting, since Christ observed the one as well as the other.


Pro. You hold still the Church is bound to the gesture of Sitting. But you are
to be put in mind, how this is but a mere fancy of yours. Your worthy
master Cartwright dissenteth herein from you (as otherwise sometime T. C. 1.
rep. p. 131.. 3.
he dissenteth from his well favored Admonitioners.) For it is not of
necessity (says he) that we should receive the Communion Sitting. If
otherwise the man had not erred, he should never have troubled, nor offended
our Church, as like a most unworthy Minister thereof he has done.

But, I pray you, why are we bound to the gesture of Sitting, and not bound to
the time of Evening? especially being sure that Christ administered his
Sacrament in the night, but are not sure that he sat.


Schis. It may be answered, Time being a common circumstance to every action
(for nothing can be done, but in some time) the particular time is not to be
observed, Genesis 2. 2, 3.
except Christ had sanctified it to the Communion, as GOD sanctified the
seventh day, on which he rested, or (at least) chose it of purpose, as he did
Sitting.


Pro. A certain gesture (say you,) but no certain time was chosen by Christ;
who appointing no time when, does choose a manner how his Supper should be
ministered, viz. in your opinion, Sitting. And yet the Scripture bears
witness (to nothing more plainly) that he instituted and celebrated his
Supper in the night, choosing that special time for that purpose, as well as
the Sitting you speak of.

But if he chose no such time (as you would make the world believe) but left
the time free, and at the liberty of his people to limit; then made he no
more choice of Sitting, then of any other site. For he either chose both, or
neither; and we are no more tied to the necessary observation of the one,
then of the other. For he using both a special time, and a certain gesture,
if he chose the one he chose both; and if his example be of us necessarily
to be followed in the gesture, it is to be followed also in the time; we can
no more alter the one, then we may change the other.


Schis. That follows not. For it was upon special and necessary occasion,
for the Passover must be Mat. 26. 31. Luke 22. 53.
eaten before the Lords Supper could be instituted in stead thereof, and
presently after Supper, the hour came that Christ was to be betrayed.


Pro. Be this acknowledged: what hereof?


Schis. Therefore if the Jews transgressed not the institution of the
Passover, by changing a gesture at the first prescribed by God, according to
that their present occasion into another fitter for a time of rest, much less
do Christians transgress the institution of the Lords Supper, by changing the
time taken by Christ upon occasion, but not prescribed, into some fitter (in
discretion) for the ordinary celebration of the Lords Supper.


Pro. You have twice now said, that the Jews changed the gesture of Standing,
prescribed even by God himself, at their eating the Passover: if you had once
proved your saying Mat. Flacius Illyr. I. Wigand. Mat. Index, Ba* Faber: hist.
eccles. Cent: 1. l. 1. c. 10. p. 329.
to make it out of doubt, you had done well. Other divines, not to be
contemned, think clean otherwise, namely, that the Jews, and even Christ
himself kept the old custom of standing, and never changed the same into
Sitting. Non autem dubium est (be some of their words) it is without doubt,
that Christ performed that ceremony (of eating the Passover) Stando amictus,
and baculum tenens: Standing, his loins girded, and holding a staff in his
hand.

But it may not be acknowledged (which now the second time also you say) that
their new Sitting was fitter for a time of rest, then their old Standing, God
having prescribed this Standing for a perpetual memory (even till the real
Passion of Christ) of their sudden and safe deliverance from the most
grievous thraldom of theirs in Egypt.

But did, or might the Jews before the very and full time was come that the
said Passover was to take an end, alter the rite and site of eating the same,
changing their Standing prescribed into Sitting, not enioynd by God, but
devised by themselves, as fitter to represent their present and future rest,
then their former troubles: may not Gods people in these days change the site
of Christ's Sitting (if he did Sit,) which was never prescribed unto Christians,
into Kneeling in their discretion?

The Jews transgressed not the institution of the Passover (say you) by
changing a gesture at the first prescribed of God: and do Christians
transgress the institution of the Supper, by changing a gesture neither first,
nor last, nor at all prescribed, if practiced by Christ?

And might Christians in former days lawfully change the time chosen by
Christ, but not prescribed, into some other fitter (in discretion) for the
ordinary celebrating of the Lords Supper: and do Christians now offend in
changing a corporal gesture, no more enioined then was the time, into some
fitter (in discretion) for the celebrating of the Lords Supper in a public
Church, at open public prayer, and thanksgiving?

Have not Christians in these indifferent matters as great power as had the
Jews, and the now living Christians as their forefathers? And might both Jews
and Christians add and alter forms of administering the Sacraments, not
changing their substance; and sin they now which in these days do use their
liberty in these things, after the example both of the Christians and Jews?
See you not how your own weapons do wound your self? Now among Christians
who changed the time?


Schis. Probably the Primitive Church did.


Pro. You cannot then certainly say it, you do but probably conjecture that
the Primitive Church made the change. What moves you so to think?


Schis. For every first day of the week ( viz. the Lords day) Act. 2. 42. and
20 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Revel. 2. 18.
the brethren came together to break bread, that is, to minister the Communion
So that either they never met upon the Lords day but in the Evening, or else
they celebrated the Communion at some other times.


Pro. Be it that the first day, yea every first day of the week, namely,
every Lords day, the Christians came together to break bread, that is, to
minister the Communion (which yet is not agreed upon among the learned:) yet
that they so met every first day in the day time, and not in the night, is but
coniecturall; yea, that they met together in the night as well as in the day to
that end, the twenty Beza in Act. 20. 7.
of the Acts does show. Whereupon some do note how nocturnall meetings are not
simply, and of themselves to be condemned.

But let it be more then probable, and most certain, that the alteration of
the time of ministering the Lords Supper came in while the Apostles lived: yet
did this ministering thereof in the day vary from Christ his ministering the
same in the night; and being done with good discretion, the Church thereby
transgressed not the institution of Christ.

So without sin was the gesture of our Savior changed into Kneeling,
whosoever were the authors thereof.


Schis. But for any alteration of the gesture of Sitting, especially into
Kneeling, there is not the least probability.


Pro. When all the world knows, and sees the gesture to be altered, how can
you say it is not probable that it was altered?

And though it be not apparent, and if you will too, not probable, that the
Apostles altered the gesture, and that into Kneeling: yet it is most certain,
and more then probable, that Apostolical men, endued with the holy Spirit,
were both alterers at the first, and users afterward of that seemly gesture.


SECT. 9.
Whether the prayer at the delivery of the bread and wine, be justifiable.

Schis. IT is further objected, that we may Kneel in regard of prayers to be
used by prescription of authority, at the delivery of the bread and wine,
viz. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy
body and soul unto eternal life: and take and eat this, etc.


Pro. What is your answer?


Schis. Hereunto these answers may be returned.


Pro. Which be they?


Schis. (First) seeing we reject Christ his example of Sitting for Kneeling,
we must not stand upon what we may do, but humbly consider what we must
do.


Pro. Those Christians which Kneel, do no more reject Christ his example of
Sitting, then do you reject it in ministering the Communion to women, privately,
and many ways besides, otherwise then he did.

If every action of Christ be a necessary iniunction binding Christians to
the imitation of the same, so as they may not vary therefrom in their
discretion but they sin, that which you have said of the Christians
celebrating of the Supper in the day, deserves the same reproof which this
Kneeling does, both swaruing from this example, but surely neither of them
tending to Gods dishonor, nor against his will.

But what incenseth your stomach against these prayers, and makes them
unlawful to be used?


Schis. If there be not a necessary, and a justifiable cause both of those
prayers, and of Kneeling in regard of them, do we not presume upon Christ his
patience, in rejecting his example?


Pro. We reject no example of Christ as ill, but do some things at the
Communion which he did not, as more meet and convenient for the times and
places where we live, then were or his would be: and we have necessary and
justifiable causes both of our prayers made at the holy Table, and of our
Kneeling in regard of them. And therefore presume we not a whit upon the
patience of Christ.


Schis. What necessity is there of those prayers, at that very time? seeing
prayers go before, and follow after.


Pro. You can show no ill at all, either in the matter, or form of those
prayers; and therefore not to be despised are they as you would have them to be.

Besides, at that very time (whatsoever go before, or follow after) the
Minister not only prays for (which is very charitable;) but also puts
the Communicant in mind, both of Gods mercy toward mankind in giving his
Son Christ to the shameful death of the Cross for our redemption, and of
his duty toward God, in being thankful for so great benefits: which are
things necessary; but never more then at the very receiving of the signs,
and pledges of Gods favor.


Schis. Again, must we needs Kneel at every bit of a prayer?


Pro. Every bit (as you scoffingly do say) and modicum of prayer unto God,
ought to be offered to the heavenly Majesty, with the worthiest gesture of
submission, to whom we cannot make our prayers with reverence too much. A
greater argument of submission, or sign of reverence is there not then
kneeling.

A base, beggarly, and contemptible bit of bread, and sup W. Rai. of the Sacra.
c. 11. p. 238.
of wine, says Rainolds the runnagate of the Lords Supper.

The world at the last now may see, and report to what height of spiritual
pride, ye Sectaries are come, when with the Papists ye scorn and deride both
our holy prayers, which ye cannot disprove or amend, as bits; and us for
kneeling even when we offer up both our prayers and praises unto our God, and
that for the chiefest benefit that ever was conferred upon mankind.


Schis. Is there more necessity to obey a needless direction to kneel at
those prayers, then to follow the example of Christ in Sitting, when we take,
eat, and drink things required in the same sentences?


Pro. Bits of prayers; Needless directions: these be your elegancies. Better
ought you to think of our public both prayers and orders, then to term them
being short, Bittes; and the other not according to your mind, needless.

Are these your proceedings (Schismatikes) both in devotion toward God; and in
obedience toward the Church, that you scorn the one and despise the other,
regard neither further* then you list?

Sweet are those prayers to our inward man, which you term bits; and
necessary those directions, which it pleases you to phrase, needless: yea so
necessary, as whereas we are not bound in every action of Christ, and all
circumstances, necessarily to follow Christ in receiving the Communion, we are
bound under the pain of his heavy wrath, to obey these directions of God made
by his lieutenants.


Schis. And why must the people kneel when they hear those prayers, rather
then the minister that pronounces them?


Pro. The people when they communicate receive the pledges of Gods love from
the ministers hand, to the comfort of their souls. The minister when he so
receaueth, and hears such prayers, Kneeleth too, as well as do the people.


Schis. But it is a question whether those prayers be justifiable, or no.


Pro. Disprooue them if you can, why are they not justifiable?


Schis. For, besides that by reason of them, kneeling, devised and abused by
Antichrist, does cross the practice of Christ's, and his Apostles, and they may
seem a vain repetition, even the adding of them to the words of institution,
is contrary to the mind of Christ.


Pro. You have strange thoughts both of our Kneeling, and prayers at the
Communion for our said Kneeling, and of our Kneeling for the said Prayers sake.

Kneeling, say you, was devised and abused by Antichrist. But you cannot prove
our Kneeling by Antichrist to be either devised, or abused.

Antichrist, and Antichristians they do kneel, but it is at their Mass, and
other prayers, both ungodly and superstitious: our kneeling at the Communion
neither did he devise, nor does abuse; and if he were the deviser of the same,
yet use we that gesture well, and to Gods glory, which he devised, or his
members abuse unto idolatry.

Again, Kneeling does cross the practice of Christ (say you) and his
Apostles: which is also untrue. For well may it differ, as do all forms of
administering the holy suppervsed in the Church, one way or other, from the
practice of Christ, but in nothing does it cross, or contrary the same; or if
it do, show wherein that we may see the fault, and amend it.

And though we kneeled not: yet (in your opinion) should we cross the
practice of Christ, and his Apostles, even for those prayers of ours. Which if
you speak as you think, hereafter condemn us not for bending our knees (as
very bitterly you have done, but as unjustly) but blame us for lending our
ears attentively unto the prayers uttered when we receive; yea, blame us for
saying those prayers, or Amen unto them.

These prayers of ours you condemn as wicked, first, because there may seem a
vain repetition, next, for that the adding of them to the words of
institution, is contrary to the mind of Christ, wherein you plainly do
manifest your detestation of the prayers, but show no word in them for all
that, savoring of impiety and error.

They seem, nay, they may seem (say you) a vain repetition.

What they seem in your eyes, nay what they seem not, but may seem, is not
material: if they seemed so, you would show it; if they were a vain
repetition, you would say, and prove it. Your manner is not to extenuate
faults, but to aggrauate offenses; yea to make faults where there be none, as
in all your discourse hitherto you have done nothing else.

Finally, be all additions to the words of institution contrary to the mind
of Christ? This conference of ours has shown, how both unto the Passover,
both words, and things were; and unto the Lords Supper, first a Supper, even a
Love feast, and at the same Love feast, holy Kisses (ceremonies most elegant,
and significant) were added: and yet neither these, nor any other additions to
this hour were ever deemed (but only of you Schismatikes) contrary to the
mind of Christ, howsoever crossing his practice.

These additions of ours add nothing to the substance, but only to the form
of ministering Gods Sacraments; and therefore not unlawful, nor contrary to the
mind of Christ.

But show, how is the addition of these words contrary to his mind?


Schis. For he did first bless or pray, and after gave the Elements in a
Sacramental form of words, without any addition, saying, Take, eat, etc.
which order of administration, and form of words, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
Mat. 6. 7. etc. 26. 26, etc. Mark 14. 21. Luke 2^. 19, etc. 1. Cor. 11. 23. 24.
Paul, do so constantly, precisely, and sincerely relate, that any may
perceive the meaning of the Spirit to be, That the Sacramental form of words
ought to be observed without any addition; and the rather because Paul
begins his relation thus: I have received of the Lord that which I have also
delivered, etc.


Pro. We stand against the Papists, we stand likewise against you
Schismatikes, that in the ministration of the holy Supper, we keep us most
precisely to the institution of Christ; neither shall you, nor they ever prove
that we swerve therefrom.

There be actions to be done of Pastors, after the example of Christ; there be
actions of the people, after the example of the Disciples; there be things
necessary, there be accessory; there be substantial, and vnmutable, there be
accidental, and changeable.

After the example of Christ, Pastors are to bless the Beza in 1. Cor. 11. 23.
bread and wine by calling on the Name of God, and opening the institution with
prayers; and to break the bread which is to be eaten, and the cup which is
to be drunk, and to deliver both the bread and wine into the peoples hands
with thanksgiving. On the other side, it is the part of the flock to examine
themselves, 1. To try both their knowledge, as also their faith and
repentance; to declare the Lords death, that is, by a true faith to assent unto
his word and institution: last of all, to eat the bread taken from the
ministers hand, and to drink the wine with thanksgiving. This was Paul's and the
Apostle liturgy, says Beza: and is it not the liturgy of our Church at the
administration of the Communion?

The taking of bread is necessary (we take it;) thanksgiving, that is, the
sacrifice Eucharisticall is necessary (we zanch. de lege. fol. 446.
are thankful;) the breaking of bread is necessary (we break it;) the
distribution (of bread and wine) is necessary (we distribute them;) and that it
be given only to the Disciples of Christ it is necessary (we give the bread and
wine unto none but Christians.) For all these things pertain unto the
substance of the Supper, says Zanchie. Now what of these necessary things
either want we, or do we not in our Church?

If any thing we add, it is but for the better setting foth of the Sacrament,
and stirring up of good affections: which may be done very well, without
offense to God, after the example of Gods people, Jews and Christians, as
before more than once has been declared.

Hence Master Calvin: so much (says he) as concerns Institut. l. 4.. 43.
the outward form of doing (or ministering the Sacrament) whether the faithful
receive it ( viz. the bread) in their hand, or not; whether they divide it, or
every one eat that which is given him; whether they put the cup in the hand of
the Deacon, or deliver it to the next: whether the bread be leauened, or
unleavened: whether the wine be red, or whit; I might add, whether we sit or
kneel; whether our payers, and thankesgiuings be long, or short (according to
the times, and occasions) whether we use prayers, or no, at the delivery, and
receiving the elements) it makes no matter. These things be indifferent
(says Calvin) and left at the the liberty of the Church.

Whereas therefore you say, that the very Sacramental form of words ought
preciselie to be observed without any addition (I say, not to the sense, and
substance of matter, but to the very words) as if keeping us to the same sense
we use other words, or more words, or in another form, though to the same
holy end, and purpose) were unlawful, and an adding unto Christ his
institution, and so a sin liable to the heavy curse of God, is doctrine
strange, hithereto not witnessed by the Churches of God.


Schis. It may seem to be against religion and reason, that to a Sacramental
form of speech, wherein the minister should only supply the person of Christ,
there should be added a Prayer, as in the name of the Church. This confusion is
fitter for Babylon, than for Sion.


Pro. That Christ said, Take, eat, this is my Body, the Scripture does
manifest: but either that Christ used no more words, tending to prayer,
thanksgiving, exhortation, or instruction, or tied his ministers to those
very, and only words, no scripture does show, no writter says, but your
self: neither does it seem that any sound religion, and little reason is in
him, that so says, being fitter to come from one of the brattes of Babylon,
than from any child of Sion.


Schis. Why is not a short prayer, after other going before, as well joined to
the Sacramental form of Baptism, viz. N. I. baptize thee in the name of the
Father? etc.


Pro. The form of Baptism is but short, the prayers, and other good speeches,
complementing the same both going before, and following after, (set down in
the wisdom of the Church, without any special commandment of God) are
neither few, nor confused, and hitherto unreproved, for ought I could ever yet
hear: which may teach you not cynicallie to bark against forms and fashions
of administering Gods Sacraments, when the matter uttered, and used, is good,
godly, and justifiable.


Schis. If then this addition of prayer to the sacramental form of words be
not of faith, how can we, with faith, and a good conscience, confirm or allow
the same with our kneeling? Romans 22. 20. 3.



Pro. But if this addition to the sacramental form of words, be no addition
to the substance of the sacrament, but only in the Churches discretion added
for the greater glory of God, and comfort of the receivers, then has it Gods
words for the warrant thereof, and may be well uttered, and reverently heard,
and assented unto even on our bended knees.

And so if there be no fault in our kneeling, but because of those prayers,
Kneeling cannot be faulty, because the prayers be justified.


SECT. 10.
Whether Kneeling at the Communion be a gesture indifferent.

Schis. LAstly, for justifying of Kneeling it is affirmed, that it is
indifferent whether we Sit, Stand, or Kneel, seeing Christ did Sit, when he
did eat the Passover, whereas God commanded the children of Israel in Egypt
to eat the Passover Standing, and some reformed Churches receive Standing.
Therefore the King may appoint kneeling as the most reverend gesture, and best
beseeming so holy an action.


Pro. We deem kneeling to be a corporal site of it self indifferent, not
because Christ did sit, when he should have stood, eating the Passover. (For
he did Stand, according to the first institution, and not Sit:) but because
it is of the nature even of Sitting, and Standing, which I think your self
will not deny to be sites indifferent.

Besides, your self have acknowledged that Kneeling has been abused as were
the Love Feasts; and therefore might before be well used as things indifferent
may.

Again, you have lately given us to note, how kneeling of it self is not
evil, and so to be taken and counted, but because it is used at certain
prayers, which in your conceit are evil, at least not justifiable. Therefore
indifferent.

Lastly, remember you not how you said of Kneeling, that it is the most solemn
sign of reverence; and a sign of the greatest submission? Therefore not
simply evil, and to be condemned.

Nay, when you say this of Kneeling, why may not the King appoint the most
solemn sign of reverence, the sign of the greatest submission, or (as you
now say, whether in earnest, or sport, I weigh not (the most reverend gesture
(for so is it) and best beseeming so holy an action, for the Lords Supper?


Schis. For answer whereunto, howsoever that which is already said, may
suffice, yet it may be further considered, that though it be admitted, that it
is indifferent to Sit, or to Stand: yet does it not follow, that Kneeling is
indifferent.


Pro. Do you but admit Sitting and Standing to be indifferent? are they so
but by way of Concession? And though you grant Standing and Sitting to be so,
yet does it not follow that Kneeling is of the same nature indifferent? what
reason have you that it is not?


Schis. For Sitting is the example, and Standing is a gesture sometimes used in
extraordinary eating, (and in the objection) it is said to be prescribed at a
Sacramental Feast.


Pro. Leaning and lying may show us how Christ ministered his Supper.

Sitting is none example. For he sat not, if Beza, if See before.. 7. p. 67.
Vilerius, if the vulgar Geneua annotation before cited, say true.

And if, because standing in some Churches is prescribed at the sacramental
feast, it is to be esteemed indifferent, then is kneeling so to be deemed,
because the most and best reformed Churches appoint kneeling to be the
seemliest gesture to be used at the sacrament.

What have you more to say?


Schis. Again, it does not follow, that because Christ used a gesture fitter
for eating in his time, in stead of a gesture prescribed upon occasion, it is
therefore lawful to use a gesture nothing answerable to eating, and that taken
out of the synagogue of Antichrist (as though the 1. Cor. 14. 36.
word of God came out of it, or to it only) instead of a gesture most
answerable to eating, and purposely used by Christ at the institution of the
Sacrament.


Pro. Will you not leave charging of Christ with violating and breaking of Gods
ordinance by using a gesture not fitter for eating in his time; refusing a
gesture prescribed upon occasion, in Gods eyes fittest for the Jewish Church?

Which thing though our Savior neither might, nor would do: yet is it free
for us Christians and all Churches, to use such gestures at the Communion, as
are fittest for the days and countries, wherein, and where we live.

England and many other Churches purged from the superstition of Popery, have
made choice of Kneeling (a site though not answerable to our common eating
(neither is it necessary it should be) yet seemliest in our eyes for our
Eucharisticall, Ecclesiastical, heavenly, and spiritual repast with Christ,
and his members.

Which Site or gesture, though Antichrist abuse, and Christ that we read, used
not yet is it not therefore unlawful, except it can be shown, that either
Christ did forbed it, or command another; or that Christians eithermay not at
all, or cannot use that well, which in the synagogue of Antichrist has been
abused.


Schism. So that notwithstanding all that is said for Kneeling, his Majesty
(upon whom the burden as of this gesture: so of other ceremonies is laid) may
remember, that Hezekiah appointed Levites in the 2. Chro. 29. 25.
house of the Lord with Cymbals, etc. according to the commandment of David,
and Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for the commandment was by
the hand of the Lord, and by the hand of his Prophets.


Pro. Whatsoever you have said, yet have you not hitherto proved, the Kneeling
in question to be unlawful; and therefore cannot conclude the same to be not
indifferent, nor to be enjoined by our King.

As for his Majesty, like a worthy Hezekiah, he has appointed Levites in
the houses of the Lord, who do perform their duties together both at
public prayer, hearing of Gods word, ministering, and communicating in the
Sacraments, according to the commandment of blessed Elizabeth, and the advice
of her Seers, the Prelates and Clergy of the Realm, and all correspondent
unto the revealed will and Counsel of God.


Sch. Withal, his highness is to consider, if kneeling were the most convenient
gesture, and best beseeming the holy comunion, our Lord and Master would not
have Sitten down of purpose at his last supper.


Pro. Your self have acknowledged this Kneeling to be the most solemn sign
of reverence, which what it does differ from the most reverend gesture, he is
sharp sighted that can discern, and so best beseeming the holy Communion in
our judgment, and country.

Howsoever our Lord and Master ministered this his Supper, he ministered the same
in most decent, orderly, and reverend manner, yet not binding us to his
example, as knowing that is comely in one Country, which is not so in another;
and meet for the time wherein he lived, and instituted the Sacrament, which
though lawful, is not so convenient for after times and all places where his
Church, or part thereof should reside. When Christ therefore in these things
has left us free, let no man bring us into a new bondage.


Schis. And (let his Majesty remember and consider) that Ahaz was deceived in
deeming the Altar at Damascus 2. Kin. 16. 10, 12, 14, 15.
more honorable for Gods service, then the Altar of Lord.


Pro. When you prove that God has appointed the site of Sitting to be the
only gesture for the receiving of the Communion in his Church, as Altars were
prescribed by God for his worship at Jerusalem; and that the site of Kneeling
at the said Communion is as unlawful, as were the Altars at Jerusalem, made
after the fashion of the Altar at Damascus; and lastly that we in the Church
of England commit Idolatry by our Kneeling, as did the Jews upon their new
made Altars, then let both King James be taken for an Ahaz, and his loyal and
obedient Subjects for Idolaters: in the space you are to be taken for an
egregious deprauer both of his sacred Majesty, and of the Church of God under
his Empire and Government


SECT. 11.
Whether Kneeling at the Communion as much is to be abhorred, as the
worshipping of Images.

Schis. I Have said that which may be sufficient to a man reasonable, and not
contentious against the institution of Kneeling for supposed reverence in
regard of God.


Pro. You have said a great deal more then enough to the same purpose; but no
whit for the satisfaction of any indifferent and reasonable man, studious of
the Churches quiet, and desirous of the truth.


Schis. It remains that somewhat be said against the institution of kneeling,
for reverence in regard of bread and wine; which need not be much.


Pro. Whatsoever you shall say, it is but too much in a needelesse contention.
You have been told, that we Kneel not, neither be to Kneel in regard of
bread and wine.


Schis. Verily no sound Protestant of any knowledge will affirm it, but rather
presently consider, that if kneeling be instituted for reverence in regard of
bread and wine, it must be either because they represent the body and blood of
Christ, though remaining bread and wine touching their substance. And then for
like reason, we may worship the crucifixe, and image of God, as the Papists
do.


Pro. True.


Schis. Or this reverence is done to bread and wine, because Christ is reallie,
bodily, and locally, though invisibly present in them, either by
transubstantiation, according to the mind of the Papists: or of
consubstantiation, according to the heresy of the Lutherans.


Pro. The Church of England, and members of the same, have in equal
detestation both of the Transubstantion of the Papists, and the
Consubstantiation of the Lutherans.


Schis. Then it must needs follow that if we abjure these heresies of Papists,
and Lutherans, we must also abhor idolatrous and superstitious Kneeling, their
daughter and Nurse.


Pro. We abhor idolatrous and superstitious kneeling from our hearts, but
not kneeling. Our kneeling is neither superstitious, nor idolatrous.


Schis. We never heard of kneeling before transubstantiation was hatched in the
sygnagoue of Antichrist: so that Relics of Rome. fol. 93. and 99. Ans. to M.
Jewels chal. fol. 110.
immediately after Pope Innocent decreed transubstantiation, Pope Honorius
decreed kneeling. Therefore if Harding does grant, that it is not well to
kneel, but in regard of a real, and bodily presence, a sound Protestant
should infer, But I detest your real presence: Therefore Iabhorre your
idolatrous kneeling.


Pro. We are to regard not so much who ordained kneeling at the first, or when
it was established, and why: as who commands it now, and the use thereof, which
we take to be very good, profitable, and necessary.

What though Harding does say, that we do not well to kneel, but in regard
of a real, and bodily presence: do we therefore ill which kneel, having no
such regard?

And though you tell us a thousand times we do ill in kneeling, because the
Papists in kneeling do adore the the bread, and wine: do we therefore ill,
which abhor the Papists both doctrine, and adoration?

Therefore whereas Harding does grant, that it is not well to kneel, but in
regard of a real, and bodily presence: and ye, Schismatikes, do say, and
maintain, that we do ill to kneel, not because we do, but for that the
Papists (in regard of a certain persuasion they have of a bodily, and real
presence) do adore Bread, and wine: we hold both them and you to be much out
of the way; them for condemning our kneeling, because it is not in adoration of
bread and wine; you, for condemning our said Kneeling, which is without all
regard of such adoration.


SECT. 12.
Whether kneeling at the holy Communion be a show of evil, and the greatest
scandal.

Schis. WE are to abhor kneeling.


Pro. What, all kneeling?


Schis. I mean kneeling at the Lords Supper; as in my proposition is expressed.


Pro. Why so? For hitherto have you given no sufficient, and satisfying reason,
why we should abhor it.


Schis. Because we abhor the heresies of worshipping of Images,
Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation.


Pro. Though the heresies of worshipping Images, Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation be detestable: yet is not our Kneeling to be abhorred,
unless you can prove us guilty of those heresies, or the like, which we
abhor, no men more.

Our gesture of Kneeling cannot be ill, when our doctrine is good; as the same
gesture could not be good, if our doctrine were unsound, and savor of those
heresies; which you cannot truly say it does.

You have before been told, that the gesture of it self is neither good nor
evil, but to be esteemed according to the doctrine which they profess, and
hold, that use it; a site, as we use it in the Church of England, very comely,
and commendable: a gesture as Papists abuse it, most horrable.


Schis. Not in respect of those heresies only, but also because it is the show
of the greatest evils that ever were, it is to 2. These. 5. 22.
be abhorred.


Pro. Those evils would be shown.


Schis. It carries a show first of Idolatry, in worshipping a God made of a
piece of bread.


Pro. Artolatrie is the evil of the Romish Church: there is neither that
evil, nor a show thereof among us, who acknowledge no breaden God, much less
give any show of adoration unto bread and wine. The show of such evils we
condemn; even as the evil it self we abhor.

You have bin answered again, and again, that our adoration in Kneeling is to
our God in heaven, not to his creatures on earth, nor to Christ in them, or
transubstantiated into them: which because we do not, the Papists before
mentioned, viz. Harding would not have us to Kneel, because we adore not what
they do, which did you conscionably remember, would remove this uncharitable
suspicion out of your head, that our Kneeling carries a show of Artolatrie,
gross Idolatry. This therefore is but an unjust surmize of yours.

What is the next evil, even the great evil, that it bears a show of?


S. Even our communion with Antichrist rather than with Christ.


P. To communicate with Antichrist, is not reverently and religiously to kneel
at the holy Communion; but to communicate in the doctrine, and superstitious
worship Crusad^ from Rome, Anno 1588.
professed, and used in the Church of Rome. Herein we communicate not with the
Papists; nor they with us.

They say that our Protestants are Amalakites, and Heretics; Test The. an.
Acts. 28. 22.
our doctrine, heresy; and that they which so call it, and that in the worst
part that can be, and in the worst sense that ever was, does rightly and
justly; and that we Rossaeus, learnedly confuted by D. Sutcliff, in his decath.
and arth. Ec. l. 2. p. 454.
are Paganis and Turcis deteriores, worser then Turks and Pagans.

We said of them, that their religion is rebellion; their faith is faction;
their doctrine, false, and erroneous; their serving of God, superstitious and
idolatrous; all their Pub. prayer 5 Nouemb.
doctrine, and worship, blasphemous, and derogatorie in an high degree to the
glory of God.

Hence have they separated themselves from us, and our Churches, by open
recusancie; and we have departed from them, and their offices, which they call
Apostacy, and us Schismatickes for so doing.

These things were they duly considered as they ought seriously, me thinks it
should be far from the thought of any man (professing the same doctrine with
us, and detesting the religion of the synagogue of Rome) to imagine, that we in
kneeling do communicate with that whorish Church, who are not so severed in
doctrine, and worship, as for our worshipping of God, and doctrine, without all
hope of atonement, or reconciliation, separated in body, but in affections much
more.

This notwithstanding, were their doctrine and worship as good, as the signs
of their devotion, commendable, whom we do communicate withal in a dumb
ceremony, and in different (if to kneel at our chiefest prayers, and praisings
of God, be a communicating with the Church of Rome) we would also most
willingly communicate withal in their worship and doctrine. And we wish and
pray, that as we convert some of their vsages to God his glory: so they may be
converted unto the same doctrine, and worship among us, that with our heart,
and form as well of doctrine and worship, as ceremonies, we may glorify God
together in this world.

In the mean while we shall, and as much do dislike your sitting (who are
like us in the maine points of doctrine,) as we like of their kneeling (in it
one nature considered) who are most unlike us in doctrine, and the true worship
of God. For we hold it better to come near the superstitious Papists (who make
shows of great devotion at Kneeling); than to profane persons in sitting at
the communion (a sign of no devotion, or of very small) especially in these
days, wherein we are to fear more, the ouerflowing of Atheism, then
th'encrease of superstition.

When we have no communion with Antichrist in Idolatry and false doctrine;
why should you refuse to communicate with us Christians, because of our
kneeling?


S. It was the greatest scandal that ever was, or can be.


P. Kneeling, no not at the communion, is not any scandal in our Church;
sitting is. And if Kneeling be, it is a scandal taken, not given: but your
sitting is a scandal both given and taken; and therefore the greatest
scandal, whereas the other is none at all.

But seeing you have said it, show why kneeling is the greatest scandal that
ever was, or can be?


S. It is so in regard of those evils it does occasionally teach, or confirm.


P. If our doctrine (as it does not) teaches no such evils, and heresies,
Kneeling of it self does not so much as occasionably teach or confirm them.
But our doctrine is most pure, and sound, no Papist can show; no Schismatic
will say; no adversary what-so-euer shall ever prove the contrary. You are
answered for this point; have you no other thing to say, why our Kneeling is so
scandalous, yea the greatest scandal that ever was, or can be?


S. Yes, it is so also in regard of multitudes (indeed the most part of the
people) either not sufficiently instructed in the right understanding and use
of the Sacraments, and therefore carried with a blind zeal, learned by
tradition; or corrupted (more or less) with the leaven of Popery.


P. We are sure, and all the world will witness, that Puritas doctrinae viget
in Anglia, true religion flourishes in England, and the people at no time was
ever so diligently and soundly taught, both what to believe, and how to live,
as they are at this day, and for these many years together have been in our
Church. If multitudes not-withstanding remain yet blind, and ignorant, it is
the fault either of their own dullness, that cannot; or negligence that will
not; or sins, that they shall not profit by the word. The care of their
governors has been great and singular, that they might grow up and increase
in all godly knowledge and affections, especially in the Sacrament.

Therefore if any, or many, either be not sufficiently instructed in the right
understanding and use of the Sacraments; or be corrupted (more or less) with
the leaven of Popery, what is all this to the church of England, which both
desires and orders (so far as in her is) that all may be instructed, and
that sufficiently in the right understanding, and use of the Sacraments; and
also both teaches the doctrine of Christ very substantially, and administreth
the Sacraments, most sincerely?

Lay not the faults, and corruptions of the multitude upon the Church of
England, and her laws.


S. The vulgar people, for a great part, in regard of their weakness, are
endangered by this gesture, either groslie to commit the idolatry of Papists,
or to have a superstitious estimation of the outward elements.


P. The vulgar people would never have those thoughts did not either our
adversaries the Papists, poison them with Popish conceits (clean contrary to
the purport and meaning of the church of England); or you Schismatikes inform
them, that we either commit Idolatry, or make show that we so do, by our
Kneeling: but all of you most falsely and slanderously.

The gesture as it is appointed, does endanger them no whit, but it is partly
the Papists suggestions, that they must not Kneel, unless they do adore the
Sacrament (which yet are the signs of the most ignorant among them); and
partly our schismatic whisperings, that the people do adore, or make show of
adoring bread and wine when they do Kneel, that does endanger the people, and
trouble us all, making the multitude for a great part, either open Recusants,
because they may not adore; or dangerous sectaries, in that they will not
Kneel, which they think to be idolatrous adoration.


S. The rather (incline the people to Popery) because by the 21. Canon it is
provided, that no bread and wine newly brought, shall be used, but first the
words of Institution shall be rehearsed, when the said bread and wine be
present upon the Communion table. As if the words were incantations, and the
table like an Altar which sanctifies the sacrifice.


P. Kind and natural children will lesson, and extenuate their mothers fault,
but never aggrauate her offenses, much less raise slanders of her when she
deserves none. Ye are most unkind to your Mother, the church of England,
which has conceived, and tenderly fed you with the food of Gods word, and
refreshed you with the heavenly comforts of his Sacraments.

This our mother and the holy Sacrament will have us put in mind, both who is
the author of those holy mysteries; and why they are instituted, and all to
raise up in us a more reverend respect of those sacred signs, when she does
nothing but well, and to our singular good, shall we unkindly turn her good
directions, and instructions into evil, and say she is faulty, when she
deserves praise? she would have us to approach unto the holy Supper, as to an
heavenly banquet; you belike would have us thither to repair as unto a common
feast. Is she that inspireth us with divine thoughts, or you rather which
receive, or would have us to resort unto the supper, as unto a common feast;
she enjoying the divine words of institution, you leaving them quite out as if
we were but at a civil, and homely dinner or supper, faulty?

And what herein does she contrary to Gods word? or differing from the example
of Christ, who took bread, and wine, and before he distributed them, or his
Disciples did eat, gave thanks, and showed what they signified, and why
instituted?

Tell what in the words of our book, is erroneous? What in the form
superstitious? If you cannot be ashamed to term such divine words
Incantations, which are holy instructions, ministering necessary and divine
meditations unto our selves, and making the table, yea our Altar, (and all
there-vppon) most holy unto the Lord, without which, or the like, they differ
not from things common, and profane tables.

Your words be reproachful both to the holy, and to the Church of England.


S. May not this promise seem (at least to the simple) to make way at least to
the Popish consecration?


P. You would belike have us blindely to come, and take the Sacrament, as we do
our ordinary food; or if we use any words, though never so heavenly we do
Popishly consecrate, in your opinion.

The words and prayers uttered do make the bread, and wine, holy, which before
were common: This is consecration, we acknowledge, yet not Popish but Christian


S. How grievous a sin it is to scandalize the weak, may Math. 18. 6.
appear by the words of Christ, Viz: who-soeuer shall offend one of these
little ones, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.


P. Our savior speaks against giving offense by open breach of Gods holy
commandments or any of them.

If you can show any precept of God either by the Churches enioyning us to
kneel; or by our kneeling violated, then you may justly conclude us to be
subject to the mentioned curse. If you cannot, whosoever is or be offended,
weak or strong, their offense rashly is assumed, not given; and they be more
to fear the wrath of God, for being offended without cause, then we for
kneeling, having no word of God to the contrary.


S. Saint Paul likewise does say, if meat offend my 1. Cor. 8. 13.
brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands that I may not offend
my brother.


P. The like are you, and I, and all true Christians to say, touching all
things in our power to do, or leave undone: but when by authority we are
directed (as at the receiving of the Sacramaent we are) then are we not for
offending of others (pretending themselves to be weak) to leave that undone,
which we are enjoined to perform. Disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft,
offensive to all good minds: obedience unto lawful Injunctions, may be
offensive either to some weak, or wicked persons, but neuer-the-lesse to be
yielded (except God say to the contrary) without scruple of conscience.


S. What an offense, or scandal is, the Apostle shows in the same chap. viz.
The occasion of falling to the weak.


P. As how?


S. The particular offense he speaks of is this: Notwithstanding the Gospel
was preached at convenient 1. Cor. 13. 7. 10.
time, and that by the Apostles: yet many wanted knowledge, and even unto that
time, did eat as a thing sacrifised unto an Idol: of whom if any should see a
man endued with knowledge sit at table in the Idols Temple, his weak
consciences might occasinatly be emboldened to eat those things which are
sacrificed to Idols.


P. This instance of yours is to be regarded.

The Apostle speaks of Idolatries, or meats not consecrated, but even
sacrificed unto Idols. This meat so abused, the Apostle condemns not, as
unlawful to be eaten of Christians. But he blames those Christians who in
the Idols temple among Idolaters did eat the same meat, to the offense of all
Christians, especially of the weak.

Now be it that Kneeling (as the meat sacrificed unto Idols) has been abused
of Papists: yet as meat so sacrificed might be both sold in the market, and
bought, and eaten of Christians privately, or without offense: so the gesture
of Kneeling, abused by Idolaters may be well used of Christians.

Which may show how far you Schismatickes are out of the way of truth, and
from the mind of the first and primitive Christians; who think that nothing
either devised, or abused by Papists, may or can be well used in reformed
Churches; and therefore do utterly condemn among other things, this our
Kneeling.

But if you find us to kneel in the idols temple offending thereby the weak,
and making them to fall, and confirming of Idolaters, then deserve we the
blame which those temporizers at Corinth deservedly did incur. But this you
charge us not withal, unless you think our Temples to be Idols houses, and
all communicants to be idolaters.

Besides, it was free for Christians to eat, or not to eat those meats, so
it were not with offense to the weak: but it is not free for us of the Church
of England, to Kneel, or not to Kneel at the holy Communion. For whether we
please the weak, or offend them, we are necessarily to kneel: otherwise, if
we kneel not, we may please the weak you speak of, but shall offend our
governors, and peaceable men, whom we ought to please: and if we Kneel, we
shall offend the weak, but please others, whom we are more to regard.

In this case therefore wherein we cannot choose but offend some or other, we
choose rather to offend the weak then the strong; private then public
persons; a few, than an whole state; yea; we choose rather to do our duties
conscionably, then to offend; for we offend not in obeying lawful directions;
but they offend, whosoever they be, which take offense before it is given.


S. If Saul would never eat flesh, rather then he would Ibid. verse 12.
offend in this case, because in so doing, he should sin against Christ; how
dare a Christian having knowledge, Kneel in the presence of any, who for want
of knowledge, receives superstitiouslie?


P. In his case (not in this case about Kneeling) Paul would not offend. This
case of ours, is not Paul's case.

For touching meats Paul was at liberty to eat, or not to eat; neither God,
nor by his authority, man having forbidden meat, or any kind of meat* but
lawful power has imposed this order of Kneeling upon our shoulders: whereas
he therefore was free, we are not.

Where orders well were established, who ever was more pliant to observe them?
who a greater adversary to those which would not obey, and fulfill them, then
this Apostle Paul, without respect of any seeming to be weak?

In this case, where orders be set down for the well ordering of Christians,
said he ever he would never keep them, then thereby offend the weak? Nay, he
both prescribed orders to be kept, not to be contemned; and reproved them
which would not keep them, but were 1. Cor. 11. 16.
contentious.

Therefore not after the example only of the Apostle, but according to the
commandment also of God, we may yield obedience to the higher powers, and
their lawful Impositions, about matters in their own nature (till they be
either prescribed, or prohibited) indifferent: such is our Kneeling at the holy
Table, where in charity we are to think none superstitiously do receive; and
if some do, it is their private offense, no public fault of the whole Church.

Furthermore, when you grant that some persons very religiously receive, when
others superstitiously do so: see you not how with one, and the same breath,
you grant the said Kneeling to be a gesture indifferent (which before you
denied) abused by some, well used, and without sin by others: Which
ouer-throweth utterly your assertion, namely that Kneeling in the very act of
receiving the Sacramental Bread and wine in the holy communion cannot be
without sin.

Say not then hence forward how dare a Christian man having knowledge kneel in
the presence of any, who for want of knowledge receive superstitiously? for
such a Christian dare kneel, and having good warrant for his so doing, may
work much good thereby his exemplary Kneeling teaching both the weak to cast
away their uncharitable, and rash supitions of their neighbors, and brethere^
for Kneeling (who doubt less, if by none ouert act or speech they declare the
contrary (receive religiously); and superstitious Communicants (if any such
repair unto the Communion) to convert their Kneeling unto the glory of God,
which others (whom through ignorance and infirmity they do favor but too much)
do superstitiously, and idolatrously abuse in the Romish sinagogue.


S. Of which sort of superstitious receivers, seeing there be so many even
until this hour, and ever likely to be, that we know not when and where to
Communicate without some such, either old or young: It follows that if
sitting at the Table in the holy Temple, could not be without sin in the
Apostles time, so Kneeling cannot be without sin in these days, when the
number of the faithful teachers be much decreased, but of Papists much
increased, and by our Kneeling much confirmed in their bread worship.


P. Conceive better of the Communicants of our Church, then that the number of
them which superstitiously do receive, should be so great, least the same
measure be ministered to you, Schismatikes, which you offer to others, and men
likewise take offense at your sitting, as at a gesture in our churches very
unseemly and sign of no rightly devout, and religious, but profane persons;
the number of which more apparently does increase, then does the number of
superstitious Communica^ts. And so surmises being had by some that such and
such be superstitious, because they Kneel; others be vain and profane for
that they sit; and weakness of mind on either and both sides alleged for their
Recusancie to join either with those superstitions, or these profane; yea
with them which be neither profane, nor superstitous, the union of our
Church by this new Recusancie and vterly refusing the Communion, be dissolved
and broken.

But did none give offense to weak consciences by their sitting, as you say
(though you name no man) many do by Kneeling: yet does it not follow, that
because Christians could not sit lawfully at table in the Idols temple and
sin not, therefore none can without sin kneel in our churches, and at the
holy Communion. For our churches be not Idols temples; our Tables in them not
Idols tables; our communicants, not the worst of them, no not so much as in
show (but only by surmise, and unbrotherly suspicions) superstitions. If you
think the contrary, great is your sin, and heavy the account you shall make
for so thinking.

That teachers, especially faithful teachers decrease, I hope not, sure I am
is not so notorious as that Papists do increase, and the increasing of these to
be the diminution of the superstitions you speak of. But that being
increased, they are confirmed, yea much confirmed in their bread-worship, by
our Kneeling, is soon said, but not proved, nor will ever be justified.


S. If his Majesty's judgment be sound that the surplice Sum of the confer.
pa. 74.
is not to be worn, if Heathenish men were conversant among us, who thereby
might take occasion to be strengthened in their Paganism: shall we by our
corrupt practice of Kneeling, strengthen the Papists, who swarm among us, in
their idolatry?


R. We doubt not of the soundness and sincerity of our Kings judgment. He
conceiueth better of Papists, though they be too bad, then of Heathens and
Pagans. And therefore albeit he would not suffer the Surplice to be worn, if
Heathenish men were conversant among us, least they should be strengthened in
their Paganism; yet does he not only suffer but enjoin the said Surplice to
be worn of the holy Ministers, albeit Papists do swarm in this kingdom.
Thereby not strengthening them as by a Popish relic in their Popery, but
letting them, and all men see that he condemns Sum of the confer. pa. 75.
nothing in use among them, that may be well used. And yet had you marked what
follows (proceeding from the soundness, and profoundnesse of his most
excellent iugdement,) you might have seen that his Highness utterly
condemns not all the doctrine, and ceremonies in the Church of Rome taught,
and used, but those ceremonies only, and doctrines, which are corrupt,
savoring of error, and superstition, not of the purity and verity of the
primitive Christians. There should you read and perceive his constant and
resolute opinion to be, that no Church ought further to separate it self from
the church of Rome either in doctrine, or ceremony, than she has departed
from her self, when she was in her flourishing and best estate, and from
Christ, her Lord and head.

Among which corruptions his Majesty never counted either the surplice, by you
mentioned; or the Kneeling between us controuerted, to be.

But whatsoever corruptions have bin either in Kneeling, or the surplice: yet
the said corruptions being taken away, and these appointed, now reformed to the
service of God: with what face can you call either our practice in kneeling to
be corrupt; or the Papists, swarming among us, to be confirmed in their bread
worship by our kneeling which is nothing Popish?


S. If the State does well, in ordering the Sacrament Rub. after the confer.
sect. 5.
to be administered in usual bread, to tale away superstition, whereas Christ
did by occasion, minister in unleavened bread; shall not we do ill, in
teaching, or confirming superstition by kneeling, whereas Christ did of purpose
minister sitting?


P. Does the State well in changing the bread? speak Schismatic, for your
words are equiuocal? If well (therein yet varying from the purpose of Christ)
then may you see the weakness of your fourth argument before alleged, binding
us necessarily to the example of Christ, as to a Persian law, which may not be
broken. For he ministered with unleavened, and we solemnize the Supper with
bread usual, and leauened, and yet in so doing sin not.

The same State which changed unleavened into usual, and bread leauened, in
place of your pretended sitting, has appointed Kneeling at the Communion:
changing the site by the same authority, which she did the bread, thereby doing
well in both or neither.

Which Kneeling also would the same State have altered into sitting, or some
other seemly and comely gesture, had it been persuaded, that the same Kneeling,
either had, or should offend the minds of Christian communicants, as it knew
the sight of unleavened Waser Cakes would displease the godly, and be
dishonorable to God.

Finally, if we either teach, or confirm superstition by our kneeling, we do
surely therein very ill: but that we so do is yet in question, not granted by
me, nor will ever be proved by you.

We swerve no whit from the mind and purpose, whatsoever we do from the
example of Christ by our Kneeling: and therefore in Kneeling do not sin.


S. Setting up of Images in Churches, only to be Lay men's books, is by
authority condemned, because they are as stumbling blocks in the way of the
blind.

So that they have been, are still, and will be here-after Hom against peril
of Idol. p. 132. Leuit. 19. 14.
worshipped by ignorant persons. Is not Kneeling as scandalous? How can it then
be justified?


P. Justly have Images (those Laymens books) by authority been condemned, I
think you will affirm as much, Gods word is directly against such Images. Now
could you make good your words, that Kneeling is as scandalous now, as Images
sometime were in our Churches, I would be of your mind, that it is to be
condemned as Images were.

That Images, the Images I mean, that you speak of, are such stumbling
blocks, I do read both in the books of God, and otherwise in most godly and
approved writers old and new: but that kneeling at the Communion is as
scandalous as Images, and therefore to be condemned, is doctrine proceeding
newly from the brain of of you Schismatics, never before heard of among the
people of God.


SECTION. 13.
Whether the Kings commandment to Kneel makes Kneeling to be no sin.

S. IT is said that the Kings commandment takes away scandal, in things
indifferent.


P. What say you hereunto?


S. It may be auerred, that this is a begging of a question, except it be
proved by the word, that Kneeling may be without sin, and that though it be
an institution of man, contrary to the example of Christ, a sign of communion
rather with Antichrist and his synagogue of Rome, the^ with Christ, and his
church, it have no proportion with Sacramental eating, and have been, is, and
will be breadworship.


P. That we may kneel at the Communion without sin; and that the said
Kneeling is neither a mere institution of man; nor contrary to the example of
Christ; nor a sign of any Communion at all with Antichrist, and his synagogue;
nor hinders a whit the Sacramental eating of Christ; nor finally with us ever
has been, is, or (I hope) shall be any Bread-worship, has sufficiently
been proved by undeniable and strong arguments. And therefore go on, prove
that it may not by the authority of the King be enjoined.


S. Suppose that in it self it were as indifferent, as was eating of flesh
sacrificed to an Idol, not in the Idols temple, but at a private table, where no
weak ones were, in the Apostles 1. Cor. 10. 27. 28.
time: yet how does the Kings commandment take away scandal from Kneeling in
public places? does it make all so sure that none can be scandalized? or, if
that cannot be, does it take away guiltiness from the scandalizer, as if all
the blame of scandalizing were in the Kings commandment* Surely it must be in
the former, or else in the latter it cannot be.


P. Our Kneeling, even in the public churches, is no scandalizing, but
accidentally, as any good, even the best thing may be. And therefore neither
does the King offend in commanding, nor we offend in obeying; and so is there
neither scandal, nor scandalizer, nor any justly scandalized by kneeling; for
neither does Kneeling, nor the Kneeler, nor the King commanding to kneel,
deserve any blame. You take things for granted, which will not be confessed.
Here is no offense given in any respect at all.


S. By scandalizing a weak brother perrisheth: Of 1. Cor: 811. Numb. 35. 3. 2.
Sam. 11. 25. 16. 17.
whose blood the scandalizer is guilty, as Ioab was of Vriabs blood,
notwith-standing the Kings commandment.


P. What of this? Insinuate you all Kneelers to be like bloody Ioabs? and our
King commanding us to Kneel to like David when he commanded that Vriah should
be murdered? O undutiful, ungodly, and inconsiderate imputations.


S. Here his Majesty, known to be of a gentle disposition, and to have
learned, yea professed better things in Scotland, is most-humbly prayed, to
take the word (King) as spoken in imitation, and vnder-stood of Cantor: who
known to be of a violent disposition, did carry matters in the convocation,
and published Canons not orderly, and fully concluded, as some of his
Suffragane Prelates reported.


P. His Majesty lived in Scotland a long-while, and many years among
Puritanes, yet was never any Puritan himself.

The most-reuerend Father, whom you term in derision Sum* of the confer: P.
20. 72.
Cantor; did never any thing about the public affairs of the Church, but upon
good advise, and lawful consent; nor published any Canons for the ordering of
the Church, but the sovereign person of the kingdom, even his Majesty
himself, and that according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and
under his great Seal ratified them all.

These reproachful words do but wound his Majesty in the sides of his
officers.

Go to your matter, leave the^ if you have any more to say.


S. It is impossible, that the Kings commandment should make all so sure, that
none can be scandalized, the general ignorance of the people, the dispotitio^
of the ignorant unto superstition, the old leaven of Popery not purged, and
the multiplying of Papists all well considered.


P. All these things considered, Kneeling at the communion, uses according to
th'ordinance of the Church of England, and none otherwise, is no Scandal given.


S. Nay rather it is likely, that by the commandment, the Scandal should be
the greater, especially in regard of the 27. Canon, where ministers are
commanded, under pain of suspension, not wittingly to administer the
Sacraments to any, but to such as Kneel.


P. The Canon is necessary, and to the preservation of unity, and the
preventing of hateful confusions, which otherwise too-offensiuely would
spring, and spread over the kingdom. Dangerous maladies, must have eating and
biting medicines.

Gods ministers may thank you Schismatikes for this severe discipline.

They that will not receive Gods sacraments but as they list, must by severity
be driven to take the^ as they should.

It is a good rule in Physic, stay the beginnings. The Philosophers do say
how Mod^eus error in principio, fit maximus in fine. That error which at the
last was greatest, at the first was but a little one: in Divinity we find the
same to be most true. For the foulest, and most horrible heresies sprang but
of petty Schismatikes at the first.

They must in time meet with, and cut of those Shismes, that would not have
the Church pestered and molested with heretics.

This very discourse of ours may put the world in mind, what hideous and
horrible fancies this Recusancie of yours to Kneel, and leaving the union of
the Church, and Communion with us in the sacraments (because ye will not
kneel) has already engendered. Your errors here-about are foul and monstrous,
and yet worser are behind: for the preventing whereof we are on all sides,
from the King to the lowest, and meanest subject, to set to our helping hands.

Neither be you, nor any other men to think that punishment severe, which is
rather necessarily, for a public good; then willingly inflicted.


S. May not simple and superstitious persons take occasion thus to argue? Why
should Kneeling be thus urged by authority, if the sacramental signing of the
body, and blood of Christ, be no more to be reverenced then water applied in
Baptizing children? seeing that is also a sanctified sign of Christ his blood,
that washes away our sins and iniquity?


P. If they will by you be advised, the simple and superstitious shall so
argue; and thereby fall into a loathing of our manner of receiving the
sacrament.

But you, and they must be answered, how the church of England has the two
sacraments in equal price and estimation, conceiving highly, and religiously
of them both, but ascribing divine adoration, yea none adoration at all either
unto the Bread, and wine of the one, or unto the water of the other: albeit the
water signifies Christ his blood that washes away our sins and iniquity and
the bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ, shed and given for man's
redemption.

But for-so-much as we are baptized infants, when we know not what we do; and
are men, old or young when we partake of the other; also that the very Bread
and Wine, exhibited to these, senses, and hands of all communicants, do
sacramentally represent the body, and blood of our Lord; the Ministers
delivery of them, Gods very offering his favors in Christ unto us; the bread
broken, his body dead; the wine, his blood shed upon the Cross; lastly, the
distributing both of the wine and bread, Christ his benefits, and Gods
blessings imparted and communicated unto all Communicants, whereof they be
remembered so often as they receive, in all places of the world, and to the worlds
end: what Christian seeing, and seriously considering these and the like
things, but will be excited with all due submission and religious reverence to
come unto the participation, and receiving of such celestial favors? Not
because it is either unlawful, or indecent with like reverence to receive the
other Sacrament, but for that partly our tenderness is such, because of our
years, that we cannot; and partly the necessity is not so urgent, that we
need to Kneel. But doubtless were we of good years, and did know what we go
about, when we are to be baptized, as we know what we do (such is my
persuasion, and ought to be of us all, of all persons communicating at the
Supper) when we come to the table of the Lord, doubtless the Lord would not
be displeased, did we Kneel at Baptism, then our assured persuasion is, that
he is not offended with our Kneeling at his Supper.

Therefore whereas all worthy communicants, even in duty, and conscience are
bound with this sign of reverence, to receive these holy and heavenly
mysteries; and yet many persons, in one respect or other, will not bend, nor
bow their Knees, but in no case Kneel; if authority do force such stubborn
and wilful persons to do that necessarily, which of themselves voluntarily
they should perform, neither does authority transgress their bounds; nor do
they sin, that obey their command.

And so let this satisfy those simple and superstitious persons, and be an
answer unto you.


THE CONCLUSION.
S. TO conclude, if kneeling in the very act of taking, eating, and drinking
the Sacramental bread and wine, in the holy Communion, be an institution of
man.


P. It is no mere institution of man.


S. If it be the taking of Gods name in vain, when it is without all respect
of reverence.


P. It is done with all respect of reverence in the Church of England.


S. If God be not honored thereby, except it be according to his will.


P. It is according to his will: and so God thereby is honored.


S. If it swerve from the example of Christ his sitting, and therefore
deserves no praise.


P. Though it swerve from the example, yet is it against no commandment of
Christ. And therefore not to be condemned.


S. If it be a provoking sin to reject the exemplary sitting of Christ,
whereby we show our selves to be in the Communion with Christ, and the
reformed churches; and to retain Kneeling, which for bread-worship, ought to
be banished, and whereby we seem to be in communion with Antichrist and his
synagogue.


P. We reject not the exemplary sitting of Christ; neither should we sit, have
we by it the more fellowship with Christ, and his Churches reformed, whose
fellowship (which without sitting, praised be God, we do enjoy) is in
partaking of spiritual graces; in obeying and doing his precepts; and in
professing of Christian religion, jointly and with one heart, and mind?
neither by our Kneeling have we either the less with Christ, and his true
churches, or the more familiarity and communion with Antichrist, and his
synagogue. In which respect neither is Kneeling to be banished out of our
churches, because of the Papists, bread-worship; nor do the kneelers by
kneeling commit a provoking sin, yea any sin at all.


S. If it obscureth that rejoicing familiarity in, and with Christ, which the
Lords supper signifies.


P. At the Lords supper Kneeling obscureth not, but furthereth our
familiarity, and joy with Christ, and Christians.


S. If the argument from Christ his example be made the stronger in that he sat
of purpose.


P. Christ his purposely sitting (whatsoever it was) makes not our purposely
kneeling to be unlawful.


S. If the lawfulness of choosing a fitter time than the evening, cannot
justify our rejecting Christ his exemplary sitting.


P. By the same authority Gods people may leave the example of Christ in
sitting (if he did sit) whereby they left his example of ministering the supper
in the evening, unless by some order and decree he had enjoined his example
for our necessary imitation.


S. If the bittes of prayer, joined with the words of institution do make
Kneeling the more sinful.


P. Every bit, yea and every crumme of that prayer (used with sound faith and
devotion) does make our kneeling the more acceptable unto God.


S. If kneeling be not as indifferent, as standing, nor best beseeming the
holy communion; and the King must appoint nothing but by the hand of the Lord.


P. It is as indifferent and more convenient than standing, and in our judgment
and persuasion, best beseeming the communion, and appointed even by God
himself by the hand of our Lord the King.


S. If we ought to abhor Kneeling as we abhor Images; transubstantiation,
and consubstantiation?


P. Kneeling is a pure ceremony of our Church void of all superstition and
Idolatry whatsoever; and our kneelers the most sincere worshippers of God; and
neither themselves, nor their Kneeling to be abhorred.


S. If to scandalize be greeuouslie to sin, and kneeling be a show of the
greatest evils, and withal the greatest scandal.


P. There is no scandal given by kneeling; neither is kneeling evil; nor show
of evil, much less of the greatest evils, or the greatest scandal.


S. If it be a begging of the question to affirm kneeling to be indifferent,
and the Kings commandment (so called) both rather increase, than lesson
scandal by kneeling.


P. Kneeling has not as yet been shown to be of it self unlawful; and
otherwise has been proved to be indifferent: in which consideration the
Kings commandment (so known) should rather increase our desire, than lesson
our care, to receive the communion kneeling.


S. It may be auerred, that Kneeling in the very act of taking, eating, and
drinking this Sacramental bread and wine, in the holy Communion, cannot be
without sin.


P. It has, may, and will be auerred, that Kneeling in the very act of
taking, eating, and drinking the Sacramental bread and wine in the holy
Communion, may be, and is used without sin, yea without all show of sin,
Gods name be praised.


Amen.

