TWELVE PROPHETICAL LEGACIES.

OR TWELVE SERMONS UPON JACOBS LAST Will and Testament, Recorded by Moses, in
the 49. Chapt. of Genesis: containing his Be^^^^^^ and Blessings, bestowed upon
his twelve Sons.

Reuben. Simeon. Leui. Judah. Zebulun. Issachar. Dan. Gad. Asher. Naphtali.
Joseph. Benjamin.
Preached by Francis Rollenson, Bach: of Divinity, and sometimes Fellow of S.
John the Euang: College in Cambridge.

LONDON. Imprinted by T. C. for Arthur Johnson, dwelling at the sign of the
white horse, by the great North door of Paul's. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD ELLESMER; LORD CHAVNcellor of England, my
very singular good Lord, such happiness and honor in this life; as may be
seconded with the glory and foelicitie of Saints in the world to come.
RIght Honorable, Counsel and Help, as the Platonistes affirm, be the Two
maine pillars and Supporters of every commonwealth, of which that saying of
Ecclesiastes is verified, Two are better then one; for One of these Two without
the other, is but as a Reed shaken with every blast of wind; but being both
together, they are like the Two brazen pillars set up by Solomon in the Temple
at Jerusalem, of which the one was called Iachin, which is, he will establish,
and the other BoaZ, that is, by interpretation in strength; for Counsel and
Help united do Establish and Strengthen any state, whether it be
Ecclesiastical or Civil; as for instance; what avail the laws and
constitutions of Sage Counsel, made to establish the Truth, unless the
Lawemakers put to their helping hands to strengthen by favor and maintenance,
such as be the Ministers and preachers of the Gospel? Certainly nothing at
all: and therefore our Savior may herein be a pattern to all great personages
(whom God has ordained to be Iachin and Boaz: namely, Establishing and
strengthening pillars of his Temple) of whom it is written, that when he
appeared in a vision to John the divine, his two feet seemed as fiery
pillars, the one standing upon the land, and the other upon the sea; and the
spouse in the Canticles, compares his legs to Marble pillars set upon
sockets of fine gold; whereby is intimated, Aug. in Psalm. 58.
that Christ does walk in the midst of his Church by Counsel and Help, so
establishing and strengthening it; that neither the malice of Satan, though he
be Leo aperte saeuiens, and draco occulie insidians, one that by open and
outrageous cruelty shows himself a Lion; and by his covert and secret
poisoning of religion, a very Dragon; nor the Enchantments of the world, though
she like the Purple whore, makes such as he of her attendance, drunk with the
Cup of her abominable vanities; nor the gates of hell, though like the great
red Dragon they vomit and cast up continually floods of poison; shall never be
able to prevail against it. This Counsel and this Help, are the Pillar like
feet of every Noble Theophilus, who treads the steps of Christ, and
walks in his paths; and such a Theophilus may your Lordship be justly
accounted; for not only by Counsel, as being one of the chiefest Oracles of
this land, but also by Help, as being one of the best Nurcing fathers of the
Church, your Honor seeks the welfare of Zion, and the good of Gods Temple.
It is not I alone that say thus; but it is Musarum vox, the voice of the
learned Twins of this Realm, the Two universities, many of whose sons had
died and been buried in their selles, had not your Honor called the^ forth,
and sent them into Gods vineyard; amongst these I may rank my self, having
lately tasted of your unlooked for, and undeserved bounty toward me: In liewe
whereof, as a Sacrifice of Thanksg^uing, I offer up and dedicate to your
honorable name, and protection, these my Labors, being the sincere
testimonies of my thankful heart; humbly desiring almighty God, that as
your Lordship has been a Pillar of his Temple upon earth, so he would make you
in the life to come, a Pillar of his Temple in heaven, and write upon you his
own New name.

Your Lordships most bounden in all duty and service, Francis Rollenson.

THE FIRST SERMON OF REVBEN.
Genesis 49. Chap. 1.2.3.4 verses. Then Jacob called his Sons, and said;
Gather your selves together, that I may tell you, what shall come to you in the
last days.

Gather your selves together, and hear you sons of Jacob, and hearken unto
Israel your Father, etc.


THE maine subject of this chapter, is the Prophetical Benediction of Jacob:
concerning the twelve Patriarchs his sons; this Title I give it, as most
correspondent and suitable to the nature and quality of the Text; Antiquity
calls Jacobs last words, The Blessing of the Patriarchs, but Amb. de bened.
pat. ca. 2.
S. Ambrose, Ruffi. in li^. eiusd. tit.
Ruffinus, and Theod. in Genesis quaesi. vlt.
Theodoret say, it is a Soloecisme, or incongruitie, so to style them, because
therein Reuben, Simeon, and Leui are cursed; wherefore they term them only
Jacobs Prophecy, alleging for the Truth hereof Jacobs words, saying; Gather
yourselues together, that I may tell you what shall come to you in the last
days. Hereupon they conclude, that the words which Jacob spoke unto his sons
severally, were Predid^ctions, not Benedictions. Rabbi Solomon, held a very
strange opinion concerning this matter, but as ridiculous as strange; Namely,
that Jacob minding to bless his children, suddenly the Spirit of God departing
from him, the want whereof caused him in a do^ting manner, to speak he knew
not what; and from this distemper and defect it came to pass that he blessed
some, and cursed others: but to omit this frivolous and impious conceit, the
abortiue of a blasphemous brain, I return to that Title, which best agrees
to the last speech of Jacob; namely, a Prophetical Benediction, which neither
abolisheth the usual and customarie style of Antiquity, nor disparageth the
judgment of S. Ambrose and the rest; for it is a mixture and composure of both
their Titles. A Blessing, and a Prophecy. For though this holy Patriarch does
sharply reprove Reuben for incest, and Simeon and Leui for cruelty, yet his
curse is but a temporal chastisement, and a fatherly correction for their
amendment: nay they are crowned, though not in so ample manner, with a blessing
as well as the rest of their brethren, because they are counted among the
Tribes, and had their inheritance among them, being thereby included within
the Covenant. Joseph. Iudaie. Antiqu. lib. 2.
There is in this whole speech a harmony betwixt Jacobs tongue and his heart,
the Tongue foretells, the heart prays, the one declares the future prosperity
of the Patriarchs, the other wishes for the accomplishment. So then in
Prophesying he blesses, and in blessing, he prophecieth; that he prophecieth,
no man can deny, and that he prays for them (which is a blessing) who will
not confess, that marketh his prayer; Genesis 49.18.
O Lord I have waited for thy salvation: wherein he makes supplication unto
God, to be a Tower of defense unto his children, against the face of all their
enemies.

Then Jacob called his Sons, etc. in the two first verses of this chapter is
contained the Prologue or preamble to the ensuing Prophetical Benediction, and
in this preamble there is a Summons and a Charge.

The first branch is the summons: Jacob cites his sons to appear, and calls
them before him, that he may speak unto them before he dies. This was a
custom amongst the holy Patriarchs, when they felt death approaching, to
call their children and their friends before them; First, to acquiante them
with the knowledge of things to come: and secondly, to instruct them in sacred
Aphorisms, and rules of good life. So did Deuter. 33.
Moses, Iosu. 24.
Iosuah, 1. Reg. 2.
David, and many others, making their deathbed their Pulpit to Prophecy and
preach in. But why should they choose such a time, a time of pain and anguish,
and a time of mourning and lamentation? because it is the fittest time: Xenoph.
lib. 8 Plat. in apel.
Some Philosophers have thought that the soul of man upon the approach of
death, grows more divine, and by a supernatural inspiration, is made even
then most able to discourse of future events; but this Assertion is repugnant
to reason: For the soul, though in its own nature it be impassible, yet does
it sympathize with the body: and therefore when the body is ill affected, and
afflicted with sickness, then also the faculties of the soul begin to languish,
to grow fainte, and dull: Let then Xenophon bring in his Cyrus, and Plato his
Socrates, to avouch that at the time of death, a man's soul is inspired with
the power of divination, yet will this position prove to be but like a house
founded upon the sand, and one of Satan's fallacies and illusions. The cause
then why Jacob prophecies upon his deathbed, is not because his soul was then
more divine, but that the remarkable circumstance of the time might procure in
the memory of his sons, a deeper and more permanent impression of his
Prophecy.

The second branch of the Preamble, is the Charge in these words, Gather your
selves together, that I may tell you what shall come to you in the last days,
gather your selves together, and hear you sons of Jacob, and hearken unto
Israel your Father. This Charge is very emphaticall, as appears by this
threefold doubling of the words; Gather your selves together, gather your
selves together, Hear, Hearken unto Jacob and Israel your Father: Tharg.
Hieros in hunc locum.
This shows, that the holy Patriarch will speak of some great and important
matters concerning his sons, and that he will instruct them both as a
natural and spiritual Father, and therefore because he will not have them
stand like idle spectators and careless auditors; First, he charge them to
gather, and gather themselves together; wherein he requires, not only the
presence of their bodies, but also of their cogitations. Secondly, he commands
them to hear and hearken unto Jacob and Israel their Father; which is, as if
he should have said, let me have both the Rup. in Genesis lib. 9. Com. cap. 25.
attention of your ears, and the intention of your minds, that I may tell you
what shall come to you in the last days: in this speech Jacob alleges the
cause, both why he summoned them to appear, and also why he gives them so
strict a charge: This cause is the seal of his commission, and a testimony
that he is one of Gods Prophets, because the ground of his speech must be a
Revealing of things to come, which is only proper and peculiar to God, and
them whom he vouchsafes to employ as his instruments. It is not registered by
the pen of Gods spirit, how the Patriarch Jacob attained unto this
foreknowledge; whether by Oracle, dream, or vision, which are the Number.
12.6.7.8.
three ordinary means of Revelation, yet it is very likely. that God was
known unto him by vision, which is three manner of wares, either when true
things are discerned by an infused light, and the mere understanding, or else
when besides that light, Im^ges are also described; and that, either in the
mind, as when Zachariah saw the Zach. 18.
Horns, and the and 4.2.
candlestick; and Hier. 1.13.
Hieremiah the Pot; or else in the eyes and outward sense, as was that Dan. 5.5.
hand, spoken of by Daniel, which appeared on the wall; and as Angels were
seen to talk with men, in a bodily shape; now it is most probable, that by
the first of these three means Jacob prophesied, telling his sons what
should come to them in the last days: Touching the bounds or limits of
Jacobs Prophecy, there is some question made amongst expositors, both Jewish
and Christian. Rab. Kimhi in 2. cap. Esa.
Rabbi Kimhi, Hieron. in Michaeam. cap. 4.
S. Hierome, and Lyranus affirm, that as often as dies nouissimi, (the last
days) are mentioned in the Scriptures, the (Time or coming of the Messiah is
signified) and that his time is therefore called the last days; because he
should be the period or end of the Jewish state, both in regard of the Law,
the Priesthood, the Kingdom, and the figures or types of the Old Testament,
and that after the preaching of the Gospel, no other priesthood, law, nor
Sacraments were to be expected; though I do not gainsay (but that the Time of
the Messiah may be called the last days) yet in these words that Time is not
principally employed; for Jacob in this prophecy fore-telleth diverse things
which were fulfilled long before the coming of CHRIST, therefore in this Text
by the Last-daies, is signified the Succeeding ages and Times, from the
departure of the Israelites out of Aegipt, till the coming of Christ.

In this prologue of Jacob, we may for our instruction observe two things;
First, The pattern of dying; Secondly, the Art of hearing; the first is
couched in the Summons, the second in the Charge of Jacob: For the first, it is
upon record, that the holy men in former times used to assemble their friends,
kins-folke, and children, to bless and instruct them before they died, Genesis 27.
so Isaac blessed his two sons, Jacob and Esau. Deuteronomy. 33.
Moses, the Tribes of Israel; so 1. Chro. 29.
David blessed Solomon, and our blessed John. 17.
Savior prayed for his disciples immediately before his death: these actions
of them ought to be presidents for us to follow and imitate, and herein by
their example, are we taught to have a special care of the spiritual welfare
of our children, bequeathing them golden legacies, wholesome counsel, and good
instructions, how to serve God, to walk in his ways, and observe his
statutes; (...)
Death is common to all (as well to the rich glutton, clothed in purple and
fine linne^, as to the famisht Lazar, whose body is embroydered with sores,
but to die well and make a good end like Isaac, Jacob, David, and Iosuah, is a
peculiar blessing, and therefore all men do not attain unto it. The worldling
when sickness (the harbinger of death) arresteth him, 2. Sam. 17.
like Achitophel, puts his house in order and dies, even when he is to make
a surrender of his soul, his mind like Luc. 10.41
Martha, is altogether entangled in temporal objects, and cumbred about
worldly affairs, scarce reserving one minute to dispose of his spiritual
estate; and in the calling of his friends, he does as 1. Sam. 16.
Ishai did, in the calling forth of his sons; first comes Eliab, then
Abinadab, then Shammah, but David the anointed of the Lord, comes last of all;
So when his body begins to decay, First, he sends for his Physician, his
Jupiter Menecrates, who must (if Art be powerful) restore him to health, and
preserve him from the ^awes of death, and from the insatiable grave; next, if
the Physician fail in his practice, like 2. Reg. 1.
Ahaziah, he will enquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron, some Wizard, Witch,
or Sorcerer, whether he shall, and by what means he may recover of his
disease; If this course prove disastrous and insuccesfull, then the Lawyer or
Scribe must take his case in hand, to entaile and perpetuate his Lands and
possessions; And lastly, when his sickness grows desperate, in comes the
Minister, whose presence but for fashion-sake, is as yrkesome as was the sight
of 1. Reg. 22.8.
Micheah to Achab, this is the worldlings end, who thinks he has done God
good service, if he can but cry Lord, Lord, at the last gasp, and presumes,
that thereupon our Savior will say unto him, as he did to the Thief, Luc.
23.43.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Oh no, Mat 7.21.
not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that dith the will of my Father which is in heaven, says Christ. Now
Gods will is, that upon our deathbed we should do as Jacob and the other
Patriarchs did, to wit, Sanctify his Name, by praying unto him, by praising
him for his goodness, and by blessing and instructing our children how to
cleanse their ways, by framing themselves according to the word of the Lord. If
we hope then to take a joyful farewell of the world, and to die the death of
the righteous, we must in the flower of our age, and in the days of our youth,
Eccl 12.
remember our Creator, before the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong
men bow themselves before the grinders cease, and they wax dark, that look
out by the windows, before the golden Ewer be broken, and the Almond tree
begin to flourish: while our legs be strong as Marble pillars, let us be glad
with David to go into the house of the Lord, and while our arms are fresh and
able, let us like Daniel seven times a day, lift up pure hands without wrath or
doubting; while we have the organs of speech, and eyes to behold the heavens,
and the firmament, which declare and show the glorious handy work of our GOD,
let us with them both magnify and praise his holy Name, and while our memory
is vnbruised, and our understanding vnblunted, let us Dedicate, Deuote, and
Consecrate, to heavenly meditation these two, being the best members that we
have: (...). Plato.
The true professors of Philosophy ever think of death says Plato, because
the thought thereof is the bridle of vice, and like the water of Jordan,
washes away the leprosy of the soul; If amongst the Pagans, no otherwise
directed but by the glimmering light of Nature, the remembrance of death was
prescribed as a sovereign Antidote against the poison of vice, ought not
Christians, to whose feet the Word is a Light, and a lantern unto their
paths, to be far more careful how to live, and how to die then they? If we
then have a desire to pattern Jacob, in the manner of his dying, we must
imitate him also in the fashion of his marrying; Jacob could not enjoy his best
beloved Rachel, till he had married Leah, because as Genes. 29.26.
Laban answered him, It is not the manner of this place to give the younger
before the elder. Even so, like Leah and Rachel, living well, and dying well,
are two Sisters, the Twins of Grace, all men long for the younger of these;
For she is beautiful and fair, but the elder is neglected, because she is
bleare-eyed and of harder favor; The very reprobate wishes to partake with
the righteous, in his well-dying, but renounceth his fellowship in well-liuing,
but the followers of Jacob contract themselves to both. These two are like the
two August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 5.
Temples (of Honor and Virtue in Rome,) which were so contiguouslie built,
that no man could go into the Temple of Honor, unless he went first through
the Temple of Virtue; Even so is the conjunction of well-liuing, and
well-dying; For none can attain to the happiness of well-dying, unless first
he accommodate and apply himself to well-liuing.

Secondly, in the charge of Jacob to his sons, is infolded the Art of
hearing Gods oracles, an Art so necessary and requisite, that without the
Theorike and practice of it, it is as hard for a man to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, as for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle. For Faith
comes by hearing, and without Faith it is impossible to please God; therefore
it is expedient for all men to be studious in this Art. In hearing then the
Prophecies of God, and the preaching of his Word, four things are required;
The presence of the body, the assembling of the cogitations, the attention of
the ears, and the intention of the mind; for as Jacob said to his sons, so
God says to us all, Gather your selves together, gather your selves together,
Hear, o ye people, and hearken unto the word of the Lord: these four, like
the four Ezekiel. 1.9.
beasts which Ezechiel saw in Vision, must all go one way together, for if
they be separated, all Preaching is effectlesse; if the body be only
present, and the cogitations absent, then the words of the Preacher will be to
less purpose, then the Prophets speaking to the Ezekiel. 37.4
dry bones; if the ear be only open, and the mind shut and sealed up, then
though the ministers lips preserve never so much knowledge, and like lillies
drop down pure mirrhe, yet is his doctrine but like seed sown in a sandy
ground: some are like unto the 1 Sa^ 5.5.
Priests of Dagon, who because their God falling before the Arc, broke off his
head and the two palms of his hands upon a Threshold, would never tread on the
Threshold of Dagon in Osh^od; these are Recusants who have made a vow to avoid
our Churches and Temples, as Synagogues of Satan, because in them the Truth of
Gods word has foiled and overthrown their Romish Idol. Some have Mary's body
but Marthaes mind, they will frequent the Temple and sit at Christ's feet, but
their cogitations are else where, distracted with earthly affairs, concerning
a Yoke of Oxen, a farm, or a new wife, these hearers are like unto the
monstrous people of India, called Monosceli, who as Pomponius Mela writes, have
but one leg to hop upon, Monsters in religion, they run, but with no desire
to obtain, they draw unto God with their ears, but their hearts are far from
him, they sacrifice the worse part to God, and the better to Mammon, doing as
the Israelites did, who kept a holiday to the Lord, but offered burnt offerings
and peace offerings to the molten calfe. Some have attentive ears but their
minds are ill disposed, such are Athenians, thirsters after novelties, not
after righteousness, men of itching ears, to which all music is harsh and
tedious, but the Chaldean consort of Cornets, trumpets, harpes, sackbuttes,
psalteries and dulcimers, these must be fed according to their humorous
appetite, with new, and fresh broacht opinions, strange inuentons, and devises,
or else in their Censure the preacher is but a babbler, hence it is that the
pulpit which like the ark of God should be the storehouse of no other food
but Manna, the bread of life is made a dish to serve in Athenaeus his Athen.
lib. 11.
Pentaploon, or galimaufrie consisting of wine, honey, cheese, meal, and oil,
for the preacher being a light and wanton person, the slave of Tham^ur, and a
polluter of the Sanctuary, in hop^ of popular applause, suiteth his sermon to
the giddie ear of his auditorie, stuffing it with poetical fragments,
strayned allegories, and Egyptian eloquence, here is like people, like priest,
both like Ephrami, fed with wine, and puffed up with vanity. Again, some will
present both body and ear externally very devout, but the heart imagines and
contriueth mischief, these are our modern Pharisees, and Herodians, that
under pretense of religion, and the cloak of sanctity, come to entrap the
ministers of Christ, these cry hail master and kiss the preacher, but
afterward betray him, slander his doctrine, wrest his speeches, and speak
evil of the way of truth, Woe be to such hearers, for they follow the way of
Caine, and are cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages, and perish in the
gainesaying of Corah: these are like unto adders which refuse to hear the
voice of the charmer charm he never so wisely, and therefore as they, so
these stop one of their ears by laying it close to the earth and the other
with their tails; the ear of the body, and the ear of the soul, the
attention and the intention, being both depraved by an inbred and natural
hatred of goodness; Aristotle wished that young men might be secluded from the
lectures of moral Philosophy, because for the most part they be unprofitable
hearers, in regard that they want experience, and are carried away with the
stream of evil affections, and of the same mind was Pandarus, and Homer,
saying, For light wits want experience, and young folk are always rash and
unstaid; whether the Philosophers advise be authentical or no, I will not
here dispute, only I wish that such hearers as these aforenamed, either had
their ears and hearts circumcised, so that they might prove worthy
proficients in this heavenly art, or that if they will not hear with zeal and
devotion, they would cease to be like Iebusites, pricks in the sides of the
Israelites and forbear by absenting themselves, to profane Gods temple,
discourage his ministers, and corrupt others with the leue^ of their lewd life
and evil example.

REVBEN.

Reuben mine eldest son, thou art my might and the beginning of my strength
the excellency of dignity, Verse 3.
and the excellency of power.

Thou wast light as water, thou shall not be excellent, because thou wentest up
to thy fathers bed, then did thou defile my bed, thy dignity is gone.

REuben was the first son of Jacob, begotten of Leah, and his name by
interpretation is the son of vision, Genesis 29.31.32.
for when the Lord saw that Leah was despised in respect of Rahel, he made her
fruitful, but Rahel was barren, and therefore when Leah had conceived and
borne this first son, she called his name Reuben, for she said, Because the
Lord has looked upon my trouble, now therefore my husband will love me; if we
survey all the sons of Jacob, we shall find that every one of them has a
significant name grounded upon reason, and imposed upon some occasion according
to the interpretation whereof, Jacob for the most part frames the letter of his
prophecy. It was the wish of Socrates that Children might have significant and
well-sounding names given them; for to wander up and down without a name as
many of the Plut: in vita Coriolani.
Savages of in ^^t Atlas in Africa have done, is beastlike; and like the
Troglodites, to call children by the names of beasts, or by their Sirnames, as
many of our fantastike witnesses do, is both brutish and ridiculous; therefore
the ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans, being civil nations, were ever
careful to give their children well-boding and significant names, as may here
appear by the name of Reuben, The sonns of vision, in the imposition whereof
Leah first expresses how thankful to God she is for this benefit of a son,
and secondly how desirous she is to win her husbands love; God had looked
upon her in her tribulation with the eye of Pity in giving her a son, and
therefore she hopes that this son will also draw the eye of her husbands
affection as well to her as Rahel. Reuben mine eldest son, etc. Jacob
speaking to Reuben gives him five titles, calling him his Eldest son, his
might; the beginning of his strength, the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power; but we must consider, that these words of Jacob being
truly tasted, are to Reuben Apo. 10.
as the little Book of the Angel was to John the divine, Sweet as honey in
the mouth, but bitter in the belly, for though they seem to intimate Reubens
prerogative, yet indeed they are spoken of purpose to whip and scourge him for
his incest, which sin disrobed him of all these ornaments.

Reuben mine eldest son: he was indeed the eldest and first borne, but the
Birthright was bestowed upon Joseph, which should have been his, if he had not
defiled his fathers bed; what profit then or honor is it for Reuben to be
called the Eldest son, and to be disinherited and deprived of the Deuteronomy. 21.
double portion which was ordinarily due to the first borne.

Secondly, says Jacob, thou art my might; or thou should have been my
might, and the strength and staff of mine age, but the remembrance of thy
heinous and loathsome sin, has been a corruption unto my bones.

Thirdly, the beginning of my strength: so Jacob calls him because he begat
him when his body was fresh and strong; the latin translation is Principium
doloris, the beginning of my sorrow; which howsoever it is by some expositours
misliked and rejected, because the hebrew word is mistaken, yet does it fitly
declare the grief of Jacob for his sons sin, because the childs fall is
the fathers corrosiue.

Fourthly, The excellency of dignity; this is spoken in respect of the
priesthood, to which office in regard of birth Reuben should have been
consecrated; for the first borne are mine says God; and this was not only
after, but even before the law was writ.

Fifthly, The excellency of power: in these words Reubens Royalty is infolded;
for by right of his eldership he should have been the supreme head of his
brethren, and kings should have descended out of his loins; It was thine by
birth o Reuben, says the Chalde paraphrast, to have been preferred before thy
brethren, in the birthright, priesthood, and kingdom; but because thou did
sin, the Birthright was given to Joseph, the kingdom to Judah, and the
priesthood to Leui, See here Jacobs wisdom in the prologue of Reubens
reproof, he gives him these excellent titles, that the consideration of the
loss of them, might drive him to repentance. Thou wast light as water, etc: or
Thou wast powered out like water; that is to say, thy intemperancie was so
great, that thou could not bridle thy lust, but running headlong unto
iniquity, and carried away with the wings of itching pleasure thou did
commit folly with greediness; here Jacob comparing Reuben to water, does
displaie and lay open his inconstancy; for as water is of that fluent
substance, that it will be contained in no vessel, wherein the least cranie can
afford an issue, so Reuben was of such an intemperate disposition, and so
inconstant in goodness, that upon the least occasion of sin, he would commit
it; Lyranus applies these words to Reubens loss of all his prerogatives;
sayin; Lyra: in h^^c locum.
This is the difference betwixt water and other liquors, as wine, oil, and
ink, because these when they are powered out of the v^ssell, wherein they were
kept, yet ever they leave some remai^d^r in the vessel, either of their
substance, as honey or of th^^r taste as wine, or of the color, as ynke, or of
the smell as oil; but water when it is powered out leaves neither substance,
nor taste, nor color, nor smell behind it; So Reuben was utterly bereaved of
all his prerogatives, the Birthright, the priesthood, and the kingdom; but I
think that the first exposition is most consonant and agreeable to the words
of Jacob, who having first in these words Thou wast light as water, laid open
his Intemperancie, does in this speech following Thou shall not be excellent,
punish him for his sin with the loss of preheminencie.

Because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed, etc: here Jacob gives instance of
Reubens lightness, for which he is deservedly degraded and put from all his
prerogatives; the history of his offense is set down in the five and thirtith
chapter of Genesi^; Genesis 35.22.
there it is written, that when Jacob dwelt beyond Migdal-eder, Reuben went and
lay with Bilha his fathers concubine, and it came to Isreal's ear; in which
foul and detestable act, three sins are infolded; first adultery in that he
violated another man's wife, for Bilha howsoever she is called a Concubine, yet
she was the wife of Jacob; this only being the difference of the name; a wife
is she that was first a freewoman and publicly married, a Concubine, a
bordwoman, and only privately contracted, Secondly, incest, for he l^ie with
his fathers wife, who was therefore his mother in law, this is a vile sin, as
may appear by S. Paul's exaggeration of it saying; 1. Cor. 5.12.
It is heard certainly that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not once named among the gentiles, that one should have his
fathers wife; and afterward he says; that he has determined in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver him that has done this thing unto Satan.
Thirdly Contumely, for Reuben is so far from honoring his father, which is the
duty of a child, that herein he dishonored him, in defiling his bed, even as
afterward 2. Sam. 16.
Absolon did in lying with his fathers Concubines; Isa. 5.18.
Woe unto them, says Isaiah, that draw iniquity with cords of vanity and
sin as with cartropes, Reuben then must needs be cursed in joining these
three sins together, Adultery, Incest, and contumely; for with three he is
deprived of three great dignities, the Birthright, the priesthood, and the
kingdom.

In this speech of Jacob to Reuben, we may observe four things; First the holy
Patriarch does very sharply reprove him for his fault, wherein we gather,
that it is the duty of a wise father to censure and rebuke a wicked son, and
to chastise him according to his merits, for such as sooth their sons in
their folly, and wink at their childrens misdemeanors, are ever by them as
just scourges beaten for their conniuencie; remember 1. Sa^. 3.
Heli, remember 2 Samuel 13.14.
David; Heli laid the raines upon the neck of his two sons, they ran into
slander, and he staid them not, wherefore the Lord swore unto the house of Eli,
that the wickedness of his house should not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever; and what a lamentable end befell both him and his sons,
they were both slain in the battle against the Philistines, with the loss of
the Arc, and Eli himself astonished with the report fell backward, and broke
his neck; as for David, it was the just judgment of God, that Absalom (whom
he so dearly loved, and therefore too easily pardoned for the murder of his
brother Ammon) should rise up to trouble all Israel and spoil him of his
crown and Scepter; we therefore says the wiseman; Ecclus. 30.11.12.13
Laugh not with thy son, lest thou be sorry with him, and lest thou gnash thy
teeth in the end, give him no liberty in his youth, and wink not at his
folly; bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides
while he is a child, lest he wax stubborn and be disobedient unto thee, and so
bring sorrow unto thine heart; chastise thy child, and be diligent therein,
lest his shame grieve thee, also Solomon says; Pro. 22.13.
foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, but the Rod of correction shall
drive it away from him; in this excellent aphorism of the wiseman we may see
how all children by reason of their Psalm. 51.1.
inbred and natural corruption drawn from the loins and teate of their
parents are prove and addicted to sin; Exodus 15.25.
but correction alters nature, and casts them in a new mould; like the
branches of the tree, that God showed Moses, it turns bitterness into
sweetness, and an ill disposition into a good inclination; be ye wise
therefore o ye parents, and learn by Jacobs example, to crush and kill the
Crocodile in the shell, to root up weeds before they be stemmed; and to beat
down sin in your children before it be ripened and come to its full growth;
Custom in sinning is the nurse of necessity, says Bernard; nay it is another
nature says the Philosopher, therefore be cautelous and wary to prevent this
inconueniencie by due correction. Jacob reproues his son, and his Eldest
son, this his action condemns such parents, as are like unto the Image of
Diana in the Island C^ios, which was so artificially carved, that on the one
side being looked upon, it seemed to smile, but on the other to frown; so we
have some which will pamper and make too too much of their eldest sons,
ouerlooke their vices, and continually smile upon them, but make no difference
betwixt servants or slaves and their youngest, ever checking, controuling and
deiecting the^ with their frowns; hence it comes to pass, that very often the
Hieroglyphicke of the Ape is verified in them; which is this; Pyer: in hierogl.
A she ape painted with two young ones, one embraced in her arms, and the
other lying at her feet, and the motto, is Inuisus haeres, The envied or the
hated ape proves to be the heir, and the reason is, because with overmuch
cockering she killes him whom she loves; so do parents with their eldest
sons; but let us hear the good advise of S. Ambrose; Amb: in genesis 37.9.
The father ought to take heed (says he) if he have more children then one,
that he show not himself more loving to one than another, for so may he easily
mar that child which he favors above the rest, since by reason of his
fathers good will he will soon take a liberty of sinning; further, the rest
of his brethren will be easily inflamed, with hatred or envy against him; I wish
therefore that all earthly fathers would be like our heavenly father, who
chastises whom he loves, and corrects every son that he receives; In the
vision of the majesty of God which John saw Apoc. 4.3.
he that sat upon the throne, was to look upon like a Jasper stone, and a
Sardine, the Jasper is green, and is the emblem of Mercy, the Sardine is red
like blood, and is the figure of Justice; of this complexion should all carnal
parents be, if their children be virtuous and religious; then let them be
cherished, that kind usage and clemency may stir and spur them up to
perfection, but if like Reuben they follow lewd courses, then let them curb
them, and restrain their intemporancie with correction and severity.

Secondly Reuben is punished with the loss of his Birthright, priesthood and
kingdom forty years after his fault was committed, and though Jacob was the
Herald to proclaim this curse, yet God was the primarie cause and author of
it; wherein we may learn, That the Revenge of sin though it be late, yet it
is ever certain; Dan. 7.9.
though God Sit upon his Throne, yet his throne stands upon wheels, his
Sitting portendeth delaie, but the wheels show that he will come to judgment,
though it be said that after the fall of Adam, God walked in the garden, Genesis
3.8.
which motion is slow, yet he came with a voice which was heard far off; so
does he now, with us which are the children of Adam; before he utter his Vbi
es? where art thou? he walks, or makes delay, to see if his adiournying and
long suffering will work any repentance in us, and his voice is this, Except
you repent you shall all likewise perish; but at length he comes, and when he
comes, he rides upon the wings of the wind, and sits between the
Cherubins, the Wind imports Swiftness, and the Cherub, as Aquinas interprets
the word, fullness of knowledge; so then his long stay breeds in him no
forgetfulness of our sins, he has a catalogue of them all, and in this book
are all our offenses written; and though it be long before he come, yet when
he comes he comes swiftly; and his feet are like Apo. 1.13.
fine brass, burning as in a furnace, of so hard and hot a temper, that at his
appearance the heavens melt like wax, and with his only touch the wicked are
bruised in pieces like a potters vessel, Gods long sufferance should be in us
all a motive to repentance, but it is the very seed of security and the
impunitie of sin daily committed, groundeth this persuasion in our hearts,
That there is no God, or if there be, Tush the Lord sees not; Oh let not our
merciful fathers love and kindness be so mistaken; you that are like the Idol
of Dagon, half fish, half flesh, I mean Christians in Name, but Atheists in
life and conversation: go to the Heathen writers, Orpheus and Socrates, and
they will both teach you that there is a God; go to the school of Reason and
it affoords you this conclusion, He that made the Eye shall he not see, and he
that planted the ear, shall he not hear? and have but recourse to former
examples and daily experience, and they will signify thus much; The punishment
of sin (though it be late,) yet it is ever certain.

Thirdly, Reuben for a little short pleasure lost his Birthright, and all his
dignity; Hence we are taught, that one momentanie delight may deprive a man of
many great blessings: For as God has Came. 5.14.
Hands like wings of gold, set with the Chrysolite, full of liberality and
bounty, to bestow his favors where he discerns any sparks of goodness, so
has he a Hand wherein there is a Fan, and a Sword, to cut off the
unrighteous, and divide them from his graces. God gave to Solomon more then he
desired, 1. Reg. ^.
both Wisdom and wealth: and CHRIST bequeaths upon the Cross to the penitent
Thief, more then he requested Luc. 23.43.
the Fee simple, and full possession of Paradise, whereas his wish was but a
Memento, Lord remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom; Lo here is
bounty, but of the contrary part, where he finds in stead of Salomons
discretion, and the Thiefes contrition, vanities adoration, then he closes his
hands, and withdraws his favor: if Esau prise a mess of pottage before his
Birthright, Esau shall loose his Blessings, and become the servant of Jacob;
if the rebellious Israelites long for the fleshpots of Aegipt, they shall be
debarred from entrance into the land of promise; and if Reuben follow the
Flesh, Genesis 27.4
and forsake the Spirit, Reuben must lose his Birthright, Priesthood, and
kingdom. Thus does one temporary pleasure rob a man of many excellent
blessings; Go to then ye garish daughters of Zion, walk with wavering Eyes,
minse it as ye go, and keep a tinckling with your feet, glory in your wyres,
your wimples, and your crisping-pins, your Hoods, your lawnes, your earelings,
and your bracelettes, go to, betroth and contract your selves to vanity, bake
cakes as the idolatrous women of Israel did, and offer them to Folly, the
Queen of your heaven; but for all this remember Reubens case, your seed time
is Pomp, but your harvest time shall be Penury, Isa. 3.24.
for in stead of sweet savor there shall be stincke and in stead of a Gyrdle a
rent, and in stead of dressing of the hair, baldness, and in stead of a
stomacher, a girding of sacke-cloth, and burning in stead of beauty; Oh, who
then is, or would be so fond, for a little gorgeousnes in this life, to
adventure upon so many curses and plagues, both in this world and the world
to come; and yet such are the allurements of Satan, and so powerful the
bewitching smiles of vanity, that even the strongest Sampson, and the wisest
Solomon are caught in their snares, and being once entrapt, they are so
benumbed with a spiritual lethargy or drowsinesse, that they quite forget
both God and themselves, being herein fitly to be compared to the companions
of Ulysses, whom Homer mentions, who by the enchauntments of Circe, were
turned into hogs; and hogs I may justly call them, for they are without
understanding and Reason, else would they never for one dram of Pleasure
purchase a pound of sorrow, for one spoonefull of honey, a gallon of gall and
vinegar, and for one minute of mirth, an eternity of weeping, mourning, and
gnashing of teeth. Is not then Luc. 16.
the Rich glutton a Hog, that for a little purple, linen, and delicious
fare, will loose and forgo the inheritance of heaven? Is not Judas a Hog,
that for the love of thirty pence will make ship-wracke of his soul? And it
not Reuben a Hog, that for a little dalliance with Bilha, will forfaite his
Kingdom, Priesthood, and Birthright? but what need I to dig up Reubens grave,
and vnco^er his shame, since notwithstanding his punishment, the remembrance
whereof me thinks should even mortify the most lust-strong Carnalists, yet the
world swarms now with Flesh-worms, and wanton Chamberers, who are so blinded
with pleasure, that they suffer themselves to be led by strange-wome^,like Oxen
to the slaughter; Well, the greatness and hainousnes of a sin is discerned in
the punishment, and therefore as our Savior says to all back-sliders,
Remember Lots wife; so say I to all incestuous persons, Adulterers, and
Fornicatours, Remember Reuben.

Fourthly, here we may learn what a grievous offense it is in the eyes of God,
to offer any wrong or contumely to our parents; Genesis 9.
Cham that mocked his, Father Noah, for his nakedness, was cursed: 2. Sam. 18.14.
Absalom who to make himself odious to David, lay with his concubines, died a
bloody death: and Reuben, that here pollutes his Father Jacobs bed, is
punished by the loss of all his dignities; Contumely against parents, is the
breach of this law Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, therefore whosoever is guilty of it, is
thus censured; Pro. 30.17.
The eye that mocketh his Father, and depiseth the instruction of his mother,
let the Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it. Every
man here upon earth has three parents, whom to touch with the least finger
of reproach is a great sin; Namely, his Natural, Civil, and Spiritual
father; Our natural parents, are not only they which begat and bore us, but
also according to the use of the world in the civil law, our grandfathers, and
great grandfathers, all these we are obliged and bound to honor, both by the
law of God, which says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may
belong in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee: and in another place,
Ex. 21.17.
he that curses his father or his mother shall dye the death: [viz] he which
frets and grieves them, with any contumelious word or action; and also by the
law of Nature, which ministers many reasons to enforce a duty and respect of
a child toward his father; The Hebrews call in their language a son Ben,
signifying that he should be a Building to his parents, and the prop and staff
of their decrepit Age: the Chaldeans call him Bar, which signifies both a son
and Bread or corn, whereby they admonish all children to imitate the nature of
the Lex Cycon. ap. Aristop. Aelia^ lib. 3. c. 24.
Storke in loving, fostering, and feeding their parents; the counsel Isoc. ad
Demon.
of Iscorates to Demonicus concerning the avoiding of all contumely toward
father and mother, is excellent; saying, So behave thy self toward thy
parents, as thou would have thy children to bear themselves toward thee;
and Eurip.
Euripedes says, whosoever in this life honors his parents, he both living
and dying is a friend of the Gods: but to omit these, let us return to the
word of God, and hear what the Apostle says; Ephesians. 6.1.
Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right; Colos. 3.20.
Children obey your parents in all things, for that is well pleasing unto the
Lord; This is the commandment of God which whosoever transgresses, being
guilty of Reubens sin, he deserves Reubens penalty. Secondly, by the
civil father, I understand him that has rule and dominion over us, whether it
be the King, or any other inferior magistrate; these as being Gods
vicegerents, and by him substituted for parents to protect and rule us, are by
us to be honored and reverenced with all duty and loyalty; for he that
shows himself obstinate, and contumelious toward them, resists the
ordinance of God; it is written, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not rail upon the judges, neither speak evil of the ruler of the
people; here is a prohibitio^ against all kind of Contumely toward Princes,
whether it be in word or in deed; how obsequious and obedient to the civil
parent, and how respective of his honor, the children of every commonwealth
should be, S. ^era: teaches us by his own example saying; Ber. Ep. 221. ad
Ludonicum regem.
If all the world should conspire against me, to move me for to attempt any
thing against the kingly majesty, yet would I fear God, as not daring
unadvisedly to offend the King, by him appointed, for I know that it is
written, that who so resists power, resiseth the ordinance of God, and
purchases to himself damnation.

Lastly, the spiritual father, is the Minister and Preacher of Gods word, who
thereby, as Paul did, begets children unto Christ; though this Father in
respect of his function, be superior to the rest; For in the whole world says
S. Ambrose, Amb. lib. de dig. sacerdot. cap. 3.
Nothing is more excellent then the Priest, nothing more 2. reg. 2.23.
high and eminent then a Bishop; yet of all the rest, he is ever most
despitefully, and disgracefully used by ungracious Reubenites; as Elisha was
scoffed at by boys, one of the children of the Prophets sent to annoint Iehu,
termed by the servants of Iehoram, 2. King. 9.11.
a mad fellow, and our Savior by the Jews, Ioh. 8.48.
a Samaritane that had the devil; even so are the ministers of the Gospel at
this day, usually rated and reviled, especially, if according to their duty
they boldly reprove sin; speak but against adultery, and Herodias will lay
a plot to take away thy head? Touch but Pride, and then haire-frizled and
face-painted Iezabel will presecute thee; Such is the misery of all spiritual
fathers, and such is the co^tumely of this viperous generation: but let them
remember Reuben, wrongs offered to any kind of parent, whether Natural,
Civil, or spiritual, never pass without a sharp and bitter censure; The
children that mocked Elisha, were rent in pieces by Bears; and Iezabel, the
persecuter of Gods Prophets was eaten up with dogs; Thus I will close and
shut up this point, desiring GOD that this punishment of Reuben, may be an
instruction to all kind of Children, whether Natural, Civil, or Spiritual,
to honor, reverence, and respect their Parents.

THE SECOND SERMON OF SIMEON, and Leui.
Simeon and Leui brethren in evil, Genesis 49 5.6.7.
the instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.

Into their secret let not my soul come: my glory be not thou joined with
their assembly, for in their wrath they slew a man and in their self will they
dug down a wall.

Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce; and their rage, for it was cruel: I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.


SImeon and Leui were the second and third sons of Jacob and Leah, the
interpretation of their names is, hearing: and Coupled or joined; and the
occasion why they were given them was this: Genesis 29.33.34.
Leah after she had brought forth Reuben, conceived again, and bare a son,
and said, because the Lord heard that I was hated, he has therefore given me
this son also, and she called his name Simeon, which signifies Hearing. And
she conceived again, and bare a son, and said now at this time my husband will
keep me company, because I have borne him there sons, therefore was his
name called Leui, which is Coupled or Joined: the names of these two sons,
declare unto us double desire that was in Leah; the first of Children, the
second of her husbands Love; she saw that she was despised in respect of
Rachel, and therefore it seems, that she prayed unto the Lord to take away
her rebuke, as afterward 1. Sam. 1.
Hannah the wife of Elcanah did, by giving her children; and because God heard
her petition and complaint, she in token of thankfulness, called her child
name Simeon: also because her husband preferred Rahel before her, because she was
beautiful and fair; therefore by obtaining children from God by her prayers,
she both hops and desires that the sight of her sons may be attractiue,
and so win the affection and love of Jacob, that he will with greater
contentment now then before keep her company; in desire hereof she names
her third son Leui.

Simeon and Leui Brethren in evil, etc: Jacob speaks to the rest of his
sons severally, but he joins these two together, because they being
confederate in sin, may be partakers in his curse; the history of that
sin, for which Jacob curses them is set down in the four and thirtith
chapter of Genesis; there it is written Genesis 34.
that Dinah the daughter of Leah which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the
daughters of that country, whom when Shechem the son of Hamor, the Hiuite
Lord of that country saw, he took her and lay with her and defiled her; so his
heart claue unto the maid, and he loved her, and spoke kindly unto her; after
Hamor at the entreatie of his son communed with Jacob concerning a marriage
betwixt Shechem and Dinah, and it was concluded upon this condition that all
the males in the city should be circumcised, which covenant being performed,
upon the third day when they were sore, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and
Leui Dinahs brethren, took either of them a sword and went into the city
boldly and slew every male, they slew also Hamor and Shechem his son with the
edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechems house, and went their way;
again the other sons of Jacob came upon the dead, and spoiled the city,
because they had defiled their sister, they took their sheep, their beeues
and their asses, and al their children and their wives, and whatsoever was in
the city and in the fields: now when Jacob reproved them for this bloody
ro^t, Simeon and Leui answered him saying, Should he abuse our sister as a
whore? this was the cause why Jacob in stead of the balm of his blessing, and
the oil of gladness^, annointeth them with his curse, and pours upon their
heads a vial of vengeance.

Simeon and Leui, Brethren in evil; etc: Jacob in sign that the detestation of
this murder of Hamor and Shechem still remained in his innocent heart, written
in leaves of marble with a pen of steel; g^ueth his two sons upon his
deathbed two Titles, in which we may read a volume of reproof: to wit,
Brethren in evil, and Cruel instruments in their compacts, (for so the word
Mechereth is better interpreted, then in their habitations, because they made
Genesis 34.13.
a subtle agreement with the Sichemites; first he calls them Brethren in
evil; not so much by nature, as in the wickedness of this action; these two
were thought to be the principal contriuers of Joseph's death, if the rest
would have consented, and some are of opinion, that the two tribes descending
from them, put Christ to death, Judas of Simeon, and the Priests of Leui, and
that therefore upon the foresight hereof Jacob calls them, Brethren in evil:
but the words of the text do only point, direct and refer as to the murder
of Hamor and Shechem; now though the rest of Jacobs sons consented to this
action, yet Simeon and Leui are only t^xt and blamed for it, because they were
Captains and ringleaders to the rest: hence we are taught what a dangerous
sin it is, to be the devils lieuetenants, and lead others, either by word or
example to Sin;

1. Reg. 12
Jeroboam for that he set up two Golden calves the one in Bethel, the other in
Dan, and made proclamation saying, Behold o Israel thy Gods, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, by which means the people were drawn to commit
spiritual fornication, therefore to this day he is branded with this title
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel sin. And Saint Gregory says,
He whosoever he be deserves so many several torments in Hell, as he has
left evil examples to posterity; therefore as there shall be in the world to
come a greater measure of glory bestowed upon such as like the Exodus 13.22.
fiery Pillar conduct the Israelites out of Aegipt toward Chanaan, and like
the star lead Wisemen out of the east, Mat. 2.9
to come adore CHRIST, offering him Mirthe, Gold, and Frankincense, as the
Prophet Daniell says, Dan. 12.3.
The righteous shall shine as the Firmament, and they that draw many to
Righ^eousnes, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, wherein there is an
^pparent difference set down to be betwixt the Follower and the Ringleader, in
Righteousness; even as 1. Cor. 15.41.
o^^ star diff^rs from another in glory, so of the contrary part, in the
wicked, there shall be a different distribution of stripes amongst Satan's
lieuetenants and satan's soldiers; all ^he ungodly, that march under the
devils standard, shall be tormented with an euer-gnawing worm, and an
unquenchable fire; but in these torments there shall be a magis and a minus,
according to their knowledge, and their ignorance. For he that knows not his
Masters will, and therefore does it not, shall be beaten with fewer stripes, but
he that knows it, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes; Then they
that like Simeon and Leui, do not only sin themselves, but also lead others
to sin, shall be more grieuouslie censured, and more bitterly tormented then
their followers; because they be not only vicious, but also presidents and
because they be not only vicious, but also presidents and patrones of
iniquity: The devil here upon earth has two Simeons, and two Leuies, Brethren
in evil; namely, the Sin-teacher, the Sin-d^fender, the Sin-wincker, and the
Sin-soother; These four are Satan's schoolmen, Satan's lawyer, Satan's
magistrate, and Satan's minister; Now as Ezech.
the four wheels spoken of by Ezechiel, moved, even whither their spirit
lead them: so these four do continually accommodate and apply themselves to
their Generals will and pleasure. The Sin-teacher, is he that Tutors others in
wickedness; him I may fitly compare to the picture of Fire in Hye. rogl.
Hercules Ga^us, who was pictured with a Golden (...), coming from his tongue,
and tied to the ears of a multitude of people, where by it was siginified that
he with his eloquence and fluencie of speech, drew his auditors after him, and
even stole away their hearts; Such a one is the Sinne-teacher, the devil ever
furnishes him with an enticing and bewitching tongue, to charm and ravish the
ears of men and consequently, thereby to lead them as it were in a chain like
staves, and vassalls to vanity: such a sin-teacher was Genesis 3.
the first woman who^ Satan used as his instrument to entrap man; such tutors
were 1. Reg. 11
Salomons wives and outlandish co^cubines, who by their allureme^ts turned away
his heart from God, to work wickedness, in following Astaroth, the god of the
Zidonians, and Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites; and such a one 1. Reg.
21
was Iezabel, who so provoked her husband Ahab, that he fold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord. But I may well ouerpasse the instances of
the old world, since our age affords examples sufficient of this nature. We
have too great store of Symeons and Leuies; Sin-teachers I mean, and tutors in
wickedness; Have we not Aretines, that by the picture of their own life
prescribe unto their beholders Aphorisms and rules of chambering and
wantonness; Have we not slow-bellied Cretians and drunken Epicures, which
instruct Nouices in the swinish art of Carowssing? Have we not professors of
every sin, that read the lectures of damnation, in the Devils freeschoole? O
yes; As the Pagans had for every thing a God or Goddess: as of wisdom,
Apollo; of beauty, Venus; of theft, Mercury; of fire, Vulcan; of bread,
Ceres; of wine, Bacchus; and of love, Cupid: Even so we, for every sin, may
find one patron or other; O woe be unto such Doctors of iniquity, 2. Pet. 15.
which forsaking the right way, have gon^ astray, following the way of Balaam,
the son of Bosor, which loved the wages of unrighteousness.

Secondly, the Sin-defender is he, that takes upon him the protection of
sin; him I may liken to the ^roglodytes Pomp. M^l.
in Aethy^pia, that feed on Snakes and Serpents, for the very poison of vice
is his meat, and like Act. 8.23.
Simon Ma^gus, he is in the gall of bitterness, and in the bo^d of iniquity;
there is not the most loathsome sin, but it has a Practitioner, and there is
no act so odious, but it is warranted by a D fender. The Aug. de haeres.
Caiani, a sort of heretics, did commend and approve of the fact of Judas, in
betraying CHRIST, says Augustine: And of late times, the murder of Princes,
who are the Lords anointed, is privileged in the Church of Rome, by the
maxims and positions of Jesuits. Vid. Ich. nNar. Ies. tolet. de reg. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
If you should read Mariana the Jesuits works, you shall find him to be a
perfect advocate for murder, and the true patron of all traiterous and
rebellious assascinates; for he teaches his disloyal auditors, that
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, by sword or poison, may lawfully be killed by
their subjects, if in the opinion of divines and learned men they be tyrants;
is it not a sin to shed the blood of an Infidel? much more of a Christian,
and a Prince: and yet these Locustes of the bottomless pit, Mariana and his
brethren in evil, Iebusites not Jesuits, blush not to publish in print the
defense of this crying sin, and thus by their doctrine a gap is opened to
infidelity, disloyalty, and murder; of whom I, and all Christendom may say,
as Job of himself Job. 3.3.4.
Let the day perish wherein they were bo^ne, and the night wherein it was said,
there is a manc^ild conc^^ued: let that day be darkness, let not God regard it
from above, neither let the light shine upon it. Wherein that disorderly order
by Ignatius Layola, was instituted, and by the pope of Rome confirmed.

Thirdly, the Sin-winker, is the remiss magistrate, that in stead of the sword
of Justice and severity, which is like the flaming Genesis ^.24. Apo. 1.16.
blade of the Cherubins, and the two edged sword of Christ, carries in a
scaberd of gold a leade^ blade; by whose conniuencie it comes to pass, that
the commonwealth, like the field of the sluggard, is ouergrowne with nettles,
briars, and brambles, to wit, all kind of vice and sin; whosoever then has
power to punish offenders, and winketh at them, he by his remissness
encourages others to commit the like offenses. By lenity the king grows into
contempt, the law is despised, and the people infected, but by gravity and
severity the magistrate is honored, the law is kept, and the people preserved;
wherefore the officer of justice, in regard that he is Gods deputy upon earth,
should have a special care to supplant sin, whereby his Lord is dishonored.
But alas, for one righteous Judge, ye shall find ten that will oppress the
innocent, and justify the wicked for reward; for there is an evil spirit like
that of king Saul, that haunteth earthly Tribunals, called Countenance in the
court; this Alastor and hellish fury makes our laws to be like the Spiders
web, through which great flies easily break, and in which little ones are
soon caught; these magistrates are not Gods vicegerents, but Satan's
lieuetenants for by their partiality they countenance wickedness, and
increase the devils kingdom.

Fourthly, the Sin-soother, is the flattering minister and preacher of the
word, that cannot but epsy the sins of great men, they be usually so gross,
and palpable, and yet he will not open his mouth to speak against them, ^ut
does with the^ as dogs in Egypt do, when they come by the river Nilus,
only lap a little, and then run away for fear of the Crocodile; either
altogether ouerpassing them, or else touching them very lightly for fear of
displeasure; indeed this is the wisest course; for the faults of mighty men be
like unto the Carbuncle which Physicians call noli me tangere, touch me not;
no, when thou preachest before them, do as the Herod. lib. 2.
lawyers and wisemen of Persia did with Cambyses, who, as Herodotus r^ports,
having a desire to marry his own sister, asked the opinion of the Magi,
whether that matrimony were lawful or no? to whom they answered, That they
indeed had no law for the brother to marry the sister, but yet they had
another law among them, whereby (...) lawful for the King of Persia to do
whatsoever himself lusted; such doctrine as this will be both pleasing and
plausible, it will be a soft pillow for the elbowe and a sovereign oil to
supple the joints of sin; well make much ye fat kine of Basan, of these
quacksaluers and mount-bankes in divinity, these Pulpit-parasites, and
sinne-soothers, let them break your heads with their precious balmes, and
poison you with their sweet drugges, but remember that a time will come when
you shall be compelled to confess with Diogenianus that flattery is a sweet,
but deadly poison, drunk in a cup of gold. What is the cause that sin so
reigns in greatness as it does? nothing else but the servile and timorous
minds of mercenaries, who are so fearful, that they cannot endure to hear a
Tumpet in their sleep, or to dream of the frown of a great man; and
therefore to avoid checks, and gain favor, they do as Zidkijah did to Ahab,
ever speak such things as be pleasing and plausible; And thus by the Agencie
of these four lieuetenants; the sin-teacher, the sin-defender, the sin-winker,
and the sin-soother, millions of souls are corrupted and eternally perish.

Simeon and Leui brethren in evil; the instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations: The second title that Jacob gives there his two sons, is this;
Cruel instruments in their compacts, for so the original expounded is better,
herein Jacob has reference, as I said before, to the murder of Hamor and
Sechem: the cruelty whereof appears in these particulars; First, the
slaughter of the Shechemites, was made against the peace and covenant
concluded; Secondly, they made a fraudulent league, having no purpose to keep
it, that with more ease they might murder Hamor and Shechem, being unarmed and
taken unprovided; Thirdly, they dishonored their own profession, in killing
those that were contented to be circumcised. Fourthly, they chose such a time
of execution of their bloody enterprise as was unseasonable; For it was when
the men of the City were sore of their cutting, and not able to defend
themselves. Fifthly, they put not Sheche^ alone to the sword, who had offended,
but all the rest of the City that were innocent; Lastly, they were not
satisfied with the slaughter of men, but they also made spoil and ^^^ock of
the City, and took away their wives, their children, and their cattle, for
these causes Jacob calls Simeon and Leui, Cruel instruments, and condemns
them of six several sins, the ingrediences of this their Cruel action.

The first is, Breach of the Peace concluded, and the violating of the Vow of
Affinity, which was made by Jacob and Hamor; herein is an evidence of their
cankred hearts, and cruel natures, that could not be restrained from murder,
by the law of Nature, which is Civil, and delights in society, wherefore
next unto God, and godliness to himward, there is nothing which men ought more
to esteem then Faithfulness, which wonderfully furthereth the society of men;
for without it, it is impossible for men to live together; if their covenants
and promises be not kept faithfully, the life of man will be liable to more
danger then the life of a beast; Though we do not read, that any Oath
passed betwixt Jacob and his sons, and Hamor and Shechem in this League of
Peace, yet may Simeon and Leui be justly taxt of perjury, because this is a
Canon and Rule in godliness; Hieron. ad Celantium.
Whatsoever thou speak, think that thou have sworn it; they had spoken
peace, and yet embrued their hands in blood; they had made a contract of
affinity, and yet broke it; and cancelled the obligation of their faith: if
Peacemakers be blessed, as indeed Mat. 5.9
they are by the verdict of our Savior; then of the contrary part
Peacebreakers must needs be cursed; an oath or a promise given for an unjust
cause may lawfully be cut off, but if equity be the ground of it, it must be
performed; Are not then Simeon and Leui justly condemned of perfidiousnes? who
slew Hamor and Shechem notwithstanding a lawful contract and promise; like
unto these two Brethren in evil, and Ringleaders in cruelty, is that bloody
Simeon and Leui of Rome, that Bonifa. 8. in. C. vnam sanct. extrauag. ne mayor.
and obedientia.
audacious challenger both of sp rituall and temporal jurisdiction: who not
only himself makes small conscience of any league and promise of peace, but
also takes upon him by his dispensations to fru trate and break the oaths
and promises of other men, though they be never so just and lawful: Pope
Zachary loosed the Frenchmen from their oath and promise of allegiance to
their Prince, and deposed the King from his kingdom, and placed Pipin in his
stead. Pius quintus by his Pius 5. ponti^a^ bulla: volumus and iubemus vt
aduers. regin. Angliae subditi arma capessant, etc. et absoluimus subditos
vinculo iurame^ti, quo reginae Elizab. constricti tenebantur.
Bull commanded the subjects of England to take arms against their Queen,
absoluing from the faith, that they had plighted to Elizabeth their sovereign;
is this beseeming the pretended vicar of Christ, to be the author of
infidelity and disloyalty? let this doctrine pass for current, that the Pope
may dispense with the oaths and promises of allegiance made by subjects unto
their sovereigns, Exodus ^0.13.
and it will prove to be like the East wind spoken of in Exodus, which brought
the plague of grassehoppers upon all the land of Egypt, for it will fill all
countries and kingdoms full of Traitors, Rebels, and bloud-suckers, and make
them like Simeon and Leui, contrary to the covenant of peace and loyalty, to
shead the blood of the innocent, both Prince and people.

The second sin of Jacobs sons is Fraudulencie, for they made a league,
having no purpose nor resolution to keep it, the Text says Genesis 34.13,
They spoke deceitfully, when they answered Shechem and Hamor his Father,
because he had defiled Dinah their sister: and therefore I may say of them, as
David does in the like case Psalm. 12.
Under their tongue was deceit and fraud, they flattered with their lips,
and spoke with a double heart; they were like unto our modern hypocrites, I
mean Pro. 30.12.
that generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet not washed from
their filthiness: which sacrifice their tongues to God, speaking like Angels of
light, but consecrate their hearts, and their hands to Abaddon the destroyer,
for their imaginations are mischievous, and their actions cruel and rigorous,
being fair Flowers with fulsome smelles, gilded sepulchers full of rotten
bones, and fig trees decked with leaves, but barren of fruit; even such as these
were Simeon and Leui, Fraudulent and deceitful in their compacts, and herein
they heaped sin upon sin, because they lincked cruelty and guile together,
Psalm. 34.13.
What man is he, says David, that lists to live, and loves to see good
days, Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips, that they speak no guile:
upon these words S. Augustine thus commenteth, Aug. hom. 1.
It is guile or fraudulencie, when one thing is close shut up in the breast,
and another is expressed either by word or deed; as Flatterers use to do,
which commend some contrary to that they think: thereby either to eat their
meat, and drink their drink, or else to get some other benefit at their
hands, and that which he speaks of flatterers, may also be understood of open
friends, and secret backbiters; As for example, here it may be auerred of
Simeon and Leui: for there was not a harmony or Symphonie betwixt their
Tongues and their hearts; their words were softer then oil, but the
imagination of their hearts bloody and violent; but there should not be this
discorda^ce betwixt these two members, The tongue and the heart: for it
becomes all men to deal plainly and vprightlie; The very Ethnikes condemned
fraudulencie, as we gather by the words of Achilles in Homer, where he
protests, That he hates those men as he hates death, which speak one
thing and think another; yet this did Simeon and Leui, being not Gentiles,
but of the seed of Abraham, and therefore within the Covenant, the
circumstance whereof does aggrauate their offense.

Their third sin is Scandal, which consists in this, that they dishonored
their profession, in murdering such as were circumcised as well as themselves;
what would the Gentiles being idolaters, judge of their religion, of which
Circumcision was the badge and cognizance, seeing the practice of perfidiousnes
and murder? must they not necessarily conclude, surely these men are not the
worshippers of the true God, but the children of Beliall.

Upon this outrage, Jacob said unto Simeon and Leui, (i) Ye have troubled me,
and made me stink among the inahbitants of the land: wherein he implies, not
only a detestation of his person, but also an abhorring and Contempt of the
true Religion that he professed; Woe be unto them by whom the ways of God
are ill spoken of, and therefore woe to Simeon and Leui, which by their
misdemeanors brought the true worship of God into contempt. There must be a
Diapason, and a true or even proportion betwixt our life and profession; and
therefore S. Paul thus writes unto the Ephesians saying Ephesians. 4.1.
I therefore being prisoner in the Lord pray you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation whereunto ye are called. Amongst the Pagans, those were ever
condemned, that only playde the Philosophers with their tongues, as Aristippus
did, whom Diogenes in scoffing manner, called The Kings dog; the knowledge of
goodness avails us nothing without the practice: It is not sufficient to
have the wing of a Cherubin, unless under that wing there be a hand, this wing
is the emblem of Contemplation, and the hand of Action; Not every one that
says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father which is in heaven says Christ; every one then that is a
true Israelite, and hops to be enfranchized in Gods kingdom, must endeavor
to dignifie his profession by his works: It is said in the Canticles, that our
Savior, as he had Cant. 5.13.14.
Lips like Lillies, dropping down pure myrrh, so had he also Hands like
Rings of gold, set with the Chrysolite; That is to say, his Language was
sweet, and heavenly, and his Actions spiritual and divine.

Such lips and such hands must all true professors have, for he that only
speaks well, and does ill, is a tinckling Cimball, but he that both says
and does well, is Christ's true Disciple: but o how much did Simeon and Leui,
balke this way, and consequently blemish and defame their profession; They
might brag that they had Abraham to their father, and that they were of the
Circumcision, but they did not the works of Abraham; but of their father the
Devil, whereby they made the Name of GOD to be blasphemed amongst the
Gentiles, their Father Jacob to be abhorred, and their religion to be
condemned.

The like scandal is offered to Infidels at this day, by Christians; who
having received the seal of Grace, yet for the most part live vngraciouslie;
what can the Mahometanes judge otherwise of our Faith, but that it is false and
counterfaite, seeing that we lead the life of Libertines, Epicures, and
Atheists being not half so devout and strickt in the worship of our blessed
Savior, as they in the adoration and service of that Impostour and false
Prophet Mahomet; But to leave forreyners, and come to our selves, we that are
Protestants and members of the reformed Church, how much do we disgrace and
vilify our Truth, in the eyes and opinions of Papists, by our want of good
Works and Charity? Oh would then we had some of their Zeal and devotion,
and they some of our knowledge: So should neither we to them, nor they to us
be scandalous.

The fourth sin of Simeon and Leui, is their Treacherous impiety, for they
chose a time to be revenged on the Shechemites, when they were so sore with
Cutting, that they could not defend themselves; This was the Genes. 34 25.
third day after all the males of the city were circumcised; upon which day
says Hippocrates, all wounds and ulcers are ever full of pain and anguish.

See here Cruelty and Treachery meet together, and kiss each other; Had
they sought for revenge before the league was concluded, the fact had not been
so heinous, or if they had given them some respite till their sores had been
healed, and then fallen upon them, the murder had not been so odious, but oh
impious treachery, and treacherous impiety, the day of their revenge, must be
the day of their greatest pain, whereby they were disenabled to make any
resistance; it is barbarous immanitie to persecute or strike the harmless
man, or him that is dejected and cast down, and the more barbarous, if herein
there be any show of fraud or guile: The case of Abner should rather have
been pitied, then himself murdered, Sam, 3.27.
and yet Ioab took him aside, in the Gate to speak with him peaceably, and
smote him under the fifth ribbe, that he died: Even so the Sichemites, by their
supposed allies and friends, were slaughtered when they least dreamed of it;
The like impiety we may observe in the whole course of this world; wherein
the wicked Symeons and Leuies do ever seek to trample and tread down him
that is in any adversity and tribulation; crying out as the Edomites did
against Jerusalem, when it was sacked by the enemy, Down with him, Down
with him, even to the ground.

Their fifth sin is Injustice: for, for the fault of one Shechem, in abusing
one Dinah, all the males of the City were put to the sword, Justice requires
a proportion betwixt the Crime and the Punishment; And therefore GOD, who is
the Father of Justice, is said by Isaiah, Isaiah. 19
to exercise judgment in Measure, and Justice in Weight; if then Simeon and
Leui had done justly in this enterprise, only, the offender Shechem should
have smarted for his folly, but they did not use Gods balance; For even
against the rule of Reason, (by violence) they spoiled the whole City.

Furthermore, they did not only deal unjustly with the Shechemites, but also
with GOD, and Jacob their Father; First with God, in that they wrested the
sword of Revenge out of his hands: For it does not belong to a private man to
correct offenses, or to punish sin: Revenge is the Lords, and theirs, in
whose hands he puts the sword of Justice. Secondly, herein they offered
wrong to their Father, in attempting it without his counsel or knowledge,
whom it most concerned, and by whom they should have been ruled.

Ramban excuses this act, Thinking that by the decrees of Noah, if the
Magistrates punished not Adultery, others might: but this Apology of Ramban
may thus be answered; It is uncertain, whether ever Noah enacted any such
thing: Traditions are unstable foundations, and he that relyeth upon them,
trusts to that broken reed Aegipt, as Rabsecah spoke of Hezechiah. Moreover,
who sees not what confusion and disorder this Doctrine venteth and brings
in; That every man should take upon him to be a punisher of sin: grant
this, and we shall be like the Madianites, sheathing our swords in each
others sides; The Apostle teaches the contrary, Saying: Romans 13.4.
The Power or Magistrate bears not the sword for naught, it is then peculiar
to him to exercise the sword of vengeance, herein then Simeon and Leui are to
be condemned. First, in that they undertook to do this without Commission.
Secondly, because they executed it without all moderation.

The sixth sin is Covetousness, Of which, not only these two brethren, but
also the rest of Jacobs sons were guilty, Genesis 34, 27.28.29.
For they came upon the dead, and spoiled the City, because they had defiled
their sister; They took their sheep and their Beeues, and their Asses, and
whatsoever was in the City, and in the Field: and they carried away captive,
and they spoiled all their Goods, and all their Children, and their Wives, and
all that was in their Houses.

Had it not been a satisfactorie revenge to have slain Hamor, Shechem, and all
the males that were men in the City, but they must also fall to pillage? not
sparing the dead, nor the buildings of the City, nor the Wives, nor the
Children, nor the Cattle; Behold here Covetousness, in Cruelty, and
cruelty in Couetosunesse, the one boundless, the other insatiable; These two
may well be called the daughters of the Horsleach, which continually cries
Pro. 30.13.
Give, Give; and will never say it is enough: As there is no mineral, wherein
there is not some quickesiluer and Sulphur, so there is not one sin wherein
there is not a mixture of Covetousness.

Our proud Hamans and Iezabels are for the most part the greatest
land-rackers, oppressors, extortioners, grinding the faces of the poor, and
selling the needy for shoes, that by the sweat of their Tenants brows, they
may cloth like the rich glutton, their bodies in purple and fine linen, Our
wanton Chamberers, the sons of Messalina, who are; often wearyed, but never
glutted nor satisfied with pleasure, are as near and needilie minded as any:
Even like the covetous Roman Soldiers spoken of by Josephus, ripping up the
bowels of the meaner sort, therein that they may find some jewel, some
gold, or some pearl, to bestow upon their Dalilah, their Crocodile, their
Siren, their Cockatrice, their Lady and Mistress: The greatest Tyrants and
Monarchs of this world, as Nabuchodonozer, and Alexander, could never stop the
mouth of their own craving desire, though the whole earth by their co^quering
swords was compelled to do homage unto them. Covetousness keeps company with
every sin, with Pride, with Luxury, with Cruelty, and with all the rest,
and the object thereof, namely, wealth and Mammon, is every man's Idol; hence it
is, that honesty is so rare, because covetousness is so rife: for it is
impossible says Plato, that a man should be very rich, and very honest. It is
no wonder then that the sons of Jacob were so cruel, considering they were
so covetous; well therefore and deservedly does Jacob call Simeon and Leui the
Captains in this bloody exploite, Instruments of cruelty in their Compactes,
because they were Peace, and Promise-breakers, Fraudulent, Scandalous,
Treacherous, Unjust, and Covetous.

This Title that Jacob gives his two Sons, calling them cruel instruments
in their compacts, is full of reproof, and therefore hereout we may collect,
how hateful Cruelty is in the sight of GOD. It is a Crying sin, that never
escapes a bitter punishment; Cruel Caine that killed his brother Abel, had Genesis
4.13.
a mark set upon him by God, that being thereby known, he might be abhorred
and cursed of all that saw him. 2. Reg. 9.
Cruel Iezabell that persecuted the Prophets, was eaten up with dogs; Iud.
1.6.
Cruel Adonibezek, as he had served seventy Kings, so was he served himself,
for the Thumbes of his hands and feet were cut off: And Acts. 12 23. Acts 12.2.
cruel Herod, that killed James with the sword, and put Peter in prison, was
in the midst of his pomp, and sitting upon his royal throne, stricke^ by
the Angel of the Lord, and was eaten up by worms: o would that the roaring
lions, and wolves of this Age, that eat up the flesh of innocent and harmles
doves, not leaving the very bones till the marrow. Whom for their filthy and
sanguinarie conditions, I may term, as once the Romans termed one of their
Emperors, Dirt soken with blood; would but cast their eyes upon these
Examples, and tremble at the view of Gods judgments; but Cruelty is blind
and cannot see: Cruelty wants that which the Fathers call Noctilucam Cer^b^i,
the Glow-worme of the brain, Reason. But let us hear what the Lord says
against the cruel Edomites, and in them against all of the same stamp, Obad.
10
For thy cruelty against thy brother, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall
be cut off for ever; And the Psalmist says, That God hates the
bloud-thirstie, and the cruel man. All cruelty is damnable, even that which
is showed toward infidels and beasts; but of all cruelties, that is the most
unspeakable, when like Simeon and Leui, we defile and stain our hands in the
blood of our confederates, either in Amity or profession, is not the^ the
Church of Rome that Scarlet-whore, spoken of in the Revelation, who is said to
be drunken with the blood of Saints and martyrs of Jesus? if there were no
other argument to prove Rome to be Babylon but this, Apo. 17.
yet this is sufficient, the cruelty of that sinagogue is a most pregnant
demo^stration, directing and pointing us to the seat of Antichrist As it was
with the sons of Jacob, Hamor, and his city, so is it with us and the
church of Rome, there was an allia^ce made betiwixt them, in regard that Dinah,
was given to Hamors son, and also because of the circumcision, whereby they
became members of Gods visible Church. So in like manner there is a spiritual
consanguinitie betwixt the Papists and the Protestants, we are their brethren,
we worship as they do, one God and three persons, we acknowledge as they do,
Christ to be our Mediator, we have the same Baptism, with them in
substance, though differing in Ceremonies, and are marked with the same seal
of Regeneration; yet notwithstanding this alliance their swords are as sharp,
and as maliciously pointed against us, as were the swords of Simeon and Leui
against the Shechemites, witness their cruel opinions concerning us, and
their bloody practices against us: First, in their opinion we are all
heretics, excommunicated, and damned, and is not this an uncharitable and
bloody opinion, so peremptorily and rashly, to bind us hand and foot, and
cast us into hellfire: some of them to make us odious, and to bar and
seclude us from all civil society, blush not to write And. Iurgiuicius: lib.
tit. Euang. quinti professores.
that Protestants do not hold any one article of the Apostles Creed, Reinald:
in libr: qui ^nscr. Caluino-Turcismus.
that our Religion is Caluinish-Turcisme, and plain Mahometisme, and that
Caluines doctrine, which they call ours, is worse then the Alcaron of the
Turks; what Arrows can they shoot against us more venomous the^ these?
whereby they strive to wound the truth, and to disgrace us; neither are their
practices less violent then their opinions, for both are most cruel and
bloody; the sword of Magog, Christ's open enemy in the East, the Turk, has
not been so banefull and deadly, Gifford. in praef. in lib. Reinaldi.
as the keys of Gog, Christ's secret enemy in the west: what murders, what
massacres, what rebellions, what treasons has that man of sin, that Beast
with two horns, that false prophet caused? have not our bones lain scattered
on every side of Jerusalem? does not the Inquisition, like the Apo. 2.
great red-dragon, that persecuted the woman in childbirth, hunt and pursue
after the true professors of the Gospel? Jews, stews, and Turks are
privileged in Rome, but if a protestant be taken, he is shut up in the Bull of
Phalaris the tyrant, the holy house: is not this as ill, if not worse, then the
act of Simeon and Leui? may not I then as well as Nemie^sis, say that Rome is a
place of monsters, yea, like Nilus, breeding cruel Crocodiles; may not I with
the Bishop of Bito^to, call Rome a stews of leacherie, a furnace of
covetousness, and a hell of all mortal sins? I may, and that deservedly; if
I should but make a catalogue of all her cruelties: But let all the members of
this Romish Hydra consider, that being instruments of cruelty, they cannot
possibly shun the vials of Gods vengeance, Obadiah. verse. 15.
as they have done, it shall be done to them, their reward shall be upon their
own heads, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, and blood for blood.

Truth and False-hood are in the Scriptures set forth by two Colors, White and
Red, the Spouse of CHRIST is ever white, as it is in the Canticles, Like Can,
2.2.
a Lilly among the thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters, but the
Concubine of Satan is Apo. 17.4.
arrayed in Purple and Scarlet. The Lilly is white, and betokens Innocence,
but Scarlet is red, and signifies Cruelty.

If we then be Meek, Harmless, and Innocent, then are we the Disciples of
CHRIST, and bear his badge, but if we be cruel and bloudilie minded, like
Simeon and Leui, then we have no fellowship with him, because we wear the
Cognizance of Satan, who Ioh. 8.44
is a murderer from the beginning: as then Elias said unto the Israelites, 1.
Reg. 18.21.
How long halte ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God follow him, but
if Baal be he, then go after him; So say I: Here Death and Life is set before
you, if you will follow the steps of Christ, which are Mercy and
Innocence, then shall you find mercy in heaven: But if you will cleave to
Satan, and be his instruments of Cruelty, accept then this Final sentence,
far more bitter then Jacobs curse; Ite Maledicti; Depart ye cursed into
eternal fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

THE THIRD SERMON OF SIMEON AND LEVI.
Into their secret let not my Soul come, my Glory be not thou joined with
their Assembly: Genes. 49. verse. 6.7.
for in their wrath they slew a man, and in their self-will, they dug down
a Wall.

Cursed be their Wrath for it was fierce, and their Rage for it was cruel, I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.


IN the former verse by two titles, Jacob having blazed the Cruelty of his two
sons, Simeon and Leui, does now in these following, first make his own
Apology, by the form of a prayer, and secondly, chastises the offenders
with a Temporal curse.

His Apology is couched in these words, Into their secret let not my soul
come, etc. The Paraphrase whereof is this, God forbid that I should consent to
so foul a sin; But it may be objected against Jacob, that he seems to be
a partaker with his sons in their cruelty, howsoever he does now at the
last inueigh against it. Because when that horrible fact was fresh and new, he
passed it over with so slight and easy a reprehension: for he only said unto
them Genesis 34.3
Ye have troubled me, and made me stink among the inhabitants of the land;
wherein he seems only to be grieved at his own imminent danger, and not
directly to censure them for their bloody riot and misdemeanour.

But his objection may thus be refelled, and Jacob excused; He partly
considered the justice of God upon the Shechemites, for the outrage committed
against Dinah, partly, he was moved with her complaint and moan, for the loss
of her virginity, and partly he gave place to the rage of his sons, which
were in their fury, and this is the cause why they were rebuk't so slenderly.
But now upon his deaths-bed, he makes himself trans-parent, by disclosing
and opening his detestation of their bloody act, saying, Into their secret
let not my soul come.

That which Jacob abhors, is of all men to be eschewed; namely, Consent in
sinning; it is the guise and fashion of the wicked, as the Psalmist observes,
When they see a Thief to consent unto him, and to be partakers with the
adulterers: but such as be like blessed Jacob, will not walk in the counsel
of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the
scornful. There is small difference (says S. Augustine) betwixt the Actor
and Consenter in sinning: As for example it was 2. Sam. 11.17.
David's sin to murder Vriah, but Ioab consented because he put the Kings
letter in execution; and it was the sin of the Jews to stone Steven, but
Paul kept their clothes, stood by, and consented unto his death, and therefore
in the course and rule of Justice, Ioab may be said to have contrived the
death of Vriah, as well as David: and Paul to have stoned Steven as well as the
Jews. It is not enough when we see any sin committed, to go aside, and call
for water, and wash our hands as Matt. 27.24.
Pilate did, when the high Priests and the rest cried out against JESUS,
Crucify him, Crucify him; and to say as he did, I am innocent of the blood
of this Just man, look you to it; No, Pilate herein did imitate the Pharisees,
washing the outside of his cup; but not cleansing it within: So then every
one is a right Pilate, that does not to his power hinder sin and thwart
Satan: It is the duty then of a true Christian, if he see any proud Herod
Act. 12.22.
houen and puffed up with the acclamations of his practices, to cry out
against his sin, as the Prophet Isaiah did, saying, Isa. 28.1.
Woe to the Crown of Pride; if a covetous extortioner, to say with James, Iam.
5.1.
Go to ye rich men, weep, and howl, for your misery that shall come upon
you; and if a deceitful and cruel person, to say with Jacob, Into thy secret,
let not my soul come.

My glory be not thou joined with their assembly. Rabbi Solomon is of
opinion that in this, and the former branch of this speech Jacob aymeth at Number.
25.
Zimri his unclean act with Cosbi, and at Number. 16.
Corah, with his rebellious assemblies, The one being of the tribe of Simeon,
the other of Leui; No doubt Jacob being endewed with the spirit of prophecy
did foresee both Zimri his incontinencie, and Corahs schism and obstinacy,
but here his words are to be understood of the cruel exploite of Simeon and
Leui, against the Sichemites, and have only relation to the Time past.

Jacob by his Glory means two things; First, Ps. 30.12
his Fame or good Name; Secondly, his Tongue, which is the instrument of
praise and glory, as it is used in the Psalm; Therefore shall my tongue praise
thee, and not cease, etc. There the Hebrew word [Chebodh] is translated Tongue:
and yet it signifies Glory, because the Tongue is the organ whereby Gods Name
is glorified; So then, the meaning of this place is this; First, he prays
that his good and glorious name may not be blemished by his sons conspiracy;
And secondly, he protests, that as he gave no consent unto them in his
heart, so neither would he afford their action any approbation with his tongue.

The first Doctrine that like fruit grows upon the stem of Jacobs speech
is this, It is good and requisite for every man to be jealous of his name,
credit, and fame; Pro: 22.1^
A good name says Solomon, is to be chosen above great riches, and loving
favor is above gold and above silver: The consideration whereof grieved and
troubled Jacob, for he feared that the infamy of his sons would blurre his
glory, and that their misdemeanour would be imputed unto him, and laid to his
charge: and yet if the inhabitants of the land have fastened any tooth upon his
credit to backbite it, he might justly say as David did, They lay to my charge
things that I kn^w not: as the^ Jacob is jealous of his glory, so should we
all be cautelous and wary of our credit; A good name is like an Ointment
powered out: which leaves behind it a sweet perfume; such a name have all we;
for our Savior, who is the Messiah, and CHRIST, which signifies anointed,
has written upon us his own Name, and thereupon we are called Hier. in Esaias,
62.7.
Christians, it behooves us the^ to take heed that we blemish not this glorious
name, by our leaud life, for Eccles- 10.1.
as dead flies cause to stink and putrify the oyntme^t of the apothecary, so
does a little folly him that is in estimation, for wisdom and for glory; Now
what name is more esteemed then the Name of JESUS CHRIST, at the hearing
whereof all knees ought to bow, and what title so Honorable as a Christian?

Who then, that is a Christian, will be so careless of this blessed Name, as
to tainte it with ill-liuing? Sins are those Dead-flies, that putrify, and
cause to stink this excellent ointment: therefore says the son of Syrach
Eccl. 7.2.
Depart from the thing that is wicked, and sin, or the reproach of sin
shall turn from thee; Judas was a Christian, so was Ananias and Saphyra, Simon
Magus, and Demas, but the dead fly of Treason caused this name to stink in
Judas, and the dead fly of hypocrisy corrupted it in Ananias and Saphyra, the
dead fly of vaineglorie, putrified it in Simon, and the dead fly of Apostasy
did rot it in Demas. If then we have a desire to preserve our name sweet, we
that are Christians, must take heed like Jacob, that no dead-flie come into our
Box of Ointment; we must keep it shut with two Couers, the cover of Faith,
and the cover of Love; First, the cover of Faith will Ephesians. 6.16
shield thee from all the fiery darts and temptations of Satan, whereby he
strives to pierce and wound thy Christian Name: and secondly, the cover of
Love will hinder and put back sin, Genesis 4.7.
which ever lies at the door of the wicked. Pindar.
They are Christians, (says Iustine Martyr,) that observe the Commandments
of CHRIST. If then we bear this worthy Name, we must not disgrace it by our
impiety; He is happy says Pindarus, who is followed with a good name, and
this happiness no doubt did attend Jacob, and shall accompany every true
Israelite after his death that can but truly say, as Jacob did upon his
deathbed against the wicked, My glory be not thou joined with their assembly.

Secondly, as I said before, by Glory is signified the Tongue; and therefore
Jacob says, my glory or my tongue be not thou joined with their assembly,
that is to say, God forbid that I should by my silence give countenance to your
cruelty, or by my tongue approve of your actions. Hence arises this doctrine;
The tongues of Gods children must ever be at open defiance with sin; words
are tokens of those passions and affections which be in the mind; says
Aristotle: out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, says the
spirit of God, Democ.
and Democritus taught that Speech was a certain flowing of reason; if then
our hearts be upright, and wholly given to God, then also will our tongues be
his instruments, but if our hearts be like Cakes bakte on the one side as
Ephraim was, half soft, half hard, half hot and half cold, then are our
tongues likewise slack in Gods cause; it proceeded from a good heart, that
Jacob with his tongue did so sharply reprove his sons; the abundance of
zeal in the heart made Eliah stand up, as the wiseman says like fire, and
tell Ahab 1. Reg. 18.18.
That it was he and his fathers house that troubled Israel; it came from a heart
that loathed uncleanness, Luc. 3.19.
that John Baptist so boldly checked Herod, saying, it is not lawful for thee
to have thy brother Phillips wife; such Jacobs, such Eliahs, and such John's are
all the true children of God, they be ever like John and James Boanerges, sons
of Thunder, with boldness and confidence crying out against sin though it
wear a crown, swaie a scepter, and be clothed in purple and gold; and so
indeed should it be; for it is far better to please God then men with our
tongues; Oh then let the Tongues of all that love God and regard his honor be
like those Act. 2.3.
that sat upon the Apostles, fiery tongues to consume and burn up sin,
what though Satan frown and the worldlings furiously rage together, when they
hear their shame and condemnation; what though in requital for preaching the
truth, thou be like Epiphanius.
Isaiah sawen in pieces with a wooden saw, like Jeremy stoned to death, like
Ezechiel slain with the sword, and like Amos have thy brains dashed out; yet
let this comfort thee; He that loses his life for Christ's sake shall find it
again; whereas of the contrary part such as flatter sin with their tongues,
and bow down to the golden Calves of mount Horeb, our licentious worldlings;
though they preach in Christ's name, yet because it is not in sincerity, our
Savior will say unto them at the last day, Verily I know you not.

For in their wrath they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down
a wall; in these words the holy patriarch delivers the cause why he so
bitterly inueyeth against Simeon and Leui, and also why he is so careful to
wind himself out of Infamy, and free or clear his name from all imputation
of cruelty; namely, because, In their wrath they had slain a man and in their
selfe-wil dug down a wall; concerning the meaning of these words, there is
some difference amongst expositours; because the hebrewe word Shor, which is
here interpreted a wall, signifies both a Wall, and a Bull, therefore some
read this text thus; In their wrath they slew a man, and in their self will
they haugh-stringed a Bull; they then which follow this interpretation, refer
the former part of the words to Shechem, and the latter part to In ira sua
occiderunt virum and in voluntate sua vendiderunt Joseph qui assimilatus est
boui; Tharg. Hieros.
Joseph, whom Simeon and Leui would have slain; indeed Moses when before his
death he blessed the Tribes of Israel, compares the family of Joseph to a
Deuteronomy. 33.17.
Bullock, and there the hebrewe word Shor is used; yet in this place it cannot
be meant of Joseph, because he was not murdered, and therefore I think, that
by these words they dug down a wall, Jacob only expresses the Violence of
their passion, by the stream whereof they were carried headlong unto this
cruel and bloody act, making their entrance not by the Gates, but by digging
down, or through the wall of the City; though this be not directly
expressed, yet these words intimate as much, mentioned in the four and
thirty chapter of Genesis, They went into the City boldly: that is, breaking
into it violently, and overthrowing the Wall before them. Wrath is the Rage of
the mind, and the eclipse of Reason; and self-will the issue of a foolish
proud heart: Wrath is like the water of the river Lyncestis, of which
whosoever drinks, becomes presently mad, for it robs a man of himself,
and Self-will bewrays the nakedness of the soul, and divides Folly; So
then, these two sons of Jacob, because of their wrath and self-will, may
justly be termed Fools and Madde-men, and so are such as parallel them in
these humors, according to the saying of Solomon, He that is slow to Anger or
wrath, is of great wisdom, but he that is of an hasty mind exalts
Folly. --

For in their wrath they slew a man, etc. Jacob before declared how much he
abhorred the cruel murdering of Hamor and Shechem, when he called Simeon and
Leui Cruel instruments in their Compacts: And now he inueyeth against the two
Wings that carried them to this bloody rage, namely, Wrath, and self-will;
Passions are the wings of the soul: A righteous souls wings are like the
silver wings of a white Dove, Swift for flight, and fair to look on, these
are Knowledge and Zeal; and by them the children of GOD, like
winged-Cherubins, are carried with speed to every good Action: but the wings of
a wicked-soule, are like the wings of the Locustes, spoken of in the
Revelation, Apo. 9.9
The sound whereof, were like unto the sound of Charrets, when many horses run
unto battle; and these are Wrath and Selfewill, whereby the ungodly are carried
violently to the executing of every evil enterprise. Wrath made Caine Genesis 4.8.
kill Abell, and Self-will, caused Rehoboam to threaten his subjects. But
Caynes wrath was punished with horror of Conscience: and Rehoboams 1. Reg.
12.14.
self-will with the Revolt of his subjects: and eue^ so in all men, wrath and
self-will are never unrewarded, wherefore as S. James says, so say I Iam. 1.19
My dear brethren: Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow
to wrath.

Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel; I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

Jacob having before made an Apology for himself, does in these words
chastise his sons with a Temporal curse, saying: Cursed be their Wrath,
etc: These bitter words of the Patriarch being spoken so emphaticallie, as
they are, and no doubt, not without the direction of Gods spirit; show that
this fact of Simeon and Leui, is inexcusable, and therefore it condemns the
doctrine of diverse Writers, who have pleaded in the behalf of these two
sons, and sought to cloak their cruelty with an excuse.

First, some of the Rabbines have excused this act of Simeon and Leui, because
Hamor and Shechem went first about to break the Covenant, thinking to spoil
them of that they had; for thus they said Gen: 34.23.
Shall not their flocks and substance be ours? but it appears not that Hamor
and Shechem went about any such thing: they speak thus to persuade the people
to be circumcised, who most respect their profit, or else they mean that by
Trading, and having intercourse with them, they should in a manner possess
their goods, but grant it were so, only Hamor and Shechem had been guilty of
the violating of this league, there was no cause to punish the whole city, and
although they had reason to revenge themselves, yet such a cruel massacre
cannot be justified.

Secondly, some do in part excuse Simeon and Leui, making a threefold
consideration, Carthusianus, in lib. Judith.
on the behalf of God, say they, the punishment was just, and also on the
behalf of the Shechemites, who because they were co^senting unto that grievous
sin of Shechem with Dinah, were justly punished; but on the behalf of Simeon
and Leui, this judgment and execution was unjust, because they did it
craftily; but this allegation makes nothing for the justifying of these two
brethren in evil, for God knows how to turn the wicked enterprises of men to
his own Glory, neither did these furious me^ ^ime at any such ends, as the
hatred of vice and the glory of God, but only to satisfy their own reue^gefull
minds

Caiet. in cap. 34. Genesis
Thirdly, some affirm that this act was not evil, in respect of the thing,
because the Sichemites had grieuouslie sinned: but in regard of the manner,
because they did it fraudulently; this is the opinion of Caieta^, whose
assertion is not sound, because it is doubtful and uncertain whether all the
Sichemites that were slain, were guilty of this crime or no. Fourthly, Thom.
Anglic. in cap. 34. Genesis
some hold that the first motion of this slaughter, was of God, and therefore
good, and that Simeon and Leui are for this only to be blamed, because in the
execution, they exceeded measure, and passed the bounds of their commission,
and of Gods decree, by being transported with passion; but this cannot be
true, for Jacob condemns not only the execution, but also the very first
devise and counsel, saying: Into their secret let not my soul come.

Fifthly, some proceeding further, have defended both their fact, and the
manner of it, calling their craft and dissimulation, a prudent caution: and
their reasons be these, First say they, All the Sichemites were consenting unto
that wickedness, and therefore they deserved punishment. But to this I must
answer as I did before: It cannot be gathered, that all the Sichemites were
consenting to the sin of Shechem; and though the whole City had offended
herein, yet Simeon and Leui had no such calling or commission to put them to
the sword, because they were not magistrates. Secondly, there is a text of
scripture alleged for this purpose, out of Judith, where it is said, that the
Lord gave unto Judith. 9.2.
Simeon a sword to take revenge upon the strangers, that opened the womb of
the virgin and defiled her, and discovered the thigh with shame, and polluted
the womb to reproach: and afterward the text says Iud. 9.4
That they, that is Simeon and Leui, were moved with zeal, and abhorred the
pollution of their blood: If then God gave them a sword, and they used it with
zeal, then was the fact rather comme^dable then to be blamed, this argument is
thus avoided; Though Simeon and Leui were ministers of Gods justice upon the
Sichemites for their sin, yet they did it not without sin, and therefore
against this book which is no Canonical Scripture, where their zeal is
commended, we may expose the censure and sentence of Jacob which says, That
they did it in their self will, therefore not by any motion of Gods spirit:
Also he curses them, saying: Cursed be their wrath for it was fierce, and
their Rage for it was cruel; Now if they had done it in zeal, he would rather
have blessed them.

Cursed be their wrath, etc. There be two kinds of cursing, the one proceeding
from a Tongue, under which there is a poison of Aspes, and this is damnable. So
1. Sam. 16.5.7.
Shem^i cursed David, saying, Come forth, come forth, thou murderer, and
wicked man; The other, is the language of a zealous heart: And so, as we
read, many times the servants of God have used imprecations, and denounced
curses; David says Psa. 35.4.
Let them be confounded and put to shame, that seek after my soul; And Jacob
here says, Cursed be their wrath, etc. But this was not done by them in
wrath, or malice, but with these considerations and regardes; First, they spoke
as Prophets, and as Mnisters, and denouncers of Gods sentence, and decree; So
then, their speeches were not so much maledictions, as predictions: Secondly,
for the most part they accursed such only in temporal things, for their
amendment and reformation: and if they denounced any spiritual curse, it was
upon such as were incorrigible; Thirdly, they did not hereby revenge their own
particular cause, but did tax and censure them as enemies to the whole Church.
Though this kind of Cursing has been used by diverse holy men, yet their
action must not be our pattern to imitate, because we have not the like
spirit of Prophecy; before we curse any man, we must examine our selves what
spirit we are of: otherwise, though like John and James we be inflamed with
the zeal of Elias, our Savior will say unto us, as he said unto them, Luc.
9.55
Ye know not of what spirit ye are.

Curse be their wrath, etc. Jacob spares not his own sons, but pronounces
against them the curse of GOD, laying aside all natural affection, and
Fatherly disposition; This may teach all men, but especially the Prophets of
GOD, and the Ministers of the Word to look upon sin with impartial eyes;
They must not spy a mote in the eye of poverty, and ouer-looke a beam in the
eye of greatness; They must not be bold in the mountains of Judah, and be
Tongue-tyed, when they come to Bethel, the Kings-chappell; but in every place,
and to every person of what degree soever he be, if he be guilty of sin,
speak boldly, and power upon his head the vial of Gods vengeance, and
proclaim his Execrations and Curses, that thereby he may be terrified from
sinning, and drawn to Reformation and newness of life. Partiality is like to
the evil and lying 1. Reg. 22.2.
spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, it corrupts both Pulpits and
Tribunals, it makes Judges which should punish sins, blind, and Preachers
that should cry out against sin, Dumb-dogges; Partiality makes great
personages presume, and assume a Liberty and privilege in sinning; but would
Judges and Ministers do as Jacob did, lay aside all Respects, the Tribunal,
and the Pulpit would be more regarded, and sin better restrained.

I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: In these words is
contained the punishment of Simeon and Leui; their Vnton is requited, and
recompensed with a Division; They were brethren in evil, and Confederates in
mischief, and therefore they must be Separated and Divided in Israel; Herein
the speech of the Prophet is proved true; Ezech. 18.2.
The Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge:
For, for the sins of Simeon and Leui these two tribes or families are
punished; and this accordingly came to pass: for Simeon had no possession or
inheritance by himself, but was Iosu. 19.
intermingled with Judah* 1. Chron. 4.
and was constrained afterward by force of Arms to enlarge his bounds; And some
are of opinion that the poor Tharg. Hieros.
Scribes which were dispersed in Israel, came of Simeon; howsoever, certain it
is, that the tribe of Simeo^ was ignoble, base, and contemptible in comparison
of the rest; insomuch as Deuteronomy. 33.
Moses omitteth it in his blessing: whether it was for this act against the
Sichemites, or for that Simeon was ringleader in the conspiracy against
Joseph, for which cause afterward, Genesis 42.25.
Joseph of all the rest, picked him out to be his pledge and prisoner; Or for
that Zimri, a prince of the tribe of Simeon had lately committed uncleanness
with the Madianitish Cosbi: or else for because Judas Iscariot, that betraide
our SAVIOVR, was foreseen by Moses, to be of the tribe of Simeon; I know not,
neither can it certainly be resolved; only thus much may suffice to manifest
their baseness; Moses neglected them in his blessing. Leui also was divided in
Israel, for the Josh. 21.
Levites had no certain inheritance, but only some cities allotted unto them
among the rest of the Tribes, to the number of 48. they went also wa^dring up
and down to gather the Tithes of their inheritance.

I will divide them in Jacob, etc. Simeon and Leui only offended: and yet they
are not only punished, but even all their posterity: this seems to be
extreme rigor in Jacob, and injustice in God, to make the children bear
their fathers iniquity; and yet so it often comes to pass; For God says,
that he will visit the wickedness of the Fathers upon the children, to the
third and fourth generation; Instance hereof we have in the dispersed Levites
and scattered Simeonites; for this speech, and other insta^ces, diverse
heretics, as the Marcionites, the Valentinians, and the Carpocratians rejected
the old Testament, and affirmed God the Author thereof to be an evil God,
because he would spare the parents that were sinners, and punish the children
that were innocents; Besides, God in doing thus, is at contradiction with
himself. For thus he answers the prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.4.
All souls be mine, like as the soul of the father is mine, so is the soul
of the son mine also: the soul that sins, the same shall dye, and the
Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; For clearing of this
difficult point, First, I will show that God is not contrary to himself; and
secondly, though he punish one for the fault of another, yet he is not unjust.
For the first, Deu. 5.9
God in Deuteronomie says, that he will visit the wickedness of the Fathers
upon the children, to the third and fourth generation: And in Ezechiel, he
says, That the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father: these
speeches seem to be as contrary one to the other, as light, and darkness,
Christ and Belial, God and Mammon: and yet if we observe this distinction, we
shall easily reconcile them, Punishments are twofold, temporal, and
aeternall; te^porall punishments have their end in this life, aeternall, are
such as appertain to everlasting damnation. Now then in Deuteronomie, God
speaks of te^porall punishments, and in Ezechiel, of aeternall; in this
world, both children are punished for the sin of their parents, as Genesis 9.25
Chanaan was cursed by Noah, for Chams sake, and subjects for the faults of
their princes, 2. Sam. 24.15.
as the Israelites that died of the plague for David's sake, and many me^ for
one private ma^s offense, as in the host of the Lord, many perished by the
sword, for Josh. 7.5.
Achans sake, but in the world to come every one shall bear his own burden,
and the soul that sins, the same shall die: And thus it appears, that God
is not contrary to himself.

For the second, Though God punish one for the fault of another, yet is he not
unjust. Justice gives every one his due: therefore concerning the punishments
of this life, as sickness, poverty, banishment, death, and such like, no man
can be said to suffer the^ unjustly, because there is none perfect; no, not the
child which is yet but one day old: wherefore seeing the case so stands, and
that we be all guilty of sin, we must not complain, that God deals too
sharply with us, if being children, we be punished for the sin of our parents,
for God can so direct those troubles, as they may belong not only to his own
glory, but also to the salvation of the parents Chrysostom. hom. 29. in Genesis
oftentimes he punishes the fathers in the children, and the prince in the
people: for the punishment of children no less grieueth their (...), then if
themselves were afflicted, but if so be the children ^e dispersed and scattered
for their sake, as the Simeoni^^^ and Levites were, or if they suffer death for
their sake, as David's child borne in adultery did, yet have they no injury
done unto them, for death is due unto them also, and otherwise it is certain,
that they must die; Now then, if God will use their death in that sort, to be
the punishment of another man's sin, he may do it lawfully. Moreover, Children
be as it were certain parts of their parents, and have somewhat of theirs in
them, therefore it is not unjust if God punish that part of the parents in the
children, Plut. lib. de sera. number: vindictae.
Plutarch being an Ethnike, did consider and understand this equity in God,
and therefore he accuses the rashness of such men, who so often as these things
do happen, complain, that God deals cruelly, saying, The Eye is grieved,
and the vein of the Arm is lanced, even so the father did offend, and the
son is punished, the Prince behaved himself amiss, and the people are
afflicted. And so here Simeon and Leui commit murder, and their posterity
therefore are dispersed in Jacob, and scattered in Israel. Seeing then as
Plutarch says, in the body one member does suffer for an other, it is no
absurd thing that the same should happen in the society of men.

I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: See here the wisdom
of God in the punishment of sin; because Simeon and Leui were united and
combined together in the sin of murder: therefore they must be separated in
the Land of Israel; It is the custom of God to punish sins with
contrarieties. The rich and covetous Nabals of Mount- Carmel, that join house
to house, and land to land, and which like the Dan. 7.5.
Bear, that Daniel saw in his vision, will not be content with one, but they
must have three ribs in their mouths, at length find it true, that poverty
is the daughter of plenty, even as Peace is the child of War; what is more
contrary to Abundance then Beggerie? and therefore God out of his wisdom
punishes the auaricious minds and insatiable desires of Rich men, with
penury and want, forcing them as Job says, to spewe up the riches which they
have devoured: And hereby he inflicteth upon them a most grievous pain,
because there is no worm like Want, no Torment like Poverty, to him that
makes Gold his God, and Mammon his Idol, experience proves this judgment of
God to be usual and ordinary. How many of the children of Usurers,
Extortioners, Fraudulent Merchants, Inclosers, and Land-rackers, continue in
the estate that their Fathers left them? Not one of a hundredth; but falls
like Lucifer, into the bottomless pit of Distress, and Poverty. Lo here the
finger of God, which makes the Rich man's gold to be corrupt, and his
garments to be moath-eaten; punishing sin with a contrariety.

The Lascivious Chamberer and Wanton, that like a Spider, spends his body in
weauing the web of carnal pleasure, that lies upon a bed of Yuorie, decked
with laces and hung with Carpets of Aegipt, and that like Samson, lies and
sleeps upon his Judge. 16.
Dalilahs knee, at length like the Prodigal Son, falls into the griping
jaws of Misery, and is forced to cry Peccaui, when he finds, that his
Seede-time of Mirth, is turned into a Harvest of Mourning, and his day of
rejoicing, into a dark night of sorrow. This alteration never alters; For God
punishes sin with contrarieties. The like may be justified in every other
sin, which though like the Apoc. 9.8.10.
Locustes, spoken of by John, They have hair and faces like women, beautiful
to look upon, and be pleasant at the first taste, yet are they tayled like
Scorpions, and their sting is Repentance. The issue of Pride, is Shame and
Contempt. For they that are clad in Scarlet shall embrace the dung, says the
Prophet; The reward of Epicurisme, is Woe. Isay. 5.11
for woe to them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, continuing until
night, till the Wine do inflame them; the end of Laughing is Mourning; For,
Woe be to them that laugh, for they shall mourn, says CHRIST; And the end
of Union in mischief, is Division and Dispersion; For so says Jacob,
concerning Simeon and Leui, who were brethren in evil, and instruments of
cruelty in their compacts. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel.

THE FOVRTH SERMON OF IVDAH.
Thou Judah, thy brethren shall praise thee, thine hand shall be in the neck
of thine enemies, Genesis 49.8.9.10.11.12.
thy Fathers sons shall bow down unto thee.

Judah as a Lions whelpe shall thou come up from the spoil my Son, he shall
lie down, and couch as a Lion, and as a Lioness, who shall stir him up?

The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet, until SHILOH come, and the people shall be gathered unto him.


IVdah was the fourth son of Jacob and Leah, and his Name by interpretation,
is Confession, or praise; for when Leah had borne him, she said Now will I
praise the Lord, therefore she called his name Judah; she had given thanks
before to God, for his grace toward her, at the birth of Reuben, saying, Genesis
29 33.
The Lord has looked upon my Tribulation: And likewise when she had brought
forth Simeon and Leui, but now upon the occasion of a newe-benefite, she
praises him again, and utters the Thankefulnes of her heart, in naming her
child Judah, which word is derived of Judah, to praise; wherein she teaches
all men, So to multiply the praises of God, as God does multiply and increase
his mercies: as the Prophet says, Isaiah. 42.10.
Sing unto the Lord, a new Song Exodus 28.34.
the skirts of the Ephod that Aaron wore, were hu^g about with Pomgranates and
golden Bells, the Pomgranate nourishes, and a Bell sounds. This is the
Emblem of thankfulness: when God feeds us with his graces, we must ever
sound out his praises: for every Pome-granate upon the Ephod there was a bell,
and for every bell there was a pomegranate; So for every benefit that we
receive, there must be in our mouths a new song of thanksgiving, and then
we may assure our selves, that for every new song we shall receive a new
benefit. In all things says the Apostle, Let there be giving of thanks, in
all things we are beholding unto God, for our Creation, our Redemption, and
our Sanctification; Therefore we must give praise and glory to him for all
things. The Physitio^s write, that a man has so many bones in his body, as
there be days in the year; Every iointe then that we look upon, may be like
the red letter in a Calendar, to put us in mind that every day ought to be a
holiday unto the Lord, wherein the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving must be offered:
as Thankefulnes is in the nosthrills of God like sweet incense. So of the
contrary part, Ingratitude is vile and loathsome, for this he so often
punished and plagued the Israelites, because they forgot him in the Desert, who
had done such wonders for their sakes in the land of Ham; The wise man says,
Wisd. 16.29.
The hope of an ungrateful person shall vanish like snow in winter. And as
Socrates says in Xenophon, the Athenians would not suffer an ungrateful
person either to bear rule, or remain in their City; because as the same
Author affirms Xenoph.
Impudency is the companion of Ingratitude, which Impudency conducteth men to
all filthiness; I can compare such persons as are unthankful to God, to
nothing so fitly, as to a certain Bird, called by Catullus, Caprimulgus,
which uses in the Night to suck the vdders of Goats, and by her unlucky
beak to mortify them, and make the Goats blind; such are all ungrateful
persons, that for a benefit received from God, requite and recompense him with
oblivion and neglect; but so did not Leah. For she as a sign of her thankful
heart calls her son Judah, saying, Now will I praise the Lord. Jacob
having in his former speeches, reproved Reuben for incest, and cursed Symeon
and Leui for cruelty, now changes his phrase, and style, turning his
maledictions into benedictions, when he speaks to Judah, Genesis 38.18.
Judah had committed incest with his daughter in law Thamar, as well as Reuben
with Bilha; and Iudahs hand was in the spoil of the Sichemites, as well as
Simeons and Leuies; yet Jacob passes over his offenses, and makes no mention
of them; the reason is, because of his Confession and Charity, for though his
sin with Thamar was heinous, yet he confessed it, and no doubt was sorry for
it, Genesis 38.26.
for he said, she is more righteous the^ I, for she has done this because I
gave her not unto Shelah my son. So he lay with her no more. Here he
acknowledges his unrighteousness, which is the first step of repentance, and
abstaines from the company of Thamar, as being sorry for that which was past,
which is the second step to Grace, his confession with his contrition, caused
Jacob to bury his fault in the grave of Oblivion. Again, his Charity and
Compassion was showed toward Joseph, who being by his malicious brethren cast
into a pit, there to be starued to death, was saved by the advice of Judah,
who said unto his other brethren Genesis 37.27,
Come, and let us sell him to the Ismaelites, and let not our hand be upon
him, for he is our Brother, and our Flesh.

Though it was cruelty in Judah to sell Joseph, and make him a bond-slaue, yet
it is the rather to be pardoned, because it was done out of pity and
compassion, to avoid a greater mischief.

The Chaldee Paraphrast in steed of these words, Judah, thy Brethren shall
praise thee: reads, Thou have confessed, and wast not ashamed. Now, what it
was that Judah confessed, I cannot conjecture, unless it be his sin with
Thamar, and the selling of Joseph to the Ismaelites, the story whereof, (it
may be) he told his Father, Genesis 45,
after his return out of Aegipt, the better to persuade him that Joseph was
alive, and therefore Iocob does not only not vpbraid him for his sins, but
also bestows Commendation upon him as a Blessing.

Judah thy brethren shall praise thee; or as it is in the hebrewe, Judah thou
shall be called Judah, or Praise: the first blessing then that Jacob bestows
upon Judah, is Glory, his tribe must be more glorious then any of the other
tribes of Israel; first in regard of the kingdom, secondly in regard of
Messiah: all Israel shall praise the tribe of Judah, because the two kingly
Prophets were of that families. David and Solomon, and ail the world shall
honor Judah, because the light of the gentiles, and the glory of the people
of Israel came from the loins of Judah.

2. Cor. 10.18.
Praise is a Blessing, if it be from God, but Praise is dangerous, if it come
from men that are not the instruments of God, as Jacob was; the first of these
may be called Gods praise, the second the Devils praise. Gods praise is that of
which the Apostle speaks, saying, 1. Cor. 4.
When the Lord shall come, then shall every one have praise of God; this Praise
is the godly man's Cordial wherewith he is comforted, when the blackemouthed
world backebites him, when his good name is impeached, and when the things that
he has well done, are brought into slander by evil tongues; this was our
Saviors Cordial when the Jews called him a friend of publicans and sinners;
this was John Baptists Cordial, when the Jews said, he had the devil; this
was Peter's Cordial, when the Jews mocked him and the rest of the Apostles,
and said they Act. 2.13.
are full of new wine, and this was Paul's Cordial, when the scoffing Athenians
termed him a Babbler; the more righteous a man is, the less praise he is to
expect in this world, and therefore the children of God are taught, only to
look for praise from Christ, and with a noble courage to contemn the praise
that comes from men, which for the most part is counterfaite and vain; it is
not material, if the World be evil tongued; if we can but truly say with
Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 1, 12.
Our glory is this, the testimony of our conscience: and with Job, Lo my
witness is in the heaven, and my record is on high. S. Augustine says, that
(p) all mortal men desire to be praised; and no marvel, seeing man is
according to the Image of God, and God will have his praises to be most highly
celebrated; but seeing this is thus, a Virtuous man when he hears himself
commended, and praised, must use a double remedy, lest he be puffed up with
vain glory; first let him rejoice on the behalf of his neighbors, because
they be so appointed by God, and inspired by his spirit, as they will praise
and allow of those things, which they shall think worthy to be praised,
which benefit of God is not common; secondly what praise soever is given unto
him, let him turn all that upon God himself, who is the author of all good
things, taking special heed that he be not desirous out of a vaineglorious
humor, to be praised of men.

The second kind of praise is the devils praise, who as he is a liar from the
beginning, so is his praise ever fained and adulterate; this is Flattery, the
food of Folly, and the Spur of vaineglorie, wherewith when the ear is
infected the soul is soon perverted; as it appeared in Herod, Antiochus,
Philip the Macedonian, Alexander the great, Dyonisius of Sicilie, Sylla,
Crassus, Nero and diverse others, who by this Psalm. 141.5.
oilie language, were inspired with arrogancy, self-love, and vaineglorie: it
is reported of Oros. lib. 6. hist. cap. 22.
Augustus Caesar, and Tiberius, that they were both deadly enemies of
flatterers, and contemners of this precious Balm, humane praise, insomuch that
they would not endure to be called Lords by their own children; if they were
so wise to discover the vanity hereof living in darkness, much more ought we
that are the children of light to detest this Sweet poison: against which this
is the most Sovereign Antidote; If thy friend praise thee to thy face, give no
countenance to his words, lest of a friend he become a dissembler; and if a
common parasite commend thee, reject and contemn his praises because he is a
flatterer. If this preservative were used, Satan would cease to transform
himself into an Angel of light, and his Orators, who (as Diogenes affirmed)
are worse then Crows, should in stead of living men be compelled to pray upon
carrine, the fittest food for such ravenous Harpies, and greedy fowls.

Thine hand shall be upon the neck of thine enemies. etc: here Jacob prophecieth
of the victory that the children of Judah should have over the Chanaanites;
and this prophecy was in part presently fulfilled after the death of Iosuah,
at what time the tribe of Judge. 1.2.
Judah by the appointment of God went first up to fight against the
Chanaanites, and overthrew Adoni-bezek, but it was more evidently accomplished,
when David triumphed over them; this is the second Blessing, which Jacob from
the spirit of God bestows upon the posterity of Judah; namely, Victory over
their enemies; if Victory in war be a blessing, then does it follow, that
some kind of warfare is lawful: and yet the Anabaptists being the furies and
plagues of our time, say absolutely, that it is not lawful to war; because
our Savior says Math. 5.39.
If a man give thee a blow on the right cheek, reach thou unto him the left,
and if a man take away thy coat, give him thy cloak also: and in an other
place he says, Math. 25.52.
he that strikes with the sword shall perish with the sword; and S. Paul says
Romans 12.
Revenge not your selves my beloved, but give place unto wrath; hereout they
conclude, that all kind of War, whether undertaken for the avoiding or
revenging of injury is unlawful; but who sees not that both our Savior, and
also the Apostle, in these alleged places speak only against private
quarrels and dissentions betwixt man and man; and not against the Public
enterprise of war, which being justly managed is lawful; the better there
fore that we may understand what kind of War God blesses with victory, let
us see what War is; War is a hostile dissension, whereby through the
Princes edict, mischiefs are repressed by force of arms, to the end that
people may quietly and peaceably maintain justice and godliness. This
definition of war, shows which is Just and which Unjust; first it is called
a hostile dissension, because contrary unto War is Peace, for as peace is a
kind of Union; so war is a kind of Dissension; and this word hostile is added
to make a difference betwixt it, and particular or private disagreements, such
as are in opinion, in the manner of life, or in the will; this kind of
Dissension is by the Hebrews called Milchamah, because therein many slaughters
are committed by the sword; secondly to make war just, there is required the
edict and authority of the Magistrate, who bears the sword, without whose
command or consent, it is not lawful to take Arms; this condemns all
mercenarie soldiers, who by covetousness, as their conducter are drawn out of
their native soil to follow and fight under forreyne ensigns, these are not
true soldiers, but like Barrabas, thieues and murderers, because their actions
are not truly authorized: thirdly in a just war there must be a repressio^ of
mischief by force of arms; in this clause of the definition, is set down the
true cause of war, which is to punish offenders, such was the war of the ten
tribes against Iud. 20.
Benjamin for offering violence to the Levites wife; lastly the end of a just
war is, that the people may quietly maintain justice and godliness, according
to that of Aug. in Iosu: quaest. 10:
Saint Austin, All things are quiet when wars be made, for wars are not
made for pleasure, nor upon a greedy desire of getting, nor upon cruelty, but
for a desire of peace that good men may be advanced, and evil men restrained;
that War, wherein these conditions or circumstances are observed, is without
all controversy most lawful, and where the sword is thus drawn, it is ever
at the last victorious: I might produce many testimonies out of the Scriptures
to convince the Anabaptists; but this is sufficient; if it be a Blessing out
of the mouth of Jacob for Judah to lay his hand in the neck of his enemies,
then certainly War is lawful; 2. Sam. 24.13.
flight in war is one of the arrows of Gods vengeance: as appears by the
words of Gad the Seer unto king David after he had numbered the people, and
Famine and the Pestilence be the other two; with which three God uses to
chastise and punish the sins of the people: of the contrary part Deuteronomy. 31, 6.
Victory in battle, Plenty and health, are Gods great blessings, wherewith
he endoweth such as serve him in truth and sincerity, the first of these is
Iudahs portion, for according to the Chalde paraphrast, Jacob prophecieth that
his hand shall prevail against his enemies, they shall be dispersed and
overthrown, and shall come in submissiue sort to beg and entreat for peace.

Thy fathers sons shall bow down unto thee, etc. Here Reubens royal
prerogative is given unto Judah, for he is ordained Lord and King of all his
brethren, this was not presently accomplished for Joseph; for the time present
had the temporal honor, but his authority took beginning in his posterity;
eue^ at that time, when after the death of Iosuah, the Iud. 1.2.
Tribe of Judah was appointed to be as the Captain to the rest; and it grew
to eminency, when Saul was cast off, and David anointed in his place, and
though the ten tribes did revolt from Judah, yet the right of the kingdom
remained with Judah still, and it continued, notwithstanding it was often by
Israel impugned, when the other was utterly dissolved. As it is a great
happiness, and a blessing that comes from the Lord, in this world to be
seated in the throne of honor and sovereignty by the special ordinance and
appointment of God, as Judah was, for he that is thus installed, is a God upon
earth; so contrariwise to be advanced by Satan unto power and dignity, which
often falls out by the permission of God, is a miserable, and an accursed
preferment, because as the Psalmist says Such have no understanding, but are
compared unto the beasts that perish; of such Kings the Prophet Hoseah thus
says: Hos: 8.4.
they have set up a King, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it
not; there is as great difference betwixt one of Gods Kings and Princes, and
betwixt the Devils Princes, and his Kings, Iud. 7.
as betwixt the fa^ Olive, and the prickie Brier in Iothams parable: and yet as
the Apostle says, All power is from God; but the power of good Princes and
Potentates is by special ordination, and the sovereignty of tyrants by
permission, the first are sent and anointed by God for the good of the people,
and for the comfort of the realms, wherein they reign, but the other as
scourges for to punish the sins of those countries, wherein they tyrannize; of
such we may say, as it was said of Boniface the eight, they enter in like
foxes, rule like Lions, and dye like dogs; and yet though they be wicked, the
people are bound to bow their necks unto them, because S. Paul says Romans 13
1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for howsoever they be good
or evil, their sovereignty either actiuely or passiuely is derived from God,
by whom Kings do reign, and this power of God thus communicated, is in them
absolute and independent. Judah as a Lions whelpe, shall thou come up from the
spoil of my son, he shall lie down, and couch as a Lion, and as a Lioness,
who shall stir him up? In these words Jacob prophecieth of the Jews; that they
should be a nation Courageous and fearlesse, their Courage is manifested, in
that they be compared unto a Lions whelp coming from the spoil, and their
fearelesnesse, in that they shall lie down as a Lion, and as a Lioness, and
none shall stir them up.

First he is compared to the Lions whelp, or a young Lion, in respect of
courage, for the Lions whelpe is ever more bold and ventrous then the old Lion,
either because he has had no trial of the strength of other beasts, or for
that he has stronger teeth; or else for that he is more greedy of his pray;
such a one was Judah, for as the Rabbines write, he was the most generous and
valiant of al his brethren, and such like was his family, the Tribe of Judah,
a most warlike, and a most valiant nation; as it may appear by their wars
against the Chanaanites, Iud. 1. Joseph. lib. de bell. Iud.
recorded in the book of the Judges, and since the coming of Christ, against
the Romans mentioned by Josephus.

Secondly he is likened to a Lion and a Lioness Coucha^t or lying down; other
beasts having killed their pray, betake the^ selves to flight, being carried
away with a natural fear, but the Lion and Lioness lie down as being not
afraid of any revenge, or if they go, it is with such an undaunted mastie, as
declares them to be void of fear, whereupon Solomon says, Prou. 30.30.
The Lion is strong among beasts, and turns not at the sight of any. Jacob
then comparing Judah and his tribe to a Lion and a Lioness Couchant,
intimates that all the Gentiles should be affraide of the Jews, but they
should stand in fear of none; this was fulfilled in David and his son
Solomon; David was this Lions whelp, who conquered the Philistines, Moabites,
Ammonites, Idumaeans, and the Syrians, even to Euphrates; and Solomon was the
old Lion, for in his reign peace flourished, and there was no kingdom that
durst provoke him to battle. This Lyon-like courage in Judah and his
posterity, was no inherent quality, but a mere gift of God; as the Psalmist
confesses, saying Psalm. 144.
Blessed be the Lord my strength which teaches my hands to fight, and my
fingers to battle; it is God alone that makes the Pro. 28.1.
Righteous man as bold as a Lion, and the wicked to flee when none pursues.
God promised the people of Israel that one of the^ should chase a thousand; and
ten, ten thousand, this seems impossible to flesh and blood, yet such is the
power of the almighty, that he can with the Iud. 7.22.
sound of trumpets, and the noise of broken pitchers overthrow the whole host
of the Midianites, and with 1. Sam. 17.50.
a stone out of a sling dash out the brains of the mighty giant Goliath, and
this he does by strengthening weakness, and by weakening strength, thus he
dealt with the Edomites, and the inhabitants of Palestina, as Moses sings
Exodus 15 15.
the dukes of Edom shall be amazed, and trembling shall come upon the great
men of Moab, all the inhabitants of Chanaan shall wax faint-hearted; it had not
been possible that the Israelites, being but a handful in comparison of the
Chanaanites and their confederates, should ever have obtained such worthy
victories, but that God did strike their strong enemies with fear, and
strengthened them from above with Lyon-like courage: Psalm. 44.3.
for they inherited not the land (says David) by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them, but thy right band, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou did favor them.

The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiuer from between his
feet, until Shiloh come, and the people shall be gathered unto him, etc.
These words contain the continuance of the kingdom in Iudahs line; for says
Jacob, the Scepter, or the Royal Rod, or the Prince shall not depart from the
house of Judah, or fail in his posterity, nor a Judge or lawe-giuer from
between his feet or coming from his loins, till Shiloh or the Messiah come;
the greatest intricacie in this speech of Jacob lies in the word Shiloh, which
some derive of Shalah, which is to be peaceable, others to Shalach to send;
some read Shil-oh dividing the word, which signifies which to him, supplying
are due or laid up, but it is most like to come of Shil, which is a Son, and
then Shiloh is by interpretation his Son, howsoever whether by Shiloh be
understood peaceable, or which to him is laid up, or his Son, certain it is
that every one of these may justly be applied to Christ, for he is the Prince
of peace, he was laid up in the promise of God, in the praedictions of the
Prophets, in figures, in signs, and in all the Jewish ceremonies, and he is
the only begotten son of God, till whose coming, Jacob prophecies that the
Scepter shall abide in the tribe of Judah, but afterward, the poople shall be
gathered or be obedient unto him; Christ then by the prophecy of Jacob, is
made the end and period of the Jewish state, and until his Incarnation, God by
the mouth of this holy patriarch promises, that the Scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a lawe-giuer from between his feet.

Concerning the accomplishment of this prophecy, and the true meaning of the
words, there be two questions propounded; the first is by Jews, who deny
this prophecy of the coming of Messiah to be fulfilled, and the second, by
Christians, who demand how this prophecy of Judah was accomplished?

For the first; when the Jews since the coming of Christ, have bin urged with
this text of Scripture, to prove that the Messiah is already come, they
cavil, and say that by the word Shebeth, which signifies a Scepter, or a Rod;
is only understood that Affliction, which the Jews should endure till
Messiah; indeed it cannot be denied, but that Shebeth, or a Rod, betokens
Tribulation and oppression; for so it is taken in the second psalm, where
David says Psalm. 2.9.
thou shall bruise them with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel; yet it cannot bear that meaning in this place, for the words
following. Nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, do show that it is here
taken for a Scepter, rather then the rod of Affliction.

Secondly, some of the Rabbis read the words thus. The Scepter shall not depart
from Judah after that Messiah is come, for he (say they) shall restore the
kingdom of Judah, thus they imagine and dream that Christ shall be a
Temporal Monarch, but this does flatly repugne, both the meaning of Jacob, and
the letter of the Text, which cannot bear any such interpretation.

Thirdly, Rabbi Solomon grants that according to this prophecy, the Scepter
shall continue in the tribe of Judah, till Messiah come, but yet he denies
that Messiah is come, because, as yet in those Regions which lie about Media,
Assiria, Babylon, and mount Caucasus, the Jews have regiments and
principalities; but this is most ridiculous, for it is notoriously evident to
all the world, that they have no commonwealth in Chanaan, the Land of promise,
of which place only Jacob spoke; and if they have any regiment in the
provinces about Media, Assiriah, Babylon, and mount Caucasus, it is not
absolute; for they are tributaries and subjects to other Kings, as to the
Persian, the Great Turk and others.

Fourthly, some hebrews take Shiloh for the proper name of that city where
the Ark of God continued a long time, whereupon they make this exposition, The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come: that is to say, till
Saul be anointed King in Shiloh, and till Hieroboam be made King over Israel;
in this short gloss, there be many errors; first neither Saul, nor Hieroboa^
were created kings in Shiloh, but 1. Sam. 10.17.
the one in Nizpeh, 1. Reg. 12.25.
the other in Sichem; secondly, it is absurd to affirm that the Scepter was
taken from Judah, and given to Saul, before Judah had any regal authority, for
it is most clear, that while Israel was ruled by Judges, most of them were of
other Tribes; Iudahs authority over his brethren began to be absolute only in
David and his posterity; and as for Hieroboam, though the 1. Reg. 12
Ten Tribes called him unto the assembly, and made him King over al Israel,
yet the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin followed the house of David; in which
family the Scepter continued till the coming of Shiloh; thirdly, Shiloh the
city in the time of K. Saul was forsaken and became desolate; the coming of
Shiloh then is improperly taken for the Ruin and desolation thereof.

Fifthly, some by Shiloh understand Nabuchadnezzer the King of the Chaldeans,
who was sent by God to punish the sins of the Jews, as it is recorded in the
prophecies of Hieremiah and Ezechiel; therefore say they, this is Jacobs
meaning. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah til Nabuchadnezzar come, he
shall bereave Judah of the crown, as it came to pass in 2. Reg. 25. Cyril.
Alex. lib. 8. cont. Iul.
K. Zedekiah, who having his eyes put out, was bound, and carried away captive
to Babylon: after whom say they, noe of David's posterity reigned over the
Jews, this was also the opinion of Julian the Apostata, as Cyrill says. Here
we may see the obstinacy of the Jewish nation, who rather the^ they will
acknowledge the Messiah to be come, will wrest the Scriptures against all
reason; that by Shiloh cannot be meant Nabuchadnezzar, the words following are
a pregnant proof, which are these, and the people shall be gathered unto him;
or according to S. Hieroms translation, He shall be the expectation of the
Gentiles; now this cannot be applied to Nabuchadnezzar, for all nations were so
far from Desirng or expecting him, as they accounted him a most deadly
enemy, and a bloody Tyrant, rejoicing over him, when he was fallen into
misery, saying Isa. 14.12.
how art thou fallen from HEAVEN o Lucifer. Again whereas they affirm that
after the Captivity of Zedekiah, none of the tribe of Judah, or lineage of
David swaide the Jewish Scepter; I answer, that it is a mere untruth; for in
the time of the Captivity, the Jews that remained for seauentie years were
permitted to choose themselves a Governor of the house Judah, whom they called
Thalmud in tract. Sanh-ca, Dinei. manmonoth.
Reschgaluta: and after their delierie Ezr. 2.2. Agg. 1.1.
Zerubabel, the son of Selathiel was the prince of Judah, and a captain and
lawgiuer to the people.

Lastly, some of them say, that this promise of the continuance of the regal
authority in Judah until the Messiah came, was only conditional, if their
sins did not deserve otherwise; but no such condition can be gathered out of
the words of Jacob, for he speaks absolutely, that the Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, till Shiloh come; furthermore though God sometimes make both
conditional promises and Comminations, yet it is observed that the promises
concerning the Messiah are ever absolute, as that he should come of the seed of
Abraham, and of the root or stock of David, and that he should be born of a
Virgin, and that till the coming of him, who is the true Shiloh, The scepter
should not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet.

Concerning the second question, it arises amongst us that be Christians, who
are much troubled about the accomplishment of this Prophecy; namely, how, and
when it took place.

The Israelites had four kind of gouernements: the first by Moses and Iosuah,
who were Captains, and this continued threescore and six years, for Moses
ruled them forty years, and Iosuah twenty six; the second was by Judges,
from Othoniel unto Samuel, for the space of three hundredth and thirty years;
the third by Kings till the captivity, to wit, from Saul to Zedechiah, five
hundredth and thirteen years; and the fourth by Priests, that were as Kings
until Herod, five hundredth and twenty years, now these alterations of the
state of Israel being considered, wherein we find, that unless it were only
under the kings, the government was least of all exercised by the Tribe of
Judah; I would know how this can be justified, that The Scepter did not depart
from Judah till Messiah came?

Eusebius is of opinion, that by these words of Jacob, Eusebius. lib. 8. de
praepar. Euangel.
The Scepter is not strictly and necessarily tied to the Tribe of Judah, till
the coming of Messiah, but only a Principality in respect of the other
Tribes; which might be, though the other Tribes had sometimes the regal
authority; but this is not probable, for the word Scepter, or as it is in the
hebrew, The regal Rod; or as the Septuagint reads it, a Prince, does
manifestly note a supreme power and sovereignty; now how could Judah have the
principality, or be accounted the chiefest Tribe, when another had the
imperial authority; seeing then that till the time of David, the Scepter was
never in Judah, but only when Othoniel, and Ibzah did Judge Israel; how can
the prophecy of Jacob be fulfilled? this exposition of Eusebius then does no
whit at all clear this point in controversy; wherefore I think with
Pererius, that the meaning of Jacob is this, When the tribe of Judah shall be
absolutely possessed of the Scepter, it shall keep it continually till Shiloh
come; there was a beginning of Iudahs principality, when after the death of
Iosuah, his Tribe was appointed by God to be as a Captain to the rest; and
likewise in the government of Othoniel and Ibzah, but when David was anointed
and installed, then was the Scepter confirmed in him, and entailed as it were
to his posterity; wherein it continued without any interruption, till Zedekiah
was carried away captive to Babylon; but afterward, how it remained until the
coming of Christ in the family of Judah, is the greatest matter in question.

As I said before, all those seventy years, wherein the Jews were captives
in Babylon; those that were left behind by Nabuzar-adan to dress the vines,
and to till the land, had evermore license to choose themselves a governor of
the house of Judah, whom they called Reschgaluta; and after their return from
Babylon, Zerubabel of the same Tribe was their captain, and others after him,
until we come down to the Machabees, who were both Captains and Priests, for
that they were as Rabbi Kimhi holds, Rab. Cimhi. com. in agg. Joseph. lib.
13. and 14. antiq. Cyrill. lib. 8. cont. Julian. apostat.
by the mothers side of the Tribe of Judah, and by the fathers side of the
Tribe of Leui; and from these men down to Hircanus and Aristobulus whom Herod
slew, there continued still the same line as Josephus declares; S. Cyrill is
of opinion, that the posterity of Zerubabel held the Scepter, and exercised
princely authority till Herod, but Josephus that writ the history of that
Nation, avouches the contrary, affirming, that the chief government was in
the Machabees and their line, who were of Leui, and that Aristobulus the son
of Hircanus, the son of Simon was the first Leuite that wore a crown; in
whose race it continued till the reign of Herod; if then the Levites swaied
the Scepter, did not the Scepter, (contrary to Jacobs prophecy and promise)
depart from Judah? It is answered that the Scepter was not taken away from
Judah, though the Levites held it; because they that were both Priests and
Princes, were by the mothers side of the Tribe of Judah; this answer is not
sufficient for 2. Chr. 22.11.
though Iehoida the Priest married Iehothabeath, sister to Ahaziah the king of
Judah, yet it is uncertain whether the high Priests did always take their
wives out of the Tribe of Judah, nay it is more probable that they did not; and
though they did, yet could they not be said to be of the Tribe of Judah,
because the Tribes were counted by the fathers side not the mothers: Because
this solution has been deemed insufficient to take away all scruple and
doubt; Therefore others understand this prophecy of the seauentie Elders,
called Galatin. lib. 4. de arcanis sidei.
Sanhedrim; which were elected out of Judah, to whom the cognizance, of the
weightiest causes, and establishing of laws, appertained, who were of such
supreme authority, that they cited Herod, who hardly escaped the sentence of
death for his contumacie; these Sanhedrim continued until Herod, who not long
before CHRIST'S birth rooted them all out. I will not deny, but that there was
in those times, such a Sanhedrim, or Council of Elders, resembling those Numb.
11.16.
seventy auncientes appointed by Moses from GOD, to be assistantes unto him
in the government of Israel, yet it is uncertain whether they were elected out
of Judah or no; and though that should appear, yet they were but Counselors
of Sat, the Regal Scepter was not in Judah, as here Jacob prophecieth, but in
Leui, of who^ were the high Priests and Kings after the Captivity: to leave
then al ambiguities; this seems to be our surest refuge; by Judah not to mean
particularly the tribe of Judah, but the whole nation of the Jews, both
because, although there were of the Tribes of Leui and Benjamin among the^, yet
the whole commonwealth had the name of Judah, and also the kingdom was in this
lot, tribe, and territory that appertained to Judah, though it might be
usurped by some, which were not of the tribe of Judah really; and in this sense
it is true, that the Jews had always a king, and a governor of their own
nation, until Joseph. lib. 14. antiquit. cap. 2.
Herod an Idumaean, who had married Mariamnes the daughter of Hyrcanus, by the
special help and favor of Anthony, who ruled together with Octauius,
obtained to be created king of Jury, without any title or interest in the
world; in the thirtieth year of whose reign, Shiloh or the Messiah was borne.

He shall bind his ass foale unto the vine, and his asses colt unto the best
vine, he shall wash his garment in wine, and his cloak in the blood of grapes;
his eyes shall be red wine, and his teeth white with milk.

Onkelos, and Rabbi Solomon do think, that this speech does indeed
demonstrate the fertility or fruitfulness of Judea; but yet they affirm,
that these words are not to be taken properly, but figuratively; and therefore
whereas Jacob says first, he shall bind his ass foale unto the vine, etc:
herein say they, Jacob prophecyeth, that both old and young men in the Tribe of
Judah, shall be just and righteous, ever cleaving to the doctrine and the law of
God; thus they make the foale to signify a Son; the ass a parent; and the
Vine the law: Secondly, by the washing of the garments in wine, and the cloak
in the blood of grapes; they say is signified the Rich and costly apparel of
scarlet color, which the Princes of Judah should wear; and lastly, by the
Eyes red with wine, and the teeth white with milk, they understand, the wine
presses of Judah, and the hills and fields full of sheep and corn; this is a
strained exposition, and altogether disagreeing from Jacobs intention;
wherefore the meaning is no more but this: Jacob thus speaks onley to declare
the fruitfulnes of that Region in the land of Chanaan, where the posterity of
Judah, should dwell, and this is expressed by three Arguments: First, that
therein should grow so great vines, and so laden with grapes, that an Ass
might be bound unto one of them, and have his full burden of the grapes
thereof; Secondly, that there should be such abundance of wine, that it
would be sufficient for them to drink plentifully, and also (if they would)
even to wash their Clothes therewith. And thirdly, that it should be
excellent wine, such as makes the eyes of them that drink it red, and that
there should be such store of good Pastures in Iudahs portion, that they might
eat milk in great abundance. Thus does Jacob prophecy six things of Judah;
First, praise or glory, for his brethren shall praise him: Secondly, victory
over his enemies, for his Hand shall be in the neck of his enemies; Thirdly,
principality, for his Fathers sons shall bow down unto him. Fourthlie,
Courage, for as a Lyons-whelpe he shall come from the spoil, and like the Lion
and the Lyonnesse, he shall couch or lie down, and none shall stir him up.
Fiftlie, Continuance of his Kingdom; for the Scepter shall not depart from him
till the coming of CHRIST; And lastly, outward plenty or prosperity, for he
shall bind his Asse-foale unto the vine, and his Asses Colte unto the best
vine, he shall wash his garment in wine, and his Cloak in the blood of
Grapes, his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.

The particulars of this Prophecy were temporally fulfilled in Iudahs
posterity, but spirituallie in Christ, who came of the Tribe of Judah, and of
the house of David.

First, as Judah was Praised by his Brethren; So is CHRIST* of whom Judah was a
Type, honored, and ever praised by the Elect, as well Angels as men, who be
the Brethren of Christ, through the grace of Adoption; so says S. John, Apo^.
5.8.
The four Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb,
having every one Harps, and golden vyals full of Odours, which are the prayers
of the Saints: By these Cherubims, and these Elders, are meant all the
Saints, both of the Old and the New Testament, which offer unto CHRIST the
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving.

Now the reason why our SAVIOVR by the Adopted children of God is praised, is,
because (g) He was killed, and Redeemed them to God by his blood, out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and made them unto God Kings and
Priests.

If then we be the Brethren of CHRIST, we must imitate the Angels and Saints
in heaven, by having his Praise ever in our mouths; our Harp must be
Thanksgiving, our Vials full of Odours, Devout prayers: and the Song that we
sing this, O my God and King, I will extol thee, and will bless thy name for
ever, I will bless thee daily, and praise thy name for ever. Great is the
Lord, and most worthy to be praised, and his greatness is incomprehensible.
Whosoever is such a Musician, is surely Christ's brother, for as Faith is showed
out of works, so is this spiritual Brotherhood tried by Praise.

They are not then the Adopted children of God, not the Brethren of Christ,
that in stead of praising him with their lips, scoff at him, mock him, spit
upon him, buffet him, and blaspheme him, as the Jews did: by taking his name
in vain, by execrable cursing, and by damnable swearing; oh no such black
mouthed persons be the children of darkness, and the Brethren of Belial, as
among the Luc. 17.12.
Ten lepers, that our Savior cleansed, one alone was found to be thankful,
the other nine went away, and never returned to requite him with praise; so in
the world for which Christ dyed, there can scarcely be found one of a thousand,
that does truly honor and praise his Redeemer, and if there be any, the
proportion of their number, is but as One to Nine; For Reformation then of this
vice of Blasphemy and Swearing, whereby as S. Chysostome says, Christ is
continually crucified again, it were to be wished that that Law made by
Ludouicus Pius the king of France, were universally established: namely, That
whosoever swears vainly, should be burned in the mouth with a hot iron.
Sed procul ite profani; I will leave them; and return to the Brethren of
CHRIST, of which number, whosoever desires to be, let him but look upon the
Picture of the three Graces, Pausan. in Eli.
as Pausanias relates it, and it will be an excellent pattern for him. Amongst
the people of Elis, thus says he were the Graces engraue^; one of them, in her
hand held a Rose, the other a Myrtle tree, and the third a Die;

These Graces being in number three, may fitly express that Praise and
Thankfulness, which from the Creature is due to the Creator, namely, Isai.
6.3.
the Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord GOD of Sabbath. The Rose which is a sweet
flower, signifies the Grace and mercy of Christ toward mankind, who as
David says, is a sweet and merciful Lord, and whose co^miseration is above
all his wondrous works: in regard whereof, he says of himself Cant. 2.1
I am the Rose of the field; this Rose, the Brethren of Christ must ever hold
in their hands; that is to say, they must ever acknowledge his favors, and be
mindful of his benefits. Secondly, the Myrtle, though it be but a little
plant, yet it brings forth store of berries; So must the Brethren of Christ,
for every kindness received, bring forth Clusters of Praise and Thanksgiving.
Thirdly, the Die is the emblem of Chance, and this may put us in mind still
to praise our Messiah, howsoever the world run, whether with us or against us.

Secondly, as Iudahs hand was in the neck of his enemies: So Christ has
gotten the victory over his Adversaries, Satan and the world, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 110
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool; The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Zion,
be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. This Triumph of our Savior, was
shadowed or figured in the dream of Nabuchadnezzar, by Dan. 2.
The great glorious Image, whose Head was of fine gold, whose Breast, and Arms
of silver, whose Belly and Thighs of brass, and whose Feet were part of
Iron, and part of Clay, which Image was broken all in pieces, by a Stone, cut
without Hands; This Image resembles the four Monarchies: The Golden head, is
for the Chaldean: The Silver Breast and Arms, for the Persian: The Brazen
Belly, and Thighs, for the Macedonian; And the Feet, part iron, and part
Claye, for the Roman Monarchy; All these were destroyed and broken by this
Stone cut without hands; namely, our victorious SAVIOVR, whose Kingdom shall
never be destroyed, but stand for ever.

The like is expressed by S. John, saying, Apo. 19.
And I saw heaven open, and behold a white horse, and he that sat vp^n him
was called Faithful and True, and he judges, and fights righteo^sly, and
his Eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his Head were many Crowns, and he
had a Name written, that no man knew but himself, and he was clothed in a
Garment dipped in blood, and his name is called the Word of GOD, and the
warririors which were in Heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed with
fine linen, white and pure: and out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that
with it he should smite the Heathen, for he shall rule them with a rod of
iron: for he it is that treads the Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath
of Almighty GOD: These words do most lively set forth the glorious victory
that Christ has over all his enemies: He is the Iosuah, 5.14.
Captain of the Lords Host; that quickly foyleth, and in the twinkling of an
eye puts to flight all his Adversaries; and therefore he is said to Ride
upon a white horse: He never fights but upon a just quarrel, for the defense
of Truth, and therefore he is called Faithful and True: It is long before he
strike, but when he comes, he is as a Giant, ready to run his course, fierce
and terrible. And therefore his Eyes are said to be like a flame of fire; when
he makes war, he ever vanquisheth; and therefore as tokens of Triumph, upon
his Head he wears many Crowns: It is bootelesse for any to withstand his
power, for he is Omnipotent: and therefore he has a Name, and this is THE
WORD OF GOD; the mystery whereof none perfectly knows but himself, who is
Light of Light, and very God of very God; As he is merciful to spare the
lives of such as yield, and Repent, so is he most severe against such as be
obstinate and impenitent, and this is signified by his Garment dipped in blood;
And likewise the Psalmist says: he shall wash his footesteppes in the blood of
his enemies, though he need not the assistance or aid of any, because he is
most strong and mighty; yet because the Righteous, for whose cause he
fights, shall be avenged of their enemies, and be partakers of his glory,
they also are said to follow him upon white horses; and being his soldiers,
their armor is linen white and pure: pure Innocence, and white Patience. The
enemies whom he smites with the sharp sword of his Justice, and whom he
rules with the Iron rod of his power, be the heathen, that is to say, all
Unbelievers or Infidels; so then Mar. 16.16.
he that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved, but he that will not
believe, shall be damned; lastly, though the children of God suffer much
violence in this world, yet must they bear it with patience, and refer their
revenge to Christ, for it is he alone, that reads the winepresse of the
s^^reenes and wrath of Almighty God: and it is only he, That lays his hand
upon the neck of his enemies.

Thirdly, as Judah was the Sovereign of all his Brethren, for his fathers
sons bowed down unto him; So our SAVIOVR CHRIST JESUS is a King, Isai. 9.7,
for he sits upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it,
and to st^^^^h it with iudgem nt, and with justice: He is a King, but his
Kingdom is not of this world: and therefore none bow down unto him, or
worship him out of zeal and love, but only his Fathers Sons, namely, the
Elect, who are the adopted children of GOD the Father. Philip. 2.8.9.10.
He humbled himself, says Saint Paul, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross; wherefore GOD has also highly exalted him, and given
him a Name, above every Name: That at the Name of JESUS, should every knee
bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.

According to this edict and statute of Almighty God, the Angels and Saints
in heaven do worship and adore him: Also the Chosen vessels that live upon the
earth, do in all humility, honor and reverence him: and under the earth,
even Satan himself, and the spirits of darkness, though not voluntarily,
yet compulsiuelie: do bow down their necks, and kneel down before him,
Mark. 1, 24.
acknowledging him to be The holy one of God.

Melchisedech was a King, and a Priest. David was a King and a Prophet; and
Solomon, a King and a Preacher: But CHRIST JESUS was both a Preacher, a
Prophet, a Priest, and a King; and therefore, if every one of them in regard
of their Office, deserved honor, his due is treble Honor.

We must therefore bow down our necks unto him, because he is a King and a
Priest; we must bow our hearts, because he is a King and a Prophet; and we
must bow our knees, because he is a King and a Preacher, offering unto him,
like the Wisemen of the East, Gold, Myrrh, and Franke-incense: That is to
say, whatsoever we take pleasure or delight in, to do him or his servants
service; our goods with Zacheus we must divide amongst the poor; with our
garments like Lydia we must cloth the naked; with our Spikenard, like Marie,
we must annoint the heads of them that be sick; for in doing this service to
one of these little ones, we manifest our love and loyalty to our King Christ
Jesus; Mark. 11.
It is written that our Savior, rid into Jerusalem upon a young ass, and that
a great multitude of them that believed, when they heard that he should come
into the city, went forth to meet him; and some of them cast their garments
upon the asses colt, some spread their clothes in the way, and others cut down
branches of palm trees and strewed them before him, every one showing some
sign of reverence and honor; and they that went before, and they that
followed, cried saying, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord. This act of the faithful Jews must be our president, though Jesus
Christ rid but upon an ass, which is a contemptible creature, yet they blessed
and glorified him, because they knew that his kingdom stood not in outward
things; so must we acknowledge him to be our King, though his earthly crown was
but a thorny wreath, his Scepter a reed, and his royal robe a white coat
wherewith Luke 23 11.
Herod in mockage arrayed him; they unclothed themselves to cloth his ass,
and made their garments his carpets; so must we hold nothing too dear for
Christ; but with Phil. 3.7
S. Paul account the things that are vantage unto us, loss for Christ's sake;
again, they which had no garments that might be spared to spread in the way, cut
down palm branches; hereby like the poor widow, with her two mites,
testifying that their hearts did offer up unto him a large tribute of homage
and obedience; so must we according to our ability tender our duty and
allegiance to him who is the Prince of Peace and King of glory, by showing our
affection to the meanest and poorest of his Subjects: to conclude; whosoever
will cry Hosanna, confessing him to be a King and Savior, he is one of Gods
sons; but such as will not bow down unto him, be Rebels and strangers to the
kingdom of grace; first therefore then we must needs conclude, that the high
Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and Jews at this day be Rebels, for they will not
acknowledge Jesus whom we worship to be their King; and therefore in them is
fulfilled the saying of Isaiah Isaiah. 6.9.
ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not understand; ye shall plainly see,
and not perceive; it is a wonder, (but that God has made their hearts fat, and
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; that the Jews of all other nations
should be incredulous, considering that they had in their custody the
Prophecies and Oracles of God which point them to our Christ, in whom they were
all fulfilled; nay further, their own Rabbis and doctors, howsoever they do
still expect a Magnifice^t Messiah, that shall conquer the world like an other
Alexander, and bring them all back to the land of Promise, confess that the
Messiah is come already; Thalmud in tract. Au^dazara.
some of them affirming that about the time of Augustus his reign (wherein
Jesus was borne) the Messiah should appear; some of them a great while ago
have complained, that there seemed to them seven hundredth and fourteen years,
since Christ (according to the Scriptures) should have manifested himself, and
therefore they marvel why God does so long defer the same. Rabbi Moses whom
the Jews call the doctor of justice, in his epistle to his countrime^ of
Africa, Rab. Moses ben Maimon epist. ad Iudaeos Affri. Rab. Iosue ben leui in
Thalm. tract Sanhed. cap. helec.
thinks that in his days, the time of Christ's appeara^ce was past above a
thousand years, according to the Scriptures; and Rabbi Iosue holds, that
according to the Scriptures, the Messiah was to be borne before the destruction
of the second temple; but he says, the Messiah for our sins does hide
himself for a time in the sea, and other desert places, until we be worthy of
his coming; thus by the confession of Jewish Rabbis Christ is come, and yet
the Jews, being stifnecked rebels, will not believe in him, nor bow down
unto him as to their Sovereign; and thus he came unto his own and his own
knew him not. Secondly, as there be stiff-necked, so there be stiffe-hearted
Rebels, and these be the Mahometanes, and Infidels, who in derision speak unto
CHRIST, as the Soldiers did, saying, Hayle King of the Jews: Hayle thou
crucified God of the Christians.

These Infidels, (notwithstanding their own prophet Mahomet, Alcoran. Azoar.
14. 11. 13.
upon whom they rely, affirms, that Jesus the Son of Marie, was a great
Prophet, and wrought his miracles by the only power and spirit of God) yet
will they not forbear, even to spit in his face, and blaspheme him.

It is strange to observe the Obstinacy of these unbelievers, who will not be
brought by any means to submit themselves to the KING OF KINGS, considering
that the very spirits of darkness, whom they worship, have confessed Christ to
be the Son of the living God, as it appears, not only in the Gospel, but
also by the writing of Porphyrius, who was an enemy of Christ, saying: It is
exceeding wonderful what testimony the gods (these are the evil spirits) do
give of the singular piety and sanctity of Jesus, Porphyr. lib. de laud.
Philos.
for which they avouch him rewarded with immortality, but yet (says he) these
Christians are deceived in calling him a God.

Thirdly, as there be stiffe-harted, so also there be stiffe-legged Rebels, who
are so houen up with self-co^ceit, and are so proud of their own righteousness,
sincerity and integrity, that in their imagination they themselves be Kings,
and therefore they think they need not to bow down to Christ, such are
hypocrites, and Pharisaicall dissemblers, who have Jacobs smooth tongue, but
Esaus rough hands: These will not kneel, like penitent Publicans, but stand
and justify themselves, and say, They are not as other men.

Against all such as these our Savior cries, saying: Woe be to you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites: which bitter Inuectiue of him, does plainly prove,
that Hypocrites are not his humble subjects, but proud, insolent, and
stiffe-legged Rebels, and consequently, neither they, nor Mahometans, nor
Jews, his Fathers sons, because they will not bow down to him, who is the
LORD OF LORDS, and KING OF KINGS.

Fourthly, as Judah, in regard of his Magnanimity and courage, is compared to
a Lyons-whelpe, the old Lion, and the Lioness: Even so CHRIST, because he
spoiled powers and Principalities, and openly triumphed over them, is called,
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

Saint Ambrose says, that CHRIST is called the Lions whelpe: To signify, Amb.
in Genesis 4^. de benedict. pat.
that he is in Nature and substance like unto his Father; Even as the whelpe
is to the old Lion: But because, in being called the Lions whelpe, he may be
suspected to be inferior to God the Father: therefore to take away that
suspicion, these words are added by Jacob, He shall lie down, and couch as a
Lion, and as a Lioness, who shall stir him up. Though it be not amiss, thus
with Ambrose, to apply these words to Christ, yet I think that best
congruitie, betwixt the literal and figurative sense will be, if by the Lions
whelpe, the old Lion, and the Lyonnesse, we understand the undaunted Courage
of our Savior, showed in the Conquest of Hell, Death, and Satan, he was a
Lion in his Birth, and a Lion in his Death: For in both he spoiled the
kingdom of the Devil: And therefore I may call him, as Isaiah called the
Child of the prophetess, Isa. 8.3.
Mahershalalhash-baz, which by interpretation is, Make speed to the spoil,
or, Make haste to the pray. For when he came into the world, though he was a
Ioh. 1.29.
Lamb in regard of his innocence, yet he was a Lion, in respect of his power
and magnanimity. For he was no sooner borne, but the Gods of the Earth
began to tremble: According to the prophecy of Zephaniah, saying, Zeph. 2 11.
The Lord will be terrible unto them, for he will consume all the Gods of the
Earth.

And so it came to pass, for as Dagon could not stand before the Ark of GOD,
no more could the Spirits of Darkness abide his glorious presence, as it may
be verified by diverse instances, both out of the Scriptures, and humane
writers. We read in the Gospel, that the evil Spirits did diverse times
beseech him, not to afflict, or torment them before the Fire. Not to command
them presently to return into the depth, but rather to suffer them, some
little time, though it were but in a Heard of Swine.

Also Suidas reports, that Apollo, whom the Grecians called the god of
wisdom, but we more truly Apollion, Suidas in Thulis.
or Abadaon, the Destroyer: made this answer to one of his priests, who
demanded some questions of him concerning God, and the true Religion; Oh thou
unhappy priest, why do thou ask me of God, that is the Father of all
things, and of this most renowned Kings dear and only Son, and of the Spirit
that contains all? Alas, that Spirit will force me shortly to leave this
habitation, and place of Oracles.

Also Nicephorus writes, that Augustus coming to know of Apollo, who should
succeed him in the Romans Empire, Niceph. lib. 1. hist. cap. 17
was put off with this answer, An Hebrew Child's that rules over the blessed
Gods, commands me to leave this habitation, and out of hand to get me to
Hell.

Thus by the testimony of the Devils themselves, CHRIST even by his Birth,
like a Lions whelpe, overthrew and spoiled them, 1. Ioh. 3.
For to this end (says Saint John,) appeared the SON OF GOD, that he might
loose the works of the devil.

Secondly, in his death, he was as the Lion, and the Lioness, for neither
Hell, Death, nor Satan, could get the upper hand of him. These three enemies
of mankind, like the Princes of the Philistims, thought they had gotten the
victory over this Sampson, when he was nailed to the Cross, but in his Death
he vanquished them; he subdued Hell by his Descention, there openly
triumphing over all the infernal spirits, and he Coloss. 2.15.
led Captivity captive, as the Apostle says, making that place which should
have captiuated us, to be his captive.

Oh Hell then, Where is now thy victory? He subdued Death, by his own Death;
insomuch, that Death, to which we were all subject and liable by the Law,
has now no more power over us. 1. Cor. 15.55.
Oh Death, then where is thy sting? And he subdued Satan by his Passion, who
though he be Ashteroth, the Accuser of men: yet his informing tongue can now
have no advantage against us, Isai, 53.5
because CHRIST has borne the punishment of our infirmities: He was grieved
for our transgressions; The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes are we healed.

Johannes Leo, speaking of the nature of the Cameleon, Joan. Leo.
says, that with one little drop of a water, issuing out of her mouth, she
will kill the most poisonous Serpent; CHRIST is this Cameleon; who with blood
and water, flowing from his heart, has slain the Old Serpent, that subtle
seducer; and as David's Harp being touched, Sam. 16.23. Strab. libr. Georgr.
Pluta. de defect. oracul. Porphy. lib. 1. cont. Christi.
did drive away the evil spirit from king Saul; so has the sweet sound of
the Gospel put Satan to silence: witness Strabo, who says, that the Oracle of
Delphos at this day, is to be seen in extreme beggerie and poverty: witness
Plutarch, who lived one hundredth years after Christ, and who wondereth that
the Oracles of the Gods were ceased in his time: witness Porphirius, who says,
that both Aesculapius, and all the other Gods, were departed from Messina in
Scicile, by the coming of Christians. And witness Apollo himself, Eusebius.
lib. 5. de praep. Euang.
who told the Emperor Dioclesian, That the just men were the cause that he
could say nothing. And thus CHRIST is not only a Lion himself, but also he
makes his Disciples and Followers Lions, Matthew. 10.8.
giving them power over Devils and unclean spirits.

Fifthly, as it was said of the posterity of Judah, The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come.
So may it be said of the Church, which is the household and family of Christ,
It shall never be destitute of a Lawgiuer and a governor, till the second
coming of Shiloh, or Christ. The Romish writers do mystically by the Scepter
and lawgiuer, understand the power and jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, who
calls himself the Vicar of Christ; but herein they err, for since by the
coming of Christ, the Church is spread throughout all the world, whereupon it
is called Catholic or Universal, therefore no one man can be the Ministerial
head thereof, but rather every bishop and Pastor represents Christ in his
charge, the Papists cannot deny but that Christ is the Head of the Church,
because the Apostle does Eph^ 1.22 2^. Colos^. 18. Romans 2.
in diverse places avouch it; but yet they say she wa^^eth a general head and
Lieu^tenant to govern her; and that is S. Peter in his successors, whom for
distinction sake they call the Ministerial Head of the Church; this their
assertion has no reli^h of reason;n; for first, we must not imagine that the
Church is an earthly Kingdom; for Christ's Kingdom is not of this world; no
more then must his be, whosoever challenges to be his Vicar or Lieuetenant;
but his administration or government must be Spiritual, to wit, the Ministry
of the word, Romans 14.1*
In peace, righteousness, and joy, through the holy Ghost: such a Vicar is not
the Pope of Rome, for he stretches his arms over the Empires of the earth,
and calls himself both a Spiritual and Temporal Monarch, usurping that
Title and name, which is only peculiar to Christ, Apo. 19.16. Bonifac. 8 in C.
vna^ sa^ct: Extra: de mayor: and ^bed.
for it is written upon his garment, and upon his thigh, The King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, so says Boniface the eight, both the spiritual and Temporal
sword are in the power of the Pope; whereby he takes more upon him then Christ
did when he lived upon earth, for he says, Give unto Caesar, the things that
are Caesar's; but the Pope will take from Caesar, that which is Caesar's; Namely,
the Temporal sword, and use it himself; this is a pregnant demonstration that
he is not the Vicar of Christ, but rather the Lieuetenant of him, who is the
Prince of this world, that rules in the air, and works in the children of
disobedience; In a word. Christ's Kingdom consists in this, that he governs
his children, and gives power to the preaching of his word, and to his
Sacraments by the virtue of his Spirit, and the Ministry of his Gospel
consists in the administration of that word, amp; of his Sacraments. Now
there is not any man, that can boast of giving and disposing of the holy Ghost,
because he is only of the Father, and of the Son, therefore none other but
Christ, God, and man, can exercise the ministry throughout the world;
wherefore it is to be concluded, that no one man can be the Ministerial Head
of the whole Church, but every Bishop and Pastor in his charge, 1. Pet. 2.^5.
Tertul. develand. virg. cap. 1.
under the Bishop of Bishops, and Pastor of Pastors, Christ Jesus, and hence it
is that Tertullian assigns no other Vicar or Lieuetenant general in the
Church, but the holy Ghost, who proceeding from the Father and the Son, was
sent after his departure, to the end (says he) that the discipline of the
Church, might be by little and little directed, ordained, and brought to
perfection by this Vicar of our Lord, the holy Ghost; and in another place he
says, that Christ was taken up into heaven, where he sits at the right hand
of the Father, and that he sent Vicariam vim Spiritus sancti, the power or
efficacy of the holy Spirit to hold his place (or be his Vicar) by whom he
guides and conducteth the faithful. In this text of Scripture, then by the
Scepter and Lawegiuer, is not meant the Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, for
that is almost departed and abolished by the brightness of the Truth, but
another more excellent, and heavenly government of the Word, and the Spirit,
which shall never fail in the Church of God, till the glorious appearance of
our Shiloh Christ Jesus. First, the Word is the Scepter, whereby all the
faithful must be ruled, Ioh. 10.17. Orig. Hom. 3 in Cantic.
my sheep (says Christ) hear my voice, and he that is my Disciple, abides
in my word: Jesus Christ (says Origin) appears always in the mountains,
and in the hills, therefore we must never seek him, but in the mountains of
the Law and Prophets, and in the hills of the Gospel. And this word is the
Rule of faith, the Mystresse of virtue, and the Scepter of the true Church.
Concerning which the Psalmist says, The Scepter of thy Kingdom, is a right
Scepter. Secondly, the holy Ghost is the Lawegiuer, and our Comforter; of him
our Savior thus speaks Ioh. 16.13.
when he is come which is the spirit of Truth, he will lead you into all Truth:
for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, shall he
speak, and he will show you things to come. According to his directions must
we frame our lives, and upon his grounds must we build our faith as Constantine
the Emperor said to the Fathers in the Nicene Synod: We have the doctrine of
the holy Ghost written, therefore laying aside all contention, let us out of
the divine inspired Scripture, take the resolution of those things which we
seek for. But to this Scepter, and this Lawgiuer, he that pretends to be
the Vicar of Christ, will never subject himself: no he is so far from
submission, that he equalizeth his own traditions to the word of God, and
takes upon him like the holy Ghost, to bind the consciences of men, by his
own decrees and constitutions; this is not to be the Vicar of Christ, but to
exalt himself ever both above the spiritual Scepter, and the eternal
Lawegiuer; both which notwithstanding his ambition and tyranny shall never
depart from Judah till Shiloh come.

Lastly, as the posterity of Judah did enjoy these temporal blessings, great
store of wine, and abundance of milk; even so the family of Christ
spiritually, is plentifully fed with wine and milk: insomuch that it may be
said of Christians, as it was by Jacob prophesied of the Jews. Every one of
them does bind his Asse-foale unto the vine, and his Asses colt unto the best
vine; they wash their garments in wine, and their clokes in the blood of
grapes; their eyes are red with wine, and their teeth white with milk. This
Vine is Christ, whose father is the husbandman: This Wine is Grace, this Milk
is his word, the food of the soul; wherewith such as be of the household of
Faith, are fed and nourished to eternal life; and this Wine and Milk, is
both bestowed and prepared by Christ; as it is in the Canticles; Cant. 5.
I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with
my spice, I have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with
my milk, and likewise in Isay, Isaiah 55 1.
ho every one that is thirsty, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
money, come buy and eat, come I say, buy wine and milk without silver, and
without money; and in Joel, Joel. 3.18
the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with
milk, all this is fulfilled in such as be spiritually of the Tribe of Judah,
or true believers, for the Milk of Gods word is their restoratiue, and the
Wine of his grace their cordial, with which whosoever is once fed, he will
never hunger or thirst again, and therefore as Christ said, eat o my
friends, drink and be merry, o my well-beloved: so say I, eat, eat, this
milk, and drink this wine, that is, hear his word with zeal and reverence,
and practice it in your lives and conuersations; receive this grace which is
freely offered you in Christ Jesus, and do not presumptuously continue in sin,
that grace may abound; this if you do, then be merry my well-beloved, for your
reward is in heaven; but if as the Israelites loathed Manna, you make light of
this heavenly food, preferring to it Esaus Red Pottage, and the fleshpots of
Egypt; then be assured, that Death is in the Pot; for by this neglect of his
word, and this contempt of his grace, ye shall like Esau loose your blessing,
and be debard like the rebellious Israelites from entering into the land of
Promise.

THE FIFTH SERMON OF ZEBVLVN.
Genesis 4.13.
Zebulun shall dwell by the Sea side, and he shall be a haven for Ships, and
his border shall be unto Zidon.
ZEbulun was the sixth son that Leah bare unto Jacob, and his name being
interpreted, is a Dwelling; for upon her delivery, she said, Genesis 30.20.
God has endued me with a good dowry, now will mine husband dwell with me,
because I have borne him six sons, and she called his name Z^bulun; in this
name Leah first acknowledges that there can be no perfect and strong Bond of
Love and liking betwixt a man and his wife, except God tie it by his means.
Riches and Beauty are bonds; but they are but like unto the green cords, and
new ropes, wherewith Delilah bound Sampson, Judge. 16.12.
for they are soon broken, even as a thread of tow, when it feels fire;
Beauty is but Natures privilege and a short Tyranny, says the Philosopher,
beauty is like grass that withers with the wind, and like a flower in
su^mer, which soon decaieth: if then beauty be the only bond of love, the
heat of that love will be quenched, when the luster of the face fades, and
when the pleasant form is blasted with sickness, or spoiled with the wrincles
of age, riches likewise may for a time continue friendship, betwixt the man and
his wife, but because commonly, men that marry for wealth be like Midas,
Crysomanes.
mad for gold, therefore when they have obtained their desire, they make so
small account of their wives, that I may say of them, as Augustus the Emperor
said of Herod the great, who having a desire to kill Christ, Mat. 2.16.
sent and slew all the male children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the
coasts thereof, from two years old and under, and for more assurance, amongst
these he slew a^ infant of his own, Phil lib. de Tempo. Macr. lib. 2. Satur.
cap. 4.
for that (as Philo notes) he was descended by the mothers side, of the line
of Judah; upon the report of which cruel massacre, Macrobius writes, that
Augustus said he had rather be Herod's swine, then his son, for that he being
a Jew, was forbidden by his religion to kill his son, though not ashamed to
kill his son: even so say I, it is better to be such a husbands bag of gold,
then his wife: because he makes his God of the one, but his slave of the
other: that then is the most permanent and firm bond of love, which Leah
calls a good dowry, namely, store of children, which are the gift of God,
and an inheritance that comes from the Lord: she that has no children, be
she never so fair, will soon be neglected by her husband, and if she be
barre^, though she brought with her never so much wealth, she will quickly be
dislikte; Children then are like chains of gold that combine and join
together the hearts of husbands and wives; and hereupon Leah calls her six
sons a good dowry, and her son Zebulun, a dwelling, saying; Now will my
husband dwell with me, or love my company, because I have borne him six sons;
this was the work of God, who saw that Leah was despised in respect of Rachel,
and therefore he bestows upon her, the fruitfulness of the womb, as the
best dowry, and strongest bond of love. Secondly, in that Leah calls him
Zebulun, or a dwelling: she manifests, how desirous she is to enjoy the
favor, and love of her husband Jacob; and in this she may be a pattern for
all married women, teaching them, that their desires must be subject to their
husbands; that is to say, not only obedient, but affectionate and loving unto
them; some women are like Hest. 1.12.
Vasti^ the Queen of King Assueroh: proud and insolent, not suffering their
husbands to bear rule in their own houses; some are like 1. Sam. 1.6
Peninnah the wife of Elkanah, full of vpbraiding words; some like the Pro:
7.1^.1^.
harlot that Solomon speaks of, will never abide in the house, but go abroad
with impudent faces hunting after strange lovers, being always glad when their
husbands are not at home; These and such like are a Canker and Corruption to
their husbands bones, and he that dwells with them, had not only need (as
Alphonsus the King of Arragon said) to be deaf, but also to be blind, for if
he have eyes to see their wanton behavior, and ears to hear their immortal
tongues, his life will be more tedious and irksome, then if he conuersed with
a she bear robbed of her whelps: concerning such kind of wives as these,
Jesus the son of Syrach, says, Eccles. 26.7.
an evil wife is as a yoke of oxen that draw diverse ways, he that has her,
is as though he held a Scorpion; and S. Ambrose says, a wicked woman is the
devils gate, the way of iniquity, and the stinging of a Scorpion, and of the
same mind is Homer; though I allege these sayings to blaze the arms of
wicked wives, yet let me not be censured, as once one of my profession was, of
whom it was reported, that he was (as it is written of Euripides,) a
woman-hater; for I am not of Plutarches opinion, who thought that when the
candle was taken away, all women were alike; no; there be some, Eccle. 26.15.
who by a double grace, and to whose continent mind no weight is to be
compared; there be some whose price is far above the pearls, but they be as
rare as pearls; these are the true-bred daughters of Leah; obedient and loving
to their husbands, and it were to be wished, that the rest would conform and
frame themselves according to this blessed Matrone; who is so far from
driving her husband out of the doors, as Xantippe did Socrates with her
malapertnesse, pride, or peevishness, that she acknowledges it as an
especial dowry from heaven, that God has sent her six sons, by whom she
hops her husband will be won to continue his love toward her, and the rather
for their sakes, to keep her company, and Dwell with her, in sign of which
hope and Desire, she calls her youngest son Zebulun.

Zebulun shall dwell by the seaside: etc. Zebulun was Jacobs tenth son
according to the order of birth, and his sixth son begotten of Leah, but he
blessed him next unto Judah, thereby giving him precedencie over Isachar, Dan,
Gad, Naphtali, and Aser, for according as he names them, so were all the Tribes
to take place, excepting Judah, who had the kingdom, Leui who had the
Priesthood, and Joseph who had the Birthright; some think that Zebulun is put
before Isachar, in respect of the situation of his country, because Isachar
had his lot between Zebulun and Dan, but I rather think that Jacob deals
with Zebulun and Isachar, as Abraham did with Genesis 25.5.
Isaac and Ishmael, as Isaac did with Genesis 27.29.
Jacob and Esau, and as himself did with Genesis 48.19.
Ephraim and Manasseth, preferring the younger before the elder, being moved so
to do by the spirit of God, who directed his tongue, for the Tongues of the
Prophets were the pens of that ready writer the Spirit: and this translation
of the eldership to Zebulun from Isachar being made by the ordinance of God,
may teach us, two things; First, that God bestows his gifts without respect
of persons; Secondly, that it is only he which prefers or raises up one,
and deiecteth or casts down another.

First, it is often seen (says Theodoret) in the Scriptures, Theod. in Genesis
Quaest. 108.
that the younger Brethren are put and placed before the Elder, as Abel before
Caine, Iaphet before S^m, Isaac before Ishmael, Jacob before Esau, Judah and
Joseph before Reuben, Ephraim before Manasseh, Moses before Aaron, David before
his brethren: and here Zebulun before Isachar, and this is not done for any
desert in themselves, either good or evil; for Jacob and Esau, before they were
borne, and before they had done good or evil, were the one loved, and the
other hated, as the Prophet (...) Malach. 1.2.
I have loved Jacob, and ha^^^ Esau; and it was said of them, even whiles they
were both in (...) womb, Genesis 25.23.
The Elder shall serve the younger, but hereby these Mysteries are reueiled:
First, the Mystery of our elect^on to Grace and eternal life: which does not
depend upon any merit in us, but proceeds freely from the will of Almighty
God, Who (as the Apostle says Ephesians. 1.4.5.6.
has chosen us in Christ, before the f^undation of the world, according to
the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace. The
second Mystery declares the praecedencie, that Man, who was last created, by
the incarnation of the Son of God, has obtained above the Angels, heb. 1.13.
for, unto which of the Angels said he at any time heb. 1.3.
Sit at my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, says the
Author to the Hebrews. The third mystery, is of the Jews and the Gentiles:
The Jew was the Elder brother, and he was first called to Grace, but seeing
that he stopped his ears, like a Serpent that would not be charmed, the
Gentile, who receives Christ, is now preferred before the Jew, as it is
expressed by our Savior Luc. 15.
in the parable of the prodigal son. The fourth Mystery, sets forth the
difference that is betwixt the judgment of God, and the judgment of men, as
the Prophet Isaiah says, in the person of God, Isai. 55.8.9.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, for, as
the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my ways higher then your ways.
Also thus God speaks unto Samuel, when he came to Ishai his house, to anoint
one of his sons king over Israel, 1. Sam. 16.7.
God sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, but the
Lord beholds the heart; and accordingly, David the youngest son of Ishai,
was taken from the sheepefolde, as he was following the Ewes great with young
ones, and exalted above Eliab and the rest of his elder brethren.

Thus we see, That God Deuteronomy. 10 17.
is a great God, mighty and terrible, which accepts no persons, he regards
not the rich more then the poor, for they are all the work of his hands, and
Job. 34.18.
therefore without any respect of persons he bestows his gifts; the eye of
God is a single eye, but man is double eyed; and therefore God judges justly,
but man partially; Gods eye beholds the heart, but the eyes of man only the
outward appearance; Birth, wealth, and gorgeousness, are the objects of humane
eyes; him we respect and reverence, that is, an elder brother, that can show
us his painted arms, the ensigns of his rotten antiquity, and honorable and
worshipful alliance; to him we bow down as the Exodus 32
Israelites did to the golden Calfe of mount Horeb, we bless his fortunes,
admire his greatness, and flatter him in every thing, though he be as insolent
as Haman, as foolish as Rehoboam, who was the foolishness of the people, as
vaineglorious as Rabsecah, as wilful as an untamed heifer, and as full of ill
qualities as Naaman was of leprous spots; yet all these infirmities are veiled
and covered by his birth; and thus in the opinion of men, folly is set in
great excellency, as Solomon says; again, him we Idolize, whose barnes are
fraught with corn, and who like Midas touches naught but gold; if he be rich
the world respects him, though he be as very ^hurle as Na^al of mount Carmel,
as greedy as a horsleach, and as basely covetous as Vespasian, who laid an
impost upon the excrements of Rome, or as they that would have drawn an
annuitie amongst us, out the packs of vagabondes and pedlars; yet if he be
rich, howsoever his wealth was gotten, whether by decaying of tillage,
enclosing of commons, usury, or by unjustly bereauing Naboth of his vineard;
yet he is accounted a God upon earth. Furthermore, him we magnify, who like
the Luc. 16 19.
rich glutton is clothed in purple and fine linen, or that like the Princes of
Judah, follows after strange fashions: and that woman is ever the galla^test
in the worlds eye, the which like Apoc. 17.7.
the Whore of Babylon is arraied in purple, and scarlet, and gilded with gold
and precious stones, and pearls, or who as the Isa. 3.16.
daughter of Sion, walks with a stretched out neck, a wandering eye, and a
mincing pace, man more esteems and regards the tire of women's heads, wherein I
have known some as variable as the Moon; or a Wire, or a Wimble, or a Crisping
pin, then he does Chastity, Virtue, and Modesty; whereby a woman is made
Psalm. 45.13.
like the Kings daughter, al glorious within, such men, and such women as these
pass for current, though their minds be as ragged and beggarly, as the body
of Lazarus; when as the rich in wisdom are set in low place. Lastly, the
humane eye is not only deceived in these outward objects, of Birth, Wealth,
and Gorgeousnes; but also in such things as concern the worship of God; as for
example; an Hypocrite that can but put on an Angels vizard, hang down his head
like a bulrush in sign of humility; make long prayers in public places, blow
a trumpet at his doors, when he gives alms, wash the outside of the Cup, and
look demurely, carrying the counterfaite of gravity, Prou. 30.12.
as that generation uses to do; that are pure in their own conceit, and yet
are not washed from their filthiness; shall I warrant you be extolled by the
people, who will bless the womb that bare him, and the paps that gave him
suck; notwithstanding he is but like a painted sepulcher full of rotten bones,
or like one of the Egyptian temples, which were outwardly curiously wrought,
and gilded, but within which nothing was to be seen, but some filthy Idol or
other, as a Dog, a Serpent, a Calfe, or Crocodile; such like is that Saint
upon earth, the hypocrite, a mere body of iniquity covered over, and wrapped in
the cloak of sanctity, and thus does the humane eye, like the eyes of blind
Bartimeus, take men to be trees, and trees to be men; but it is not so with
God, for his Eye beholds the heart, and therefore if he that is an elder
brother, and honorable, be not also virtuous; he accounts him a fool, and
compares him to the beasts that perish; and so may he justly censure the
greater part of that rank; bacause ordinarily, Worldly honor and heavenly
wisdom like the Oak and the Olive, never grow in one ground; as it was most
lively declared among the Romans, (by the report of Fulgertius in their picture
or Image of honor: they (says he) pai^ted honor like a woman, riding in a
Chariot, wrapped in a mantle of diverse colors, in one hand holding a Scepter,
in the other a Peacock and drawn by four Lions; first honor was resembled by
a woman, because great men like Heuah are soonest inueigled by the Serpent; for
ordinarily in matters spiritual, they be more frail the^ any: by the Scepter
they did intimate sovereignty, by the colored mantle, variety of pleasures,
and by the Peacockes spangled train, garish ostentation, hereby signifying
that great personages, do cloth themselves with delights, as with a garment,
and fix their felicity in matters of no moment; the Lions which draw the
Chariot of honor, are indeed emblemes of Royalty, yet being but brute
beasts, they show that Man being in honor, has no understanding, but is
compared unto the beasts that perish. As God respects not these mighty
Nimrods, so likewise he regards not the wealthy Nabals, and the gorgeous
Herod's of this world; the naked Lazarus, or John Baptist in Camels hair, or
Eliah clad in hairecloth, are more dear and precious in his eyes, then any of
these sheep with golden fleeces; for in his sight honor is but a bubble,
wealth but the angling rod of Satan, as S. Basile calls it, and gorgeous
attire, but like unto Adams figleaues, the cover of ma^s shame. And as for the
hipocrite though he cast a mist before the eyes of men, yet he cannot blind God
with his impostures: no, for his eye can pierce and enter into the most secret
cauerne and closet of the heart; and therefore when he discouers a discordance
betwixt the heart and the tongue, his judgment is this, woe be to thee thou
pharisaicall hypocrite; and thus does God contrary to the guise and fashion of
the world bestow the birthright upon younger brothers, preferring David with his
scrip and sheep hook, before Saul with his Crown and Scepter, Lazarus in his
poverty before the rich glutton in the midst of all his wealth, Ioh: Bap. in
his garment of camels hair, before Herod in his royal apparel, and plain
Nathaniel without guile or fraud, and the poor publican, before all whited
walls, dissembling hypocrites and proud Pharisees; wherefore we may conclude this
point, and say with Peter, Act. 10.34.
of a truth now we perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in every
nation, and in every degree, he that fears him, and works righteousness is
accepted of him.

Secondly, it was by the ordinance of God that Zebulun has precedencie of
Isachar, who thereby teaches us, that it is only he which prefers or
raises up one, and deiecteth or casts down another; when Ezechiel saw in a
vision the Majesty of God, after the appearance of a man, there were Ezech.
1.18.
four wheels that moved before him full of eyes; whereby it was signified,
that there is nothing done within the compass of this round world, but the eye
of Gods providence appears in it, we must not think as the Stoickes did,
that al things are governed by Fate or destiny; or by Chance and fortune, as
the Epicures dreamed, and the Poets have imagined; but whatsoever falls out,
we must believe, that it is brought to pass, by the providence of God;
whether generally in the whole world, or particularly in the actions of men;
Mat. 10.29. August. in Psalm. 31.
a sparrow (says our Savior) falls not to the ground without the will of our
father, yea and all the hairs of our heads are numbered; Saint Augustine
says, that is a great offense for a man to say, it was my fortune, it was my
chance; and Saint Basile does grievously reprehe^d such as use these kind of
phrases; saying, do not say this fell out by fortune, and this happened by
chance, for in things created, there is not any one disordered, confused, or
rashly done, but all by Gods providence. But as amongst the Gentiles, this
opinion concerning Chance and Fortune, did as the same Father affirms, grow
from Atheism, and the ignorance of God; so amongst us that be Christians, the
like conceit springs from the want of divine knowledge, when we see a wicked
man raised from the lowest ebb of poverty, to the height or greatest pitch of
honor; we usually say, that such a man had good fortune; again, when we
behold the head of a virtuous, and honorable man, brought with blood unto the
grave; we commonly say, his chance was disastrous, and he had very ill luck; is
not this plain Epicurisme, when we bring in fortune, and exclude Gods
providence? Fortunes wheel is but a fable, or a poetical fiction, it is the
finger of God alone that governs and changes all things, and it is only his
powerful arm, that puts down one, and raises up another; but it may be
objected, if providence govern all things, why is there such a confusion here
upon earth, for we often see the godly to be oppressed, and the wicked to
flourish; as David says Psalm. 73.
They are lusty and strong, they are not in trouble as other men, their eyes
swell with fatness, they have more then their heart can wish, they are
licentious, and they talk presumptuously; but of the contrary part, the
righteous are weak and feeble with want, their lives are shut in the dungeon;
waters flow over their heads, their eyes drop without stay, and cease not,
their hearts are broken with sorrow, and their mouths are in the dust; the
consideration of this difference betwixt the ungodly and the righteous, did in
former times shake the faith eue^ of the Saints of God, as it may appear by
David's speech, Psalm. 73.
Lo these are the wicked, yet prosper they always and increase in riches,
certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence;
and likewise Job says, Job. 1.6.21.
o that a man might plead with God, as a man with his neighbor; his meaning
is, that if this liberty were granted, then would he know why God suffers
the wicked to live, and to wax old, and grow in wealth, why their breasts are
full of milk, and their bones run full of marrow, when as the righteous dies
in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure; thus by the
observation of this supposed confusion, these holy men were almost brought to
infidelity, and to say as the Atheist does; Job. 21.15.
Who is the almighty, that we should serve him, and what profit should we
have, if we should pray unto him. To this objection it is answered; that herein
there is no confusion, for the reasons of God are most good and just, why he
suffers the godly to be oppressed, and the wicked to triumph and wallowe in
pleasure; for hereby the patience of the righteous like gold is tried in the
fire; and the wicked are made inexcusable, who being in this sort advanced to
honor and wealth, will not acknowledge God to be only he which raises up one
and casts down another.

Zebulun shall dwell by the sea side, etc. or as Pagnine translates the words;
Zebulun shall dwell in a Haven of the Sea, and he shall be in the port of
ships, and the bounds of his country shall stretch unto Zidon; the Chalde
Paraphrast makes this gloss upon them, Zebulun shall dwell upon the sea
shore, he shall subdue the nations with his ships, and shall be fed with the
goods of the sea, and his limittes shall be unto Zidon; in these words Jacob
prophecieth of the country, which was to fall by Lot to the Tribe of Zebulun;
but in that he says, his border shall be unto Zidon, it is to be understood,
that he means, Over against Zidon; for otherwise his prophecy had not been
fulfilled, for in the book of Iosuah, where the Ios. 19.
dwelling of Zebulun is bounded there is no mention at all made of Zidon; when
Moses before his death blessed the Tribes of Israel, he spoke thus unto
Zebulun Deu. 33.18.
Rejoice Zebulun in thy going out, that is to say, in thy prosperous voiages
upon the sea, and and a little after he says, that the Zebulunites should suck
of the abundance of the sea, and of the treasures hid in the sand; this speech
of Moses is an Explanation of Jacobs words, who tells Zebulun that his
posterity shall have their portion in a place of great plenty, and very
fruitful, and that they should be very wealthy and rich; as for the most part
all Merchants be, and such as dwell in haven towns; hence we may learn that
the lot of men for their habitation or dwelling upon the earth, and also their
portion either of wealth or penury falls not out unto them by fortune or
chance, but by Gods providence and appointment, for as it is in the Psalm,
Psalm. 24.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, therefore every one should
be contented with his portion and lot, as being assigned unto him by God.

There be four Vocations or professions of men most necessary in a
commonwealth, and all these by the assignment of God were in the land of
Israel a Priest, a Soldier, a Husbandman, and a Merchant; Leui was the Priest,
as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 33.8.
Let thy Thummim and thine Vrim be with thine holy one; Gad was the Soldier,
for of him it is said Deuteronomy. 33.20.
he dwells as a Lion that catches for his pray the arm with the head, Deuteronomy.
33.18.
Isachar was the Husbandman, for he must rejoice in his tents, and Zebulun was
the Merchant, for he shall rejoice in his going out; these four professions,
are most necessary and profitable, and yet like Balaams ass, even where they
deserve well for their service they receive stripes.

First the vocation of a Priest is most honorable, because the Priest or the
minister, is Gods Angel, without whose instructions the people must needs
perish, because faith comes by hearing, and none is allowed by God to open the
sealed book of his my stories, but only whom his lamb Christ Jesus sends
forth to preach, and to baptize; and yet for all this of all other men the
Minister of the Gospel is ever the most hardly used, both in reputation and
maintenance; as it was with our Savior, so is it with him; if he but eat and
drink, our Jewish scoffers will say he is a friend of publicans and sinners,
if he neither eat nor drink, they will say of him as it was said of John
Baptist, he has the devil; and whereas it is fit that such as serve at the
Altar should live of the Altar, the griping worldling to his power abridgeth
the minister ever of his duty, saying to him, as the devil said to Christ,
Maih. 3.
if thou be the son of God command these stones to be made bread; so he, if
thou be the minister of God, command the stones of the Altar to be turned
into bread, and eat them or els^e starve; in former time when gross popery
reigned the Laity was like Pharaohs Genesis 41.2.3.
lean kine, and the Clergy like they fat; but now the world is changed, for
the Eyes of the ^^itie are swollen up with fatness, and the Clergies visage
Lam. 4.8.
like the famisht Nazarites is blacker than a coal, and their skin cleaves to
their bones; Impropriations and Simoniacal contracts of Patrones, whose
language is ever that of the Traitor Judas; quid dabitis? what will you give?
are like unto the strong teeth of Leuiathan, by which the Laity, (whom I may
well liken to the bear with three ribs in in his mouth spoken of by Daniel,)
Dan. 7.5.
has eaten up and devoured three parts of the livings of the Church; But with
what face and conscience can you receive tithes and oblations, Damas. decr. 3.
seeing you are neither able to pray for your selves nor others? says Damasus,
and thus the Minister, who is the most necessary member of a commonwealth, is
not only disgraced, but also pilled, spoiled, cut short, and half shaven like
2. Sam. 10.
David's servants by the King of Ammon.

The second honorable vocation is of the Soldier, who exposes his body to
imminent danger, and puts his life in his hands, for the defense of his
country, without whose sword, no Realm can be secured from the invasion of
foreign enemies; and yet (alas) if he return as it often falls out,
disme^bred from the wars, with the loss of a leg, or of an arm,
sacrificed for the safeguard of his nation; he is rewarded with
unthankfulness, having the same entertainment, that Christ had amongst the
Jews, to wit, the Gall and Vinegar of affliction for his meat and drink, and
a Whippe for his entertainment; I do not here speak in the behalf of such,
as without the commission of their Prince and Magistrate go to the wars to
make a benefit, and to purchase their maintenance by the slaughter of men; as
the Mercenarie Suitzers use to do, for the action of such is a crying sin,
and every drop of blood so shed cries out against them for vengeance, as the
blood of Genesis 4.10.
H^bel, did against Caine; neither do I in tearming the vocation of a Soldier
honorable give any applause to such, as are commonly called Carpet Knights,
that in stead of Tents lie upon beds of Iuorie, in stead of armor are clad in
silk and satin, and in stead of the cold earth lie upon their Delilahs,
knees, and yet they be called Milites, or Soldiers, though their Souldiership
or or Knighthood be but gotten, as Act. 8.18.
Simon Magus would have purchased the power of giving the holy Ghost by the
imposition of hands; namely, by Briberie; but when I commend a Soldier, my
aim is at such a one, as being sent forth by the authority of the Prince for
the defense of his country and nation, ventreth his life; such a one deserves
to be respected, and relieved; because he is a necessary member in a
commonwealth.

Thirdly, the vocation of a Husbandman, is both most ancient and honorable; it
is ancient, for Genesis 3.19.
Adam was a husbandman, and his children were tillers of the ground; and it is
honorable, because in former times 1. Sam. 11.5.
Kings have not scorned to follow their cattle out of the field; also it is
most necessary, for by the Plough the King is maintained, and but for tillage
the people of the land would be eaten up with famine; and yet there is no man
more oppressed and trodden upon, then this poor laborious Pismire; how is he
continually set upon the Rack, and tenturd in his rent by his imperious and
tyrannical Landlord, who like another Procustes stretches him upon a bed of
steel; In Pharaohs dream en. G 41.4.
The seven lean kine did eat up the seven fat; but now, The fat kine of
Basan eat up the lean; that is; the Landlord, the husbandman, and the
Gentleman, the farmer, in whom is verified the saying of God in the Psalm;
They eat up my people like Bread, there be four little things upon the earth,
and yet they do much hurt to the Husbandman; Joel. 1.4.
the palmerworme, the Grasshopper, the canker-worme, and the Caterpillar; The
Palmer-worme is the Extortioner, such a one was 1. Reg. 21.
Ahab, who could not rest till he had gotten Nabaothes vineyard; and like unto
him be all such great great men, as will not suffer a Husbandman that is a
freeholder, to live by their good will in their Lordship, but by one slight or
other, they will worm him out of his inheritance, that so they may join house
to house, and land to land.

The Grasse-hopper, is the Incloser of Commons, making that part of his Demaine
and Freeholde, which in former times, out of charity was given, and laid out
for the relief of the poor. The Cankerworme, is the Improuer and enhauncer of
his Rentes, by whose cruelty it comes to pass, that Beggarie like a weed
ouer-runs the Commonwealth. For whosoever falls into his Rough hands, is in
as miserable a case, as Luc. 10.
the man that travailing from Jerusalem to Hiericho, fell among Thieves.
Lastly, the Caterpiller is the decayer of Tillage, and the turner of arable
Land into Pasture; Hence grows the famine of Bread, and our cleanness of
Teeth, and by these four is Husbandry spoiled, and the husbandman oppressed,
whose profession is both necessary and profitable.

The fourth honorable vocation is of the Merchant, and it may well be called
Honorable; for I read that mighty Princes have bin of that order; For 1. Reg.
9.26.27.28.
Solomon and Hiram were Venturers, for they sent their Nauies to Ophir, which I
rather take to be the East Indies, then as Arias Montanus, and Vatablus think,
Peru in America, because that country though it be rich in gold, Arias Mont:
in appa. suo ad Biblio. Vatablus in scholijs, sup. 9. cap. 1. lib. Reg.
yet it brings forth no Elephants, Apes, nor Peacockes, as Pererius
affirms: All which together with Gold, were brought from Ophir, by the
servants of Solomon and Hiram; by which means the land of Israel was so
enriched, that in Jerusalem gold was as plentiful as stones: And even so
there is abundance in all those countries where Shipping is maintained, and
where the Merchant with encouragement, goes down to the Sea in his ship, and
occupies his business in the great waters, for hereby the commodities of any
land that may well be spared, are transported, and other brought in, with great
advantage, and increase; Notwithstanding the Merchant is so profitable to the
Commonwealth, that his Ship may fitly be called a kingdoms Mint, and a
kingdoms storehouse; yet the Merchant as well as they whom I mentioned
before, is not free from hard usage: for oftentimes burdens are laid upon his
back, too heavy for him to bear; In portu nauigo: or, my Ship is in the
harbor, had wont to be the proverb of Tranquillity and Rest, but now it
falls out that the Customers countenance is more terrible and harmefull unto
them then the Tempestuous North-winde; and the Merchant is as much troubled in
the Haven, as amidst the raging waves of the Sea: for he can arrive in no Port,
whether it be in Turkey, or Christendom, but the Officer like Saules evil
spirit, will haunt him, and ransack his Ship; and therefore it cannot be said
of the Merchants of our Time, as it was said of the Zebulunites, who were the
Merchants of Israel. Rejoice Zebulun in thy going out, because their voyages
are not so prosperous.

Many of our Venturers, by shipwreck or Piracie, are suncke, and utterly
undone, but the Deuteronomy. 33.
Zebulunites, as Moses says, Did suck of the abundance of the Sea, and of
the creatures hid in the Sand: that is to say, they were very Rich Merchants;
for both Sea and Land did yield them fruits of increase: for they dwelt by the
Seaside, which soil is for the most part very fruitful, and their Cities
were Havens for Ships.

Zebulun shall dwell by the Seaside, etc. The Zebulunites had a great portion
or inheritance, and large borders, which was a singular blessing bestowed upon
them by God; also their Port-townes and Havens were a marvelous benefit to
their whole Tribe; but besides these, there be three things, which make the
land of Zebulun most famous.

First, the Mount-Tabor, where CHRIST was Transfigured; Secondly, the City
Nazareth, where CHRIST was Conceived, and brought up; and thirdly, because in
that country he began to preach, to the people that sat in darkness, therein
fulfilling the prophecy of Isaiah, who says, Mat. 15.16.
The land of Zebulun, and the land of Nepthalim, by the way of the Sea, beyond
Jordan, Galile of the Gentiles, The people which sat in darkness, saw great
Light, and to them which sat in the Region and shadow of death, Light is risen
up. Herein we may observe the wickedness of the tribe of Zebulun, and the great
Mercy of God.

First, the Zebulunites in the time of Christ, were become as Gentiles, for
they did not only Walk in Darkness, which sometimes Gods chosen do: for as
the Wiseman says, The righteous man falls seven times a day, but they sat
in darkness: that is, they had settled themselves in Gentilisme, and were
wholly addicted to Idolatry, or the worship of False Gods, having quite
forgotten the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; by whose outstretched arm they
were placed in that fruitful land, and in those rich Havens. In them as in a
Glass, we may see two things; First, what is the ordinary effect of worldly
prosperity: and secondly, how soon such as dwell by the Sea, and in
Port-townes are corrupted.

For the first, the Zebulonites were blessed with prosperous voyages by Sea, for
they rejoiced in their going out: for these they should have been thankful to
God, Whose wonders and glory they had seen in the deep. But lo, Prosperity
makes them forget God, Poverty, is like the Frenzy, and Plenty is like a
Lethargy.

And therefore, against these two Solomon prays, saying, Pro. 30.8.9.
Give me not poverty, nor riches, Feed me with foo^e convenient for me,
least I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord, or least I be poor,
and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.

Many when they are pincht with want, will not bear it patie^tly as Job did,
who says Job. 1.21.
Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither, the
Lord has given it, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the
Lord; but with Jobs wife, they are presently in the gall of bitterness Job. 2, 9.
Cursing God, and dying desperately. Of the contrary part, Many that are Rich,
will not call upon their Lutes and Harps, as David did, saying, Awake Lute and
Harp, singing unto them this Ditie, Psalm. 30.1.
I will magnify thee O Lord, for thou have exalted me; but they attribute the
increase of their wealth to their own policy and endeavor: and in their
prosperity they say, I shall never be moved, therefore Soul take thy rest.
This was expressed by our Grandfather Adam, in the names of his two sons,
Caine and Habel, the first signifying Possession, the second Vanity: whereby
he would give us to understand, that Man, the richer he grows, and the
higher he climes, the more he is devoted to Vanity, and the more he dotes on
Folly.

The like consideration moved Joseph to call one of his sons Ephraim, and the
other Manasseh, which are by interpretation, Increasing and Forgetfulness: As
if he should have said, Abundance of wealth darkens the eye of the soul,
and breeds an oblivion of God: this was true in the Zebulonites, and likewise
for the most part, in such as be most wealthy. For, who are more negligent in
the service of God then they? and who more careless of his holy Word, and
Sacraments? These make Christ stand at their doors and knock. For unless it be
to show their pomp, they will never enter into the gates of the house of
Prayer: These make the Ministers of the Gospel, like Judge. 17 10.
Michaes Chaplain, serve their turns for meat and drink, and preach at
their tables ends, only for Countenance.

These are so cold in devotion, that they think it pains to go unto Gods
Temple, to receive the Sacrament, and therefore the Sacrament must come unto
them.

Belike these Slowe-bellies also are in hope, that when they die, God will send
2. Reg. 2.11.
a fiery Chariot for them, as he did for Eliah, and thereby in State convey
them into heaven; No, no, they deceive themselves, it is to be feared, that a
fire will come down from heaven to consume them but no Chariot, to carry them
from hence; Better is the poor man that is wise unto salvation, the^ the rich
man that is a fool, and says in his heart, there is no God.

For the second, the Zebulunites were Sea-borderers, and therefore the more
wicked: for they that dwell by the Sea are most given to corrupt ma^ners,
either because of their wealth, which makes them proud, or else because their
Situation ministers occasion of Robberies and Pyracies, and their Trading
with other Countries breeds a morrall infection among them; and for this
Plato in his Commonwealth, would not have the Metropolis, or chief City of a
Kingdom to be near unto the Sea, but distant ten miles, as Eusebius. li. 12. de
praepa. euang. c. 27.
Eusebius writes, that Jerusalem was situate; Certain it is, that in places
most populous, Satan bears the greatest sway; as in Cities and great towns,
in them you shall find the Schoolemens nine-fold rank of Devils; As first
Hypocrites, or 1 (t) Pseudothei.
false-gods, that by their fained sanctity, lead captive simple women, and by
their dissimulation, win reverence and adoration among men. Secondly 2 (u)
Spiritus me^daciorum.
Spirits of lies, these are Shopkeepers, which vent their wares with lying and
couzenage, and use false- Measures, which are an abomination unto the Lord.
Thirdly 3 (x) vasa iniquitatis.
Vessels of iniquity, these are cheaters and deceivers, the disciples of
Theutus, which devil, as Plato says, was the first inue^tor of Cards and Dice.
Fourthly 4. (y) vltores scelerum.
Reue^gers, assascinates, or cut-throtes, that for less then Judas Iscarioth,
will be hired to stabbe and kill a Christian. Fifthly, 5. (z) Praestigiatores.
Iuglers, that is to say, deceitful Scribes and Lawyers, that by their
legerdemaine can mould the body of the Law like a Nose of wax, and alter the
case according to the Clients fee. Sixthly, 6. (a) Aereae potestates.
Airie powers, or turbulent and rebellious spirits, that are never contented
with the present government: Such are all schismatikes, that wilfully cut and
divide themselves from the unity of the Church. Seventhly, 7 [b] Furiae.
Furies, or kindlers of debate and discord betwixt man and man; by carrying of
forged tales, and whisperings in the ear. Eighthly, 8 [c] Exploratores.
Intellige^cers, that like Ioab will embrace a man, and kill him; and like
Judas, kiss a man and betray him. And ninthlie 9. [d] Tentatores.
Tempters, that like shadows, will follow and haunt men, provoking and
inciting them to mischief, and afterward exclaim and cry out against them,
as the Devil himself uses to do, who is therefore called Astaroth, the
accuser of his brethren.

All these, and many legions more dwell in the City, that are far remote from
the Sea; and for this cause our Savior says unto his spouse in the Canticles,
Cant. 7.11.
Come my well-beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us remain in the
villages. Herein he declares, that in solitary places, there is the
greatest integrity, and in the Country there is the most plain dealing, and
truest honesty. Sin and Sincerity, are like the Gowte, and the Spider; the
Spider is for the Cottage, the Gowt for the Palace; if the Gowt come into the
cottage, it will want a pillowe, and if the Spider go into the Palace, her
web will be swept down; Even so Sin is for the City, and Sincerity for
the Country: For if Sincerity should appear in the City, the Citizen will
make a scoff at her Coat: because it is without seame, and therefore out of
the fashion: and if Sin should abide in the country, it would soon be
weary, because the country being not so rich as the city, cannot afford Sin
so good entertainment as she desires.

If then Cities, that are far distant from the Sea, be Caves of unclean
Byrds, and holds of foul spirits, what may we judge of Hauen-townes, wherein
not only domestike sins reign, but also at whose ports or keys continually
arriues the Ship-of-Fooles; The Moabitish women were stu^bling blocks to the
Israelites, and they of Tire and Zydon, no doubt, did in the la^d of Zebulun,
corrupt and deprave the true worship of God, with their Idolatry; And so it is
in all Nations; by intercourse and Confederacy, one learnes the manners of
another. Hence it is, that Englishmen, by conuersing with Forreiners, are
become like the Beast called Camelopardalis, which in one part resembles the
Camel, and in an other the Panther; For they sometimes fashion themselves,
according to the Dutch, Sometimes they imitate the Italian and Spanyarde; And
sometimes they follow the French, not only in Apparel, but also in manners,
in borrowing Sobriety from the Dutchman, Sincerity from the Italian, and
constancy from the Frenchman; And so did the Zebulunites, with their
borderers; by which Imitation, the Light of true Knowledge, concerning God, was
in the time of CHRIST utterly extinguished, and put out, and all the people, (as
the Prophet says) sat in darkness.

Having discovered and laid open the sins and wickedness of Zebulun; Let us
now take a surueye of Gods Mercy: In this Land of Darkness, was CHRIST by the
Angel Gabriel, promised to the Virgin Marie, there he was conceived, and
there brought up.

Secondly, upon Tabor, a Mountain in this Country, he was Transfigured in
glorious manner. And thirdly, amongst the tribes of Zebulun, and Nepthalim,
which were become Gentiles, and so odious in the opinion of the Jews, that
they thought, that No goodness could come out of Galilee: CHRIST began to
work his miracles, and to preach the gladsome tidings of eternal life.

This teaches us, that God has mercy in store, even for them that are most
wicked, if they will repent. And for this cause, sent his dear and well-beloved
Son into the world, To gather together the lost Sheep of Israel.

If then we have lost our selves in the Darkness of sin, yet if we be Sheep
that will hear his voice, we shall not perish, though for a time we be Lost
sheep: Zacheus was a Publican, but after Christ had called him, he became the
child of Abraham. Marie Magdalene was possessed with seven Devils, and yet
Many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much; and one of the
Malefactors that was Crucified with our Savior, was a Thief, and yet he was
made a free-denison in Paradise.

If therefore (says S. Chrysostom,) any man have sinned grievously, yet let
him not despair, but looking upon these examples of Gods mercy, comfort
himself. For Christ was Conceived amongst the Zebulunites, by his conception,
instructing us, that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; he was transfigured upon mount Tabor in the land of Zebulun; to
signify that he is not only the glory of Israel, but also a light unto the
Gentiles; and he first preached among them that sat in darkness, declaring
hereby; that if sinners will be converted unto him, they shall enjoy that which
the Gospel promises, eternal life: for sweet and merciful is the Lord, and
his commiserations spread over all the rest of his wonderful works.

THE SIXTH SERMON OF ISACHAR.
GENESIS CAP. 49.14.15. Isachar shall be a strong Ass couching down he ween
two burdens, and he shall see that rest is good, and that the land is pleasant,
and he shall bow his shoulders to bear, and shall be subject unto tribute.


ISachar was the fifth son of Jacob and Leah, and his name signifies Wages,
and Reward, according to the first signification, it has relation to Reubens
Mandrakes, for the which Leah bargained with Rahel, that Jacob should sleep
with her, whereupon she conceived and bare Isachar, the history hereof is thus
recorded by Moses; Genesis 30.14.15.16.17.
Reuben (says he) went in the days of wheat harvest, and found Mandrakes in
the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah, then said Rahel to Leah,
give me I pray thee of thy sons Mandrakes; but she answered, is it a small
matter for thee to take my husband, except thou take my sons Mandrakes also?
then said Rahel, therefore he shall sleep with thee this night for thy sons
Mandrakes; and Jacob came from the field in the evening, and Leah went out to
meet him, and said come into me, for I have bought and paid for thee with my
sons Mandrakes, and he slept with her that night, and God heard Leah, and
she conceived and bare unto Jacob the fifth son, who was called Isachar,
which name is agreeable to the circumstance of his conception, for when he was
begotten, she paid wages to Rahel for her husbands company; These wages were
Epiph: in philol. cap. 4. Aug. lib. 22. cont. Faust. cap. 36. Rhodigin; l. 7
Lect: antiq: cap. 3.
as some think, Mandrake apples, and that therefore Rahel was so desirous of
them, because they have virtue to cause women to conceive; but this is a mere
fable, for the Mandrake apple is very refrigeratiue, a great procurer of sleep,
and forgetfulness, and Galen: lib. 7. simpl. medicament. Oleast. in genesis cap.
30.
Galen says, that it is cold in the third degree; furthermore Rahel
notwithstanding these Mandrakes conceived not, neither would Leah, having now
ceased to bear, have given them away, if they had any such virtue; others take
them to be flowers, which were wondrous fair in color, and sweet in smell;
Oleaster says they were lillies; Onkelos holds, that they were violets, and
some think they were inchaunted, or loue-flowers, but Rahel needed not to use
any enchantments, for her husband did already love her most dearly; most
likely it is, that they were lovely flowers both for sight and smell, as the
Hebrew word Dudaim signifies, but what flowers they were, it is uncertain;
howsoever certain it is, that they were very pleasant, else would Rahel never
for them have forgone her husbands company one night, in this bargain of Leah
we may observe, both how desirous she was of children, and also how loving she
was to Jacob, because rather then she will want his society, she will buy him,
and pay for him with her sons Mandrakes; Secondly Isachar signifies a reward;
and accordingly, Leah after her delivery of this son, frames her speech,
saying, Genesis 30.18.
God has given me my reward, because I gave my maid unto my husband; in these
words she both manifests the chief occasion of Isachars name; and also
bewraieth her own infirmity; in that she assigns that to be the cause of
her reward, which by the institution of God was forbidden; namely, Polygamie,
or the multiplicitie of wives and concubines, as it may appear by the words
of God, saying, Genesis 2.24.
Man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and
they shall be one flesh; the breach of any law is sin, and therefore as
Jacobs tetragamie cannot be justified, no more can Laban, Rahel and Leah be
excused, who were the causes impulsive of this error in him: and yet Leah
thought that she had done well, in giving her handmaid Zilpah to Jacob, and
therefore she says, that God had given her a reward for it, and this her
conceit she expresses in the name of her son Isachar, which is by
interpretation a reward: and thus in stead of acknowledging her fault, she
braggeth and boasts of it; as I cannot but commend her, in that she would
give wages to buy her husband; so I cannot but condemn her, in that she makes
God accessarie to evil, in calling him a Rewarder of her guiltines in Jacobs
trespass. Isachar shall be a strong Ass, etc. these words contain the
character of Isachar and his posterity, whom Jacob compares unto an Ass; not
out of any contempt of them, though the Ass be a contemptible beast: but only
by comparing the one to the other, to show what kind of men the Isacharites
should be; The Ass is an humble, profitable, and a gentle creature; whereas
then Isachar is likened unto an Ass, Jacob does hereby make the Ass an
Emblem of three things which were praise worthy in the tribe of Isachar, to
wit, humility, public utility, and meekness; first the Isacharites were
men Deuteronomy. 33 18. Prou. 30.28 Judge. 9.5. 2. King. 11.1 1. Sam. 22.9. Amos. 7.10.
1. King. 12.31.
that rejoiced in their tents, (as Moses says) they were not like unto the
ambitious spider, which (as Solomon writes) takes hold with her hands, and
is in Kings palaces, as most worldlings be, some catching hold with the bloody
hand of violence, and thereby striving to mount, as Abimelech and Athaliah did:
some by fraudulencies smooth hand, advancing themselves as the Talebearing Do^g
did in the Court of King Saul, and flattering Amaziah in the Kings Chapel at
Bethel, and some by the gilded hand of Briberie, procuring preferment, as
Ieroboams Priests did, and as many clergy men at this day do, the scholars
of Simon Magus, who though they be asini coronati, as one of the Emperors
censured them in his speech to the King of France, yet they have as aspiring
minds as Lions: such were not the children of Isachar; for they were humble
and lowly minded; in this respect, it is good for every man to be an Ass like
Isachar, because the humble are blessed; and the proud are cursed: for 1. Pet.
5.5
God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble; he cast down the
high Genesis 11.8.9.
Tower of Babel, and raised the low Tabernacle in Siloh: he deposed proud Dan.
4.30
Nabuchadnezzar, and advanced humble David: and he resisted the haughty and
insolent Hest. 7.10
Haman, but graced the poore-spirited Mordecai; humility, though in the worlds
eye, it be but like Hagar in Abraham's house, a despised bondwoman, yet in the
sight of God, it is as S. Bernard says, the Queen of virtues, that stands
upon the right hand of the King of heaven in a vesture of gold, wrought about
with diverse colors; for Luc. 1.52.
God casts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts the humble, and
them of low degree; humility is one of those flowers that grew in the cheek
of Christ; of whom the spouse thus speaks in the Canticles, Cant. 5.13
his cheeks are as a bed of spices and sweet flowers; and these flowers were
Humility, Purity, Charity and Patience, in sign of his humble mind, he rid
into Jerusalem upon an Luc. 19.35.
Ass, thereby teaching us to learn of him to be humble and meek; though
like Serpents we stop our ears, because we will not be charmed, with
Christ's exhortation, yet me thinks the frailty of our own nature should
abate the swelling humor of Pride, being truly considered and examined; Psalm.
144 3.4.
Lord what is man? man is altogether vanity, his time passes away like a
shadow; what is man? Genesis 3.19
Dust that must return to dust; then why art thou proud, o dust and ashes?
what is man? an Idol and a light shadow says Sophocles, and what are the
greatest of men? they be but like unto (y) Nabuchadnezzars Image, which he
saw in his dream; though their heads were golden diadems, though their
breasts and arms be arraied in cloth of silver, though their thighs be
harnessed with brazen armor, and though their legs be as strong as pillars of
iron, yet are therefore but Claie, and therefore their state is most frail and
brittle; our grandfather the first man was called Adam, because he was made of
Adamah, which is Red claie, or red earth, and we that are his children, are
framed of the same metal or matter, and therefore like potten vessels we be
soon bruised and broken in pieces; oh then why should any man be proud; or
puffed up with vain glory? art thou honorably descended, yet be not proud of
thy birth or alliance, for he that bragges of that, boasts of that which is
his own, says Seneca; art thou fair and welfauoured like Absalom or Hester?
though beauty be as Plato says, the principality of nature, and according to
Aristotle, a greater commendation then all epistles; yet let it not make thee
Proud; because All flesh is grass and quickly withers; art thou Rich? yet
let not thy wealth make thee prouder, for naked thou came out of thy mothers
womb, and naked thither thou shall return; art thou learned? yet be not
proud; for humane knowledge is but foolishness in Gods sight; seeing then that
man has nothing to be justly proud of, why should he not rather strive to be
like the humble ass, then the headstrong horse, that must be holden in with
bit and bridle;

Secondly, the Isacharites, were very profitable members to the commonwealth
of Israel, for they were Husbandmen, and did exercise tillage; and therefore
Jacob compares his son Isachar to an ass both in regard of his laborious
vocation, and also in respect of that commodity which is reaped by husbandry;
what beast takes more pains then the ass and what beast can be more for
profit, then that which takes pains; the Isacharites then being Husbandmen
were right Asses, because they were both painful and profitable; they did not
like the Amos. 6.4.
fat kine of Bashan, or the noble men of Zion lie upon beds of Iuorie, and
stretch themselves upon their beds; but they did rise up early and went to
bed late; They did not spend the time in singing to the sound of the viole, in
inuenting to themselves instruments of Music, in drinking wine in bowls,
annoynting themselves with the chief ointments; but making the Pismi^e their
president; of which Solomon says, Pro. 6.6.
Go to the Pismire o sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise; in the sweat of
their brows they ate their bread; by whose labors it came to pass, that the
rest of the Tribes were well fed, and plenty of meat and drink was in their
Princes palaces; the Plough is the true Cornucopia, or horn of
plentifulnesse, and where it is not followed, Scarcity comes like an Armed
man, and Dearth upon a Apo. 6.5.
Black horse with balances in his hand; the one violently, the other
speedily; In a well-gouerned commonwealth therefore, every man ought to be an
Isacharite, and put his hand unto the Plough; that thereby he may show
himself to be a profitable member; The Kings plough is a vigilant care over
his Subjects, in making good laws and seeing them executed, in suppressing the
wicked and protecting the good, and in ministering Justice without respect of
persons; the Bishops plough is Watchfulness; the word Episkopos says Plato,
Aug. de Sanct. Ser. 51. Iliad. 10.
signifies a Vicegerent or an Ouerseer; he is called a Bishop (says Austin)
who is the Superintendent; Homer calls the Scoutmaister in an army Episkopos,
and Andromache named her husband Hector the Bishop of Troy, because to him
principally was commended the defense of the city, the very name then of a
Bishop, tells every Bishop, how he must follow his Plough, and look to his
charge; he is the Churches centinell that must sit in the watchtower; Cant.
2.14.
the Church is a dove in the holes of the rock, therefore he must preserve her
from the harpies talant, Cant. 2.2.
The Church is a lilly therefore he must look to her that she be not gorged
and galled with thorns, the Church is a Rose, therefore he must keep her
from the Cankerworme, Heresy and Schism be the ravenous Harpies, pricking
thorns, and venomous worms; as the King and the Bishop have their several
Ploughes, so every inferior person whether Clericall or Laicall, must have his
hand ever at his Plough, for if the Clergiemans Plough rest, the souls of men
will starve for want of the Bread of life; and if the Layemans plough lie idle;
the commonwealth like the Pro. 24.31.
Sluggardes field will be ouer-growne with thorns and briers, want and penury;
Thirdly, the Isacharites, were a people so meek and gentle, that they would
bear any burden upon their backs rather then kick against the Prick, or
seek revenge; and herein they fitly resemble the ass, which of al living
creatures will bear strokes with the greatest patience; as may be gathered out
of Homers words, Hom. li^. 11.
who says, that the slow ass, though many staves be broken upon his back,
yet will he not be moved, and driven from his pasture; The Egyptian Priests in
their Hieroglyphickes, deciphered a patient meek man, by painting an
asses-head upon a man's body; and if we look into the history of Balaam and
his Ass, we shall there see the perfect picture of a hasty man and a meek
Beast; Balaam because his Ass would not go forward, smote her diverse times
with a staff, and also wished that there had been a sword in his hand, that
therewith he might have killed her; But the Ass when the Lord had opened her
mouth gave him no harder language but this; Numb. 22.28.30.
What have I done unto thee that thou smitest me three times? am not I thine
ass, which thou have ridden upon since thy first time unto this day? have I
used at any time to do thus unto thee? these words were framed by the Angel of
the Lord, who makes the asses tongue his instrument of speech, as the devil
used the Genesis 3.1
Serpent when he tempted Euah; but yet the phrase and manner of speaking does
aptly agree with the asses meek and gentle nature; whereas then Jacob says
that Isachar shall be an ass; his meaning is, that his posterity shall not
only be lowly minded, and profitable to the commonwealth, but also patient,
long suffering, and meek spirited; such an ass must every true Christian be,
namely, Meek and gentle; it was no shame for our Savior in that he was
compared to a Isa. 5.7.
Sheep in regard of his meekness, and it is no disgrace for us if we be his
disciples to be likened to an ass in respect of our ge^tlenesse; amongst the
people called Cumai, the Adulteress that had ridden upon an ass, which was
their customarie punishment, Plut. in probl.
was ever afterward in disgrace called, Onobatis, or Asse-rider; now it were to
be wished, that all such hot spurs, and impatient Shimeihs, as will not
imitate the ass in meekness, might like the Cumaean adulteresses, when they
offend with their fiery tongues, and shoot out their arrows, even bitter
words, be compelled to ride upon asses, that being so put to shame, shame might
force them, to learn of Christ to be meek; Math. 5.5.
Blessed are the meek (says Christ) for they shall inherit the earth, and the
Psalmist says, that Psalm. 37.11.
meek men shall possess the earth, and shall have their delight in the
multitude of peace; but of the contrary part, our Savior tells us, Mat. 15.22.
that whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of
judgment, and whosoever says unto his brother Raca, which word in the Syrians
language, is Idle brain, shall be worthy to be punished by the counsel; and
whosoever shall say foul, shall be worthy to be punished with hell fire; seeing
then that Blessedness attends upon the Meek and gentle, and that Judgment
and the Curse of God hangs over the houses of Angry and fiery persons, let
us all strive to conquer and subdue this hot and wilful passion; which (as the
Philosopher says) is worse then madness; what though Heraclitus say it is
hard wrestling against anger, and Plato, that anger is neither to be striuen
with, nor to be subdued; yet by the help of Gods spirit we may easily
extinguish this immoderate heat, if we but set before our eyes the Great
reward of Meekness and the sharp punishment of Anger.

Isachar shall be a strong ass, etc. The Ass is a word of Disgrace, but
strength is commendable, so then though according to the letter of this text
Jacob seems to vilify Isachar, in saying he shall be an ass; yet he
magnifies and blesses him and his Tribe in comparing him to a strong Ass; or
as it is in Hebrewe, an ass of good bones, or as Oleaster interpretes the
words, An ass with a strong, and a spinie back: that is to say, as Onkelus
translates them, Rich, and Wealthy, and according to Jacobs speech it fell
out; for the portion or lot of the Isacharites, in regard of the soil was more
fruitful then the inheritance of any other Tribe, for in it lay Esdrelon,
abounding with Corn, wine, and oil, there likewise were the mountains of 2.
Sam. 1.21.
Gilbo^h, which were cursed by David, because upon the^ Saul and Jonathan were
slain, and these were very fertile, Isachers posterity then, were both asses,
and strong, that is, rich and humble, rich and profitable to others, and Rich
and Meek, in them we may behold Three rarities, or three Wonders.

First, it is a very strange thing to see a Rich man humble; for Riches are of
the nature of the dropsy, they make a man swell; every foolish and churlish
Nabal, that has a possession of his own in Carmel, and is master of three
thousand sheep, and a thousand goats, will scorn, and disdain the worthiest
David; saying, 1. Sam. 25.10.
Who is David, and who is the son of Ishai? also these Cormorants which like
Caterpillars are but engendered ex putredine, of some muddie and slimie stock,
when they have scraped together store of wealth, and have commenced Gentlemen,
or are made Symoniacall Knights, they, I say, will look for more reverence and
worship, then he which is truly generous and noble borne; and indeed their
expectation is seldom frustrated; for the poorer sort do crouch unto them,
and bow their knees to these Baals and unrighteous Mammons; but yet I may say
as Aristodemus of Sparta was wont to say, Riches, Riches are the man; it is the
Wealth of these men, not their Persons, which al people so much respect; and
therefore they may well be compared to the ass, which amongst the Egyptians
bare upon her back the Image of Isis; This ass going along the streets, and
seeing the people kneel and do reverence, thought that this obeisance was made
to her, not knowing that it was for the Goddesses sake, whom she bare upon her
back; hereof there is an Emblem; with this motto, Non tibi sed Isidi; Not to
thee, but to Isis; this Ass may be the Rich and proud churles looking glass,
wherein he may see how he imitates the Ass in stupiditie and simplicity,
but not in humility; I do not condemn him because he is strong, for Eccles.
6.2.
Riches are the gift of God; but for that his strength makes him proud and
insolent; if the worldling would like Isachar be a strong ass; that is, join
Wealth and Humility together; then should I commend him, like Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, who were very Rich and very Humble; but such kind of strong asses,
are as rare as black Swans; for it is the nature of wealth to make men
arrogant; and therefore I account it a wonder in the Isacharites, that were both
asses and strong; welthie and poor in spirit; so should all men be, for if we
look upon this worlds pelf with judicious eyes, we shall find, that they be
not so honorable things, as Euripides esteemed them, and likewise, Antiphanes,
Herod, and Menander; the first of which writes thus; O god the m st excellent
ornament of mortal men: the second, Silver is the blood and soul of a man:
the third, Riches are the souls of miserable mortal men: and the fourth, Our
Silver and our gold, are our best Gods: Are Riches blood? why then do rich men
grow old? Are Riches the Soul? why then do rich men die? are Riches Gods,
why then do rich men go to hell? but leaving these poets and Idolaters that
make Mammon a God, let us see what there is in Wealth that can make a wisema^
proud; What are Riches? Things gotten with much labor and care, kept with
suspicion, and jealousy, and lost with anguish of mind and despair; what are
riches? an unhappy or miserable harvest, and the snare of the soul, for they
which be rich fall into many temptations: what are Riches? impediments and
hindrances of salvation? Math. 19.24.
it is more easy for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God: If the Proud worldling would but
imprint this consideration in his mind, he might prove to be an Isacharite,
rich, and humble, and hereby work a miracle.

Secondly, it is wonderful, to find a Rich man, that is profitable to others;
the Rich man is a golden Ass, but his gold as little profits the
Commonwealth, as Midas his meat being turned into gold, did profit or
pleasure him; Nay, he is so far from distribution to any man, that the more
he desires; his tongue like the horsleaches daughters, cries continually
Give, Give; his throat is an open Sepulcher, and his desires like the barren
womb, and Hellmouth will never be satisfied.

I have read of a covetous Rich-man, who lying upon his Deathbed, made his
last will or Testament, and therein because no man living should fare the
better by him, he bequeathed all his lands and goods to himself: There be many
as unwilling to be beneficial to others, though not so foolish as that
miserable wretch. The Poets feign Plutus, whom they make the god of wealth, to
be blind and lame: Blind, because he blinds rich men, in such sort, that
they will neither look upon, nor look unto any but themselves; and lame,
because he makes rich-men so lame, both in their hands and feet: that neither
their hands can give any meat to the hu^grie, nor their feet walk to visit
the sick, and such as be in prison; because wealth makes a man more covetous
then otherwise he would be, and less profitable to the commonwealth.
Therefore Plato wished that out of his Commonwealth gold and silver might be
banished; for as he thought, it was impossible for a man to be rich and good; I
cannot absolutely subscribe to this position, because we read of diverse in the
Scriptures, who were both good-men, and rich-men; as for example, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and Job: and even in our days, there have been many rich-men so
good both to the Church and Commonwealth, that they deserve to be called
Patres patriae, and Ecclesiae nutritij: The Fathers of their country, and
nourcers of the Church; These are builders of Hospitalls, Founders of
Colleges, and Charitable workers.

O let all such men O Lord, be had in perpetual memory, and ever flourish in
thy house like green Baie-trees: but as the number of the^ which bowed not the
knee to Baal, was nothing co^parable to the^ that went a whoring after that
strange-god; so there be scarce seven of seven thousand Richmen, that will
voluntarily disburse a mite for the public good either of the Church or the
Commonwealth.

Thirdly, it is rare to see a Rich-man that is meek and gentle; for wealth is
the mother of Pride, and pride begets impatience. Rich-men therefore are
like Aesops Ass, wrapped in a Lions skin, cruel and rigorous in their
carriage and behavior: He that is truly meek and patient, when he is
smitten on the right cheek, will turn the other also: and when he is sued at
the Law for his coat, will deliver up his cloak also: being so far from
seeking revenge, that like a sheep, dumb before the shearer, he will not so
much as open his mouth to complain of any wrong, but bear all with meekness:
but rich-men do quite contrary: and therefore few of them be meek and gentle;
Let but one of their inferiors offer to touch their cheeks, they will
presently do to them as 1. Kings, 25.7.
Nabuchadnezzar did to Zedekiah, pluck out his eyes: or if he lay any claim
to their cloak, they will serve him such a trick as the 2. Sam. 16.7.
king of Ammon did David's Ambassadors, cut his garments so short, that he
shall want wherewith to cover his nakedness; There be five foolish virgins, which
continually follow this Ass, Apo. 14.4.
as the five wise virgins follow the Lamb; and these are sorceresses, that
make him drunk with the cup of impatience: the first is, Orgilotes, she upon
every slight and light occasion stirs and provoke him to anger; the second
is Acrocholia, and she fills his heart with the gal of bitterness, and
annointeth his tongue with the poison of aspes; the third is Picrotes, she
makes him Engraue his wrongs and discontents in marble, so that they may never
be forgotten: the fourth is Chalepotes, her office is to remove out of his body
the fleshy-heart, and to give him a heart of stone; the fifth is Menis, and she
makes him so perfectly outrageous and mad, that any little trespass moves
him forthwith to take his neighbor by the throat.

These are the Euill-spirits that haunt Rich-men, by whose charms it comes to
pass, that it is a great wonder if any of them be like Isachar both strong and
asses; that is to say, Rich, and Gentle, Isachar shall be a strong Ass,
couching down between two burdens, etc.

Judah by Jacob, is compared unto a Lion couchant: whereby is understood that
his victorious family should be afraid of no enemy; but Isachar is likened
to an Ass Couchant, because he must yield his back to the burden, and his
shoulders to bear; some Hebrews say, that by Isachars Couching like an Ass,
is meant their great labor and study in the Law; because in the first book of
the Chronicles, and the twelfth Chapter, it is said, 1. Chron. 12.32.
that the children of Isachar had understanding in their times, and knew
what Israel ought to do; this is but a strained interpretation; for all that
can be collected from hence, is this, that the Isacharites which took David's
part against the house of Saul, were men of good experience, which in the
managing of war, and ordering of battles, knew at all times what was to be
done; more truly, by the Ass Couchant is signified, the great labor and toil
which the Isacharites did endure in the tillage of the ground, and this
exposition is most correspondent to the quality of a husbandman; whose custom
is to rise up early, to go to bed late, and to eat the bread of
carfulness, which three will make the strongest body couch, and droupe, and
these are incident to all husbandmen; for if they hope to prosper and thrive,
they must not say as the Sluggard in the Proverbs did, Prou. 24.33.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, and a little folding of the hands to
sleep; but they must rise up early, neither must they follow the course of
the Sun in going to bed when it settes; nor like the Epicure say, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; but they must be watchful and
careful, for otherwise Prou. 24 34.
poverty will come upon them, as upon one that trauelleth by the way; if a man
be an Ass rampant* and play the prodigal, he will soon be brought to keep
hogs; and if a man be an Ass dormant, and neglect his business, he will
quickly, according to the Proverb, scratch a poor man's head: therefore he
that desires to rejoice in his tents like Isachar, must like Isachar Couch
like an Ass between two burdens.

Couching between two burdens, etc. the word in the original which is
Mishphat, signifies both a Bound, a Lot, and a Burden; and therefore some
have interpreted the words thus; Isachar shall be a strong Ass, lying between
two bounds; the Sea of Galile on the one side, and Thabor on the other: some
thus, Isachars portion shall lie between the Lots of Manasseh and Zebulun,
having the Lot of Manasseh upon the South, and Zebulun upon the North, but the
most natural exposition is, to say that Isachar coucheth between Burdens,
for so shall the translation not vary from that metaphor which Jacob uses,
calling Isachar an Ass, betwixt whom and Isachar there is this similitude; as
the Ass yields his back to the burden, and willingly bears it, and
plieth his prouender notwithstanding his burden, so shall Isachar labor as an
Ass in tilling of the ground, and shall yield to the payment of any tax or
tribute, rather then leave his tents or go abroad: but here this question may
be demanded; were the Isacharites more burdened then the rest of the Tribes
of Israel? they were, first because of the fruitfulnes of their country, for
they were very rich, and therefore in equity they were to allow large
subsidies to the King; secondly, being wealthy, they were content to buy their
rest and quietness with money; thirdly, being husbandmen, they were therefore
liable to the most burdens, because ever the weakest in reputation go to the
wall; and therefore their plough must feed the Epicure with dainty fare, and
it must cloth the rich glutto^ with purple and fine linen, the Burden the^
between which the Isacharites did couch, were these two; Tillage, and Tribute;
And he shall see that rest is good, and that the land is pleasant, and he
shall-bowe his shoulder to bear, and shall be subject unto tribute; in these
words Jacob alleges the causes why Isachar is an Ass; and these are the
Sweetness of rest, and the pleasantness of the land; for because Rest is
good, and the land pleasant, therefore he shall pay tribute to procure rest,
and willingly take pains, because the land yeeldes him fruits of increase;
Tillage and tribute were Isachars burdens; the first whereof, though it be
heavy, yet the carriage of it to delightsome, the second, though it be
troublesome to his back, yet it discharges him of many encumbrances; so then
his Rest was painful, and his labor pleasant: his rest was painful because
it made him subject to tribute, but he was contented with any imposition to
obtain his freedom, and live at home; because the Retired and quiet life is
the best of all other; the rest of the tribes of Israel, which had not so heavy
a burden laid upon them; were ever at the Kings command, either for service in
the war, or attendance in the Court; now Isachar seeing that the companions
of War, are Death and Danger; and that the Court is a gorgeous or sumptuous
prison, where the greatest nobles wear golden fettars; therefore he chooses
rather to rejoice in his Tent, and to live privately, and quietly, though his
rest be costly; certainly, notwithstanding the husbandmans burden is heavy,
yet his manner of life is very sweet and happy; first because he lives very
laboriously, and ever eats his bread in the sweat of his brows; and this his
labor is Physic, both for his body and his soul, first it preserues his body
from diseases; for what man is so healthful as the husbandma^? who can have a
better appetite, and better digestion then he; of the contrary part, such as
wallow in pleasure, and live idly; are ever either chastned as David was by
their reins in the night season, or else like Mephiboseth, they are lame of
their feet; the Stone and the Gout, cleave (like 2. Reg. 5.27.
the Leprosy to Gehazj) to such as lead idle and intemperate lives; secondly
the husbandmans labor is the devils obstacle; for what is the cause that the
laboring man is ordinarily less vicious then such as live at ease; because
ease and slothfulness are the occasions of many sins, as appears in the
Sodomites, Ezech. 16.49.
whose iniquity, was pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness. S.
Ambrose shows by the similitude of the Crabfish and the Oyster, how Satan
tempts and inueigleth such as live idely: The crab (says he) most willingly
eats ye meat of Oysters, but for so much as the Oister is well fortified on
both sides with most strong shelles; so as they cannot be broken by force,
therefore the Crab does craftily watch, till the Oister do open her self to
the sun, and to take the air, and then she puts a stone into the mouth of
the gaping Oister, whereby being hindered from closing of her shelles, she
safely thrusts in her claws, and feeds of the meat; so (says he) while
men be given to idleness, and open their minds to pleasures, the devil
comes and puts in filthy cogitations; so that when they are not able to
draw back their shel, wherewith they were armed before, they are presently
devoured; it is Idleness then that lays a man open to the temptations of
Satan: but Labor Ephesians. 6.16.
like the shield of faith, quenches all the fiery darts of the devil; The
husbadman is like Demosthenes, he spends more oil then wine; but the Wanton
Chamberer is like the Epicure, he spends more wine then oil; hence it is; that
the one is so honest, and the other so dissolute; because the one takes pains,
and the other lives idely; Secondly, the husbandmans life is both happy and
sweet, because it is a Quiet life; and therefore in that Isachar chooses it
before any other, he may well be compared to the Olive tree, the figtree, and
the vine in Iothams parable; Judge. 9.
The trees (says Iotham) went forth to anoint a King over them, and said unto
the olive tree, reign over us: but the olive tree said unto the^, should I
leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honor God and man, and go to advance
me above the trees? then the trees said to the figtree, come thou and be King
over us; but the figtree answered the^: should I forsake my sweetness and my
good fruit, and go to advance me above the trees? then said the trees unto the
vine, come thou and be King over us; but the vine said unto them should I leave
my Wine? whereby I cheer God a^ man, and go to advance me above the Trees? So
Isachar, like the fig tree, will not forgo his sweetness, like the
Oliue-Tree, will not depart from his Fatness: and like the Wiue, will not
forsake his Cheerfulnes, for to wear a Diadem, or swaye a Scepter; And his
reason is, because there is no life like the quiet and private life, either for
the service of God, or for the contentation of the mind.

Let us but cast our eyes upon the Ambitious Brambles, which desire to grow in
Palaces, and to have other Trees put their trust under their shadow, and we
shall find that in them there is neither Fatness, Sweetness, nor
Cheerfulnes; No, for in stead of these, they bear Pricks, the Prick of
Fear, the Prick of Suspicion, the Prick of Aemulation, and the Prick of
Discontent.

For one of them being grown to great height, is afraid to be cut down
suddenly, as Haman was; An other being high, and having goodly branches or
Offices, suspects that every one that looks upon him, will strive to loppe him;
Another, because he is outstript in growth, withers and pines away with envy;
and the last when he feels his sap dried up, dies with grief and discontent.

These are Courtiers, being barren of Cheerful Grapes, sweet Figs, and
fat Olives, that is to say, Peace, Content, and inward Mirth, as the fruitles
Tree, which our Savior cursed; Seeing this is true, Isachar is not to be
marvelled at, because to obtain Rest at home, he couched like an Ass under
the burden of Tribute; thereby purchasing his freedom from service to the
king, both in the wars, and in the Court. The second cause of Isachars
couching like an Ass, is the pleasantnes of the land; for he saw that the land
was pleasant, and therefore he bowed his shoulders to bear; the inheritance of
the Isacharites, as I said before, did abound with Corn, Wine, and Oil; And
therefore seeing this soil was so fertile, it made them take pains in Tillage
and husbandry, for they followed the Plough for Corn, they dressed the vines
for wine, and they planted Olive Trees in hope of oil,

Tillage then was Isachars second burden, which he bare with alacrity,
because the heaviness thereof was counterpoised with the pleasant fruits of the
land; the like consideration in former times moved great Princes and Potentates
to give their minds to Tillage, as a thing most pleasant and profitable.

Xenophon called it a Royal study, and Cyrus the king of the Persians, was
accustomed to sow Corn, and to plant Trees.

Also we read of diverse worthy Romans, that have bin called from their
Husbandry in the Country, to come and bear office in the City, and
afterward return to the Plough again; which they never would have done, but
that they perceived that the Pleasure, and the Profit of the Plough, were
far greater then any other pleasant, but unprofitable delight.

Isachars lotte is every true Christians case; for as he was an Ass couchant,
so are they: The wicked worldling is an Ass, but not an Ass in humility,
public profit, and meekness, but an Ass rampant, that is so proud, that he
cares not for his Master, GOD ALMIGHTY; at whose Cribbe he continually
feeds: but the Righteous, an Ass Couchant between the burdens.

These Burdens are, Tribute and Tillage; the Tribute of a Christian, is the
patient bearing of the Cross, which by the Imperious World is laid upon his
shoulders.

Concerning this burden, our SAVIOVR says, He that will be my Disciple; let
him take up his Cross, and follow me. Cic. lib. de Senect.


Though this Cross be so heavy, that it makes many a one groan under it,
yet it is in this respect pleasant; because at the length it procures rest;
(d) For blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, For
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; as the Isacharites under their burden, for
great content: so do the righteous under the Cross; For it is like unto Number.
17.8.
Aarons rod, which brought forth buddes, Blossoms, and ripe Almonds, the
budde of the Cross, is the certain mark of Salvation: for whom God loves
he scourges, and whom he chasteneth he receives: the Blossom of it is, an
assured hope, that he is one of them that enters in at the straight gate;
because the Apostle says, that by many afflictions and tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and the Ripe almondes that grows upon it,
is a Confidence, that neither height nor depth can separate him from the love
of GOD, considering that he bears the mark and badge of his well-beloved
son CHRIST JESUS; This Cross is the Burden of all Christian Isacharites,
neither must we grudge at the bearing of it, seeing that our SAVIOVR did not
only carry the wooden Cross upon his torn and wounded shoulders, but also
bear our infirmities, and was chastened for our transgressions; and then ought
the Disciple to be above his Master? indeed the Cross is heavy, and he
had need of Sampsons shoulders that can with patience support it, but as Simon
of Cyren did help CHRIST to bear that Cross upon which he was put to death,
so CHRIST helps his followers by strengthening their weakness with his
omnipotent arm; Aug. in Psalm. 93.
The Church is a Ship, the world is a Sea; by the swelling waves whereof this
Ship is continually troubled, but the power of CHRIST is such, that when he
awaketh and comes to judgment, he will rebuke the winds and the Sea, and
then there shall be a great Calm; John in his preamble to the Revelation thus
styles himself; Apo, 1.9.
I John even your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom,
and patience of JESUS CHRIST; herein we may observe how he places this word
Kingdom, between Tribulation and Patience, to teach us that there is no
obtaining of eternal rest, without the patient bearing of the Cross; No man
says Augustine, can rejoice with the world, and reign with CHRIST. and Saint
Hierom says, It is impossible that any man should enjoy both preseent and
future delights; as then the Isacharites did willingly bow their Shoulders to
bear the burden of Tribute, because they saw that Rest was good, so must all
true Christians be contented to undergo the Cross in this life, if they hope
after death to rest from their labors.

Secondly, Tillage is the other burden of a Christian: God is a Husbandman,
and he sowe^ good wheat, and the Devil also is a Husbandman, but his grain
is, Tares; these two have their several bailiues of husbandry; Gods Bailiues,
be zealous and industrious ministers that labor in his harvest, at his plough,
and in his vineyard, the Devils Bailiues be Heretics, and Schismatickes,
which by their corrupt doctrine, poison the souls of men; both of these
Bailiues have their Burdens, but herein there is a difference, the Devils
burden is light, and is borne with ease and pleasure; but Gods burden is
heavy, and the carriage of it painful and troublesome, for when the Devil
entertaines any Bailiue into his service, he makes the same promise that Syrus
did, saying, Plut. in apoth: prisc. regum.
Whosoever will come and be my servant, if he be a footeman, I will make him
a horseman: if he be a horseman* I will make him ride with Coaches: if he
be a farmour, I will make him a Gentleman: if he possess a cottage, I will
give him a village: if he have a village, I will give him a City, if he be
Lord of a City, I will make him a Prince of a Region or Country, and as for
gold, I will power it forth unto them by heaps and weight, and not by number;
these are the wages of Satan's hirelings, wondrous glorious in pomp of words,
and ostentation of style: but of the contrary part, Gods proclamation to his
husbandmen, is Repent, for except you sow in tears, you shall never reap in
joy; Ioh. 16.2.
in this world you shall receive affliction, they shall whippe and murder you,
and you shall be hateful in the sight of all men for my name sake; this is
the entertainment proposed by God to such as will come and serve at his
plough, and bear his burden; hence it is, that Satan has so many, and God
so few husbandmen, because the Burden of the one is so light, and the others
so heavy; but this ought not to discourage a true Christian from Tillage;
remember Isachar; he saw that the land was pleasant, and yielded him for his
pains and labor, Corn, wine and oil, and therefore with alacrity he bowed
his shoulder to bear the Burden of tillage; so let us look upon the
pleasantness of Gods Land which we till; and then we shall find that the
fruits thereof do ouerballance all our Labors; for in stead of corn we
reap Christ himself, who is The bread of life, in stead of wine, we enjoy the
Grace of God, and in stead of oil, we shall be partakers of everlasting joy
and gladness; o then who would not like an ass couch under Gods burden in
this life, by holding his plough, laboring in his vineyard, and sweating in
his harvest, considering that his Penie is eternal life, and his wages, joys
everlasting.

THE SEVENTH SERMON OF DAN.
GENESIS 49.16.17.18. Dan shall judge his people, as one of the Tribes of Israel.

Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder by the path, biting the
Horse-heeles, so that his Rider shall fall back-ward.

O Lord I have waited for thy Salvation.


DAN was the Son of Jacob, by Bilhah the Hand-maide of Rahel; for when she
saw that she bare Jacob no children, she envied her sister, and said unto
Jacob, Give me children, or else I die; Then Jacobs anger was kindled against
Rahel, and he said, Am I in Gods stead, which has withheld from the
fruit of the womb? and she said, Behold my maid Bilhah: Go in to her, and
she shall bear upon my knees, and I shall have children also by her, then she
gave him Bilhah her maid, and Jacob went in to her: So Bilhah conceived; and
bare Jacob a son: then said Rahel, God has given sentence on my side, and
has also heard my voice, and has given me a son; therefore she called his
name Dan; which is by interpretation, Judgment. This name of Dan being given by
Rahel, discovers in her three infirmities; the first is Envy, because her
sister Leah was fruitful, and she barren: August. con^. Faust. lib. 2. cap.
54.
therefore she envied her. S. Augustine excuses Rahe, saying, non inuidit, sed
zelauit sororem; she did not envy her sister, because she bear children, but
she had an earnest desire to be like unto her in fruitfulness; but the Word
Dan which signifies a Sentence or a Judgment, is an evident demonstration of
her malice and envy; the second is foolishness, for she said unto her husband
give me children: she says not so: as though Jacob of purpose had restrained
his natural force as Rabbi Leui thinks: neither is it her meaning that Jacob
should by his prayers obtain children for her, as Isaac had done for Rebeccah,
for then Jacob would not have been angry with her, but her womanly heat had
in such sort dampt reason, that she had forgotten that God was the only giver
of children: for there be four Paraph. Hierosol in cap. 30. Genesis
keys in Gods hand, which he has not committed to any other: the first is the
Keye of rain: as it is in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 28.12.
The Lord shall open his good treasure the heaven to give rain: the second is
the Keye of food, of which David says, Psalm. 104.28.
Thou openest thine hand, and they are filled, the third, is the Keye of the
Womb, of this there is mention made in the history of Joseph's conception,
where it is said, Genesis 30.22.
that God remembered Rahel, and God heard her and opened her womb: the fourth
is the Keye of the Grave: as it is in Ezechiel: Ezech. 37.13.
Behold my people, (says the Lord) I will open your graves, and cause you to
come up out of your Sepulchers: now Rahel shows her foolishness herein, that
she would take the Keie of the Womb from God, and put it into Jacobs hand;
the third is her Impatience: couched in these words: (or I die,) her meaning is
not, that if she die without children her name should perish, but that if she
remain barren still: she can live no longer, for inward grief and discontent
will macerate and consume her: three things moved This envy, foolishnes and
impatience in her: namely, an aemulation of her sisters happiness: a desire to
be endeared to her husband, and a fervent longing to be interessed in the
promised seed; herein she does ill that good may ensue: which is not to be
allowed or justified; neither is there any inconvenience, to yield to such holy
women as Rahel their infirmities: but here is not the lowest ebb of her
weakness; for she goes further, and gives her handmaide to her husband;
hoping to be comforted by her issue; and upon that contract with Bilha was Dan
borne; as I said before in my lecture upon Isachar; Laban by deceit made Jacob
to divide his Rib and to have two Sisters to be his wives; and his two wives
being sisters by their persuasions made their own husband to be Tetragamos the
husband of sower wives, the one giving him Bilha, the other Zilpha, their
handmaids to be his Concubines; now herein how can Jacob be excused? or the
children of Leah, Bilha, and Zilpha be accounted legitimate, considering that
by the first Canon and institution of marriage made by God in paradise, Genesis
2.24.
One man was to have but one wife* and they two says Christ, shallbe one
flesh; the breach of every law is sin; Jacob breaking then the law sins;
and consequently all his children, except Joseph and Benjamin, the sons of
Rahel to whom Jacob was first contracted were illegitimate: S. Augustine thus
answers, as long as it was the custom to have many wives, it was no sin;
Aug. Cont. Faustum. manich. lib. 22. cap. 47.
but now it is a sin because it is not the custom, some sins are against
nature, some against Custom, some against the law; now says he; Jacob is not
to be blamed for he transgressed not the law of nature because he used his
plurality of wives not for lust, but for the increase and multiplication of
mankind; neither did he break custom, for in those days in the east
countries Polygamie was usual, neither was it prohibited by any law;
concerning Custom Saint Augustine he holds the Truth; but as for the Law of
nature, and the Law of God; they Both are opposite to the multiplicitie of
wives; first the law of Nature appears herein; Zanch. de sponsal.
that God when he was to give Adam a wife, took only one Rib, not two, and
made only one woman not two, teaching us thereby that one man should be
contented with one wife, and one wife with one Husband. This Law of Nature is
confirmed by that which God commanded Noah to do, when he destroyed the world
with water. Genesis 7.7.8
Noah, and his wife, and his 3. sons, and their wives, and of beasts both
clean and unclean, the male and the female, entered into the Arc. This
coupling of Creatures both reasonable, and unreasonable, shows that Nature in
her Seminary, requires no more but one Male, and one Female; Furthermore,
these are two Axioms, or Maxims in Nature; Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
facias: Do not that to another, which thou would not to be done to thy
self. Also, Ne quod alterius est inuito eripiatur; Let nothing which belongs
to another be taken from him against his will; Now in Polygamie, these two
Rules are broken off.

For, first a man will not bear nor brook it, that his wife should take unto
her another man; Then why should he have another wife? Secondly, the 1. Cor.
7.4.
Married man as the Apostle says, has not power over his own body, but the
wife; How then can the Man without offering manifest wrong to his Wife, bestow
his body upon an other woman?

Concerning the law of God it does directly forbid Polygamie, as appears by
the words of Christ, who is the best interpreter of the Law, saying, Mat. 19.5.
For this cause* shall a man leave father, and mother, and c^eaue unto his
wife, and they twain shall be one flesh; Herein our Savior teaches us, that
the wife is not only not to be put away upon every cause, but also, that the
Husband ought not to take unto himself another Wife; Thus both by the Law of
God and Nature, Polygamie is condemned: Can the Custom be Jacobs protection?
How ca^ his tetragamie be justified? and the rest of his Sons, excepting
Joseph and Benjamin be legitimate? I answer, by Dispensation. For God according
to the state of those times, dispe^sed with the Patriarks, for the Law, which
he had made at the beginni^g; And this is evident out of the examples of
Abraham, Jacob, and Elcaenah, and other godly Fathers, who were not reproved by
any Prophet, for their multiplicitie of wives; Nay, which is more, God gave
Saules wives, as 1. Sam. 12.8.
Nathan says, into the bosom of David; Now then, if God gave David wives,
notwithstanding his first institution is for the contrary; we may conclude,
that he dispensed with his own Law; and gave the Patriarchs liberty for
Polygamie. The reason of this dispensation was this, in those times God had
chosen the seed of Abraham to be his people, in whose lineage the true worship
of the Deity was preserved, for all other people were given to idolatry, and
went a whoring after strange gods. Therefore it was necessary that the
Children of Abraham should be permitted to use Polygamie, and have many wives,
that mankind might be spread by procreation; because this propagation of the
flesh was the increase of godliness; Seeing God would that the people in who^
true religion was planted, should continue even unto Christ; So then, it was by
dispensation lawful unto the Patriarchs, to have many wives, to the intent
that that people whom God had chosen, namely, Israel, might be many in number;
neither can it appear, that they sinned when they did so; but here sin must be
disti^guished. For if to sin, be to stray from most perfect reason, surely
they sinned; but if we determine that to be sin wherewith God is offended,
and provoked to revenge, they sinned not, since God dispensed with his law, to
the end, that the people of whom he would be worshipped, might be of the
greater number. For although amongst other Nations, some perhaps were good men,
yet the public worshipping of God, was no where else, but in Israel.
Furthermore, Abraham, Jacob, and the rest, though they had many wives yet they
were not hereunto led by lust, but by a chaste desire, to augment and multiply
Gods family; This was Jacobs motive, when he went in unto Bilha, and begot
Dan. And therefore considering both Gods dispensation, and his own intention,
Jacob is not to be condemned, neither his children borne of concubines to be
debased; yet Rahels act in giui^g her handmaid, cannot be excused; because she
was moved thereunto, by the spirit of Pride and Envy; she knew it was a
glorious thing to have children, and a shame to be barren, and therefore she
desired to have a child, though borne by her maid, to free herself from infamy
in the world, and to be more equal with her sister. Herein is manifest, that
she aimed at glory and victory over her sister, not the worship of God and
propagation of the true Religion.

From this example of Jacob, some have concluded, that Polygamie is lawful
unto us. But let such Opinionists know, that a General Canon cannot be
infringed, by a particular example.

If we can claim the same Dispensation that the Patriarchs had, then I
grant that a man may have many wives, but we cannot. For now there is no
Nation more peculiarly Gods people then another, (as it was before the coming
of Christ; Acts. 10, 35.
But in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him.

Furthermore, our Savior canceld the dispensation, when he said concerning the
Husband, and the wife, Mat. 19.5.
They twain shall be one flesh; Not only now the law of God is against
Polygamie, but it seems also that the law of Nature, which by Socrates is
called A permanent and firm Edict of God; and by S. Paul, The law written in
our members, caused the Roman Emperors being Infidels, to make decrees against
Poligamy; Cod. lib. 5. alt. 5. de incestis, and inutilibus nuptijs.
brading such with infamy, as had more wives then one: And when as Socrat. in
hystor. eccles. lib. 4. cap. 31.
Vale^tinia^ a Christian Emperor, to cover his own filthiness, having besides
his legitimate wife Seuera, taken also to wife a young maid called Iustina;
made a law that every man might lawfully have two wives; This law published by
him, was not only rejected, but also afterward condemned, as contrary to the
law of Nature. And therefore I conclude this point with Clemens Alexandrinus,
saying, Clemens Alexand. in stromat. lib. 4
that Polygamie which was granted unto the Fathers, is not now lawful unto
us; And therefore he that has two wives, is like unto wicked Lamech, and his
second wife like unto his second wife Sela, which by interpretation is, vmbra
eius, or his Shadow; because she is rather to be esteemed the shadow of a
wife, then a wife indeed.

Genesis 4.19
Dan shall judge his people, as one of the Tribes of Israel, etc. Jacob in his
prophecy co^cerni^g Dan, alludeth unto his name which by interpretation is
judgment, or revenge, according to which significations, these words Dan
shall judge his people, may two manner of ways be paraphrased; first Dans
tribe as well as any other of the tribes of Israel shall afforde a Judge, or
one that shall be a Prince and ruler of his people, this was accomplished in
Judge. 16.31.
Sampson, who judged Israel twenty years, and this was a great glory to the
tribe of Dan; for the Tribes of Reuben, Simeon, Gad, and Aser, were the more
ignoble, because God did not raise up any out of the^ to judge Israel,
secondly, Dan shall judge his people, that is to say, Rab: Solomon in hunc
locum.
One of his family shall be avenged upon the Philistines for their hatred and
cruelty against Israel, and this was Samson, then whom never was there any
Israelite more miraculously victorious over the enemies of God, for Judge. 15.15.
with the Ia^e bone of an Ass, he sl^we a thousand men, in these words Jacob
comfort his son Dan, who because he was the son but of a Concubine, was
therefore no doubt the less regarded in his family; and also foreseeing that
the inheritance of his Tribe in the land of promise, should not be like unto
the rest, therefore that the other tribes should not contemn Dans, in
comparison of themselves, he tells them, that his Birth, and small
possessions do nothing at all empaire his worthiness, because out of his
loins should come a Ruler, and a Revenger in Israel: The worthiest and most
valiant of all the Judges of Israel was Samson a man of a mean Tribe, and yet
God chose him to deliver his people out of the hands of the Philistines,
herein teaching us first, that he himself is not an accepter of Persons; for
the ostentation of Birth, and Parentage in his eye, is but a Bubble, and
worldly Possessions and wealth like Chafe, or dust before the wind; secondly,
he instructs hereby, all great families, how they should behave themselves
toward their inferiors, Judah though he have the Kingdom, though Joseph has
obtained the Birthright, and though Leui be invested in the Priesthood, yet
must neither Leui, Joseph, nor Judah contemn Dan the son of a Concubine,
because he also as well as they shall judge his people, and deliver Israel; it
is ordinary amongst us, one to debase another, as the Ephraimites did the
Gileadits, saying, Judge. 12.4.
Ye Gileadites are runnagates of Ephraim among the Ephramites, and among the
Manassites; So the Nobleman scorns the Gentleman, and the Gentleman ouerlookes
the Farmer; as the Jews contemned the Galileans, and all this is, because of a
little eminency in Birth and Blood, which is nothing, for what difference is
there in nature between one man and another? I have read of a King, who was
too too much co^ceited of his own worth in regard of his descent, and he on a
time did boast that he could draw his petigree even from Noah's arc; his
Fool or Iester hearing him, answered him thus; Then of necessity we are
kinsmen, for my ancestors likewise came from thence; and thus was his
vaineglory checked by the Tongue of Folly; This world is a theater, the earth
is a stage, our life a Tragedy, and every man is an actour, one man plays the
Kings part, and another the servants, whose robes being changed, the servant
becomes the King, and the King is turned to be a servant; and thus the state of
man like a Planet in its orb or sphere is moved circularly by the finger of him
that raises up one, and casts down another; why the^ should any man take too
much upon him? why should any one trust so much to that reed shaken with every
blast of wind, greatness? if the honorable in birth be more virtuous then
other, then it is injustice to abridge or deprive the^ of their reverence and
due respect; but if (as it often falls out) they blemish their birth by
folly, why should we commit Idolatry in worshipping the^? Virtue is neither
the Bondwoman of birth nor wealth; she is tied to neither; for as worthy men
both for policy at home, as for war abroad have been bred in cottages, as in
palaces, as then Jacob would not that Dan should be contemned by the rest of
his sons for his mothers sake, who was but Rahels handmaide, so God would that
such as are of great birth, should forbear to vilify, others of meaner
descent, because in his sight there is no difference of mankind, the King and
the beggar are al one.

Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, and an adder by the path, biting the horse
heels, so that his rider shall fall backwardes.

These words are to be considered both generally, and particularly 1. generally
they describe the quality of the children of Dan, who are compared to the
Serpent and Adder, because they were a crafty and a subtle generation, as may
very well appear by their sudden surprise and sacking of Judge. ^8.27.
Laish, secondly the particular sense which is most proper, has relation to
Samson, being of the tribe of Dan; who is therefore called by Jacob a Serpent,
and an Adder, because he used to set upon the Philistines suddenly and
subtilely, he was avenged upon the^ subtilely, when Judge. 13.5
he took three hundred foxes, and turning the^ tail to tail, put a firebra^d
in the midst between two tails, with which being fired, and the foxes sent
out into the standing corn of the Philistines, both the rickes and their
standing corn with their vineyards and olives were burned, also by his means
destruction light upon them suddenly, Iud. 16.30
when at his death he pulled down the house, wherein both the Princes of the
Philistines and a great multitude of the people were assembled, and met
together, to make him being bli^ded their laughing stock; as the^ Paraph.
Chalda. in hunc locum.
the Serpent and the Adder use to fly upon a man, to bite and sting him when
he least thinks of them, so Sampson by policy and sudden assaults like a
Serpent or Adder biting the horse heels, to give the rider the overthrow,
obtained victory over the enemies of Israel, some think that this speech of
Jacob tends to the dispraise of Dans tribe, but I rather apply them to the
commendation of his family, because it is a good thing to imitate the Adder or
Serpent in wisdom, and therefore our Savior exhorts his disciples Mat.
10.16.
to be wise as Serpe^ts, but harmless as Doves, which is as if he should have
said; join to the Serpents subtletie, the Doves innocence, so shall no man
be able to wrong you because of your innocent subtlety, and you shall be
loath to offend any, because of your subtle innocence; the Serpents or Adders
wisdom then is to be imitated of all men as well as Samson, but their poison
and malice is to be avoided and shunned: There be four kinds of Serpents,
whose imitation all Christians ought to beware of; Plin: l. 8. cap. 21.
the first is the Basilisk, a serpent so poisnous, that with her only touch
herbs wither, and stones are broken, and with her hissing all other venomous
worms are terrified and affrighted, like unto this Serpent be such violent and
supercilious persons, as with their very eyes astonish such as come before
them, imperious and furious Rabsecahs, virulent and bitter-tongued Shemeis, and
impatient and mad Saules, who upon no occasion will cast their Iauelines at the
most righteous David; or guiltless Nathaniel; in the I Will of Rhodes there dwelt
a kind of people called Telchines, who with their very looks would infect and
poison a man: such as these are, all such persons as are highminded, and have
proud looks: whose aspect is as terrible to their beholders; as the 1. Sam.
17.24.
face of Goliath was to the timorous or fearful Israelites: it is said of our
Savior in the Canticles, that Cant. 5.
his eyes were like doves eyes washed with milk, that is to say, he had an
innocent and gentle countenance, and such Eyes must all his followers have;
Christ will allow us the Basiliskes heart, but not the Basiliskes Eye; the
Basiliskes heart is full of subtlety, and his Eye full of poison; if the^ a
man should have both the Eye and the heart of a B^silisk, he would be both
subtle and harmefull; therefore to avoid this, it is our Saviors will, that in
his Disciples the doves eye should be joined to the serpents heart, that so
wisdom and innocence may meet together and kiss each other. The second is
the Aspe, whose poison lies in her teeth, if she once bite a man, he dies
without remedy or cure; like unto this Serpent is the Backbiter and detracter,
concerning whom the Psalmist says, The poison of aspes to under their lips,
and their words are very swords, these bite a man by the heel, and wound him
behind, not daring to confro^t, or assault him face to face, in such we may
behold malice and subtilty mixed together, against these S. Peter writes,
saying, 1. Pet. 2.1.2.
Wherefore laying aside all maliciousnes, and all guile, and dissimulation, and
envy and all evil speaking, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of
the word that ye may grow thereby. The Backbiter in some respect is of a more
venomous nature then the aspe; for Pliny affirms that the Aspe being kept
tame, will never bite or hurt them that feed her, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 37.
and for proof hereof he alleges a strangestorie of an Aspe, which was fed
continually by an Egyptian at his table, this Aspe says he, having brought
forth young ones, it so happened, that one of her young Aspes bit and kilde one
of this Egyptians children, which when she perceived she presently her self
killed her own young one, and afterward as ashamed that any wrong was offered
to her feeder she went away, and never returned to his house, and can there be
found such humanity in a backbiter? oh no; for such is his poisnous
disposition, that he will fasten his malicious and venomous tooth even upon his
dearest friend, when the spouse in Salomons song describes her well-beloved, she
thus says of him; Cant. 5.13
his lips are like lillies dropping down pure Mirrhe; the lilly is white, and
Mirrhe is sweet, these two then do lively set forth our Saviors phrase and
manner of speech, in whose mouth there was no black rancour, no poisnous
backbiting, no venomous detraction, for his words were ever charitable, and his
speech gentle, whosoever then is his Disciple must in stead of lips full of
guile, have lips like lillies, and these in stead of the poison of Aspes, must
drop down pure mirrhe; Leuit. 19.16.
Thou shall not wa^ke about with tales among the people (says God) thou shall
not stand against the blood of thy neighbor, as a slanderer, backbiter, or
quarrelpiker. The 3. Serpent, whose poison we must beware of, is the Scytale,
Solin. ca. 39.
she (says Solinus) is wondrous stowe in her pace* and marvelous beautiful,
for her back is as it were embroidered, and spangled with golden spots, with
these she entangleth the eyes of her beholders, whom while they stand
astonished and amazed at her strange form, she suddenly surpriseth and
stingeth; in her behold the true picture of hypocrisy; what man comes more
near to the heavenly shape of an Angel then the hypocrite; and yet who can
more justly be called one of the generation of Vipers then he? for like the
Scytale he has a glorious outside, but within he is full of the poison of
Dragons, and the bitter gall of aspes; the golden spots wherewith he dazles
and deceiues the eyes of men, be fained holiness, counterfaite gravity, long
prayers in public places, pretense of conscience, words softer then oil,
and almesdeedes with the sound of a Trumpet; with that he purchases
reputation, commendation, and admiration; but were there, as Momus wished, a
window in his breast, that his heart might be seen, then would his viperous
nature be discovered, and then should he appear to be as he is, a wolf in
sheep clothing: against such Serpents as these our Savior inveyeth, saying
Mat. 23.14.
Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; and the reason is, because
under color of long prayers, they devoured widows houses, as there is no
Viper so dangerous as the Scytale, because first with her beauty, she
bewitcheth, and afterward with her sting she kills; so there is no man more
to be feared then the hypocrite, because he will 2. Sam. 3.27.
like Ioab embrace Abner, and stab him, and kiss Christ like Judas and betray
him, as then our Savior said to his Disciples, Beware of the leave of the
Pharisees, so say I, take heed of the Poison of this glorious Scytale the
hypocrite; if we imitate him, we have our reward, which is a little airie
reputation among men: and if he close with us, we are in danger to be damaged
by him. The fourth is the serpent called Cerastes, so named of his horns,
wherewith being shaken, as a bait, he allureth and draws the birds of the
air unto him, whom being within his reach he snatcheth up and deuoureth, Pline
lib. 8. cap. 23.
having before shrouded the rest of his body in the sands, this is that
Serpent to which Dan by Jacob is compared, according to the latin translation,
which is thus; Fiat Dan Coluber in via, Cerastes in Semita etc, let Dan be an
Adder in the way, and the Cerastes in the path, etc. the wisdom and policy
of this Serpent is great, but his malice is to be feared; if he had only wrapped
his body in the sand to avoid danger, I could not condemn him, but when he
uses his horns as a train to entrap souls, and lies in the sand, as in an
Ambush, I cannot but abhor his peevishness, and venomous disposition; this
Cerastes is a lively emblem, of all such men as lay baits to ensnare and
catch their brethren; concerning these Serpents, thus says David: Psalm. 10.8.9.
They lie in wait in the villages, in the secret places do they murder the
innocent, their eyes are bent against the poor; they lie in wait secretly,
even as a Lion in his den; they lie in wait to spoil the poor, they do
spoil the poor, when they draw them into their nets, like Cerastes, the
wicked have horns, wherewith they betray the innocent and harmless soul;
sometimes in stead of a lure or bait, they show the horn of friendship, by
fained amity and color of love, deceiving such as trust them; so was David
caught, as he affirms himself, saying. It was not mine enemy that has
done me this wrong, but mine own familiar friend; the mischievous intentions
of an open enemy may easily be prevented, but the malice of a secret Serpent
can hardly be eschewed; wherefore the Greek Poet says well in his Epigramme,
I hate a man that has two faces, and is only a friend in the tongue, and an
enemy in the heart, and sometime they shake the horn of Religion, making
semblance of sanctity and piety, that with the greater ease they may wind
themselves into the Simple man's bosom, and consequently with their sting
pearce his heart; such a Serpent was Simon the Pharisie, who desired our
Savior Christ, that he would eat with him, therein making show that he did
love our SAVIOVRS Doctrine, but when he saw the poor penitent woman that was
a sinner, wash his feet with her tears, wipe them with the hairs of her
head, kiss them, and annoint them: then he cast up his venomous gorge saying
within himself Luc. 7.39.
if this man were a Prophet, he would surely have known, who, and what manner
of woman this is which touches him, for she is a sinner; against this Serpent
I will pray with the Psalmist, and say o Lord break his horns, and let not
his wicked imaginations prosp^r; thus have I deciphered the nature of these
four Serpents, the Basiliske, the Aspe, the Scytale, and the Cerastes; the
first being the Character of Cruelty, the second of de^raction, the third of
hypocrisy, and the fourth of fraudulencie; to imitate these in wisdom is
Christianity, for our redeemer says, Be wise as Serpents, but to have the
Basiliskes deadly eye, the Aspes banefull tooth, the Scytales fair skin with
treacherous spots, or the Cerastes his dissembling horns is devilish; for
to be such a one, is to be the old Serpents discipline, who is like the
Basiliske in his eyes for he is a Ioh. 8.44.
murderer from the beginning; an Aspe in his teeth; for he is a Backe-biter,
and the accuser of his brethren, like the Scytale for his skin, for he can
transform himself into an Angel of light, and like the Cerastes for his
horns, for he is a diss^mbler, a liar, and the father of Lies, o Lord I have
waited for thy salvation, Jacob having under the similitude of a Serpent and an
Adder expressed both the Quality of the Danites, and also the policy and
valor of Sampson, who was one of the Tribe of Dan, turns now his speech to
God, and prays: saying, o Lord I have waited for thy salvation, or according
to the Ch^lde paraphrase, Thy Redemption, or as some translate the words Thy
Savior, this speech is something obscure, and the obscurity thereof appears
in the multiplicitie of expositions; First Oleaster upon this place says thus;
Oleaster in hanc locum.
Even as old and sick men, use to make a pause, breathing, and sighing, when
they speak, so did Jacob; who being wearied with speaking to his sons,
diuerteth his voice from them to God, and says, O Lord I have waited for thy
salvation; which is as if he should have said; I hope that thou will heal, or
heal me and make me sound o Lord, for my trust is only in thy salvation; but
says he if we join these words to the words going before, then the sense of
them is this; Because I perceive o Lord that the family of Dan will be like
the Serpent and Adder, subtle and malicious, therefore I hope that thou will
preserve me from their venomous imaginations; this is Oleasters exposition;
which may partly be admitted, and partly rejected, first in that he makes
Jacob pray for help, it is not to be disliked; but secondly, whereas he
brings in Jacob praying against Dan as he did against Simeon and Leui; his
conceit is frivolous; for though Dan be likened to a Serpent, yet this
comparison is not to his Dispraise, but to the commendation of his Wisdom and
policy, by which one of his posterity, to wit Sampson, redeemed Israel, and
conquered the Philistines their enemies.

Secondly, some think that these words contain that prayer which Judge. 15.18.
Sampson used when he was sore a thirst after his slaughter of a thousand
Philistims with the Iawebone of an ass; or rather as some are of opinion, they
are to be referred to the time of his death, when he called unto the Lord and
said, Judge. 16.28.
O Lord God I pray thee, think upon me; O God I beseech thee strengthen me at
this time only, that I may at once be a^ged upon the Philistims for my two
eyes.

Thirdly, S. Hierom, Rupertus, and ^yranus say, that Jacob foreseeing the
admirable and rare virtues of Sampson, began to demurre and think with
himself, whether Sampson should be the Messiah or no? but when he considered
that Sampson after his death should not presently rise again; and also that
after his government the Israelites should be led into captivity; he
acknowledges that he was not to be the Messiah, and therefore he cries out
saying; O Lord I have waited for thy salvation; as if he should have said,
Tharg. Hieros. in hunc locum.
I expect another Savior of my people, then either Gideon or Sampson; but this
cannot be the meaning of Jacob, for he knew that the Messiah should come of
the Tribe of Judah; and therefore he says, that the Scepter should not depart
from Judah, till Shiloh come.

Fourthly, Ier^nae. lib. 5. aduers. hae^es. Amb. lib. de bened. p^t. cap. ^.
August. quaest. 22. in Iosu.
many of the fathers have thought, that Antichrist should be of the Tribe of
Dan, and that therefore Jacob th^s prayed to convince the Jews of error,
which in time to come should take Antichrist for the Messiah, of this opinion
was Irenaeus, Ambrose, Augustine and diverse others; and at this day it is held
as an article of faith in the Church of Rome. That Antichrist shall be of the
Tribe of Dan gotten by the devil, as Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost;
by this means the ancient fathers turn that to a curse, which by Jacob was
pronounced as a Blessing upon Dan; and whereas Jacob speaks of one that
should be a deliverer of his people, which is very fitly applied to Sampson,
they would have him point ou^ an enemy, and an adversary to the Church of
God; but I will leave these fathers, who being men might err in their opinion;
and come to the Papists, who willingly embrace this exposition, because it
freeth their holy father from being Antichrist; the which title the Bishop of
Rome, and his adhaerents are maruelously afraid of, and therefore in the
Council of Laterane straight charge was given to all preachers, that none
should dare once to speak of the coming of Antichrist, which prohibition
argues the guilt of their conscience;

First, the church of Rome maintains, that Antichrist shall be one singular
man; for proof whereof they stand much upon this greek article: 1. Ioh. 2.18.
Bellar. lib. 3. cap, 2. Rhem in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Sect. 8.
ho^ ho Antichristos; the Antichrist shall come, hereby say they is expressed
some singular and notable person; likewise our Savior says John. 5.4^.
I come in my fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another come in his own
name him will ye receive; this opposition of One to one says the Jesuit, is
of Antichrist to Christ, of One person to ^^other; furthermore S. John says
Revel.
here is wisdom, let him that has wit count the number of the Beast, for it
is the number of a man, and his number is six hundredth, sixty, six; Hence they
conclude that Antichrist should be but one man, and no whole body, tyra^nie,
or kingdom; these reasons are broken reeds, quickly shaken* and dispersed with
the least blast of wind; for the first, is the greek article of that
importance, that it ever implies a singularity? then must there be but one
devil, because Christ says, [ho echthros] Mat. 13.25.
The adversary came and sowed tares, and but one righteous man, because S.
Paul says [ho tou theou anthropos] that the man of God may be absolute, being
made perfect to all good works* which to grant should be most absurd; their
second reason is, the direct and peculiar opp^sition of Antichrist, unto
Christ's person; and that he she be received of the Jews, 2. Tim. 3 17.
as their Messiah: but no such collection can arise out of the text; It is
apparent that our Savior spoke only of Joseph. lib. 20. Antiquit. cap. 4.
Theudas Judas Galileus and such like false prophets, as both before and after
him rose up, boasting themselves to be the Messiah Act 5.36
to whom resorted a number of men, says Gamaliel: all which were adversaries
to Christ, but not that Antichrist. As for the proper name of the beast, which
is the number of a man, that little avails them: for as there is mention made
of a man whereout they would enforce a singularity; so is there of a Beast,
which ever implies a plurality. For Dan. 7.17 Dan. 8.20.21.
Beasts in the scriptures signify Kingdoms, Empires, and Monarchies. The
Rhemists themselves, by the Beast do understand the universal company of the
wicked: now the Beast and the man, are both one name; wherefore by their own
confession, it must be understood of a company or congregation, and not of one
particular person; of the contrary part, the spirit of God teaches us, that
Antichrist shall be a whole Body, company, ^inagogue, and succ^ssion of
heretics; whose co^ception was in the time of the Apostles. For S. Paul says,
that 2 Thessalonians. 2 7.
the mystery of iniquity does already work; Theod. in 2 Thessalonians ca. 2
which mystery (says Theodoret) signifies nothing else but these heresies,
by which the devil makes way to Antichrist, until such time, says S.
Augustine, August* de ciuit. De^. lib. 20. ca. 9
that they have gotten unto him great people, and then shall the wicked man be
reueiled, o^ show himself openly; How the^ can Antichrist be one Man, seeing
2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
he was conceived in S. Paul's time, born, or reueiled afterward, and shall
die, or be abolished with CHRIST'S coming? Also, S. John says, 1, John. 4.3.
Every Spirit, which confesses not JESUS CHRIST come in the flesh, is not of
GOD, and the same is the spirit of Antichrist (which you have heard that he
comes, and now he is in the world, 2. Ioh. v. 7.
There are many deceyuers entered into the world, which confess not Jesus
Christ that he is come in the flesh, the same is the deceiuer, and the
Antichrist.

What more evident testimony can be required then this? the Apostle calls many
deceivers by the name of one Antichrist, who was come in mystery, and secretly
in the Apostles time; which mystery by the malice and subtletie of Satan,
which is the spirit of Antichrist ceased not to work until the open, and
plain revelation of his pride was publicly professed in the papacy: this
truth is confirmed by the writings of the Fathers; for Tertullian calls
Antichrist Tertulide resur. carn. cap. 25.
A City prostitute to spiritual fornication: S. Ambrose Ambros: in Apoc. 17.
The City of the devil; S. Augustine August. homil. 10. in Apoc.
The body of the ungodly, fighting against the Lamb; and A people contrary
to the people of God, which jointly with their head, are called Antichrist:
Aquinas, Aquinas in Apoc. ^^.
a body, not a man. Hugo Cardinalis: an assembly, or a company. And lastly,
the Gloss says, The head and the body together, make up the whole
Antichrist; Here is a cloud of witnesses, proving that Antichrist is not one
man, and then consequently, how is it likely that one woman of the tribe of Dan
should be his mother, Rhem. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and the devil his father; But let us proceed to examine the reasons why the
Papists affirm, that Antichrist should be of the family of Dan, begotten by
the Devil; and therefore a Devil incarnate? the sandy grounds of this dream
are these.

First, because Jacob says Genesis 49.1^.
^an shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder by the path bytin^ ^he
horse-he^^^s, So that his rider shall fall backward. Secondly, because Hieremie
says, Hier. 8.1^.
The neighing of his Horses was hear^ from Dan, the whole Land trembled at the
Neighing of his strong Horses. The third foundation of this conceit is in the
Apocalipse, where tw^lue thousand of every tribe are reckoned, only Apoc. 7.
Dan is left out. These are pithie reasons, if well examined, let us appeal to
Bellarmines ce^sure; the speech of Jacob to Dan, says he, was fulfilled in
Samson, and herein he iumpeth with Saint Hierom; the same father even according
to the Prophets intention, applies the second speech to Nabuchadnezzars
coming to destroy Jerusalem; as for the omission of the tribe of Dan in the
catalogue of the Elect, that is no forcible argument; for might not then
Antichrist be as well an Ephramite, as a Danite, considering that Ephraim, as
well as Dan is left out? Ephraim is omitted, because Joseph supplieth his place,
and to fill up the number of the twelve tribes, Leui is put for Dan, and of all
the Rest Dan is secluded, not that all of his tribe are condemned, or for that
Antichrist should be of his stock, but because it was more accursed the^ the
rest, for their great Amos. 8.14.
Idolatry in worshipping the golden calves; of the contrary part, we are taught
by the Apostles words, that the mother of Antichrist, must not be any woman of
the tribe of Dan, but the Carcass of the Roman empire; for S. Paul says, 2.
These. 2.7.8.
The mystery of iniquity does already work, only he which now
withholdeth* shall let till he be taken out of the way; in these words is
contained the history of Antichrists nativity; his Conception lasted 3.
hundredth and 16. years, or there about; al which time Rome was governed by
Ethnic Emperors: and the Bishops thereof, even to the loss of their lives
labored in Gods harvest. But when Constantine reigned, who was the first
Christian Emperor and who translated the Seat of the empire to Bizantiu^,
which he called Constantinople, leaving the city of Rome to Pope Siluester the
first and his successors, who was the first Bishop that lived in Rome
vnmartired, and the first that ever possessed patrimony, rents, or dignity;
then was Antichrist borne, and his regiment spr^ng up out of the ashes of the
Roman Empire, if then the time of his birth or revealing falls about the
year of our Lord, 3. hundredth and 16. for then Deret distinet. 96.
did Co^stantin the Great give to Siluester the City of Rome, and bestowed
upon him a triple Crown for his coronation, in token that he had made him
Supreme head over all the Churches in Asia, Africa, and Europe; and at that
time says Platina, there was a voice heard from heaven saying, Now is poison
sown in the Church of God; does not this history accord with Paul's prophecy;
whom then shall we judge to be the mother of Antichrist? a woman of the Tribe
of Dan? no, that is but a fable; whom then? even the Carcass or Ruin of the
Roman Empire; which seeing it is most apparent, if we will look for
Antichrist, we must go to Rome, and there we shall find the Purple whore
sitting upon the Beast, with seven heads and ten horns: I could (if I would)
make a larger digression from my text, and with pregnant arguments, prove Rome
as it now stands, to be that Babylon spoken of in the Revelation of Saint John:
and the Succession of Popes there reigning to be That man of sin, and that
child of perdition, but this shall suffice, to show that Antichrist is not one
man but a Multitude, and that he shall not be, as the Papists imagine, of the
Tribe of Dan.

O Lord I have waited for thy salvation; having delivered the variety of
opinions concerning this prayer, I will now in the close show what was Jacobs
intention, and why he thus prayed; being a Prophet, he did foresee the double
Danger, which the Tribe of Dan should fall into; the first Temporal, in being
oppressed of their enemies, as they were of the Amorites; the second Spiritual
in being corrupted with Idolatry, and therefore he makes this prayer, therein
imploring, Iud. 18.30.
first Gods gracious assistance and deliverance; and secondly, the illumination
of his spirit, that thereby they might be taught that there is but One God to
be worshipped, namely, the Creator of heaven and earth, and that the Idols of
the Gentiles are but the works of men's hands.

In this prayer we are taught, what is the most Sovereign Remedy, both
against temporal and spiritual afflictions; namely like Jacob to call upon
God, for his aid and help. Penury, oppression, sickness and such like be
Temporal afflictions, whereby God usually tries the patience of the Elect, if
then like Lazarus we be poor: like Joseph fettered till the iron enter into
our souls, or like Hezechiah sick unto death, yet let us not say; The Lord
has forgotten us, he hides away his face, and will no more see: but lifting
up our hearts and our hands; make our supplication, saying, O Lord I have
waited for thy salvation. God is the Lord of hosts; and in his hand are three
arrows, The sword, famine, and pestilence* these he shoots sometimes amongst
the thickest troops of his children, as well as amongst the wicked, to
chastise the one sort for their sins, and utterly to destroy the other;
against these then the best armor of proof is the Shield of prayer; it
quenches the fire of Gods wrath, and kindles his love; what is the cause that
the Bloody sword of God has pierced the very entralles of so many Christian
Nations, which at this day do groan under the servile yoke of Mahometanes and
Infidels; is it not Want of prayer and devotion? they have forgotten God, and
never truly and fervently call upon him who is the surest refuge, but rely
upon their own policy, and power, which alas are but reeds shaken with every
blast of wind; what is the cause that in many kingdoms Famine plays the
Tyrant, and like one of Pharaohs Lean kine, eats up the people as if they
were bread? is it not Negligence in the service of God? would the people but
call upon him for relief; rather then they should perish, he would satisfy
them with Quails, and Manna from heaven, or else command the Ravens to feed
them, as he did to the Prophet Eliah; what is the cause that in this Realm
the Pestilence has devoured so many both in the city and the country? it is
because we sleep securely upon Satan's lap, as Sampson did upon Delilahs,
never lifting up our eyes to heaven to entreat almighty God to command the
destroyer to stay his hand, and cease from slaughter; would we but call upon
God, when we are afflicted either with the Pestilence, Famine, or the Sword,
saying as Jacob did in the behalf of his son Dan; O Lord I have waited for
thy salvation; there is no doubt but that God would look upon us with the Eye
of pity and compassion, Jonah. 4.2.
for he is a gracious God, and merciful* slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and rep^rteth of the evil.

Secondly, as prayer is the best remedy in Temporal afflictions; so likewise
in spiritual; God permittes Satan for trial sake to tempt us, that our faith
like gold may be tried in the fire; it was Job. 1.12
Jobs case; but the devil he assaults us like a Roaring Lion, seeking to destroy
us; to withstand his violence, our safest course is prayer; for our Savior
teaches us, that the Devil is not only repulst, but also cast out by Prayer,
as Iug. 7.22
Gideon only with the sound of Trumpets, and the Breaking of Pitchers, put the
Midianites to flight; eue^ so the voice of him that prays deuoutely, and the
groaning of a broken and contrite heart, resists, drives back, and
vanquisheth the whole army of darkness; as the children of Dan, so every one
of us, is allured by Satan to forsake God, and commit spiritual fornication,
with one Idol, or other; the covetous person boweth down to Mammon; the
envious man to Abaddon, the proud in heart to Lucifer, the Fleshworme to
Belial, the heretic to Sathanas, the intelligencer and talebearer to Asteroth,
and every sinner has one familiar Spirit of darkness or other, who with
sweet entisements and allurements, leads him like an Ox to the
slaughterhouse; and then delivers him up to these two bloody Butchers,
Despair and Death; for when we have committed sin, Chryso. hom. 2. in Ps. 50.
the Devil stands by (says S. Chrysostom,) whetting his sword of
desperation, and saying unto every one of us; Thou have lived wickedly all thy
youth, and thy former days have thou misspent, thou have haunted plays and
spectacles with thy companions, and followed after loose and lascivious women,
thou have taken other men's goods from them wrongfully, thou have bin covetous,
dissolute, and effeminate, thou have forsworn thy self, thou have blasphemed
and committed many other heinous and wicked crimes, and therefore what hope
can thou have of saluation^ truly none at all, thou art a mere castaway, and
can not now go back, therefore my counsel is, that now thou use the
pleasures and commodities of this world, and pass over thy time in mirth of
heart, without any cogitation of repentance or hope of Gods mercy; This is the
Devils oration, persuading Security and Desperation, now what greater
affliction can light upon the soul the^ this? to be enthralled by Satan, and
to be made the bondslaue of Despair? to free our captiuated Souls of these
deadly fetters, we must do as the Doves in Persia do, who when they are
pursued by the Serpent, use to fly to a certain Tree called Pedixion, and
there safely shroud themselves, because no venomous creature dare approach or
come near unto it, so must we do, when the Old Serpent huntes us, to destroy
us with the poisnous sting of Despair, let us speedily betake our selves to
the Tree of Life, the Cross of Christ, and holding fast by it, implore Gods
mercy, and beg pardon for Christ's sake, saying, as Jacob did, O Lord, I have
waited for thy salvation.

THE EIGHTH SERMON OF GAD.
GENES. 49.19. Gad, an Host of men shall overcome him, but he shall overcome
at the last.


AFter the birth of Reuben, Simeon, Leui, and Judah, Leah left bearing;
wherefore she seeing that her sister Rahel had given her ha^d-maid Bilha to
Jacob, Genesis 30.9
who had borne him two sons, Dan, and Napthali; she I say, in like manner
took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife; thus Zilpah bare Jacob a
son, Genesis 30.11,
the^ said Leah, A company comes, and she called his name Gad, which
signifies an Army, or Troop of men. In this history of Gads nativity, and
the imposition of his name, we may discover two infirmities in Leah. The first
is, sins imitation, the second is Enui^s correspondencie; First, she
imitates her sister in evil, in that she gives her ha^d-maid to her husband;
for Polygamie is in it self a sin, because it is contrary to the first
institution of Marriage; Howsoever it was dispensed withal in the Patriarchs,
Aug. contra Faust. lib. 22. cap. 18.
who entertained many wives, not for lust, but for propagation, as S. Augustine
says.

As it is an evil thing to give evil example, as Rahel did to Leah, for such
persons (says Gregory,) deserve so many several torments in Hell, as they
have left evil examples to posterity upon earth. So likewise, it is a great
fault in any man to make an evil example his pattern, and yet such is the
corruption of our nature, that generally, we are all in this, like Leah, more
prone to follow Satan in the foote-steppes of sin, then GOD in the pathway
of Righteousness. CHRIST is the Pattern of the Elect, he is the Apoc. 14.1.
Lamb upon mount Zion, whom the virgins follow whither soever he goes: 1.
Pet. 2.21.
and he suffered, for as (says S. Peter) Leaving us an example, that we
should follow his steps. His steps be Meekness, Humility, Mercy and
Charity. But alas, few there be that follow them; but millions of men run
after Satan, which is the President of Reprobates, saying unto him, as the
young man said unto Christ, Master, we will follow thee whither-soeuer thou
go.

The devil according to his qualities, has certain names given unto him, by
the Spirit of God, and according to his several names, he has his several
followers, which imitate him most exactly; As he is Astaroth, which is by
interpretation, a Calu^niator, or an accuser; he is attended by Intelligencers,
tale-bearers, detractours, whisperers, and backe-byters, which with their
tongues as two edged swords, strike their brethren and neighbors secretly
Prou. 26.21.
As the cole makes burning coals, and wood a fire, so these kindle strife; As
he is Belial, which signifies Irregular, and one that is subject to no yoke or
discipline: he is garden with Atheists, which say in their hearts there is no
God: and therefore like untamed Heifars, refuse to submit their necks to Gods
two yokes, the Law, and the Gospel; As he is Mammon, he is followed by
Extortioners, Oppressors, Usurers, Land-rackers, Inclosers of Commons,
Decayers of Tillage, and Depopulatours, which rauenously eat up the poor like
bread; As he is Sathanas, which is, being interpreted, an Adversary, and a
Serpent, he has the atte^dance of Hypocrites, which like Judas, will kiss a
man, and betray him: And like Ioab, embrace and stabbe him; As he is
Beelzebub, which signifies the Master of Flies, he has five sorts of Flies,
that continually swarm about him, making his bosom their hiue; Namely,
Golden-winged Cantharides, which breed upon high Cedars and Olives.

These are the hautie minded, whose eyes are lofty, and their hearts swelling
with pride and ambition; the Pyr^^llides, which fly so long about the flame of
a Candle, that they burn their wings, these are Carnalistes, whose felicity
is dalliance, chambering, and wantonness: the fiery Pyra^stae, which being
bred, and living in the fire, die presently when it is quenched; these are the
envious and malicious, whose tongues set on fire the course of Nature, and are
set on fire by hell; The blood-sucking Solipungiae, I mean Assassinates,
manslayers, and murderers, whose glory is to embru^ their hands in innocent
blood; And lastly, the Idle drones, which lie upon beds of yourie, and stretch
themselves upon their beds, which fold their arms, and say, yet a little
sleep, as the sluggard does in the Proverbs. Of all these Flies and many
other, Beelzebub is master: so that if whole mankind should be surueied, it
would evidently appear that Many are called, but few chosen; because few
follow CHRIST, but many Satan. The second thing blame-worthie in Leah, is
Enuies correspondencie: Genesis 30.1
Rahel envied Leah, because of her fruitfulnes, and her envy she expressed in
the name of her handmaids second son, whom she called Napthali, or
Wrestling; saying, Genesis 20.8
with excellent wrestling have I wrestled with my sister, and have gotten the
upper hand; and Leah envied Rahel because of Jacobs love. This her envy she
manifests, in calling her Hand-maides first son Gad, which is an Army, or
Troop of men; herein Leah answers Rahel in her kind, saying, an Army
comes: which is, as if she should have said, though my sister hops to be
r^ue^ged upon me in having a son, whom she has named Dan, which signifies
Judgment or revenge, and also wrestleth and contendeth with me for
superiority, as appears in the name of Napthali; yet I shall overcome her,
for I have five sons, and an Army of children: Here then is Leahs sin,
she strives with her malicious sister, and pays envy with envy again,
contrary to the rule of godliness, which thus instructs us, Romans 12.21.
Be not overcome of evil; but overcome evil with goodness. In this
infirmity of Leah, we are taught not to be provoked to a corresponde^cie in
envy, by the envy of others; but rather to bless them that curse us, to
pray for them that hate us, and to heap coals upon the heads of the envious,
by rendering good for evil, Gad, an Host of men shall overcome him, but he
shall overcome at the last.

The Chalde Paraphrast expounds these words of Jacob to Gad, thus; A Camp of
Armed men shall come out of the house of Gad, and pass over Jordan, before
their brethren to battle, and with much substance shall they return;
According hereunto, Hier. in hu^c locum.
some do apply this prophecy to the marching of the Gadites, with the rest
of the Tribes against the Canaanites, and their returning back again over
Iordane to their own possessions; but this cannot be: for the Tribe of
Reuben, and the half Tribe of Manasses, went also before their brethren as
well as Gad, according to the covenant that they made with Moses, Numb. 32 17.
promising that they would go armed before the children of Israel, until they
had brought them unto their place. Furthermore, this exposition is disagreeing
to the text, for Jacob prophecieth, that the Gadites should be overthrown,
but in their first exploite against the Canaanites, under the conduct of
Iosuah, they were not overcome, but had prosperous success.

Saint Hierome thus interprets this speech; Gad, a Thief, shall spoil or
pray upon him, but afterwrd he shall pray upon, or spoil the Thief; Hereupon
Caiet. in hu^c locum.
Caietan refers this Prophecy to Iephthe, who was first a Judge. 11.3.
Captain of Robbers, and Idle-fellowes, afterward chosen to be the Judge. 11.6.
General of the Israelites, in their wars against the Ammonites, Judge. 12.4.
and last of all, compelled to fight against the Tribe of Ephraim; To make good
this exposition, by a Thief, in the first part of the prophecy, the king of
Ammon is to be understood, who made war with Israel, especially with the
Tribes of Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh, who dwelt beyond Jordan, from Arnon unto
Iabbok, which Countries were taken from the Ammonites, and given as a portion
to these Tribes, and thereupon war grew betwixt Ammon and Israel; and in
the second part, by the Thief, is meant Iephthe, who was, as I said before, A
Captain of Thieues. There is some appearance of truth in this exposition of
C^ietan, if it were certain that Iephthe was one of the tribe of Gad: but he
is rather thought to have bin one of the tribe of Manasseh, because Gilead was
his father, not Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, but another
of the same name and kindred; Iosu. 12.31.
Also the children of Manasseh had the half of Gilead in their lotte, as the
Gadites had another part.

So then, though Iephthe was a Gileadite, both in respect of his fathers name,
and the country where he was borne: yet it cannot be necessarily concluded,
that he was one of Gads Tribe.

The Patriarch Jacob then in this Prophecy may more truly be thought to aim
at the diverse Conflicts, which the Gadites had with the Hagarenes, with
Iethur, Naphish, and Nedab; whom 1. Chron. 5.20.
at length they overcame, when as they carried from them fifty thousand
Camels, and a great preye of Cattle besides. This also is agreeable to Deuteronomy.
33.20.
Moses his prophecy, comparing him to a Lion, that catches for his preye, the
arm with the head.

Gad, an Host of men shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at the last:
Jacob in this Prophecy deals with Gad, as 2. Reg. 2.20.21.
Elisha did with the waters of Hiericho, into which being bitter, he cast
salt, to make them sweet: for the beginning of his prophecy is Bitter, being
the prediction or foretelling of an overthrow; but the end is Sweet, for it
promises conquest and victory: Both in the Bitterness and Sweetness of this
prophecy be contained excellent points of doctrine, and instruction.

First says Jacob, an H^ste of men shall overcome Gad, etc. The Gadites,
though they were Israelites, members of Gods Commonwealth, and the seed of
Abraham, yet their enemies by the permission of God, laid their hands in their
necks, and overthrew them in battle; And this did God not only suffer, but
also ordain, without whose providence Mat. 10.30.
a Sparrowe falls not to the ground; out of his great and unsearchable
wisdom: namely, to teach both them and us, that Man has no strength in
himself to defend himself; for it is the Lord only that gives the victory.

It is the Lord (says the Psalmist) that breaks the bow, and knappeth the
Spear in sunder, and burns the Chariots with fire. And in another place,
Psalm. 44
I do not trust in my bow, neither can my sword save me, but thou have saved
us from our adversaries, and have put them to confusion that hate us.

Pliny observes, that Plin. lib. 7
Nature has given armor and covering to all other living things, shelles,
crustes, hydes, prickles, hairs, feathers, fleeces, scales: and Chrysostom
adds Talants, Tusks, and Horns. So likewise, Anacreon sings in his Odes;
only Man upon his birthday she casts forth naked, and upon the naked
ground, to weeping and howling.

The reason hereof, is thus given by Chrysostom, God has so disposed of man,
that himself might be his only protection; and that he should not put any
trust or confidence in his own strength, which at the best, is but like a
Reed shaken, and at the worst, a Reed broken with every blast of wind: Upon
this consideration, David thus infers; Psalm. 146
Put not your trust in Princes nor any son of man, for there is no help in
him, his breath departs, and he returns to his earth, then his thoughts
perish.

Here the Psalmist displayeth the feebleness of man, who of himself has
neither power to defend others nor himself; and therefore GOD only must be our
Hope, our Strength, our Shield, and our Bulwark, we must not 2. Kings. 18.
like Senacherib, presume upon our mighty Host, for though his Army was like
a Swarm of Bees, yet it was soon extinct, even as a fire of thorns; we must
not 1. Sam. 17.
like the Philistimes, vaunt of Goliath, for a little Stone out of a sling,
laid him groueling upon the ground, nor must we trust in the courage of our
horse, for a horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man Exodus 15.3.
the Lord, then, is as Moses says, the only Man of war, his name is
Jehovah; he is power of himself, and there is no power but from him.

Secondly, it was by the providence of God, that the Gadites were overcome; for
being a warlike and a valiant people, if they had always been prosperous, and
succesfull in the field against their enemies, they would have been houen and
puffed up with pride, and have ascribed their victory to their own sword and
their own arm, and therefore God to humble their hearts, to make them know
themselves, and to give all the glory to him alone, who is the Lord of hosts,
suffers them to be overcome by an host of men. Prosperity makes men forget
God, but adversity and affliction makes them both acknowledge him, and to
fly unto his throne for succor.

This appears in Saneherib the King of Assiria, 1. Reg. 19.
who because he had conquered Hamath, and Arpad, and Sepharuaim, Hena, and
Iuah, began to insult, not only over the Gods of the heathen, whom he himself
worshipped, but also did lift up his arm against the God of Israel, and
blasphemed him, saying; Who are they among all the Gods of the nations, that
have delivered their land out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver
Jerusalem out of mine hand? thus victory and good success in battle put
this Tyrant in his Ruff, and made him so proud that he cared not for God;
wherefore because he was become like the horse and the mule that has no
understanding, (as the Psalmist says) but must be holden in with bit and
bridle, Esaias. 37.29.
God put his hook into his nostrilles, and his bridle in his lips, and by the
sword of his Angel smote in the Camp of Asshur, a hundredth fourscore, and
five thousand, and afterward slew him in the Temple of Nisroch his God, with
the sword of Adramalech and Sharezer his sons. Thus did almighty God resist
the proud, and humbled the mighty; as for Saneherib, so for every man, he has
his hook and his Bridle; whereby he rules him, even as Iam. 3.4
great ships driven of fierce winds are turned about with a very small
rudder; if the Rich man grow insolent, and brag of his full barnes, saying,
Soul take thy rest: God has a Palmer-worme, a Cankerworme, a Caterpillar, and
a Grasshopper, to devour and eat him up: If the fair daughters of Zion, boast
of their beauty, and gorgeous apparel, he has to abate their arrogancy
Isay. 3.
stink, a rent, baldness, a gyrding of sackcloh, and sun-burning: And if the
Gadites or any else, presume upon their own strength, because they have
obtained some victories against their enemies, an overthrow is his hook, and
his bridle, to bring them back, that they may acknowledge their own
weakness and his power.

Thirdly, God not only suffers, but also ordains, that the Gadites should
be overthrown, to teach both them and us, that we must not only confess our
own weakness, and humbly acknowledge him to be the only giver of victory,
but also by earnest prayer to crave his aid and assistance against our
enemies, Numb. 10.35.
as Moses said, when the host of Israel marched with the Arc before them, Rise
up o Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee
before thee. So must we say, first following the Arc, that is, making God the
captain of our host or army, and secondly, putting our whole trust and
confidence in his protection, without whom, no enemy can be scattered, and no
adversary be put to flight, when Exodus 17.11.
Joshua fought against Amalek, ever as long as Moses held up his hands, Israel
prevailed, but when he let his hand down, Amalek prevailed: so it is in every
skirmish and conflict, where there is a fainting in prayer, there is a failing
in victory, but where prayer is fervent, there the sword is powerful, for the
ear of God is ever open to a just prayer.

Fourthly, The Gadites were overthrown by such as were Gentiles, and the
enemies of God; here it may be demanded why God would use the sword of the
uncircumcised, to strike the seed of Abraham, to whom he had promised that he
would be their God, and they should be his people; it is answered, that God
used the Gentiles in this kind as his instruments, that he might exercise his
children in patience, and in humility, and that by them as the messengers of
vengeance he might destroy such as were stubborn, and stiffnecked, this is
proved by the words of God himself, saying, Leuit. 26.23.24.25.
if you will not be reformed, but walk stubbornely against me, then will I
also walk stubbornely against you, and I will smite you seven times for your
sins, and I will send a sword upon you that shall avenge the quarrel of my
covenant: yet as a father burns his rod when he has chastised his son, so
God ever dealt with the gentiles, as soon as by them being his Rods he had
scourged his own people for their sins, he consumed them with the fire of
his fierce wrath.

Gad an host of men shall overcome him but he shall overcome at the last, in
the former part of this prophecy, Gad is overthrown, but in the later he is
victorious: herein we may see the difference that God makes in his
chastisements: when he overthrows the gentiles, he strikes them with a Rod of
Iron, and bruiseth them in pieces like a potters vessel cutting them off, as
he threatened Obad. 10.
the Edomites for ever; but when the Israelites were overthrown, he stroke
them with a Rod like Numb. 17.8.
Aarons, which budded, and bare ripe almondes, a Rod of gentle correction,
whereby they were not destroyed but humbled, and though he suffered them to be
euil-entreated for a time, and to be overthrown, yet at the last, he delivered
them out of all distress, and gave them victory over their enemies. In Gad
we may behold the estate and condition of the whole Church of Christ, and
particularly of every member thereof, both in regard of his Name, his
overthrow and his Victory.

First, this word Hierom. in tradit. haebraicis in Genes.
Gad does not only signify an Army, or Troup of men, but also a Soldier
gyrt in armor, or harnessed; in the first signification it may be applied very
fitly to the Church of Christ here upon earth, which is called Militant; as in
the Canticles, Cant. 6.3.
Thou art beautiful my love as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
army with banners; and in the second, to every one, that is the son of
Christ's spouse; for such a one is Cant. 3, 7.8.
one of the strong men about Salomons bed, which handle the sword, and are
expert in war, every one having his sword upon his thigh for fear by night,
and both the Mother and her sons, namely the Church and the true members
thereof, are called militant, because they Ephesians. 6.12.
Wrestle against principalities, and powers, and wordly governors, the Princes
of the darkness of this world, and Against spiritual wickednesses, which are
in high places, that is to say, against the devil and his Angels, with whom
the elect have continual warfare, as it appears by the Vision of the battle
betwixt Apo. 12.7.
Michael and the Dragon: So then the life of a Christian is a Warfare upon
earth, as Job says, and therefore every one of us must be a Gad gyrt in
armor, that we may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil; as
Saint Paul exhorts us, saying Ephesians. 6.10.11.
finally my brethren be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, put
on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the assaults
of the devil; the better that we may be prepared for this spiritual combat,
let us consider these four particulars;

First against whom must every Christian Gad fight? It is against Satan the
adversary of mankind and his Angels, who are not as the Sadduces dreamed,
only the affections and Perturbations of the mind, but real substances, for
the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6.12.
that we wrestle not with flesh and blood, from whence our Affections arise,
but with powers and principalities; namely with such creatures as be most
excellent in regard of their substance, and are endewed both with Will and
Understanding, which were created in heaven, and afterward for their sin
cast down from thence, into these lower regions under the moon: and S. Peter,
and S. Jude witness, these Enemies are the more to be feared, because they be
invisible, or not seen of us, for they be spirits, mighty in performance,
bold in adventures, subtle in contriuing plots, expeditious in executing them,
never wearied in taking pains to effect their designs, and purposes: and in a
word, there is nothing wanting in them which can be desired in a Soldier;
besides we are to fight with them in their own kingdom, which is This world,
which makes the war more dangerous; moreover the evil spirits are above,
Ephesians. 6.12.
in the high places, over our heads, which is a great disadvantage unto us, and
lastly, their Leader or Captain is as a 1. Pet. 5.8.
Roaring Lion that goes up and down seeking who^ he may devour; in which
words the Apostle does most lively describe the fierce adversary of mankind;
first he compares him to a Prou. 30.30.
Lion, which is strong amongst beasts, and turns not at the sight of any:
thereby setting before our eyes his great power and strength; Secondly, he
calls him not simply a Lion, but a Roaring Lion, therein showing the Greedy
desire of the devil to destroy man, for he is wondrous fierce and cruel, as it
is in the Revelation of S. John Apo. 12.12.
wo^ to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the devil is come
down unto you, which has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.
Thirdly, he does not only Rore, but also goes up and down, or as it is in
Job, Job. 1.7.
he compasses the earth too and fro, and walks in it; as the Pharisees did
compass sea and land to make a Proselite, so does the devil raunge through
all the corners of the world; he is upon the mountains, and in the low
valleys, in cities, and in villages, in courts and in cottages, as the woman
in the Gospel did, to find her lost groate, so does he sweep every room to
find his preye, whereupon the Apostle adds, that he does not only walk up
and down, but also he Seeks whom he may devour. The devil like Genesis 10.^
Nimrod is a great Hunter, and he pursues us by our sent, and foote-steppes.

Now, if as S. Peter exhorts us, we follow the 1. Pet. 2.21.
steps of Christ, which are Meeknes, humility, mercy, and charity, then
he may hunt us, but he cannot hurt us: But if our foote-steppes smell of
impatience, pride, cruelty, and hatred, the^ are we sure to fall into the
snare of the hu^ter; but this is not all, if only this General and Prince of
Devils, did lie in wait to intrappe our souls, the danger were not so great,
because we should have some truce and intermission of pursuit, for the devil
cannot assault every man at one time, for being a Spirit, he is definitiuely
in a place, wherefore that ma^like Genesis 8.
Noah's dove, may find no rest for the sole of his foot; the devil has his
Lieutenants, who like their master, are Roaring Lions, only they go not up
and down from man to man, too and fro, as he does, but they haunt one man, and
him they seek to devour: these are the Mali-Genij, Evil spirits, that
follow us continually, and attend us from the Cradle to the grave, evermore
enticing and alluring us to sin, as every man that is Elect, has ordinarily
One good Angel, and extraordinarily many, by the assignement of GOD, to guard
and accompany him from his nativity to his death. So of the contrary part,
as many of the Fathers held for trial sake, he has one euill-spirite
ordin^rily, and extraordinarily many by the permission of God. The two
branches of this position grow from these roots; In the Gospel by Saint
Matthewe* Our Savior says, concerning children, Math. 18.10.
See that you despise not one of these little ones* for I say unto you that in
Heaven their Angels always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
Hereby our Savior means nothing else, but that young children, and also when
they be grown men, have their spiritual Tutours, to teach them, to defend
them, and to implore vengeance from God against him that offers them any
injury. So does Chrysostom, Hierome, and Augustine expound this place.

Likewise in the Acts of the Apostles, when Peter being by an Angel delivered
out of prison, came to the house of Marie the mother of John, Acts. 12.
whose surname was Mark, and knocked, a maid came forth named Rhode, to
hearken, who it was that knocked, and when she knew Peter's voice, it is
written, that she opened not the entry door for gladness, but ran in, and
told how Peter stood before the entry; but they said unto her, Thou art
mad: yet she affirmed it constantly, that it was so. Then said they, It is
his Angel.

Here the women spoke according to the opinion of the Hebrews at that time,
which was, that Every man has his good Angel assigned unto him, for
Direction, and Protection. And from the Hebrews, as Iustine and Eusebius
affirm, the Gentiles learned the same Doctrine, as it appears in Menand.
Menander, saying; A spirit stand^th by every one as soon as he is borne,
being the good guide of his life.

Chriso. in Matthew. 18. hom. 60.
Saint Chrysostom says, that All the Saints have their Angels: and Basil. in
Psalm. 33. Concien. 9.
Saint Basile, Every one that believes in the Lord has his good Angel ever
about him, if we drive him not away with our evil works. Of the same opinion
is Hiero. tom. 9. in Mat. ca. 18.
Saint Hierome, whose words are these, Great is the dignity of our souls,
when as every one of them from the nativity, has an Angel appointed unto it,
for the preservation and custody thereof: and of the same mind is S.
Augustine, who thus speaks unto God in his meditations Aug. libr. med. cap.
12.
I esteem it a great benefit, that from my Nativity thou have assigned unto
me an Angel of peace, to k^epe me even unto my end.

I might allege many other testimonies out of the Fathers, but these are
sufficient to show that every one that is Elect, has his good Angel. But the
mai^e doubt is of the contrary part, whether every one has his evil spirit.

Concerning this point, I find no universality in opinion among the Fathers.
Yet it is affirmed, not only by the Gentiles, but also by the Christians.

The Platonists say, that every man has his Evil spirit assigned unto him:
and so likewise does Orig. peri. archon. lib. 3. and in Luc. tom. 2. hom. 2.
Origin in two seu^rall places of his works; Every man says he, has two
Angels; The one is an Angel of Justice, the other of iniquity; If there be
good cogitations in our heart, without doubt, the Angel of the Lord speaks
unto us; but if evil thoughts arise in our mind, then one of the devils
angels speaks unto us.

Of this opinion was Chry. hom. 2. in Mat. ca. 4. hom. 5. Mag. senten. lib. 2.
did. 11.
Chrysostom, and S. Gregory, as he is quoted by the Master of the
sentences. The Scripture tells us, that King 1. Sam. 16.14.
Saul had an Evil spirit, sent of the Lord to vex him; and S. Paul confesses
that he was buffeted by the spirit of Belial: but it cannot be proved directly,
that these did follow them from their birth. Certain it is, that every man is
beset continually with legions of evil spirits. And it is probable, 2. Cor. 12
7.
that as God appoints extraordinarily many good Angels, who are his
ministering spirits, and ordinarily, one to attend and guard us; so he
permits ordinarily one, and extraordinarily many evil spirits daily to
assault us. So that a Man has no time wheren he can be free from the Tempter.
For his life is a daily warfare. As Zach. 3.1
with Iehoshua, so it is with every one of Gods children, even when we stand
before the Angel of the Lord, either preaching or praying, Satan or some of
his angels stands at our right hand to resist us.

Secondly, the Fight that every spiritual Gad, or Soldier, has with the
devil and his angels, is not for a Day, a month, or a year, but all the
days, months, and years of our life, we must combat and skirmish with them,
without any truce or intermission.

That speech in Job mentioned before, where it is said, according to the
Latin translation, Vita hominis est mili^ia super Terram; The life of man is a
warfare upon earth: is by the Septuagint Translated, (Peiraterion.) which is, A
Place of Pyracies, and Temptations, the Greek word does aptly express the
danger to which the life of man lies open. For Satan being both a Pyrate, or
a Thief, and a Te^pter, by his subtle temptations seeks continually to rob
us of eternal life: therefore it concerns our freeholde to resist him
courageously.

When the Jews under Nehemiah repaired the walls of Jerusalem* it is said
that Nehem. 4.17.
They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, and they that
laded, did the work with one hand, and with the other held the sword: And
this they did for fear of Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the Ammonite, who
were their enemies, being ever ready both to work and to fight.

So must the Christian Soldier do, whatsoever his temporal emploiments be;
let him ever have the Sword of Gods Word in his hand, for fear that
spiritual Sanballat, the Devil surprise him at unawares.

We must not think to conquer Satan by delaying and prolonging the fight
from day to day, as Quixtus Fabius did Hannibal, the Carthaginian; Of whom
Ennius thus writes, Vnus homo nobis ^unctando restituit rem, Ennius.
One man by delay our ruins has repaird; No, the case is not alike.

Hanniball was far from his own country, and therefore could not be
speedily supplied with victuals, men, and munition, the want of which, was the
cause of his overthrow; but the Devil is in his own Dominion: Ephesians. 2.2,
for he is the Prince of this world, that rules in the Air, and works in
the children of disobedience; wherefore in us rest or delay breeds danger,
because it weakens our own forces, and strengthens him.

Therefore we must ever stand upon our guard; as the Apostle counsels us,
saying Ephesians. 6.14
Stand therefore, and your loins gird about with verity. We must never lay
aside the H^lmet of Salvation, nor the Breast Plate of Righteousness, nor the
Shield of Faith, nor the Sword of the Spirit: but Pet. ^.8.
Watch and be sober continually, least our Adversaries find us, either
disarmed, or sleeping; 2. Sam. ^.7
Remember Ishboseth the son of Saul, he was slain by two captains Baanah
and Rechab, while he slept on a bed at noone; and Sampson was spoiled of his
long hair wherein lay his strength, while he slept on Judge. 16.^9.
Delilahs knee; even so shall we be served if we sleep at noonetide, or be
bewitched by this harlot our own flesh to continue in sin securely,
therefore it behooves us while we have light, to walk in the light for fear
the rebellious spirits of darkness murder us sleeping, and to beware of the
devils stumbling block our own Carnal desire, least it clippe our locks,
and deprive us of all spiritual strength, thereby disabling us to withstand
the furious assaults of our enemies.

Thirdly, there be two causes of our fighting, the first is, the Glory of our
God, the second is our own salvation, for the devil is an adversary both to
God and man, and his chiefest study is to rob God of his honor, and to
deprive man of aeternall life; this his attempt appears in his first conflict
with our Grandparents in paradise, where persuading Heuah to eat of the
forbidden fruit; he first begins to condemn God of Genesis 3.4.
falsehood; for whereas God has said* Genesis 2.16.17.
Thou shall eat freely of every tree of the garden, but of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die the death; he tells her a contrary tale, saying,
ye shall not die at all; but God does know that when ye shall eat thereof,
your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil; in
this practice with Heuah, we may see his malice bent even against his
creator, in that he contradicts his commandment, and therein like a Rebel
strives to spoil him of his honor; and secondly with the glorious, and
golden promise of a dietie, included in these words, ye shall be as Gods, he
traineth them to disobedience, knowing assuredly, that if they did eat the
fruit, though pleasant to the eye, and good for meat, would be their bane;
thus with one blow he strikes both God and man, God in regard of his glory,
and man in respect of his life, and therefore our Savior calls him Ioh. 8.44.
a Liar and a murderer from the beginning; a Liar because he ever oppugneth
the Truth of God, and a Murderer, because he is delighted with the ruin and
destruction of man; if then we have care of Gods glory and our own
salvation, we must ever be at open d^fiance with Satan; as Iehu answered the
King of ^^reel, who said unto him, Is it peace Iehu? so must we answer the
devil, who oftentimes offers us fair conditions of peace, that by security
he may betray us; Iehu his answer was this, 2. Reg. 9.22.
what peace? whiles the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel, and her witchcrafts
are yet in great number? so ought we to say to the devil, whiles by spiritual
whoredom and fornication which is Idolatry thou robbest God of his honor,
and by innumerable witchcrafts or temptations make havoc of the souls of
men, we will have no peace with thee, this ought to be the resolution of a
Christian Soldier; for as there is no fellowship betwixt light and darkness,
God and Mammon, Christ and Belial, so there must be no amity, or truce betwixt
the champions of God and the spirits of darkness.

Gad an host of men shall overcome him, etc: though the Gadites were a warlike
and stout people, yet they were overcome; and this (as I said before) fell out
by the ordinance of God, first to teach them and us, that a man has no
strength in himself to defend himself; secondly to humble them and make them
know themselves, and thirdly, to move them to crave by prayer Gods assistance
and aid, as it was with the Gadites, so is it with every Christian Soldier;
there is not any so strong, Genesis 9.21.
be it Noah a preacher of righteousness, Exodus 37.4.
or Aaron the anointed of the Lord, 2. Sam. 11 ^.
or David a man after Gods own heart, or Luc. 22.57.
Peter the Apostle of Christ Jesus, but a mote may be found in his eye, either
the mote of drunkenness, or of Idolatry, or adultery and murder or
apostacy; none then, when as even the most righteous adorned with epithetons
of grace are frail, can presume of his own strength, wherefore as the Prophet
Hieremiah said of the noblemen of Zion, Lam. 4.2.
The noblemen of Zion comparable unto fine gold how are they esteemed as
earthen pitchers? So may I say of the children of men; in our creation, we
were golden vessels, and vessels of honor for we were made after the Genesis 1.27.
image of God himself; but by the transgression of our first parents and the
infection of original sin, we are become earthen Pitchers, brittle, and
dishonorable vessels, soon cracked, and broken in pieces by Satan, even like
the work of the hands of the potter; the spirit of God exhorts us to stand to
it and sight manfully, saying, Ephesians. 6.14.
stand therefore; but who is so strong that can say, I will stand; oh no; that
freedom of will which was in Adam before his fall, is quite extinct and buried
in us; before we be regenerate; for, as the Apostle says 1. Cor. 2 14.
The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned; in these words the Apostle by a Natural man, understands him that
is estranged from Christ, being guided by his own reason, and left to the
powers of his corrupt nature; the proper guise of such a one, is not only Not
to understand the things of the spirit of God, but also Not to be able to
perceive them; for there is in him a natural impotencie and weakness toward
God, and all good things; as then the strongest man is but as chafe before the
wind in respect of bodily strength, so likewise in regard of spiritual power
and ability Ioh. 6.44.
No man can come unto Christ unless the father draw him; Ioh. ^5.5.
without Christ we can do nothing, Phil. 2.13.
it is God that works in us both the will, and the deed; Ierem. 0.23.
for the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk and to
direct his steps. Aug. de lib. arbit.
God is the author of merit, (says Augustine) who applies the will to the
work, and the work to the will: seeing then that the natural man wants
freedom of will in the choice of that which is good, it cannot otherwise be
but he must needs be overcome, and be made the bond-slaue of Satan, and the
servant of sin; But our Savior says Ioh. 8.36.
if the son shall make you free, then are you free indeed; be like then
whosoever is regenerate, has freedom of will, being redeemed by grace both
from the thraldom of the devil and sin; and consequently, he Overcomes,
and is not overcome.

I answer, granting indeed, that after a man is regenerate, and borne anew of
the water and the spirit, he has some freedom of will. because in the new
birth his will being instructed by the holy spirit, does willingly consent to
Gods will, and works with God for the attainement of salvation; this is
proved out of S. Paul's words to the Philippians, saying, Philip. 2.12.
Work your salvation with fear and trembling: but this freedom in this life
is not perfect, if it were, as it shall be in the life to come, when the whole
Image of God shall be renewed in man; then should our reason be ever sound, our
affections staid and settled, and our will most just; but we find the
contrary, for there is civil war in our selves, the flesh rebels, and
fightes against the spirit, and we are daily overcome by the temptations of
the devil, it was Saint Paul's case, and it is ours; who says, Romans
7.1^.19.2^.21.22.23.
for I know that in me, that is in my fl^^h, dwells no good thing, for to
will is present with me, but I find no m^anes to perform that which is good,
for I do not the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not*
that do^^; now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me, I find then by the law that when I would do good,
evil is present with me; for I delight in the law of God concerning the inward
man: but I see another law i^ my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members;
hence we may learn our weakness; and in S. Paul, as in a looking glass,
behold our imperfections. No man is so just, but he is forced by the rage of
concupiscence or lust, to be the captive of sin* sometimes, yet here is our
comfort, that nothing done by infirmity of concupiscence, without consent of
the inward man, can make the regenerate man guilty before God, because the
grace of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, does discharge and quitte him in Gods sight,
without which he were a miserable and an unhappy man: As the Apostle
confesses of himself, saying, Romans 7.24
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Secondly, as the Gadites were overthrown by an Host of men, so the children
of God are often foiled and overcome by the euill-spirites, the enemies of our
salvation; and this falls out by the ordinance of GOD, to humble Man, and to
make him confess his own unworthiness. If a man should never fall before his
spiritual enemies, he would presume that his perseverance in Righteousness,
grew from his own inhaerent Justice; And thereupon, like the Angel of the
church of Laodicea, boast Apo. 3.17
that he was rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing. And
therefore GOD in his great Wisdom, permits the Devil oftentimes to get
the vpper-hand, and to overcome his Children, that by this means in feeling
their own weakness, they may be brought to humility, and that he in raising
them up again, may declare his powerful grace and mercy; As then it was said
of the Angel of Laodicea, by CHRIST, Thou art wretched and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked.

So it may be said of all Mankind; For there is no man, so happy in Grace,
so rich in the spirit, so quicke-sighted in understanding, and so clothed
with the rayments of Righteousness, but that he had need to Buy Gold of
GOD, tried by the Fire, that he may be made Rich, and white Raymentes, that
he may be clothed, and Eye-salue, that he may see. It was a confident
protestation of Peter saying unto Christ Mat. 26.33.34.
Though all men should be offended by thee, yet will I never be offended; but
yet the sequel proved the words of Christ to be true, who replied thus,
Verily I say unto thee, that this night before the cock crow, thou shall deny
me thrice, Mat. 26.75.
for he denied our Savior with swearing and cursing 3. times, heaping sin upon
sin: and drawing iniquity with cart-ropes; thus did God for a time suffer
him to be overcome of Satan, to humble him, so that afterward he should not
presume upon his own strength, but acknowledge his weakness, and attribute the
gift of Perseverance to Gods grace alone; As then the Apostle said, so say I,
let him that stands, take heed least he fall; beware of presumption, though
we be now the children of God, yet we know not what we shall be.

If we resist Satan, and vanquish him to day, yet let us not like the proud
Pharisi^, say within our selves, we are not like unto other men, but more holy,
and more righteous; for if we do, the devil and his host shall overcome us
to morrow, that we may be humbled: God rejects the proud, and gives grace to
the humble; If then we be lowly in our own eyes, God will strengthen us with
his grace, and thereby make us able to withstand the adversary: but if we
justify our selves like insolent hypocrites, and trust in our inherent
righteousness, he will check our hau^ie hearts, by suffering the Tempter to
overcome us.

Thirdly, as God did not only suffer, but also ordain, that the Gadites
should be overthrown, to teach them by prayer to crave his help against their
adversaries, and not to rely upon their own strength; So it is his will and
pleasure in our spiritual skirmishes, to permit Satan to overcome us, that
groaning under his hellish yoke, and the burden of sin, we might by the
consideration of our own infirmities, be moved to fly only unto him for
succor, by humble and devout prayer. For it is not sufficient for a spiritual
Soldier to be arme^ with the breast plate of Righteousness, the Shield of
Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, but he must
Ephesians. 6.18.
pray always, with all manner prayer, and supplication in the Spirit, and
watch thereunto, with all Perseverance.

God permits the devil to go up and down, and to compass the earth;
therefore it concerns us to watch, and he Roares continually, as a Lion greedy
of his pray; and therefore it behooves us to pray, that GOD would assist us
with his Grace, and break the jawe-bone of this fierce Lion, and his cruel
whelps; Fervent prayer is the strongest and most powerful Exorcisme, that can
be used to give Satan the repulse.

It is reported by the Herbalists, Re^b. Dod^^.
that the perfume made of the root of Lysimachion, will drive Scorpions and
Serpents out of a house: and we read in the book of Tobit, Tobit. 8.3.
that Tobias with the perfume made of the heart and liver of a Fish, by the
direction of the Angel Raphael, did put to flight the evil spirit which loved
Sara the daughter of Raguel, and killed those which came to her; Such like is
devout prayer; It is that Exodus 30.34.
sweet perfume burnt upon the golden Altar, wherewith GOD is delighted, and
Satan affrighted: but yet the smell of it is neither pleasing to God, nor of
any virtue to repel the devil, unless it be burnt upon the golden Altar.

Which Altar of pure gold is Apo. 8.3.
CHRIST JESUS, in whose Name alone we must pray, because he is our only
Mediator and Advocate; If then in his Name, we implore assistance and aid,
against our spiritual enemies. Mat. 7.7
it shall be given us: for so has our blessed Savior promised; saying, Ioh.
16.23.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you.

Lastly, though Gad was subdued for a Time, yet he overcame at the last; So
the Church of GOD, and every member thereof, which fights under the banner of
CHRIST, though they be liable to the fiery darts of Satan for a little
while, that thereby God may bring them to the knowledge of him, and his great
power, to humility, and to prayer, yet they shall triumph and have the
victory in the end, as our Savior says to his Apostles, Ioh. 16.33
In the world ye shall have trouble, but be of good comfort, I have overcome
the world. And in another place he says, The Prince of this world shall be
cast forth.

So then, though the life of a Christian be a Warfare upon earth, and though
Apoc. 12.7.
the Dragon and his angels fight against Michaell and his Angels, that is to
say, against Christ the Iosu. 5.14
Captain of Gods Host, and his Soldiers, yet they shall not prevail, but
being overcome, be cast out, even into the earth, or the bottomless pit.
The consideraton hereof binds us to give thanks unto GGD, which gives us 1,
Cor. 13.57.
victory, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

The reason then of our victory is, because athan and all the evil spirits
are the captives of Christ, so that they can do nothing against Man, but by
permission; as appears by diverse places in the word of God. For it is
written in the book of Genesis, that Genesis 3.15
God has put enmity betwixt the Serpent and Man; insomuch as the serpent
shall seek to bruise or wound the heel of man: but the man shall break his
head. These words do specially belong to Christ, the seed of the woman, who
by his death and Passion, has Romans 1^ 20.
trodden Satan under his feet: Col. 2, 15
and has spoiled powers, and principalities, and has made a show of them
openly, and has triu^phed over the^ in the same Cross: but generally they are
to be applied to every Christian Gad or Soldier, who by the power of his
Redeemer, vanquisheth at the last, his Adversary the devil, and breaks the
head of the old Serpent. The like may be showed out of the prophecy of Isaiah,
who says, Isa. 27.1.
In that day the Lord with a sore, and great, and mighty sword, shall visit
Leui^than, that piercing Serpent, even Leuiathan that crooked serpent, and he
shall slaye the Dragon that is in the Sea; Here the devil is compared to
Leuiathan, or the Whale, in regard of his great strength, and his attributes
be Piercing, and Crooked. He is called a piercing Serpent, because his
kingdom stretches far and near, and a Crooked Serpent, because he is full
of guile and subtlety; And yet Job. 41.
Though he be so fierce, that none dare stir him up, though his Teeth be
fearful, round about, though the majesty of his scales be like strong
shieldes, and are sure sealed, so that no wind can come between them; though
his neisings make the light to shine, and his eyes be like the eyelids of the
morning, though out his mouth go lamps and sparks of fire leap out; though
out of his nostrils comes a smoke, as out of a boiling pot or caldron; though
his heart be as hard as the nether millstone, and though the mighty be affraide
of his majesty, and he cares neither for sword, spear, dart, nor habergeon,
being King over all the children of pride, yet God draws out this monstrous
beast with an hook cast into his nose, and pierces his jaws with an angle,
and with his sharp and mighty sword he visites him, this Sword, this hook,
this angle, is Christ, the wisdom, and power of God, who by his death, has
put to death, The dragon that is in the sea: Origin. Hom. 8. in Iosu.
The Cross of Christ then, as S Origin says, is a Victorious Chariot, in the
upper part whereof Christ sits as a triumphant Conqueror, and in the lower
part of it, the devil is drawn as a captive, and is made an open spectacle of
ignominy and reproach: hence it comes to pass, that the devil and his angels
by sufferance may assault, wound, and overthrow the elect for a time, even as
the Gadites being Israelites, and of the seed of Abraham were overcome by an
host of men, but they do never utterly vanquish the children of God, because
they do ever rise up again in arms, and at the last by the help and grace
of Christ, triumph over Satan and his whole army: for Christ as he
professes, has such care over them, that he suffers none of them to perish
or to be taken out of his hand. And the Apostle says; That God is faithful,
and will not suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able to bear; but
it is not so with Reprobates and Castawaies, for the devil deals with them
as Nabuchadnezzar did with Zedekiah the King of Judah, 2. Reg. 25.7.
who put out his eyes, and bound him in chains and carried him to Babel, even
so Satan, who works powerfully and victoriously in the children of
disobedience, when he has subdued the wicked and s^eked the city of their
souls, puts out their eyes, so that they shall have no understanding of
God; and binds them in Chain^s, so that they cannot turn to goodness by
repentance, and at the last carries them along with him to Babel, the land of
confusion and death aeternall: as then after the death of Goliath, and the
overthrow of the Philistims the women of Israel came dancing with timbrels to
meet Saul and David, and sang by course, 1. Sam. 18.7.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand, so may all we the
elect of God dance for joy, that Christ the son of David has slain the
mighty Giant, that reviled the host of the living God, thereby giving us
victory over powers and principalities, which are in the high places; and to
our dance we may join this song; 1. Cor. 13.55.
O death where is thy victory, o hell where is thy sting?

THE NINTH SERMON OF ASHER.
GENES. 49.20. Concerning Asher, his bread shall be fat, and he shall give
pleasures for a King.


ASher was the second son of Jacob by Zilpah Leahs handmaid, and afterward
his concubine; whose name signifies Blessedness; and it was given him by
Leah, whose adopted son he was, because he was borne upon her knees, and
therefore upon his birth she said, Gen 30.13.
A^ Blessed am I for the daughters will bless me; and she called his name
Asher; which name is the discouerer of Leahs passions; ^^rst she said, Ah I am
blessed; because her sister had not, Genesis 30.8.
as she her self had said upon the birth of Naphtali gotten the upper hand; so
the^ in these words, she does not only rejoice, but also insult over her
Sister; to whom barrenness was a great affliction; though Rahel did ill, in
calling the two sons of her handmaid Bilhah, the one of them Genesis 30.6.
Dan, which signifies Judgment, as though God had given sentence on her side;
and the other Genesis 30.8.
Naphtali; which is wrestling, as though by excellent wrestlings she had
overcome her sister in fruitfulness; yet Leah, who indeed was more blessed
with children then she, having at that time four sons from her own womb,
and two from Zilpahs, should not by Insultation have vexed her that was grieved
at the heart, but rather have given the looser leave to speak, and winckt at
her aemulation, Insultation is the daughter of Pride, and it seems that Leah
was grown proud with prosperity, and therefore she insultes saying, Ah I am
blessed, for the daughter will bless me; as if she should have said, every one
will proclaim me to be happy, but my sister miserable; it is the nature of
man, Hos. 12.1.
like Ephraim to be fed with wind, and to follow after the east wind; for
prosperity makes him arrogant, and insolent; ^^d yet the chiefest prosperity
of this world is but wind, and to become proud upon it, and to insult, is but
to follow the east wind, which of all the rest is most hurtful and dangerous,
being cold and moist; The second reason, why Leah utters this passionate
speech; Ah I am blessed, and thereupon calls Zilpahs son, being hers by
adoption, Asher is the Multiplication of Children, which in those days was
accounted a great Blessedness, because among the daughters of Abraham
Barrenness was reproachful: first, because it seems to be repugnant to that
precept, wherein God commanded, both immediately after the making of the
world, and also after the flood, saying, Genesis 1.28. and 9.1.
Increase and multiply: secondly, because they which be barren, attain not
unto that blessing of God which he promised unto Abraham; to wit, that his Genesis
22.1^.
seed should be as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the sea: thirdly,
they which wanted children, seemed after a sort to be hated of God, in that he
would not have their generation or stock to be spread any further abroad:
fourthly, among the Jews, (as some have thought, barrenness was infamous,
because Messiah should proceed from their posterity, and therefore every one
endeavored to have many children, that out of his progeny Messiah might one
day be borne: not only amongst the people of God, it was a reproachful thing
for a woman to be barren, but also amongst the gentiles. The Romans that had
begotten many children were excused by the civil law, both from charge, and
public offices, and three was sufficient for an excuse amongst them; but the
Italians admitted of four, and the provinces of five, so that they were not
adopted, nor yet taken of the enemies, nor died out of the wars. Howbeit this
number of children excused the parents only from personal offices, but not
from offices of inheritance, but digest, de iure immunitatis leg. semper
pertinax.
sixteen children excused from both kinds of offices, afterward, twelve did
excuse. Furthermore, the bearing of children has always been esteemed an
honorable thing amongst all Nations, as may appear in the history of the
Lacedemonian, who being a Nobleman, and unmarried, as he passed by the way,
Cod. de decurionibus leg. siquid decurio.
saw a man that did not rise up to give him honor, whom he asked why he did
so; to who^ the young man answered, because thou have left none unto the
commonweal, that may rise up unto me when I am old. Children in the opinion
of the Gentiles, were a furthera^ce to felicity: but yet this furtherance is
conditional: namely, if they be well instructed, and virtuously brought up:
For otherwise they be rotten impostumes, and cankers, as Octauius Augustus
spoke of his daughter and niece, when they were unchaste. Also Tiberius
sorrowed, that he did nourish in his house for the people of Rome, Caligula, a
most cruel Snake. Thus in this name Asher, which is, being interpreted,
blessedness, we may observe the causes of Leahs rejoicing: the first whereof was
evil, for it includes an insultation; the 2. was good, for it contains her
exultation, for the increase of Gods family.

Concerning Asher, his bread shall be fat, and he shall give pleasures for a
king: In these words spoken to Asher, Jacob prophecieth of the ple^tifullnes,
and pleasures, which the Asherites should enjoy in the land of promise. First,
their plentifulnes is set down in these words, his bread shall be fat, which
is to be understood, of the abundance of oil and corn, which the land of
Asher did yield. As it was said of Judah Genesis 49.11.
he shall wash his garments in wine, and his cloak in the blood of grapes; and
as Job said of himself, Job. 29.6.
I washed my paths with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil. So
does Mos. speak of Asher Deuteronomy. 33.24.
saying, he shall dip his foot in oil: In these texts of scripture, by
washing of the cloak, the paths, and the feet, in wine, butter, and oil, is
meant the ple^tifulnes, and great store of wine, oil and butter, which Judah,
Job, and Asher had. Joseph. lib 4. de bell. Iud.
Josephus reports that the inahbitants of Giscala, a city within the lot and
portion of Asher, were all tillers of the ground, and that their chiefest
wealth consisted in Corn and oil. This is a plain testimony, that the land
of Asher was both a great Corne-countrey, in that they had Bread, and an
oyle-cou^try, because their Bread was fat. It is a singular blessing to dwell
in such a country as that, which by the providence of God, became Ashers
portion; for as famine is one of the arrows of Gods vengeance, so of the
contrary part, fulness of Bread, is a sign of his favor. As no man can so well
judge of the happiness of health, as he that has bin long sick, so the great
blessing of plentiefulnes is best declared in the consideration of want and
penury. The inhabitants of Thule, or Island, have no corn growing, and
therefore in stead thereof, they make bread of dried fish, as Munster reports.
The Scythians and Tartarians feed upon horseflesh, and mares milk: and the
Troglodites, upon snakes and serpents, for want of better food, as Pomponius
Mela writes: How much more happy then were the Asherites, that had both Bread
and Oil? namely, fat bread to satisfy them?

The kingly prophet David affirms, that GOD, for the love that he bears
unto his Servants, Psalm. 107.33.34.35.36.37.
changes the order of nature for their commodity. This his Assertion may be
drawn out of the Psalm, where he says, He turned the floods into a
Wilderness, and the springs of water into dryness: and a fruitful land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Again, He turns
the Wilderness into pooles of water, and the dry land into water-springs, and
there he places the hungry, and they build a city to dwell in, and sow
the fields, and plant vineyards, which bring forth fruitful increase.

Here the Prophet shows unto us two things; First, who is the author both of
Fertility and Barrenness of soil: Namely GOD, whose powerful hand alone,
alters the course of nature; for if he but say (Fiat) let there be ple^tie,
or let there be want, both heaven and earth obey him, even as the handmaid
looks unto the eyes of her Mistress. And secondly, what is the impulsive
cause, whereby God is provoked to lay the yoke of misery or penury upon the
neck of man; Namely, Wickedness: God sets before our eyes a Blessing, and a
Cursing; the one, the stipend of righteousness; the other, the reward of
disobedience. Deuteronomy. 7.12.13.
If ye hearken (says Moses,) unto these Laws, and do them, then the LORD
thy GOD shall keep with thee the Covenant, and the mercy, which he swear unto
thy Fathers: and he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee, he
will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy Land, thy Corn,
and thy Wine, and thine Oil, and the increase of thy Kyne, and the flocks of
thy Sheep in the Land, which he swear unto thy Fathers to give thee. Deuteronomy.
28.15.16.17.
But if thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and do all
his Commandments and Ordinances, which I command this day, then all these
Curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the
Town, and cursed in the field, cursed shall thy Basket be and thy Dough,
cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the
increase of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, etc. As God dealt with the
Israelites, so he does with us; if we walk before him, with upright hearts
like Ashers, our Bread shall be fat; But if we be stubborn and stiff-necked,
and go on still in our wickedness, etc. he will strike our Corne-fields, with
Blasting, and Mildewe, and they shall pursue us till we perish; He will make
our land, which like Chanaan flows with milk and honey, Barren; he will send
amongst us cleanness of Teeth, the tongue of the sucking child shall cleave
unto the roof of his mouth: For first, the young children shall ask bread,
and no man shall break it unto them: they that feed delicately shall perish in
the streets, and they that were brought up in scarlet, shall embrace the dung:
Our visages with famine, shall grow blacker then a coal: Our skin shall
cleave to our bones, and wither like a stock.

What is the cause that our land comparable to the land of Asher for fat
Bread, in former times, is now become as a Wilderness, for scarcity and want?
Why do we sow much, and reap so little? and why do the Powers of heaven
fight against us? If we do but as Moses did, Exo. 4.6
put our hands into our bosoms, and take them out again, behold, they will
be as leaprous as snow; Our Sins alas, which like a leaprosie cleave unto
us, have brought these punishments upon our heads; Spots.
from the head to the sole of the foot, we are full, both of white and black
spots, and like the Genesis ^0.32.
sheep, which were Jacobs wages, we are become party-colored, in regard of
the variety of our wickedness. For we have not used this Blessing of fat-bread,
to the glory of God, and the good of his poor members; No, no, the inuectiue
speech of the Prophet Isaiah, against the princes of Judah, may well be
applied to our mighty and rich men: Isai. 1.23
They are all rebellious, and companions of Thieues; and for their Thieuerie,
our Fatnes of bread is turned into scarcetie; First, they are Thieues unto GOD,
for they devour holy things, and seek after vows, that is, they Rob his
Church of Tithes, prete^ding they were given to superstitious uses; and
therefore may lawfully be taken away from the Church: but are not
impropriatio^s sacrilege? considering GOD himself says Leu. 27.30.
All the Tithes of the land, both of the Seed, and of the ground, and of the
fruit, of the Trees, is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord: and by the mouth
of the prophet he says, Bring my Tithes into my Barnes, and see if you shall
not prosper; The want of paying Tithes then, which is a robbing of God, is the
first cause, why the Seed rotteth under the clods, why the garners are
destroyed, why the barnes are broken down, and why the corn withers. The 2.
is, the oppression of the poor and needy, by such as Amos. 6.3.4.5.6.
put far away the evil day, and approach to the seat of iniquity, which lie
upon beds of yuorie, and stretch themselves upon their beds, and eat the la^bs
of the flock, and the calves out of the stall, which sing to the sound of the
violl, and invent to themselves instruments of music like David, which drink
wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chiefest ointments, but are
never sorry for the affliction of Joseph: the wickedness and cruelty of these
tyrants, is the 2. cause that the land tre^bles, and every one mourns. For so
says the prophet Amos Amos. 8.4.5.6.7.8.
hear this, o ye that swallow up the poor that ye may make the needy of the
land to fail, saying, when will the new month be gone, that we may sell
corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephah small,
and the shekell great, and falsify the weightes by deceit, that we may buy
the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes, yea and sell the refuse of the
wheat, the Lord has sworn by thy excellency of Jacob, surely I will never
forget any of their works, shall not the land tremble for this? yes; Behold
the days come, says the Lord, that I will send a famine in the land, not a
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of the hearing of the word of the
Lord, which is the food of the soul, this is the true fat bread, that comes
down from heaven, that bread of life dipped in the oil of gladness, which
makes both the heart and countenance cheerful, and of this bread are the
Israelites deprived, because of their sacrilege, and oppression.

Secondly, the Pleasures of the Asherites are expressed in these words, And he
shall give pleasures for a King; or he Chal. paraph. Pag-m^.
shall enjoy the delights of Kings, the meaning of both which readings is this;
the Land of Asher shall bring forth such delicate fruits, that even Kings
shall desire to eat of them, and be much delighted with them; this is the
ordinary paraphrase of this speech, but yet it does not truly declare the
meaning of the word Madam in the original, which though it be sometimes used
for to signify delights, and pleasures; yet more properly it signifies a
Thing, that breeds or procures Pleasure, and delight; and so I think is it
here to be taken; now, what those things be, Moses declares, in his Blessing
of Asher, of whom he thus said, Asher shall be blessed with children, Deuteronomy.
33.24.25.
he shall be acceptable unto his brethren, and shall dip his foot in oil; thy
shoes shall be iron and brass, and thy strength shall continue as long as
thou live: here Moses being the Herald of God promises five things to the
children of Asher, which even the Kings of the earth do desire and wish for.
The first is to be blessed with Children, and to have store of them, which
according to the Philosophers is a furtherance to felicity, and the Psalmist
confirms the same, saying, Psalm. 127.
Behold, children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb
his reward, as are the arrows in the hand of the strong man, so are the
children of youth, blessed is the man that has his quiuerfull of them, for
they shall not be ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate. The
second is to be acceptable unto his brethren, that is to say, to be beloved of
the rest of the Tribes; not because the daughters of Asher did excel the rest
of the Israelitish women in beauty, as Pererius thinks, but because all his
brethren should be benefited by the plentiful and pleasant commodities of his
country; Senec. de beneficijs.
It is better to give, then to receive a benefit, says Seneca; Asher then is
happy in this, that the Lot or inheritance of his posterity should fall in so
good a ground, as that he may be enabled to give bountifully, and to distribute
amongst such as want, the increase of his land, for which kindness he should
be requited with love and friendship, which according to Aristotle is one of
the proppes of man's felicity.

Thirdly says Moses, he shall dip his foot in oil, whereof he shall have
such abundance, as he may not only annoint his head, but also his feet
therewith, Psalm. 140.
the use of ointments made of oil was very frequent amongst the Kings and
Princes of the East, whereas then it is said, that Asher shall dip his feet in
oil, the meaning of Moses is, that the Asherites, like mighty potentates,
should feel the want of nothing, but have all things according to their hearts
desire.

Fourthly, his shoes must be iron and brass: hereby is signified the mines of
brass and Iron, which were in the land of Asher, of which there was store, and
hereupon one of the cities of Ashers portion was called Sarepta, because there
these metals were molten, refined, and sold in shoppes; how necessary these
matters are for a commonwealth, we may conjecture easily, if we do but
consider into what streights the Israelites were driven for want of a Smith;
now then if the Artisan be so profitable a member, the metal, wherein he
works, must of force be needful and very commodious; the Asherites then were
happy in their mines of Brass and iron, because thereby they were stored with
vessels for their houses, with instruments for husbandry, and with weapons for
the wars.

Lastly, his strength shall continue as long as he lives. Which words are thus
interpreted by Saint Hierome, As the days of thy youth, so shall be thine
old age; full of strength and ability; as Balaam speaking of the Israelites,
made this wish, Numb. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his: even
so the Kings of the earth, if their desire might be granted, would say, Let us
live the life of Asher, let us be blessed with children, whom we may make
Princes in all lands; Let us be acceptable unto our brethren which are our
subjects, for their love, friendship, and loyalty, are the surest guard; let
us dip our feet in oil, for plenty is the sinewe and strength of royalty;
Let us be shod with brass and iron, for the sword and the mattocke are a
kingdoms bulwarks, and let our strength continue as long as we live, because,
if our arms grow feeble, the hearts of the people will faint, seeing then
that Kings desire these things, therefore they may fitly be called Pleasures,
or Blessings for a King; but it often falls out, that those things which are
given unto us by God for our good, prove to be by our abusing of them
occasions of our falling, so that of blessings they become Curses, and of
pleasures, Corrosiues; As for example;

First it is a singular Blessing for men to dwell in a fertile land, where they
may be fed with fat bread, as the Asherites were; but if this Plentifulnesse
breed in them a forgetfulness of God, as it did in the Sodomites, whose crying
sin sprang from Pride, Ezech. 16.49.
fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness; then it had been fair better
to have dwelt upon the barren mountains, or in a wilderness void of
water-springs: though God give fat bread unto many, yet few there be that make
right use of it; the true use of it, is to preserve our own lives, and to be
beneficial to the poor, according to the direction of the wiseman, saying
Eccl. ^1 1
Cast thy bread upon the waters; that is, be liberal to the poor, and though
it seem to be as a thing ventred on the sea, yet it shall bring thee profit,
for after many days thou shall find it; for as the Apostle says it is a
Sacrifice wherewith God is pleased; and as the Table of Shewbread in the
Tabernacle, was circled or compast about with Exodus 25.24.
a Crown of gold, even so such as keep a Table for the poor, which is holy
unto the Lord, shall be Luc. 6.36.
rewarded, because he that gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord, and
the giver of a cup of cold water in Christ's name shall not loose his reward,
but for one Tabitha, that makes almes-coates for the naked, we shall find
ten Iezabels, that will strippe Naboath, both out of his vineyard, and of his
life; for one David that will give bread and water, and figs and rasons to an
Aegiptian the servant of an Amalekite his enemy, we shall find ten Rich
Gluttons, who will not relieve poor Luzarus with the crummes which fall from
their tables, but rather suffer him to starve for want: so incompassionate are
the fat of kine of Bashan, the wealthy worldlings, who by abusing their
Blessings of fat bread, heap upon their own heads the Curse of God Wealth,
whether it consist in corn, in cattle, in land of inheritance, or in coin,
is called Goods, first because it is the good gift of God, Job. 1.21.
for it is the Lord that gives, and the Lord that takes away; and secondly,
in respect of the end for which it is given, namely, that thereby a man might
be enabled to do good; now then; if we employ these good gifts contrary to
the intention of the giver, either by spending them prodigally upon our
bellies, like Epicures, whose daily language is this; Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall die: or by Idolizing our backs, as many men do, in
imitation of the princes of Judah, who in their apparel, as the Prophet says,
followed after strange fashions, or by maintaining strange women, who like
Horsleaches cry continually, give, give; or by Carding and Dicing, which are
the Canker-wormes of wealth, then the Fat Bread becomes like mouldie Manna,
and Gods Blessing is turned into a curse.

Secondly, it is a great Inheritance that comes from the Lord, for a man to
have many children, and therefore because Asher had many, he is said to be
blessed with children, but this Blessing is conditional, to wit, if they be
so brought up as they may be worthy members in the church, and commonwealth:
Otherwise they be, as I said before, Cankers and Impostures, and more happy is
the barren womb, then she that is mother of many ungracious and ungodly
children.

Therefore, if Parents desire to have them be, as they are called, Blessings,
they must ever be careful to give them good education and bringing up; for
education alters nature, and makes such children, as without it would be like
Branches of the Sicomore, or foolish Fig Tree, to become like Olive branches
round about the table.

The Plut. de instit. puer.
two dogs spoken of by Plutarch, which Lycurgus showed to the Spartanes,
proves this to be true; For these two dogs being both of one litter, were
different in qualities, because there was a difference in their bringing up.
The one was trained up in hunting and pursuing the Game, the other was suffered
to lie by the fire, and to be fed upon the trencher; Wherefore, when Lycurgus
would demonstrate to his Citizens, how necessary good education was for
children, he only showed them these Two Dogs, having set before them a
Quicke-Ha^s, and a Pot of Meat, and letting them both loose, either of them
showed their several delights, for the one ran to the Pot, the other
followed the Hare. So is it with children, if they be pampered, and suffered to
live idly: like the field of the sluggard, they will be ouergrowne with
thorns, briers, and thistles, that is to say, with innumerable vices, which by
custom will be so habituated, that they shall commit sin necessarily: but if
they be stricken upon the sides while they be young, and taught to fear God,
and honor their parents, then will they prove to be good members in Gods
Church, and profitable to the Commonwealth.

Eccl. 22.3.
An evil nurtured son, says the Wiseman, is the dishonor of his father,
and the daughter is least to be esteemed. And in another place he says, Eccl.
16.1.2.3.4.
Desire not the multitude of unprofitable children, neither delight in ungodly
children, though they be ma^ie, except the fear of the Lord be with them,
trust not thou to their life, neither rest upon their multitude: For one that
is just, is better then a thousand such, and better it is to die without
childen, then to leave behind him ungodly children.

Seeing then, that the multitude of children is rather a curse then a blessing,
if they be not trained up in godliness, it concerns parents to have a special
care of their education. They must not be like the forgetful Job.
39.17.18.19.20.
Ostrich, The which as Job says, leaves his eggs in the earth, and makes
them hot in the dust, and forgets that the foot might scatter them* or
that the wild Beast might break them; He shows himself cruel unto his
young ones, as if they were not his, and is without fear, as if he travailed
in vain. For God has deprived him of wisdom, and has given him no part of
understanding.

The children of careless parents be like these Eggs left in the dust, and
the parents themselves like unto the foolish Ostrich; Did the Ostrich sit upon
her Eggs, the foot of the wild beast should not break them, but being
neglected, they are often scattered. So is it with children; if parents would
look to them, and have an eye over them, that wild beast Vice, should not
make a spoil of them, but by their carelessness it comes to pass, that they
are soon corrupted, and soon destroyed.

Thirdly, it is a Happiness, for a man to be acceptable unto his Brethren,
and to be beloved of them, as Asher was. If that this Love and Friendship
proceed from a good cause, and be erected upon a firm ground, otherwise, it is
better to be hated then beloved.

The true root of Friendship and love, is virtue and godliness: To be beloved
then for wisdom, for justice, for integrity, for charity, for humility,
and such like spiritual ornaments of the soul, is a Blessing: but to be
acceptable unto men, as many are, for their prodigality, and riot, is a Curse:
The world loves her own (says Christ) but hates the children of God: Of the
contrary part, Gods children are acceptable unto him, but the children of this
world are hateful in his eyes; To be beloved then of the world is a curse;
because it shows that we are of the world: but to be hated of the world is a
blessing, because it declares us to be the beloved children of God. As then
Asher was acceptable to his brethren the Israeltes, not to the Gentiles; so
must we endeavor, so to be have ourselves, that the Servants of God may be
friendly and loving unto us: As for the wicked, their love is not material, it
is better to be abominable in their eyes then acceptable. Eue^ as 1. Sam. 17 10.
Goliath the giant did defy the host of Israel, and challe^ged any man to
fight with him: such was his hatred against Gods people; so every Philistim,
or child of man, does naturally abhor the sons of God, because there is an
antipathie betwixt vice and virtue, light and darkness, the flesh and the
spirit; These strive evermore together, as Genesis 25 22.
Jacob and Esau, wrestled in Rebeccahs womb, so that there can be no true
friendship or love betwixt them now. It is an empeachment, and a blemish to a
true Israelite, that is the child of God, to be in grace and favor with an
Alien to Strangers, and one that is not of the household of faith.

Such are to be esteemed of, as Goliath was by David, namely, uncircumcised and
unclean persons, we must not regard whether we be acceptable unto them or no;
for they are not our Brethren, but the children of their father the Devil;
Whosoever then desires to be accepted of God, and of such as he the brethren of
Christ (for so are they called, which do the will of our Father which is in
heaven) but must in imitation of David with Goliath, to enter combat, and be
at open defiance, and with all worldly Giants, loathing their love, and
rejecting their friendship.

Of these Giants there be diverse sorts, with whom to hold friendship is a
sin; For we are commanded not to say so much ^. Ioh. 10
as God speed unto them. The first be Anakims, or Chayne-men, to wit, the
bloody Tyrants of the world, who are so wicked and so proud, that they care
not for God, but Hunt the poor, and when they have gotten them into their
Nets, eat them up like bread; The second be the ^^mims, these are
uncontrollable Giants, who with their terrible countenances astonish the
beholders: Tell any of them of the judgments of God, and they will answer,
Who is the Lord, and who is Lord over v^^ such a Giant is that monstrous man
of sin, the pope of Rome, for Dec. can. 32.
if he lead a thousand souls to hell, no man must call him to any account for
it. The third be the Zamzummims, Namely, the wealthy, and the greedy
worldlings, who trusting in their Riches, presume they may commit any sin
whatsoever, because they are countenanced by Mammon. The fourth be the Rephaim,
or Dead men, for so does the word signify, or rather, men of death, because
they be the bane of the people amongst whom they live, and these be Usurers,
who like the Roman soldiers (spoken of by Josephus) make no conscience to
kill the afflicted citizens of Jerusalem, Joseph. de bello Iudaico.
that fly unto the^ for succor, hoping in their bellies being ripped up, to
find some jewels or treasure. The fifth be the Nephilims, or Rushers upon men,
and these are such Judges as the prophet Zephariah speaks against, saying,
Zeph: 3.3
Her Judges are as Wolves in the Evening, which leave not the bones till the
marrowe; men whose hands receive gifts, and who by briberie will be drawn to
condemn the innocent, and let the guilty go free: thus were the Giants of
the old world called in the Scriptures, Hanakim, Emim Zamzummim, Rephaim, and
Nephilim: and so may the wicked generation of this age, be truly termed, for
they do most exactly the one sort pararell the other. I will not say, that the
spirits of darkness, which keep company with women in carnal manner, be
the fathers of these our modern Giants, as Franciscus Georgius and Psellus
thought, that the Giants before the flood were forgotten, neither that the
Incubi were their fathers, as Paulus Burgensis surmiseth; for these are but
conjectures, not warranted by Scripture; but sure I am, They are not our
Brethren: for they do the works of their spiritual father the devil; and
therefore to be accepted of them, is to be rejected of God, for it is a sin
either to give unto them, or to receive from them the right hand of fellowship.

Fourthly, it is a happiness from heaven for a man to dippe his foot in oil,
and to have plenty of all things, but if, as it often falls out, abundance
cause greediness; and that the more a man has the more he desires, then it is
better to dip the foot in water, then in oil; and to feel scarcity, then to
have superfluity; for if we be both Rich and Covetous; the^ Riches be snares
whereby Satan entangleth our souls, they be like Bunches upon the back of a
Camel; they hinder us, that we cannot enter in at the straight and narrow way
of heaven, which is compared to the eye of a needle; so says our Savior Mark.
10.25.
it is as hard for a rich man to enter into the knigdome of heaven as for a
Camel to go through the eye of a needle; he does not mean al Rich men, for
Abraham was rich, and so was Job, yet both righteous; but he points only at
such as make wealth their felicity, and therefore hunger and thirst after it:
as long garments (says Socrates) are hindrances to them that walk, so Riches
are impediments to the souls of men; the reason is, because ordinarily they
increase covetousness, eue^ as they themselves increase; for this cause the
spirit of God says, If riches increase, set not thy heart upon them; but they
must be used like Wives, which is to have them as though we had them not:
Aristophanes in his comedy brings in Plutus, (who^ the poets make the God of
Riches) Blind, and says that he is Aristo. in plut.
Insatiable: and Horace compares the Hor. lib. 2. carm. od. 2.
rich man to one that is sick of the Drepsie, who the more he drinks, the
more he calls for drink; and the wiseman likens him to the Prou. 30.15.
Grave, and the barren womb which will never say, It is enough. It is a curse
for a man after this manner to have his feet dipped in Oil, and to abound in
riches; so it may appear to be, out of the words of the Apostle, saying; Iam.
5.1.2.3.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and houle for your miseries that shall come
upon you, your riches are corrupt; and your garments motheaten, your gold, and
silver is cankred, and the r^st of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh, as if it were fire, oil being put in the lamp causes
the flame to burn, so riches being ill used* set the soul on fire, therefore
if we look that our oil shall be a blessing unto us, we must not pour it
into the lamp, that is to say, we must not like the griping Cormorant in the
Gospel, lay up our corn in our barnes, and our oil in our storehouses; and
say Luc. 12.20.
Soul take thy rest; for thou have treasure heaped up for many days; but we
must do as the woman that was a sinner, did with her ointment; Luc. 7.38.
annoint Christ's feet with our oil, and do good works with our wealth; the
feet of Christ be first, such men as bring good tidings of Salvation, or the
ministers of the Gospel, and secondly his poor afflicted members; these are
the feet of Christ, whom the rich man ought to annoint with his oil; and
precious ointments; In the making of the oil of the holy ointment of the
tabernacle, Moses by the appointment of God did put unto Exodus 30.24.24.
en^ Hi^ of oil olive, four principal Spices; pure Myrrh, sweet Cinnamon,
Calamus, and C^ssia, of every one of them a certain quantity, whereby the
oil olive was sweetened: so must all Rich men use their Oil, wherewith they
ought to annoint the feet of Christ; to the Oil of their wealth they must
join the Spice of liberality; which will make their abundance to be a Sweet
Blessing; but if they add unto their Oil either the poison of Covetousness
or Prodigality, then shall their Plenty be made unto them a noisome and
unsavory Curse, the first Spice that they must put into their Oil, is pure
Myrrh, Myrrh that issues out of the Tree of it own accord, without any
incision or cutting of the bark: hereby is meant a voluntary giving with
Cheerfulness, 2. Cor. 9.7.
for God loves a cheerful giver; and our Savior says Matthew. 6.3.
Let not thy left hand knew what thy right hand does; for he that gives
unwillingly, is like him that in stead of bread gives a stone, and in stead of
fish a Serpent: the second Spice, is Cinnamon, which is very hot both in the
mouth and the stomach, and by this is understood zeal and love to Christ, for
whose take, the rich man ought to extend his bounty; assuring himself that
whatsoever he does unto one of the Mat. 25.4.
little ones of Christ's flock, he does it unto him: the third Spice is
Cal^^us, being a powder made of a sweet Reed; which though it be very sweet,
yet it is but a Reed, this reaches all them that do works of charity, not to
put any confidence in them as Meritorious in themselves, because, when a man
has done the best that he can, he is but an unprofitable servant, and his
choicest work is like these combustible things, timber, have, stubble, and
reeds. The fourth Spice is C^ssia, which is as sweet in smell as the rest, but
yet it is a very low shrub; this is a figure of that humility, which must
ever be mixed with the Rich man's bounty; when he does annoint Christ's feet
with oil, and give alms; Mat. 5.1.2.4.
he must take heed that he do it not before men to be seen, of them, neither
must he cause a trumpet to be blown before him, as the hypocrites do in the
Synagogues, and in the streets, to be praised of men, but it must be done by
him in secret, and then God that sees in secret, will reward it openly; he
that can thus use his Oil, God will annoint him with the Oil of gladness,
and give such a blessing unto his substance, that his store shall never be
diminished; it shall be said to him, as it was by Eliah to the widow of
Zarephath; 1. Reg. 1^.14.
the meal in the barrel shall not be wasted, neither shall the oil in the
cruse be diminished: for God receives not benefit for the use of his, but he
promises a most ample recompense for the same.

Fifthly, it is a singular blessing to be Shod wih iron and Brass, and to dwell
in a country where there be store of mines; whether they be of gold, silver,
tin, lead, copper, brass, or iron, for there can be no want of any thing,
where such rich commodities can be found in the bowels of the earth: yet if
they be not rightly employed, it is better to want them then to have them: the
minerals of the earth are indeed the strongest sinews in the body of a
commonwealth, and by the Prophet David they be called hidden treasures, yet we
see by experience, that the possession of them is the root of these branches,
violence and oppression, according to the saying of the Poet, effodiuntur opes
irritamenta malorum: Riches are dug out of the earth, being the
Instigations of mischiefs; they make men insolent and proud, because a
servant, as Euripides says, if he be rich, is honored, but an ingenious poor
man is weak in aestimation, and the wiseman says: Eccl. 10.6, 7.
folly is set in great excellency, and the rich set in the low place: I have
seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the ground: these
fools that Solomon speaks of, be such as be Rich and proud, and these Rich
Princes be such as be wise and poor: these vaineglorious fools are made proud
by their flatterers, who like shadows follow them, and fawn upon them; and
for this cause Demosthenes was wont to compare Rich men to Sheep with
golden-Fleeces, because their wool does not proffite themselves, but is shorn
to cloth their Parasites.

Again, from Pride and Arrogancy, caused by wealth and flattery, arises
Oppression and violence; For Rich men will neither do right, nor suffer wrong.
Their will stands for reason; for with Gold they can blind the eye of
Justice, corrupt Law, and make the tongues of the Advocates, which are for the
most part mercenarie, plead against innocence.

Such is the power of this Mineral, it wrought strange effects in Salomons
time; for he says Eccl. 4.1.
I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought under the Sun,
and behold the Tears of the oppressed, and none comfort them, and lo, the
strength is in the hand of them that oppress them, and none comfort them.

The consideration of this violence and Oppression which grow from Wealth,
moved Plato to banish Money out of his Commonweal. And Aristotle removed
Riches from Felicity, because they belong unto violence. Seeing then that
Mineralls bring forth such effects, it appears that Brass and Iron be
rather hurtful then profitable, unless they be well used.

If therefore we desire to possess them as Blessings, we must not of our
Brass make a Brazen Bull, as Phalaris did, therein to fry and Torture such as
be poor and helpelesse. We must not of our Iron make an yron-bedde, as
Procustes did, thereupon to Tenter and Rack the stranger; That is to say, we
must not, presuming upon our wealth and greatness, offer violence to the poor,
and oppress the needy; For if we do, into the same pit shall we fall that
we have dug for others: and according to our own measure, it shall be
measured unto us again: An Eye, for an eyes, Tooth for a Tooth, Oppression for
oppression, and violence, for violence.

Sixthly, it is a blessed thing to live long; but to live long, and to have
strength as in the days of youth, is a far greater blessedness; yet neither
the one nor the other, are to be regarded as Blessings, except both the life
that a man lives, and the strength that he enioyes, be used to the glory of
God; happy was Moses that he was a hundredth and twenty years old when he
died; Deuteronomy. 24.7.
more happy, because his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated, but
most happy, because he was the Servant of the Lord; Iosu. 14.10.11.
Caleb was four score and five years old, and yet as strong then either for
war or government, as when he was but forty; to have then the years and
strength of Moses and Caleb, as Asher had is a blessing, if Age, strength, and
godliness go together; but if they be separated, then is their quality
altered; Age without strength is wearisomnesse; and strength without
godliness, is the anuile upon which Satan hammers his temptations; the days
of a man are pain and sorrow, when the Eccl. 12.3.
keepers of the house, (as the wiseman says) begin to tremble, when the strong
men bow themselves, when the grinders cease because they are few, and when
they wax dark that look out by the windows: if the eye, the teeth, the
legs and the hands, grow weak and fail to do their office, a man the^ is
but the image of a man, or a breathing coarse: but join strength to age, and
disioyne godliness, then behold what an odious creature a strong old man is:
is it not a hateful thing in the eyes of God, that an old man should be
leacherous: or that an old man should be a drunkard, and yet there be flocks
of such grate-bearded goats, and heardes of such aged swine, who will never
leave sin, till sin forsake them; the long life and strength of such
persons, is unto thee an occasion of falling, and of increasing their sins:
but if godliness do accompany Age and strength, then is L^ng life a Crown:
so says Solomon Prou. 16.31.
Age is a crown of glory when it is found in the way of Righteousness; o then
let all that are old and strong, strive to walk with God as Genesis 5.24.
Henoch did, and if, notwithstanding their years, they be lusty as Eagles,
let them mount upwards, by meditating upon the laws of God night and day,
Psalm. 102.
as David did; and glorify God in their strength; so shall they be crowned
with glory: for the eye that sees them shall give witness of their
integrity, and the ear that hears of their good life, shall bless them.

THE TENTH SERMON OF NAPHTALI.
GENES. 49.21. Napthali shall be a Hind let go, giving goodly words.


NAphtali was the 2. son that Bilha the concubine of Jacob bare, and the
signification of his name is, wrestling, or comparison; which upon this
occasion was given unto him: Genesis 30.7.8:
when Bilha Rahels maid had conceived again, and borne Jacob the second
son; then Rahel said, with excellent wrestlings have I wrestled with my
sister, and have gotten the upper hand, and she called his name Naphtali; This
name shows how far Rahel did proceed in sin, and how many steps she went
toward hell; being notwithstanding a godly woman; for it cannot be denied, but
that the most righteous have their infirmities, and that by the corruption of
nature, and the suggestion of Satan, they are even compelled to do that which
otherwise they would not, as the Apostle says, Romans 7.19.
I do not the thing which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do
I. And herein they may be compared unto the Planets, whose natural motion is
from the West to the East, but by the violence of the first Mouer, whose course
is contrary to theirs, they are daily wheeled about the Center of the world,
from the East to the West.

This is seen in Rahel, she like a Planet, is carried headlong, by the
forcible motions of Satan into many sins, contrary to the course of
Righteousness; first she is Envious, for when she saw that she bare Jacob
no children, Genesis 30.1.
she envied her sister. Secondly, she is foolish, for she said unto Jacob, give
me children, not knowing that it is God alone, Psalm. 113.
which makes the barren woman to dwell with a family, and to be a joyful
mother of children. Thirdly, she is Impatient, for she must either have
children or she dies, not being content to stay the Lords leisure. Fourthly,
she is Reuengeful; for after the birth of Dan, she said, Genesis 30.6.
God has given sentence on my side; or he has revenged me on my sister.
Fifthly, she is vaineglorious; for having but only two adopted sons, Dan and
Naphtali; whereas Leah had six of her own body, and two borne upon the knees
by Zilpha her handmaid; she boasts that by wrestling, she has gotten the
upper hand of her sister; Insultation and Imperiousness are hateful things,
and therefore God by the mouth of the wiseman says, Pro. 30.21.22.23.
for three things the earth is moved, yea for four it cannot sustain it
self; for a servant when he reigns, and a fool when he is filled with
meat for the hateful woman when she is married, and for a handmaid that is
heir to her mistress; such a hateful woman as is here spoken of, was Rahel,
being both malicious and insolent; and out of the very words of the text,
wherein is set down the occasion of Naphtalies name, she discouers her self
first to be malicious, because she is a wrestler. Secondly blasphemous, and a
taker of Gods name in vain, for she calls her own opposition against her
sister, an excellent wrestling, or as it is in the original, the wrestlings of
God; as though he should be accessarie unto sin. And thirdly foolish, for she
triumphs over Leah before she had gotten the victory. In her we may see that
one Sin never goes alone; for Rahel draws, as the prophet says, Isaiah.
5.18.
iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin with cart-ropes: for first she is
Envious, secondly foolish in her envy; thirdly, impatient in her folly:
fourthly, reuengefull in her impatience: and fifthly, vaineglorious in her
revenge; all this is manifested in the name of Naphtali, which is by
interpretation, wrestling or comparison.

Naphtali shall be a Hind let go, giving goodly words.

Jacob compares five of his sons unto five Beasts; Judah to a Lion;
Ishachar to an Ass; Dan to a Serpent; Benjamin to a Wolf; and Naphtali to a
Hind; not that they were like unto the beasts that perish, which is David's
comparison concerning men of honor; saying, Man being in honor has no
understanding, but is compared unto the beasts that perish; wherein he taxes
such as be puffed up with a high conceit of their place, and precedencie; but
the reason why Jacob thus calls them, is, because in respect of some good
qualities, they rese^bled these brute beasts; As for example, Judah is likened
unto a Lion, and so likewise Benjamin unto a Wolf, not for cruelty, but for
courage; Ishachar is called an Ass, not for stupiditie, but for patience and
humility; Dan is said to be a Serpent, not in regard of poisnous malice and
hatred, but for his Wisdom and policy: and Naphtali is named a Hind, not
for Timorousness, but for Swiftness.

Naphtali shall be a Hind; etc: Of these words there be diverse expositions;
first the Hebrews apply them to Barack, Judge. 4.
who being of the Tribe of Naphtali, by the commandment of Deborah who was a
Prophetess, and judged Israel; gathered together of Zebulunites and
Nephthalites ten thousand men, and fought for his country against Sisera the
captain of the Canaanites, and with great speed put him to flight: and
therefore he is compared to a Hartora Hind; because he both undertook and also
managed that exploite with such expedition: Chald: paraph: in hunc locum.
secondly, the Chalde paraphrast, seems by this comparison of the Hind, to
understand the forwardness of fruit in the land of Naphtali; for as the Heart
or the Hind has the speed of all creatures, and easily ouerturneth them; so
the portion or inheritance of Naphtali, did bring forth corn, and al other
kind of fruits, sooner then any other province in the land of Israel. Thirdly,
Andreas Masius in his commentaries upon the 19. chapter of the book of Iosuah,
And: Masius in omment: super Ios: 19.
thinks that the meaning of Jacob was, that the Nephtalites, like Hearts or
Hinds should live and feed at ease, dwelling in a country full of grassie
plains, and all kind of pleasant fruits: but I rather follow the opinion of
the Hebrews, so that the speech may be applied generally to the whole Tribe,
and not to Barak alone; this the^ is Jacobs meaning; he calls Naphtali a
Hind, thereby signifying that his posterity, should be quick and speedy, for
the dispatch of buisinesse, whether pertaining to war or Peace; Resolution
for warlike affairs, and acuteness or sharpness of wit, for matters civil
were Naphta^^es commendations; and these two are admirable gifts, both for
Soldiers and Politicians; he that is a Soldier must be like a Hind in
Swiftness; for delay breeds danger; such a Hind in war was Julius Caesar,
for he says of himself, Veni, vidi, vici; I came, I saw, I overcame; and such
a Hind in Counsel, was Nestor, whom for his wit and wisdom, A^amemnon
preferred before a thousand Aiaces; so then in this place Jacob commending the
Tribe of Nephtali, compares it unto a Hind, because the Naphtalites were Swift
in battle, and quickwitted in counsel: amongst many other excellent
endowments which God bestowed upon David, this was one, that he made his feet
like Hinds feet, whereby is intimated, David's speedy victory over the enemies
of Israel. In an other sense our Savior Christ Jesus is compared to a young
Heart or Hind; for so does the Church his spouse call him, saying, Cant. 2.1^.
Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: return my well-beloved, and
be like a Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether: in these words the
Church by the breaking of the day, understands the Incarnation of Christ, the
Star of Jacob, and the Sun of righteousness; at whose rising and approach, the
shadows did fly away: that is to say, the Priesthood of Aaron, the paschall
lamb, and all other sacrifices and ceremonies, which were but shadows of
things to come; and by his returning like a Roe or young Heart upon the
mountains of Bether, is signified his Speedy victory over hell, death and
Satan; the Mountain upon which he conquered these three Enemies of mankind,
was mount Caluarie or Golgotha, the place of his Passion, which by similitude
may well be called Bether: for Beth in the Hebrew tongue signifies a house, Aug.
lib 22. cont. Faust. cap. 48.
and Er signifies sometimes watchful; sometimes it is interpreted Pellicius,
of skin or leather, and sometimes desolation and Destruction: which three
significations may well be applied to our Saviors passion: for first, when he
was about it, he was watchful: for the same night that he was betrayed, the
burden of our sins would not suffer him to sleep, but he watched and
prayed in Gethsemane, and at that time his agony was so great, that while he
prayed, his Luc. 22.44.
Sweat like drops of blood trickled down to the ground: secondly, when he
came before Pilate, he was stripped to his very skin and whipped, and when he
hung upon the Cross, he was naked, and his body so stretched and tentard,
that all his bones (as the Prophet David says) might be counted: thirdly, in
the midst of his Passion, he was desolate and forsaken, being like a sparrow
upon the house top, like an owl in the desert, and like a pelican in the
wilderness, and therefore he cried out, saying, Math. 27.46.
Eli, Eli, Lammasabachtham, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; and not
only forsaken but also the Temple of his body was destroyed, for he yielded up
the ghost, and died; but by his Death upon this Mountain of Bether, he got the
victory over hell, death and Satan: and that very speedily, for within the
Compass of three days by his resurrection, he openly triumphed over powers
and principalities, and led Captivity captive. Now then as Christ in the work
of our redemption, was like a Roe, and a young Heart or Hind upon the mountains
of Bether, running quickly over the heads of our spiritual enemies: so must
we in imitation of him strive to be swift, and Speedy in our Course: it was a
great commendation for Naphtali, that he was like a Hind; and it will be a
glory for us, if we can run well. The Apostle Paul would have all true
Christians to be good Runners, like unto the Hind: for he says Gal. 1.5.
So run that you may obtain: The life of Man is a Race, from the Cradle to
the Grave. He that Runs well, shall receive a crown of glory, he that
runs ill, shall loose his reward. The Race that we must Run, lies along
the streite and narrowe-way, spoken of by Christ, saying, Math. 7.
^nter in at the streite gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in th reat, because
straight is the gate, and narrow is the waey, which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

This shows that it is a very hard and difficult thing to run this race,
which is the race of Righteousness, because of the streitenes aed narrowness of
it Math. 19.24.
it is like the Eye of a Needle; and therefore he that like a Camel, has a
Bunch upon his back, can never pass along through it.

This Bunch is the round world, together with the Honors, riches, and
pleasures thereof; with which Burden, whosoever is laden, can never run well:
Because it is impossible to serve GOD and Mammon. And therefore, if if we
desire to be good Runners, we must be as slender and smooth-backt, as Hearts or
Hindes, and this we may attain unto, if we cast away the Care of this world;
which is the greatest hinderance and impediment that can be in our passage
toward heaven. Such Hearts and Hindes were the Apostles, for they left their
wives, their children, their houses, goods, and all things whatsoever, to
follow CHRIST, and therefore they ran a good race; for our Savior said unto
them Math. 19.28.
Verily I say unto you, that when the Son of man shall fit in the throne of
his Majesty, ye that have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also
upon twelve seats, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. This then is the Path
that we must follow, and the way that we must Run in; namely, Righteousness, by
endeavoring to do well, as the Prophet Isaiah exhorts us, saying; Isai.
1.16.17.
Cease to do evil, learn to do well; To learn to do evil, and to cease
to do well, is a Broad way, easy for flesh and blood to find, but it leads
to destruction; but to cease to do evil, and to learn to do well, is a
Narrow-path, hard to be found of any but the Regenerate, and yet it leads to
Life eternal; This Path of Righteousness is like the passage of the Israelites
through the red Sea, Exodus 14 22.
when the Waters were a Wall unto them, on their right hand, and on their left
hand. For they that run their race in it, are so compassed and hemmed in with
watrie walls, that if they balke the way, and run not straight forwards, they
are sure to be swallowed up by the waters. These Waters are the first and
second Death, which shall be the reward of them that keep not a direct course,
and which frame not their lives according to the rule of Justice; therefore it
concerns every one that Runs, to have an Eye to the mark, unto which he
runs; following the example of the Apostle, who thus says of himself,
Phillip. 3.14.
But one thing, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that
which is before, and follow hard toward the Mark, for the prize of the High
calling of GOD, in CHRIST JESUS. In these words S. Paul makes himself every
man's pattern, to imitate and follow, in running of the race of Righteousness.

First, he aimed only at One thing, and at one mark. So must we have but one,
and no more. For one thing is perfection, but many things are confusion: One
thing is Mary's choice, but many things be Marthaes incombrances; This one
thing, that we must seek for, is the Kingdom of heaven; And these many things
that we must avoid, be the Cares of this World; which if we look upon with any
regard, they will be unto us like Hippomenes his golde^-Balles to Atala^ta,
impediments to stop and stay us in running; Wherefore, when we begin to take
our race, we must forget that which is behind. Namely, all those things wherein
we took delight, and which were before unto us the occasions of sinning. We
must not look back to Sodom, Genesis 19.26.
with Lots wife, nor with the Numb. 11.5.
Israelites, remember the Cucumbers, Pepons, Leekes, Onyons, Garlic, and
fleshpots of Egypt; but go on forwards toward Zoar; and toward Canaan, the
city of Refuge, and land of Promise; to forget that which is behind, and not
to go forward, is all one, as to be like Lots wife, turned into a Pillar of
Salt. Non progredi, est regredi: Not to go forward, is to go backward.
Therefore, it is not sufficient for us, when we begin our Race, to forget,
and to forsake the things of this world, but we must also Endeavor our selves
to that which is before: which no man can do, that either stands still, or is
idle. As long as we remember that which is behind, we are like unto the Marc.
2.11:
man that lay in his bed sick of a palsy: but when we forget that which is
behind, and endeavor our selves to that which is before, then are we cured of
our lamenesse; and therefore we must arise, take up our beds, and walk to
our own house.

First, we must arise from sin to Righteousness, Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 20.
cap. 6.
this is the first Resurrection, which only pertains to the Elect; and this
is it of which our Savior speaks to Nichodemus, saying: Ioh. 3.3.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. Secondly, we must take up our Beds: These beds are the
Sins and vanities, wherewith in former times we have been delighted; And
these we are to bear upon our backs, because we must remember them to avoid
them, and not upon our Breasts, because we must forget to practice them. 1.
Tim. 1.13.
So did S. Paul, he remembered that he had once been a persecutor, and he
repented of it, and made amends for it, and was afterward ten times more
zealous to save the wicked, then before he had been to destroy the godly.
Thirdly, we must walk, Nay, we must Run to our own house; which is, as
Zoroastres calls it, Heaven, the bright and glorious country of the soul;
The Body is not the house, but the prison of the soul; neither is the world
the mansion or abiding place of the Body and Soul, but rather the Pilgrims
Inn. And therefore when we run or walk, it must be, not to another, but to
our own house, if we walk or run to the flesh, and follow the lusts thereof,
then we go to the house of Belial, who being a disobedient spirit, and subject
to no yoke, forces the members of the body to be servants of uncleanness,
and if we run or walk to the world, then we go to the house of the
Devil, Ephesians. 2.2
who is the Prince of this world, which rules in the Air, and works in the
children of Disobedience; Therefore, leaving these two Houses, we must endeavor
our selves toward that which is before; namely, the kingdom of Heaven; the
Greek word which the Apostle uses is, [Epecteinomenos:] which signifies
stretching; This very word shows how we must Run our righteous race; It
must be with all our Power and strength: we must be like the Giant, ready to
run his course: and like the Hind, that is, strong and swifte. For if we run
not strongly, every stumbling block will cast us down; and if we run not
swiftly, the world and the flesh will overtake us, and catch us by the Garment,
Genesis 39.12.
as Potiphars wife did Joseph, to stay us. As then we must not run too
slowely, nor too weakly, for then we be lukewarm. So must we beware that we
run not too fast, for they that run so, are transported with a
superstitious and a blind zeal; and do easily either run by, or ouer-shoote
the mark. Our pace then must neither be too fast, nor too slow, but an
endeavoring or stretching of our selves to follow hard, and to run well toward
the mark.

He that has Knowledge and no zeal, is like 2. Sam, 4.4.
Mephibosheth, lame of his feet, he will never run fast; and he that has
Zeal, and no Knowledge, is like 2. Sam. 2.23.
Asahel, he will run upon his own death; Therefore knowledge and zeal are
those Hindes feet, which carry the soul neither too slowly, nor too fast,
toward the mark. And such feet must Christians have, else they can never Run
a good race; So says S. Bernard, as zeal must erect our discretion, that we
run not too slowly, so discretion must direct our zeal, that we run not too
fast: but grant that we keep a mean in running, yet all is to no end or
purpose, unless our eye be still upon the Mark: the Cherubims, which covered
the mercie-seate, were so made and placed, that though their wings were
stretched out on high, Exodus 25.20.
yet both their faces looked toward the Seat of Mercy; so must we, howsoever
we Endeavor or stretch our selves, ever fix our Eye upon the Mark, for fear
we loose the way, and wander by unknown Paths; This Mark is the Word of God;
the light unto the feet, and the lantern unto the paths; 2. Tim. 3.15.
It makes a man wise unto salvation, and it is, as S. Chrysostom says, the
most exquisite Rule of faith, and good life; he then that is directed and led
by this light, as the Israelites were in the night time by a Pillar of fire,
shall never need to grope and feel with his hands for the way, Genesis 19.11.
as the Blind Sodomites did; he that makes the Scripture his guide, he shall be
a wise virgin and follow the lamb whithersoeuer he goes; in the Hebrewe tongue
a virgin is called Nagnara, because of her agilitie, and Simplicity; and even
so every one that follows Gods word, is a Right Nagnara, a true virgin, for he
runs nimbly, and plainly, neither too much on the left hand, as the foolish
Atheistes do, in the broad way of Sin; nor too much on the right hand, as
Scismatikes do, in the broad way of humor, and Selfe-conceite; again, he
that makes the word of God the Rule of his belief, and life, shall ever go
directly forward, and run continually in the right way, and it is a Pleasure to
see him Run, his pace is so graceful; so says Christ to his Spouse, the
Church; Cant. 7.11.
how beautiful are the goings with shoes o Princes daughter; this shoe is by
S. Paul called Ephesians. 6.15.
The preparation of the Gospel of peace; he that is shod with this shoe, is
ever prepared both to believe, and to do as the Gospel commands; if it, as
the Centurion, say Go, he goes: and if it say Come, he comes: the Council.
Trid. Sess. 4. page 11. and 12.
Papists cannot endure to wear this shoe, because it is too straight for
their feet, and therefore they prefer to it, the Old shoes of the
Gibeonites, namely, the Traditions and beggarly Rudiments of their forefathers:
and hence it comes to pass, that they cannot run forward, because they want a
Certain mark to direct them, but they turn round like a wheel, and are ever
found in the same place; sometimes they turn toward traditions and humane
constitutions, making them equal to the Scriptures; sometimes to councels, and
sometimes to their Idol the Pope, whom being a Man, they place in the Temple,
as if he were a God, Bellar: de Rom: pont: lib: 4: cap: 2:
affirming that he cannot Err; and that therefore Mosconius. de may milit.
eccl. lib. 1. cap. 1.
all men ought to stand to his sentence; also they lift him up above the
Scriptures, being not ashamed to auoch, Carol. Ruinus. consil. 10^. number. 1. vol
5.
that he has power to decree against the Epistles of S. Paul, because he
Anton. de Rosellis. in tract: de concilijs.
is greater then Paul; never a one of these three, Traditions, Councels, or the
Pope, are sure Marks; for if they were, they would abide; but they are as
uncertain as those that be led by them; one Tradition shoulders out another,
one Council crosses an other, and one Pope cancels the decrees of an other;
as for instance, whereas the Council of Nice allows the Marriage of
Priests, and the communion under both kinds; the Councels of Constance, and
of Basile, take the cup from the Layitie and that of Trent, both the cup from
the Layickes, and marriage from Priests: The Council of Constantinople beats
down Images; but the second Council of Nice commands them to be worshipped;
the third Council of Carthage, does Excommunicate, and declare him that shall
name himself universal Bishop, the forerunner of Antichrist; but the Council
of Trent decrees the contrary, making the Pope not only Universal Bishop,
but also King of Kings: as for Popes, they are like Herod and Pontius Pilate
never at unity, but when Christ is to be crucified in his members, and the
Truth to be suppressed; therein indeed they shake hands and are combined
together; but in other things they may be compared to the three Joseph. lib. de
bello Iudaico.
seditious captains in Jerusalem, Simeon, Iehochanan, and Eliazar; for every
New popes sword is in the neck of his predecessor; as for example, Gregory
the first abolished the decrees of Pelagius, Innocent, and Sabinian; disanulled
the Co^stitutions of Gregory the first; Steven, the which Formosus made, and
Romans did abrogate the decrees of Steven; and that most often in such as
co^cerned matters of faith, how the^ can any of these be Marks, which be so
variable and uncertain: of force the^ the Papists like men in Mazes or
Labyrinths, run round in a circle, and never go forward, because they do not
endeavor to follow hard toward the mark, namely, the written word of God,
which is, as Ireneus says, Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 1.
the Pillar and the firm Mark of the Church. Arnobius writes that the Pagans
had a Goddess, Arnob. aduers. gent. lib. 4.
called Vibilia, whom they used to pray unto in their iourneying, that she
might keep them from erring out of their way; their Goddess was but a
shadow, for an Idol is nothing, says the Apostle, and such like Idols, be
ceremonies, traditions, councels, and decrees, for he that trusts to their
direction, is like him that in the night runs after Ignis fatuus, or the
fiery Exhalation, that fools them that follow it, but the Word of God is a
Right vibilia indeed, it never deludeth, it never deceives us, if we make it
our Mark, it will like the Math. 2.9.
Star of the wisemen conduct us to Christ: Running was one of the Games of
Olympus, and to stir men up to this exercise, there were Prizes appointed for
such as ran best; so it is in our Spiritual race: for the reward of them that
Run well, is the prise of the high calling of God, (as Paul says) in Christ
Jesus: this high calling, is everlasting life, eternal glory, joy in the holy
Ghost, and the whole kingdom of heaven: who then would not like a Hind run
swiftly to attain unto this infinite felicity; as then the Genesis 28.12.
Angels which Jacob saw in his vision were not Idle, but either ascending, or
d^scending the heavenly Ladder: so let us be ever in Motion, and ever going
forward, from grace to grace, from goodness, to goodness, from virtue to
virtue, til we come to perfection, Ephesians. 4.13.
eue^ the measure of the fulness of Christ's age: as he was like the Heart or the
Hind upon the mountains of Bether, so let our feet in the imitation of him
be like unto Hinds f^ete, swift, not to shed blood, but to Run a good race,
even the race of Righteousness: this if we do, we shall be sure not to loose
our labor, for Christ will meet us at the end of the Race, and say unto us,
well run good and faithful servant, enter into the Ioies of thy Lord, and take
the price of the high calling of God, for thy reward.

Naphtali shall be a Hind let go, giving goodly words.

Jacob proceeds in his Comparison, and says, that Naphtali shall not be
only a hind, but also a Hind let loose, not imp^rkt, not impaled, not impent,
but living at Liberty; and enjoying freedom; when he prophesied of I h^char,
he said, that he should be an ass Couching between the burdens, being
liable to exaction and oppression: but Naphtali is let loose, and his
posterity must be free; Bondage is a great misery, but freedom is a
wonderful Blessing; the felicity of the one may be discovered in the misery
of the other; for first Bondage is a thing against Nature, Genesis 1.26.
for Adam was created to bear rule over the fish of the sea, and over the
foul of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth, and over
every thing, that crept, or moved on the earth; by creation therefore all the
children of Adam are freemen, but Bond-slaues by sin: secondly, Bondage is
one of those means whereby Sin is punished, for when the Kings of Israel and
Judah together with their people did forsake God, which had brought them out of
the land of Egypt, and went a whoring after strange Gods, God suffered their
enemies 2. Reg. 17.
to conquer them, and 2. Reg. 25.
carry the^ into captivity, binding their Kings in chains, and their nobles
in linckes of iron; thirdly, Bondage, is so irksome and so grievous a yoke,
that many have rather chosen present death then to endure it; Iud. 16.30.
Sampson preferred death before imprisonment; 2. Maccab. 14.42.
Razis was willing rather to fall upon his own sword, and to die manfully,
then to give himself into the hands of Nicanor: and Cato the Roman slew
himself, because he would not become Caesar's slave: fourthly, Servitude and
bondage is a Curse and this appears out of the words of Noah, saying, Genesis
9.25.
Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren: seeing
then that Bondage is so miserable, we must needs conclude that to be let
loose, and to have freedom is a singular happiness: for thereby a Man is
delivered from Fear and Care, which two, like evil Angels, be the daily
Attendants of Servitude; First, a Servant is ever affraide to displease his
Master, whose supercilious look like the Gorgons-Head, in Perseus his
shield, astonisheth the beholder. For ordinarily, Masters be like unto 1.
Reg. 12 11.
Rehoboam, great threatners and oppressors of their bondmen: and therefore S.
Paul, charge them, Ephesians. 6.9.
to put away threatening, knowing that they have a Master also in Heaven, with
whom there is no respect of persons. Secondly a servant is continually careful
to please his Master, be he never so vile and wicked a man, he is compelled
to say, as he says, be his words never so unsavory, to flatter and praise
him, be his actions never so ignoble and dishonest, and to bow the knee unto
him, is the servants of Hest. 3.2.
Ahashuerosh did to Hama^, though he be but an Agagite and of base condition.
And therefore they may well be likened unto the Indians, who are accustomed to
offer sacrifices unto the devil, and this worship they give him, not for love,
but out of fear.

As then the Poet spoke of Husbandmen, so may I say of Naphtali, and his tribe,
O happy Naphtalites, if ye knew the worth of your own happiness; Reuben
lost his prerogatives, Simeon and Leui were cursed, scattered in Israel, and
Isachar had his back ouerloaden with burdens, but ye are as a Hind let
loose, free from the Chain of bondage, and the yoke of oppression.

If it were a Blessing for Naphtali, to be like a Hind let loose, and to
enjoy freedom and liberty, which was but only in regard of his body, and his
temporal state: oh how happy are all spiritual Naphtalies. Ephesians. 6.12
that wr^stle against powers, and Principalities? I mean, true Christians, who
being by the first birth Bond-me^ to sin, death, and Satan, are in their
second birth, through the Passion and Merits of Christ, made freemen, and
heirs of Salvation. So says our ^auiour to his disciples Ioh 15.15
He^ceforth I call you not servants but friends Mat. 5.
not cursed Goats, but blessed sheep Genesis 8.
not black Ravens, forsaking the Arc, but white Doves, making your Nests in
the holes of the Rock; Apoc. 20.
not chained Serpents in the bottomless pit, but Hindes let loose in the green
Pastures. While we were Gentiles, we lived like the Israelites, under the
bondage of that spiritual Pharaoh the devil, but since Christ came into the
world, and wrought his miracles. Of which place Egypt, as S. Augustine says,
is a type and figure. He by opening the Red Sea, with his Cross, has set us
free, and delivered us out of that land of darkness, where no order, but
everlasting horror abides, and our enemies, the Devil, Hell, and Death, are
fallen into the same pit, that they dug for us, and fettered in the same
chains, wherein we by them were bound. First, by the Passion of Christ, the
Tyrannical dominion of Satan over man was dissolved. For the Apostle says,
that by his Death, he did not only overcome death, but him also, which had
the power of death, the devil. And therefore S. Origin says, that there were
two crucified upon the cross of Christ. Namely, CHRIST himself, visibly, and
with his will; The Devil inuisibly, and against his will.

Judge. 16.
As the Philistims thought themselves sure of Triumph, when Samsons eyes were
out; Nay, they called him out of prison, to make a laughing stock of him, and
set him between the Pillars, but yet he was avenged on them, by pulling down
the house upon their heads. So the Devil thought himself a glorious
conqueror, when the Eyes of Christ, being nailed to the Cross, were closed up
with dim death: Nay, the Jews (being the Devils iesters) made mowes at him,
and ceased not, saying Matthew. 27.42.
If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross; But yet
even at that very time, all the spiritual Powers and Principalities received
their Bane, and were stripped of that usurped Empire, which they held over
mankind, and by the Preaching of the Gospel, which is Apo. 20.1^
the keye of the bottomless pit, whereby Hell is shut up to the Faithful, and
opened to Infidels: the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and
Satan was utterly put to silence, and bound, as it were in a Chain, for a
thousand years: And thus was he that led man into captivity, made a captive,
and a bond-slaue himself.

Secondly, his Death was Deaths destruction, and therein he was as good as his
word. For before he was incarnate, by the mouth of his Heralde, the prophet
Hoseah, he challenged Death, saying, Hos. 13.14.
O Death, I will be thy Death; O Grave, I will be thy destruction; And in his
Death, he subdued Death, by taking his sting from him. And therefore the
Apostle (in the person of Christ) insulteth over Death; and derideth him,
saying, 1. Cor. 15 55.
O Death where is thy sting? Sin was the cause that Genesis 2.17
man was made captive to Death: Romans 6.23.
For the wages of Sin is Death; but Christ being Righteousness it self, by
laying down his Life, and taking it up again, Acts. 2.24.
loosed the bonds and the sorrows of it. So that to all true Belieuers, Death
is no longer bitter, but sweet, And. Casar. in Apoc. cap.
Not a thief, that surprizeth suddenly, but the Harbenger of Joy.

Thereupon, in the old Testament, the Death of the righteous, which believed
in Christ to come, is called Geuigah, that is to say, without pain or grief;
because that though Numb. 21.6.
like the Israelites that spoke against God, they were stung with this fiery
Serpent, yet by looking unto the Brazen Serpent, their M^ssi^h, the wound of
death was healed in them. Though like Dan, 6.16.
Daniell, they were cast into the greedy Lions den, which is the Grave, and
like Jonah, 1.12.
Jonah, into this Whales belly, which is insatiable; yet for all that, neither
had this Lion power to devour them, nor this Whale ability to digest them.
The reason is, because Christ the head has tasted Death for all his members,
to set them free, and loose them from their bonds.

Thirdly, as by his Passion upon the Cross, he has Redeemed us from the
tyranny of Satan, and by his Death freed us from the bondage of the Grave; So
likewise, by his descension into Hell, he has delivered us from the Thraldom
of the bottomless Pit; Had not he broken the Serpents Head, by the drops
of his Blood, the Serpent would continually have bruised our heels. Had he not
taken away the sting of death, death would never have ceased from stinging us:
and had he not descended into hell, there to manifest his glory, by leading
Captivity Captive, Hell would never have been satisfied, nor ever have said,
It is enough; but the Teeth of the Mouth thereof, would have been as swords,
and the Chawes as knives, to eat up mankind out of the earth.

Therefore as Iud 16.1.2.^.
Samson, in spite of the Philistims, who laid wait to entrap him all night,
in the gate of the City, went forth of Gazzah carrying upon his shoulders
along with him, the Doors, the Posts, and the Bars of the Gates of the
City; So CHRIST, maugre all the Spirits of darkness; Descended into the
neathermost parts of the Earth, that is, the Depth, or Hell; And there having
bound the strong-man of that Infernal house, returned with victory, and
Triumph. And therefore the Apostle mocketh Hell, saying: 1. Cor. 1^.55.
O Hell where is thy victory?

Though all true Christians be Hindes, let loose, and delivered from the
bondage of Hell, Death, and Satan, yet are they still Servants, and so ought
to be, to him that loosed and Redeemed them. By the Civil law, Code. de
captiuis postliminio reuersis. Honorius.
if any Captive be delivered at the costs and charges of another, he when he
shall be returned home, ought to repay the charges to him that redeemed him;
and if perhaps he shall not be able to repay him, then he should satisfy
his redeemer by labor and service.

This is the case of all Christians, and this is a plain Law, that ought to
bind our Consciences; We were Ca^tiues, and CHRIST has redeemed us, not with
corruptible things, as Gold and Silver, but with his own Blood.

Now then, because we are otherwise unable to repaye him his Charges, we are
bound to satisfy him for his Cost, with our Labor, and our Service:

Romans 6.17.18,
This Service is A Sweet yoke, and is to be esteemed above all carnal
liberty; Eusebius. tract. de prepa. euang.
it was said of Democritus and Chrysippus, that The one of them made men slaves
altogether, and The other half slaves: so it may be said of Christ and the
Devil, the Devil by sin made man a servant wholly: but Christ has made him
half a Servant: for he is both a freeman and a servant: first he is a freeman
because he is made free from sin: secondly he is a servant, because he is
made the Romans 6.18.
servant of Righteousness, this then is the duty of every one of us which be
spiritual Naphtalites: seeing that Christ has bought us and loosed us from
the bondage of hell, death, and Satan, first we must be willing to serve him
truly, and to labor in his vineyard: as under the law of Moses; Exodus 21.6.
such as were content out of their love to their masters, to be servants for
ever, did willingly lay their Ear to a post, and their masters did bore it
through with a nawle, which was a sign, that they were made servants for ever:
so must we, if we desire and be willing to serve Christ perpetually, suffer
our Ears to be bored through with a Nawle, which Boring is the badge of our
voluntary servitude, hereby I understand, the mortification of the flesh: for
as the Cutting off of the foreskin amongst the Israelites was an outward sign
of the inward circumcision of the heart: so is this Boring of the ear with a
nawle, a figure of the mortifying of all carnal desires: according hereunto
Saint Paul says: Romans 6.19.20.21.22.23.
as you have given your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity to
commit iniquity, so now give your members servants unto righteousness in
holiness, for when ye were the servants of sin, ye were freed from
righteousness: what fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed: for the end of those things is death: but now being freed from sin,
and made servants unto God, ye have your fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting life: for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord: secondly, we must not only be
willing to serve Christ, in liewe of his charges in our redemption, for
certain years; Cod. de Captiuis post liminio reuersis. Honorius.
as by the law of the emperor Honorius, Captives that were unable to make
satisfaction were enjoined to serve five years, but our Service must continue,
as the service of that Hebrewe, whose Ear was bored with a Nawle against a
Post, even until the year of Iubilee; which is the day of our death; Though
we be Hindes let loose, yet it is to run in the race of Righteousness, after
the example of Christ, and not to Run away like Vagabonds from Christ; wilfully
enthralling our selves to them from whose tyranny we are delivered; such
Vagabonds be Dogs returning to the vomit, and Swine to their wallowing in the
mire; Backesliders, and Apostataes; concerning such the Apostle says, Heb.
6.4.5.6.
It is impossible that they which were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall
away, should be renewed by repentance, seeing they crucify again to
themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him; hence it appears, that
it shall be far Easier at the last day for them, that were never enlightened
by the word of Grace, and never let loose by the preaching of it; then for such
as have been set free, and loosed out of the Dungeon of Ignorance (whereof the
Devil is Iaylour or keeper,) by the Keie of the Gospel; if they start aside,
like broken bows; and depart from the service of Christ, wherein there is
sweet freedom, to follow the liberty of the flesh, which is a bitter Bondage.

Naphtali shall be a Hind let go, giving goodly words; Though the
Naphtalites, as Jacob prophecieth of them, were like Hindes let go, namely,
Quick and expeditious in war; and as forward to battle as Giants, ready to
run their course, yet he says, that They should give goodly words, and seek
by friendly and peaceable words for Peace, before they would rashly attempt
war; some are of opinion, that Jacob by the Hind meant Baracke one of the
Tribe of Naphtali, who ouerthrewe Sisara; and by the goodly words the song of
Deborah; Judge. 4. and 5. And. Masius in hunc locum.
but Andreas Masius in my opinion of all other expounds these words most
truly, by applying them to the affability, courtesy, and gentle behavior of
the Naphtalites both in word and deed; which Courtesy, and vrbanitie was in
them an excellent quality, and worthy to be embraced of all men; for it
wins a good report, and even steals away the hearts of men; of the
contrary part, rigorous language, venomous inuectiues, lying clamours, aspish
and waspish eloquence, such as ever drops, nay flows from the tongues of
supercilious, ouerweening, and insolent hot spurs, make a man odious,
hateful, and detestable in the eyes of all men. The lips of a virtuous
Naphtalite are like Lillies dropping down pure mirrhe: the lilly is white,
and mirrhe is sweet, such like are the lips of the righteous, full of
Innocence, full of courtesy; for when a godly man is reviled, he is like a
sheep dumb before the shearer; and blesses them that curse him, but under
the Tongues of wicked men lies the poison of Aspes; and with their tongues as
bows of steel they shoot out their venomous arrows, even bitter words; Iam.
3.5.6.7.8.
The tongue (says the Apostle) is a little member, and boasts of great
things, behold how great a thing a little fire kindles, and the tongue is
fire, yea a world of wickedness: so is the tongue set among our members, that
it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is
set on fire of hell, for the whole nature of beasts, and of birds, and of
creeping things, and things of the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of the
nature of man, but the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly euillful of
deadly poison, was it not then an admirable virtue in the Naphtalites to bridle
this unruly member, and to force it even against nature to give goodly words?
There be two sorts of Tongues, the one is Gods tongue, the other is the Devils;
the one speaks or utters the language of Canaan, the other of Ashdod; the
one says Shiboleth, the other says Siboleth, the one swears by the Lord; the
other by Milchom: and the one gives foul and filthy, but the other goodly
words: Gods Tongue, is a Praising, praying, preaching, and a blessing Tongue;
touched with a fiery cole from his own Altar, and therefore, zealous and
impolluted; but the devils Tongue is a lying, blaspheming, boasting, and a
Cursing tongue, set on fire by hell, and therefore mischievous and wicked: as
Jacob and Esau might be discerned by the Smoothness, and roughness of their
skins: so may Tongues be known whose they are, by their rough and smooth
words: The Tongues of the Righteous do praise God without ceasing, do pray
unto God continually, do preach the gladsome tidings of salvation in season
and out of season, and speak well of all men: but the Tongues of the wicked
are always ready to make lies, and their most delightsome language, is
swearing and blasphemy: boasting and cursing: as the Tongue is, such is the
heart, for out of the abundance of the heart the Mouth speaks: he then that
has a Tongue like Naphtali giving goodly words, has a great Jewel, let him
preserve and keep it as the apple of his own eye; for Solomon says that,
Prou. 10.20.
The tongue of the just man is as refined silver; and as for him that has A
Tongue giving foul and unseemly words; I will not say unto him, Wo^ be unto
thee thou evil tongue, but I wish and counsel him to set these words of the
Psalmist, as a watch before his lips Psalm. 34.12.13.
What man is he that desires life, and loves long days to see good, keep
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile; In this world
these two Tongues are contrarily censured: for Gods Tongue that gives goodly
words, is ever blamed, but the Devils tongue, which is the Organon or
instrument of wickedness, is always extolled, this iniudicious censure is
caused through the corruption of man's nature, which embraces vice, and
abhors virtue, the world being a land of darkness, has no fellowship with
the light, and therefore it blames the good tongue, be the words thereof never
so godly.

All the Prophets of the old Testament, either were persecuted or murdered
because of their tongues.

John Baptist, who was the Common limite of the old and the new Testament, for
his Tongue, lost his head; and most of the Apostles of the new Testament,
because of their tongues, were like sheep led to the slaughter.

So is it in these days, the Tongue that vtters the Truth, is accounted an
unquiet, seditious, and factious tongue: As Eliah was said to be a troubler of
Israel, Amos a conspiratour, and John Baptist, a tumultuous person, so all such
as speak with zeal against vice, are by Worldlings reputed evil tongued
raylers, and bablers: But let the blind world judge as it will; Sure I am,
that such Tongues as give goodly words, and speak the Truth boldly, are the
Silver Trumpets of Gods Tabernacle. Of the contrary part, the evil tongue,
though it swell with the venom of Blasphemy, Swearing, Insolency, Lying, and
Flattery, yet it is admired, and highly esteemed, if it can but say, as the
Tongues of the false Prophets did, Peace, Peace, and make a covenant with the
devil, and the world, not to speak against sin.

To conclude, seeing that it was so excellent a quality in Naphtali, to give
goodly words; Let us all study to speak his language, and though for speaking
the truth, the world hate us, yet this is our Comfort, God will love us.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON OF JOSEPH.
GENESIS 49.22.23.24.25.26. Joseph shall be a fruitful Bough, even a fruitful
Boughe by the Well side, the small Boughs shall run upon the wall.

And the Archers grieved him, and shot against him, and hated him.

But his bow abode strong, and the hands of his arms were strengthened, by
the hands of the mighty GOD of Jacob, of whom was the feeder appointed, by the
stone of Israel.

Even by the God of thy Father, who shall help thee, and by the Almighty, who
shall bless thee with heavenly Blessings from above, with blessings of the
deep, that lies beneath, with blessings of the breasts, and of the womb.

The blessings of thy Father shall be stronger then the blessings of mine
Elders; unto the end of the hills of the world, they shall be on the head of
Joseph, and on the top of the Head of him that was separate from his brethren.


Joseph was the Son of Jacob and Rahel, who had been barren long, for he was
borne in the end of Jacobs fourteen years service; In the history of his
birth, it is said that Genesis 30.25. Genesis 30.22.23.24.
God remembered Rahel, and God heard her, and opened her womb: So she
conceived, and bare a Son, and said, God has taken away my rebuke, and she
called his name Joseph, saying, the Lord will give me yet another Son. The
circumstances of Joseph's birth, are demonstrations of Rahels repentance; In my
former lectures upon Dan and Naphtali, I laid open her envy, folly,
impatience, and vaineglorie. But now she is another woman, and a true convert.
For in that God first remembered her, secondly, heard her, and thirdly, opened
her womb; all which are signs of grace and favor, it is evident, that she
had repented and sorrowed for her sins, and also that she had prayed unto God
to make her fruitful, whereupon God remembered her, heard her, and opened her
womb. This name of her son Joseph, is by interpretation, Increasing: And
therein is infolded or included, Rahels hopeful desire of a threefolde
increase. The first is, the increase of her husbands love, who loved her
before, better then Leah: yet now upon the birth of this son, she hopes that
his love will be augmented; for children are bellows, that kindle mutual
affection betwixt man and wife, and this was one cause why Sarah, Rahel, and
Annah, were so desirous of children. The second is, the increase of glory, for
she said, God has taken away my rebuke, or infamy. For barrenness in the
family of Abraham was reproachful, as may appear by the words of Isaiah,
saying Isai, 4.1
And in that day shall seven women take hold of one man, and say, we will
eat our own bread, and we will wear our own garments: only let us be
called by thy name, and take away our reproach. The third is, the increase of
issue, for she said, the Lord will give me yet another son: and this
increase, as she truly acknowledges, must come from God: for none but he
caries the Key of the womb; Barrenness and fruitfulness do both of them
depend upon his providence.

Of the first of these, there be diverse Natural causes, as either some
original defectes in the Birth. For some are borne unapt for Generation.
Arist. lib. 2. de genesis animalium.
Or it may come by diseases; and sometimes the constitution of the body is an
impediment, as in fat bodies, where nature is turned into the nutriment of
the body, but the supernatural cause of Barrenness is, when it pleases GOD
to restrain the womb, which he does sometimes for a punishment, Genesis 20.18.
as in the women of Abimelechs house, whose wombes God shut up, because
Abimelech had taken Sarah Abraham's wife; And sometimes for the manifestation of
his own glory and power, as when he makes Sarah and Elizabeth continue
barren, even until they be stricken in years, and until it cease to be
with them, as with other women; that contrary to the course of nature, he may
make the barren woman to bear and to be a joyful mother of children.
Secondly concerning fruitfulnes, even the heathen Philosopher confesses thus
much; Though generation [saith Plato] be done in a mortal creature, Plat.
Sympos.
yet it is a a^^ure thing, procured by an immortal power: and though Jacob and
Rahel were both very desirous of children, yet for all that, nature could do
nothing, till God had opened her womb.

Joseph shall be a fruitful Bough, etc. In this speech of I^cob to Joseph,
there be three things contained, a prediction, a narration, and a Benediction.
First, the Prediction or Prophecy is implied in these words, Joseph shall be
a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough, by the Well-side, the small boughs
shall run upon the wall. In this prophecy, which is a declaration of things to
come, Jacob expresses the multiplication of Joseph's seed, by comparing him to
a Bough, and therein he uses a gradation, raising his speech by steps, his
first step is this, Joseph shall be a bough: the second is, Joseph shall be a
fruitful bough by the well side: and the third is, the branches of this Bough
shall run upon the Wall.

First, Joseph shall be a Bough, or as a bough, according to Pagnine, and Rabbi
Kimhi, but Montanus translateth the words in the original thus: Joseph shall be
a Son increasing. The reason of this variety in readi^g is, because the
Hebrew word Ben, signifies both a bough and a Son: but the Rabbines have
observed, that this word Ben, does never signify a son, but when it is
joined with a Real relative, that is to say, with the name of a father or a
mother, wherefore the best reading is to say. Joseph shall be a bough, because of
the words following, a fruitful bough by the well side; for hereby the
Metaphor is continued. Jacob was the planter of this Bough, Rahel was the
barren stock wherein it was graffed, and God was he that watered it, and made
it grow; when the barren stock begins to bud, that Bough proves excellent;
Sarah, Rahel, Annah and Elizabeth were all of them barren stocks, but when
they bear; their boughs or Branches proved admirable; Isaac was Sarahs bough;
Samuel was Annahs, John Baptist was Elizabeth's, and Joseph was Rahels, all
worthy Boughs; and such like are those Branches, that spring from spiritual
Barrenness, for they that are truly converted from a sinful life, do ever
prove most excellent instruments in Gods tabernacle; as for instance S. Paul,
before his conversion was a Persecutour of Christians, but afterward there was
none of the Apostles that labored more abundantly in Gods harvest then he;
The Bough is the Emblem of Excellency; because it is the highest part of the
Tree; and therefore Jacob compares Joseph to a Bough, to show that he was more
excellent then all the rest of his brethren; first in regard of the prerogative
of Birthright, which was taken from Reuben, and bestowed upon him; and secondly
in respect of his great dignity in Egypt, for God had made him Lord of
Pharaohs house, and ruler of all his substance; so that according to his two
Dreams, Genesis 37.7.9.
the sh^^es of his brethren did reverence unto his Sh^fe, and the Sun, the
Moon and the Eleven stars did bow before him; for a long time he was cast
out like an abominable Branch, Genesis 37.28.
being for twenty pieces of silver sold to the Ishmaelites by his brethren;
and by the Ishmaelites brought down into Egypt, of whom Genesis 39.1.
Potiphar an Eunuch the steward of Pharaohs house bought him: afterward
through the false accusation of his mistress he was cast into Prison, Psalm.
^05.18.
and there he lay in the stocks, till the iron entered into his soul; but in
process of time he became a flourishing Bough; for the Lord sent and
delivered him, and the Prince of the people set him free; in this humiliation
and Exaltation of Joseph; we may observe the singular mercy, and providence of
God; who though he suffer his children to be oppressed for a time, that their
faith and Patience, like gold and silver may be tried in the furnace of
Affliction; yet does he never utterly forsake them, but is ever present with
them to sustain them and comfort them; he was with Daniel in the Den, and
musled the fierce Lions: he was in the whales belly with Jonah, and cast a
hook in the nosthrilles of Leuiathan, to bring him to the shore, he was in the
Inner prison to visit Paul and Silas, being fast in the stocks, Genesis 39.21.
and he was in the dungeon with Joseph, and showed him mercy: and because he
was constant in his humiliation, he promoted him to honor, and made him
eminent in his exaltation, for of a bondslaue he made him a Lord: of a
Prisoner a Prince, and of an abominable Branch as a flourishing bough: Joseph
shall be a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by the well side: here is
the second step: Joseph is not only compared to a Bough, but to a fruitful
bough by the well side; hereby Jacob foretells, Chal: paraph in hunc locum.
that Joseph should be a mighty people: for so does the Chalde paraphrast
expound these words saying, Joseph my son shall be multiplied as a Vine, that
is planted by the fou^taines of water; and so it came to pass, for Numb.
26.34.37.
we find that when the children of Israel were numbered in the plain of Moab
from twenty years old and above, the families of Joseph did far exceed the
rest in multitude: Jacob did foresee this, and therefore in this comparison, he
doubleth these words, saying, Joseph shall be a fruitful bough, even a
fruitful bough, that is to say, very fruitful in children, and the more
fruitful, because growing by the well side, for places of temperate moisture
are the fittest to plant trees in; This well is mystically the Blessing of God;
without the water whereof the stem and root of every tree will grow dry,
that is, every womb will be barren; for Children are the gift of God, and an
inheritance, that comes from the Lord.

Thirdly, Jacob steppeth further, and says, that The small boughs of this
fruitful tree, shall run upon the wall: the word in the original is Banoth;
which signifies both Daughters and Branches; and therefore some read this
text thus, his daughters have run upon the wall; which Rasi expounds of the
daughters of Egypt, that did strive to behold Joseph riding in his chariot;
and some of Joseph's mistress that gazed upon his beauty, but this cannot be;
for the Daughters of Egypt cannot be called his daughters; neither is there
any likelihood that Jacob prophesying of things to come, would turn back to
speak of Potiphars wife: and therefore howsoever the Hebrew word signifies
Daughters, yet in this place it is more fitly translated Branches; whereby is
meant the Increase of the two Tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh, both which bra^ched
out of Joseph; and so is it in the Septuagint: Two tribes shall come out of his
sons and shall receive their part and inheritance; Joseph is here likened
unto a fruitful Bough by the well side, in regard of the Increase of his
family, which is a Temporal Blessing; and in the first Psalm the Righteous
man is compared unto a Psalm. 1.3.
Tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth fruit in due season,
which is a Spiritual happiness; now if we respect both these blessings,
spiritual and temporal, I say, in respect of them both, Joseph was a fruitful
Bough: first because he had many branches or children, secondly because he was
a righteous man, and a true Israelite, in whom there was no guile; Whosoever is
like Joseph in goodness, shall not want Joseph's blessings; for his leaf shall
not fade, and whatsoever he shall do, it shall prosper; A good Bough: or a
good Tree has these three properties; Increasing, fructifying, flourishing:
therefore as the figtree is known from the Sycomore, by the leaves and the
fruit, for the one bears only leaves, the other both leaves and sweet fruit:
as the Olive is discerned from the bramble, and the vine from the brier, the
one by oil, the other by wine, both which the Brier and the bramble want, so
are the righteous known from the wicked by these Properties, as infallible
touchstones.

First the Elect like good Trees do ever Increase, and strive to attain to
perfection, by increasing in knowledge and Zeal: and though there be no
perfection in this life; Luc. 17.10.
for when a man has done his best, he cannot but acknowledge himself to be an
unprofitable servant; Isaiah. 64.5.
his righteousness to be like a stained cloth, and his 1. Cor. 1^.
greatest strength weakness, yet for all that they Endeavor to grow
continually from faith like a grain of mustard seed unto fullness of faith,
from Grace as low as the hy^op on the wall, to Grace as high as the Cedars of
Libanus, and from Goodness to Goodness; Nyssenus Peritel^iotetos.
It is a kind of Perfection (says Gregory Nyssenus) to labor for perfection;
his words be these; It is perfection not to stand at a stay, but still to
grow better, and never to limit or confine our perfection; wherefore as
Solomon went by 1. Reg. 10.1^.
steps up into his yuorie throne; so must we ascend into heaven by degrees,
where the golden throne of Perfection stands; It was a grace for Saul, that he
was higher the^ the rest of the people by the head: of the contrary part we
use to call such as be of a low stature, dwarfes, in disgrace; so it is in
spiritual things, a shame for a man who by Sin is a borne dwarf, not to
alter his stature, and grow higher by grace; considering that God has planted
every man by the well side, and offers grace freely to all.

Secondly, the Elect like good trees do ever bring forth fruit, and hereby we
may know, who are of God, and who are not; Mat. 7.16.17.
for as grapes are not gathered of thorns, nor figs of Thistles: so every
good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth either
no fruit at all: or that which is evil; God in paradise planted two Genesis 2.
Trees, both which bare fruit: the one was called the Tree of knowledge; the
other The tree of life; like unto both these Trees be the Children of God: for
first by hearing the word of God attentively, by reading the scriptures
diligently, and by meditating in the law of God continually, they Increase in
knowledge; and secondly by joining Practice to their Theorie, and action to
their understanding, they bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Ferus
says, It is nothing available for a man to eat of the tree of Knowledge,
unless he eat also of the tree of Life. So say I, It is to no purpose for a
man to be like the Tree of knowledge, unless also he be like the Tree of
Life; For what is Faith without works? is it not dead? and what is knowledge
without Love? does it not puff a man up? Therefore, whosoever is a true Joseph,
must not only be an increasing, but also a fructifying tree: like unto that
Apoc. 22.2.
Tree of life, spoken of by Saint John, which b^re twelve manner of fruits, and
gave fruit every month. These monthly fruits, be works of Charity, whereby
Faith is approved and known to be lively and iustificant: So says S.
Bernard, Do thou believe in Christ? why then do the works of Christ, that
thy faith may appear, not to be a dead, but a lively faith.

The Sycomore is a fair tree, but it bears no fruit, such like be
hypocrites, whose holiness is altogether in show, not in substance: The Cedar
is a high tree, but yet it yields naught but leaves; Such like are they that
have the Ezech. 1.
Wings, but not the Hands of the Cherubims, which mount up to the highest pitch
of Knowledge, but never second their knowledge with good works.

Solinus says, that there be Apple Trees in Assyria, the fruit whereof is as
yellow as gold, but yet being touched, it is rotten; such like be Papists and
Operists, which strive to be superabundant in works, and believe them to be
meritorious; but yet because they do not proceed from a true Faith their most
glorious works of supererogation, are but as rotten apples. Judge. 9.9.11.13.
There be three Trees very fruitful, the Oliue-tree, the Figtree, and the
vine: such like Trees, should all Christians be; First, like the olive, they
must yield the oil of gladness: and this is, to seek peace, and ensue it;
namely, Peace with God, peace with themselves, and peace with men: Secondly,
like the Fig Tree, they must give sweet fruit, this fruit is merci^, which is
showed in feeding the hungry, giving drink to the thirsty, clothing the
naked, harboring strangers, and in visiting them that be sick and in prison.
Thirdly, like the vine, they must bear the Grape of cheerfulness: and this
Grape is a good Conscience in all things. As the blood of the Grape cheareth
the heart of man, so is a good Conscience like a continual Feast, delighting,
comforting, and solacing the soul, Peace, Mercy, and a good Conscience, are
the fat, sweet, and cheerful fruits of good Trees, that grow by the
well-side of Grace.

Thirdly, the elect are Trees, whose leaves do never fade, but they are
green, as well in winter as in summer, that is to say, their Faith and their
Love do continue unto the end. These two leaves may indeed be blasted for a
time, but they do not perish utterly, nor become withered like Chafe, which
the wind drives away: because the Trees upon which they grow, are planted by
the waterside, which is the grace of God, being a Well of liuing-water
springing up to Eternal life; by which whosoever is planted, can never be
transplanted or removed; Bellar. lib. 3. de iustif. cap. 14.
The Church of Rome teaches the contrary: Namely, that a Man may fall from
grace, and consequently make shipwreck both of Faith and Love. But this cannot
be. For whom God loves, he loves unto the end, and none can take them out
of the hand of CHRIST, whom the Father has given unto him.

If then Grace be a water that springs continually, How can Faith and Love,
which are like the leaves of a Tree, ever finally fade or wither? Want of
moisture is the cause why Trees die. So then, if the Elect be Trees planted by
the waters side, as the Psalmist calls them; then surely they shall flourish,
like the Palm and the Baye-tree, and bear green leaves continually.

Faith and Love in some men are like grass, which to day flourishes, and to
morrow perishes. This Faith is dead, and this Love is counterfaite; but the
lively Justifying Faith, and true Love, which are proper, and only belonging
to the children of God, do never fade or decay; For Ioh. 5.24
he that belieueth says Christ, is already passed from death to life, 1. Cor.
1^.8.
and he that has true and perfect Love, never falls away altogether from
God; Cant. 8.7 Aug. de Cor. and gra: ca. 7.
for his love is so hot, that by much Water it cannot be quenched, neither
can the Fleuds drown it. Concerning this Faith and this Love, thus says S.
Augustine, He that is Elect, and whose faith works by Love, either never
falls at all, or if he do, he is revived, and raised up again, before
this life be ended.

By these three properties, Increasing, fructifying, and flourishing, every man
may examine and try himself, whether he be such a Tree, as shall for ever
grow in the Court of Gods house, Mat. 3.
or such a one as shall be hewn down with the Axe of judgment, and cast
into the fire.

And the Archers grieved him, and shot against him, and hated him. But his
bow abode strong, and the hands of his arms were strengthened by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob, of whom was the feeder appointed by the stone of
Israel.

The second general part of Jacobs speech is contained in these words, being a
history of Joseph's misery, and his deliverance.

First, the misery that he endured is set forth by this Allegory; The
Archers grieved him, and shot against him, and hated him. By these Archers
be understood his Brethren, and Putiphars wife his Mistrisse, all which were
the instruments of cruelty, for they grieved him, they shot against him, and
they hated him.

First, his Brethren shot against him two Arrows, the one drawn out of the
Quiver of the Heart, the other of the Tongue, namely, Malice and Mocking; For
Genesis 37.4
they hated him, because his Father loved him: and because of his Dreams, they
derided him, and called him Genesis 37.19.
the Dreamer in scorn. These two arrows were headed with steel, and wondrous
sharp, for there is no malice to the malice of a brother. For proof whereof
we may instance in Jacobs Sons, who conspiring against Joseph, said one to
another, Behold this dreamer co^mmeth, come now therefore and let us slay him,
and cast him into some pit, and we will say, a wicked Beast has devoured
him, then shall we see what will come of his dreams. Afterward, being
dissuaded by Reuben from this bloody practice, they sold him unto the
Ishmaelites, to be made a Bond-slaue, betwixt which condition and present
death, there is but little difference.

Joseph's Grace with his Father, and his Excellency in virtue above the rest,
stirred up his brethren to shoot against him the Arrowe of malice and envy.
Envy caused Anger and hatred. These two being the feathers of this Arrowe,
made their will swifte and speedy in the desire of killing him, wherein being
ouerswayed by Reuben, yet was not their fury stinted: for they rest not, till
they have sold him.

Amb. lib. ^. de Joseph.
Saint Ambrose hereout observes, this to have been an oversight in Jacob, for
preferring one of the brethren before the rest: who if he in Joseph loved and
preferred virtue, should rather have concealed his affection. For as he well
says, it is no marvel, if brethren fall out for Houses and Land, when
Joseph's brethren hated him for a Coat which was party-colored. There is
nothing more sweet then the concord of brethren, and therefore the Wiseman
says Eccl. 25.1.
Three things rejoice me and by them am I beautified before God, and men: The
unity of Brethren, the love of Neighbors, and a man and wife that agree
together. And the Psalmist co^pareth the concord of Psalm. 133.2.
brethren to the precious Ointmte^, which was powered upon the head of the
High Priest. For this cause Xenophon brings in Cyrus the Persian, Xenoph.
lib. 8 Cyropoed.
being ready to die, making this grave exhortation unto his sons, concerning
Love, and mutual friendship, saying: They which are sprung from one and the
same seed; which have been brought up by the same mother, and have been Nursed
in one house together, how should they choose but be most loving, friendly, and
familiar? To this league of Love both God and Nature exhorts brethren, Arist.
polit. lib. 7. cap. 7.
and yet how often is it violated and broken? Nay further, when Brethren or
such as be allied in blood, begin to shoot the arrowe of malice one against an
other, their shot is ever most violent, so says the Philosopher. The
contentions of Brethren be ever most bitter; had the sons of Jacob hated
Joseph for some notorious vice, then their hatred had been commendable, for it
is the duty of Gods children, Ps. 139.21.
to hate them that hate him, and earnestly to contend with them that rise up
against him, but their malice was devilish, for they abhorred him because Jacob
conceived a greater hope in him then in them, both of virtue and worthiness;
again, had they mocked him 1. Reg. 18.17.
as Eliah did the Priests of Baal for some hamous sin: then had they followed
the steps of God himself, who uses to laugh at the wicked, and to scoff at
them as they did at Adam, saying Genesis 3.22.
Behold the man is become as one of us: that hereby, as by the most sharp
reproof, he may force them to repentance, and newenesse of life: but they did
not so: for out of rancrous envy, and the very gall of bitterness, they mocked
and derided him: and with these Two arrows, to wit, Malice and Mocking, they
shot at him and grieved him; and his Grief was so much the greater, because he
received his wounds from his own brethren, who should have loved him because
he was their brother, and pitied him, because he was their younger brother,
and their fathers joy, and chiefest comfort.

Secondly, his Mistress Potiphars wife, shot likewise against him two poisoned
arrows: the one was hatred, the other Lying, for because he would not yield
unto her wanton allurements, Genesis 39.12.
but left his garment in her hand and fled away; Genesis 39.14.15.
she called unto the men of her house and told them, saying, behold he has
brought in an Hebrewe unto us to mock us, who came in to me to have slept with
me, but I have cried with a loud voice: and when he heard that I lift up my
voice, and cried, he left his garment with me, and fled away and got him out:
here we may see, that this adulterous woman's love was turned into hatred: even
as (l) Ammons filthy love, 2. Sam. 13.15.
or rather lust toward Thamar was changed after his unclean act; such are the
affections of the wicked, variable, inconstant, and unsteadfast.

To her hatred she ioynes a lie, and by the means of them both Joseph was
cast in prison, where he endured for a long time much misery; had he suffered
as an evil doer, his case were not to be pitied or lamented, but to be bound
in fetters of iron for well doing, who that reads his history, is so stony
hearted, as not to bear him company in his grief? yet Mat. 5 10.
Blessed are they that suffer for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven; and therefore Joseph was a happy man, and one that might
rejoice in his bonds, because howsoever he was accused, Amb. lib. 5. de Joseph.
yet he was not a malefactor; but a true servant both to God and his master;
first he served God truly because he did not give his members as servants to
uncleanness, secondly he was loyal to his master, because he would not be
drawn to pollute or defile his bed; and this may be gathered out of those
words which he spoke unto his mistress, when he refused to satisfy her
desire, Genesis 39.8.9.
Behold (says he) my master knows not what he has in the house with me,
but has committed all that he has to mine hand; there is no man greater in
this house then I; neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee,
because thou art his wife, how then can I do this great wickedness, and so
sin against God? The fear of God and loyalty toward Potiphar, who had put
him in trust, restrained Joseph from committing folly; whereupon Satan, who
is an Enemy of goodness, put it in the heart of his mistress to shoot
against him these two arrows of hatred and lying; But notwithstanding the
bloody shot both of his Brethren, and Potiphars wife, his Bow abode strong,
and his arms were strengthened by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; who
never forsook him in the midst of all his miseries.

In this history of Joseph's Misery, we may behold generally the condition of
all the afflicted members of Gods Church; as he was, so they are continually
grieved and wounded by the arrows of Envy, hatred, mocking and lying; the
Devil shootes against them the Arrowe of Envy, Greg. Moral. li. 5.
for being himself already condemned, and despairing of mercy, he is grieved
that any one should have hope of life eternal, and therefore he seeks by
all means possible to hinder the Salvation of the elect. Wisd. 2.24.
Through the envy of the devil (says the wiseman) Sin entered into the
world, and they that hold of his side prove it; and for this cause in the
Gospel he is called The adversary, because wheresoever God sowes wheat, he
casts Tares; and where he gives a commandment, which may stir men up to
godliness, he has his countercommand to provoke them to vice: and all this is
done by him out of envy to empaire Gods kingdom, and to enlarge his own: for
as the sons of Jacob hearing Joseph's two dreams, concerning the sheaues, the
sun, the moon and the eleven stars, did prognosticate, and foresee that
Joseph should be exalted above them, and therefore they envied him; and
consequently to cross his rising, sold him for a slave, so the devil knowing
that man shall be exalted above himself, and enjoy that happiness which he
has lost, endeavors by all plots and stratagems that he can devise, to
hinder him, the Arrowe of hatred is shot against the Elect by Potiphars wife,
The world, so says our Savior; Math. 24.9.
They shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be
hated of all nations for my names sake; what Christ spoke particularly to his
Disciples, is verified in all Christians; whether Clericall or Laicall; for as
Herodias laid a plot to bereave John Baptist of his head, because he preached
against her and Herod for their Incestous life, so the wicked of the world are
fired with malice, and seek for revenge upon that minister that shall but
glaunce, or speak never so covertly against their Herodias, their lawless
concubine, the sin that lies in their bosom, Wisd. 2.12.13.14.15.
Come (say they) let us defraud the righteous for he is not for our profit,
and he is contrary to our doings: he checketh us for offending the law, and
blames us as transgressors of discipline; he makes his boast to have the
knowledge of God, and he calls himself the son of the Lord, he is made to
reprove our thoughts, it grieueth us also to look upon him, for his life is
not like unto other men's, and his ways are of an other fashion: thus is the
minister of the Gospel made the mark, at which the wicked worldlings shoot
their arrows of hatred; as for the laytie, if any one amongst them be like
Nathaniel a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile, a zealous hearer of the
word, a hater of sin, a lover of righteousness, and one that makes
conscience of all things, him they call by the hated name of a Puritan: I know
there be many Wolves in sheep skins, and many Rotten bones enclosed in
painted sepulchers, and many hypocrites, which are shrouded under the Cloak of
Purity: for the devil can transform himself into an Angel of light; yet
our Savior says, Mat. 5.8.
That the pure in heart are blessed. It is then an open wrong to wound one of
Gods Puritans with the venomous shaft of hatred: for the rest, I say nothing in
their defense; they are wise enough (at least in their own conceit) to speak
for themselves; Lastly, the same Archers that I spoke of before, shoot
likewise the Arrows of Mocking and lying against the servants of God: with
these two the Jews pierced the reputation of the Apostles, when they said,
Act. 2.1^.
They are full of new wine; and the Athenians of Paul, when they called him
Act. 17.^8.
a Babbler: and the Children of Bethel, of Elisha when they said unto him 2.
Reg. 2.25.
Come up thou bald head: Come up thou bald head; our Savior was not only
Belyed, but also mocked by the Jews, when he hanged upon the cross; and every
one that takes up his cross, and follows him, is sure to drink of his cup:
for it is a pleasure to the wicked, by Lying and telling of untruths, to seek
the overthrow of the righteous, and by floutes and tauntes to disgrace them: So
says God to the Prophet Ezechiel Ezech. 33.32,
Lo thou art unto them [meaning the idolatrous Israelites) as a jesting song,
of one that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well. Thus we see that Joseph
and the Elect are Paralels: For as his Brethren, and Potiphars wife, were
Archers; So the Devil and Worldlings are Archers, both sorts shooting, the one
at Joseph, the other against the Elect, the Arrows of Envy, Hatred, Mocking,
and Lying.

And the Archers grieved him, and shot against him, and hated him, etc. The
Bow and the Arrowe are terrible and fearful weapons in battle; And
therefore, when Gods wrath is kindled against the wicked, and when he is
resolved to destroy them, he is said to use the Bow and the Arrowe, whereby
is signified Speedy vengeance: as in the Psalms, Psalm. 7.11.12.13.
God is a Righteous Judge, strong and patient and God is provoked every day.

If a man will not turn, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, and
made it ready, he has prepared for him the instruments of death, he
ordains his arrows against the persecutors.

Whereas then Jacob uses this Alleg^ricall speech, and compares his Sons
and Potiphars wife to Archers, and their Envy, Hatred, Lying, and Mocking to
Arrows, we may gather, that his meaning is to express how dangerous weapons
these four are, and therefore not fit to be used by the children of God, who
are bound to profess in imitation of Christ, humility and meekness.

The first Arrowe is Envy, an Arrowe made in Hell, by the Envious man, the
Devil: the Feathers whereof are these two; Sadness, or Discontent in the
prosperity; and Gladness or rejoicing, Ovid. Metamor. lib. 2. Horat. lib. 1.
Epist. 2.
in the adversity of another man.

It is Headed with a Desire to do hurt: and yet it is a weapon that ever
hurts him that uses it, more the^ him at whom it is shot, and therefore Pro.
14.0.
Solomon calls Envy the rotting of the bones, and the Poet tells us, that
Envy is a Pale woman, and very lean, with Rolling eyes, Rustie teeth,
Breasts full of gall, and a Tongue sprinkled over with poison: One that never
laughes but for grief, and never sleeps, but pines away continually, and even
dies with discontent. So says Job, Job. 5.2.
doubtless anger kills the foolish, and slays the Idiot. Envy then is but
a Fools Bolte soon shot: and ever most hurtful to him that shootes it,
wherefore, as the Apostle says, so say I to all men, 1. Pet. 2.1. Basil: in
sermon. de Invidia.
Let us lay aside all maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation, and
envy, and all evil speaking; for as Blasting (says S. Basile) spoileth
corn, so Envy is the bane of Friendship. In this world, Apo. 22.25.
and in the life to come, such as be Envious and dogged, shall be excluded
out of the society of the Elect: For without shall be Dogs, etc.

The second Arrowe is Hatred; and it may fitly be likened to that which by the
Psalmist is called Sagitta volans, The Arrowe that flies by day, Namely, the
Pestilence, because by it many have been destroyed and overthrown; It is like
the Iaueline 1, Sam. 18 11.
which Saul darted against David, thinking therewith to have nailed him to the
wall. He that shoots it, is 1. Ioh. 2.11.
a Manslayer, and a murderer: that walks in darkness, or in the shadow of
death. Such Archers as use it be like unto the Old Serpent their father, whom
our Savior calls a Ioh, 8.44
murderer from the beginning. It is the nature of the Serpent when he comes
to a fountain, before he drink, to cast up his poison, and after he has
drunk, to lick it up again; So the hateful Man, though for a time he
voydeth his stomach of venom, and makes show to be in love and charity
with all men, yet forthwith here turns to his vomit, and renueth his hatred.

I know by experience some such Serpents, whose poisonous hatred is so
inueterate, that it can never be forsaken, nor left utterly. It is written,
that Germanicus the Emperor did naturally hate a Cock, so that he could not
endure his sight, nor his crowing, and it is reported, that the Arabians and
Aethiopians do naturally abhor the mouse: like unto these be some sort of
men, in whom a hatred of their brethren and of their neighbors, is inbred by
nature; but let all such hear what Christ says Mat. 5.43.44.
ye have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy neighbor and hate
thine enemy, but I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you and
persecute you: here we may learn, that our Savior would have all men to
eschew hatred as a most deadly sin, and the root of many ill branches, as,
detraction, slander, murder, and such like abominable vices.

The third Arrowe is Mocking or Taunting; and this Arrowe, as it is used, is
both Good and Evil, if it be shot against the devil, it is a good arrowe, if
against God, it is evil: Psellus says, that some devils are driven away by
Jesting; and a Mock or Taunt is one of the most forcible medicines of sin,
and therefore some of the Prophets used it in desperate cures; 1. Reg. 18. 17.
Eliah mocked the Priests of Baal, teaching them by his witty mirth, that Baal
was no God, Isa. 44.
and Isaiah does pleasantly deride the Idol maker, because of the one half of
a tree, he makes a fire to warm himself, and to sees his meat, and with
the rest of the block he frames an Image, before which he afterward falls
down, gives honor unto it, worshippeth it, calls upon it, and serves it;
to shoot thus is the wounding of Satan, and the killing of sin. But when a
man makes God his mark to shoot at, then is the Arrowe evil; the arrowe of
Mocking is shot against God, either directly or indirectly: directly by foolish
Atheists, which say in their hearts, there is no God, and laugh at the^ that
serve him, saying, Tush the Lord sees not; indirectly when such as sincerely
honor and love him, are scorned and taunted; concerning this Arrowe the
Apostle says, Let not there be in you (l) [Auchrotes, that is, filthy and
foul communication, [Morologia, fond and foolish words, neither [Eutrapelia,
that is, vrbanitie and pleasant ieasting. In this place S. Paul by [Eutrapelia,
does note Bomolochia, which signifies Scu^rilitie, whereby Scoffs and railing
speeches are rashly cast out against others, rather with offense unto the godly
hearers, then with any edifying.

This Arrow ever sticks under the girdle of the proud and vainglorious man;
whose custom is to shoot it against such as he means to disgrace; with
this Arrow was Samson wounded by the Philistims, when they made him their Iud,
26.25.
laughing-stocke: and our SAVIOVR by the Jews, when they platted a Crown of
thorns upon his head, and put a Reed in his Right hand, and bowed their knees
before him, and mocked him, saying, Math. 27.29.
Hayle, King of the Jews.

The fourth Arrowe is Lying; of all the rest this is the worst, and the most
venomous Arrowe, for it is the Devils sharpest weapon, Ioh. 8.44.
who is a Liar, and the father of Lies. Genesis 3.4.
Herewith he wounds the Truth of God; Herewith he puts out the eyes of
men, so that they walk in the way of error; Herewith he stirs up strife
and dissension; Herewith he depriueth men of their lives, and herewith he
takes away the good name and fame of the innocent.

This Arrowe is so hateful in the eyes of GOD, that by an express
commandment, he forbids the shooting of it, Leu. 19.11.
saying; Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie.

Coloss. 3.9.
And the Apostle says, Lie not one unto another, seeing that ye have put off
the old man with his works.

Furthermore, GOD does not only forbid lying, but also threatens all such as
use this hellish Shaft.

Psalm. 5.6,
Thou shall destroy them (says David) that speak Lies, the Lord will abhor
the bloody and deceitefull Man. And the Wiseman says, Pro. 6.19 12.
That the LORD GOD abhors a lying tongue, and a false witness that
speaks lies. The very heathen Philosophers and Poets have in their writings
condemned the shooting of this arrowe; for Plato says, it is Plat. politic.
cap. 2.
odious both to God and men: And Menander affirms, that every wiseman hates a
lie: And yet there be some amongst us Christians, that call this arrowe, Mart.
Nauar. Azpil. in d.c. humanae, page 352. and 349
good wisdom, Greg. de Val. Jesuit. Tom. 3. disput. 5. quaest. 13.
a profitable art, and a wise defense; these are those croaking frogs that
come out of the mouth of the Beast, and the false Prophet; the frye of Satan
Rommish unclean spirits; I mean the Jesuits which teach equivocation, and
mental reservation, thereby to deceive, perverting the way of truth;
concerning such Impostors and deceivers, even Homer the heathen Poet says,
That man to me is as unjust as the gates of hell, which reserueth or concealeth
one thing in his breast, and speaks another: seeing then that these four
arrows shot against Joseph by his unnatural brethren, and his lascivious
mistress, are so hellish and so hateful, it concerns all men that fear the
Bow and arrowe of Gods vengeance, to abstain from shooting them against their
Brethren: to be an Envious person, to be a hater, to be a mocker, and to be a
liar, is to be the devils Archer, and he that shoots in his Bow, shall be
sure of his pay, which is torment everlasting.

But his Bow abode strong, and the hands of his arms were strengthened by the
hands of the mighty God of Jacob, of whom was the feeder appointed by the
stone of Israel.

In the words going before, we saw Joseph's misery; in these we may behold
his Deliverance, which contains two parts; first, his resistance, secondly,
his Advancement.

The Archers shot at him, and grieved him: for with their shooting, they did
drive him into bondage, and into Prison: yet for all that, they could not
utterly foil or overthrow him; for like a valiant Boweman, he resisted and
withstood them with his strong Bow; this Bow was his Confidence and Sure
trust in God; that he would deliver him out of all distress; we here read of
his Bow but not of his arrows, whereby it may be collected, that he used a
Defensive, but no offensive weapon; this Bow was unto him as a shield or a
Buckler; whereby he did retort and beat back the fiery darts or shaftes of
his enemies that hated him; being a weapon of such a temper, that it will never
break, but always abide strong; David protests that he will trust in the
Lord, and upon this Confidence he grows courageous, for he says, Psalm. 56.
I will not fear what man can do unto me; though a man be never so strong and
mighty, yet if he want this Bow, his greatest strength is weakness, and let
a man be never so weak and feeble, yet if he have this Bow, the gates of
hell shall not prevail against him; Joseph was never without a Bow; when his
brethren shot against him the arrows of Envy, and mocking; his confidence in
God armed him with charity and patience; wherefore he did not Recompense
evil with evil; when his mistress shot against him the arrows of hatred and
lying, the Bow of his confidence, even in the dungeon abode strong, making him
free from discontent, and fearelesse of death; They that trust in the Lord
shall be like unto the mount Zion (says the Psalmist) which shall not be
removed, but stands fast for ever; like unto this Mount was Joseph, for
because he trusted in God, neither Bondage nor Imprisonment had power to daunt
him; Pro. 20.26.
The Conies (says Solomon) are a people not mighty, yet make they their
houses in the rock; these creatures are weak by nature, and yet it is hard to
overcome them because of their strong fortresses wherein they dwell; a man is
like unto a Conie, impotent and feeble in himself, yet if he have the Conies
wisdom, (as Joseph had) to make his house in the rock, which is to Trust in
God, who is a fortress and a Bulwark, then is he sure, that neither the
world nor the devil, are able to endamage, or do him harm. As Joseph was, so
ought we to be all of us Bowemen: but not Archers; he is an Archer, that uses
both Bow and arrows; and he is a Boweman, that has a Bow, but never
shoots arrowe out of it; the Bow with an arrowe in it, is an Instrument of
offense; but the Bow without an arrowe is an Instrument of defense Christians
must be Bowemen in defending themselves; but not Archers to offend others, so
says Saint Paul,, Romans 12.17.19.
Recompense to no man evil for evil; avenge not your selves, but give place
unto wrath, for it is written vengeance is mine, and I will repaie, says the
Lord; and Tertullian says, It is the property of a christian, Tertulan a
pologet. Plato. in hipp. minor.
rather to be killed then to kill, and Socrates (as Plato reports) held it
far better for a man to suffer, then offer an Injury. There be two Bows,
which never ought to be out of the Eye and the hand of a Christian: the one is
for contemplation, the other for action; the one is an excellent weapon to
resist the temptations of the devil; the other, to withstand the assaults of
the world.

The first is the Bow of the Covenant, Genesis 9.15.
which is seen in a cloud, commonly called the Rainebowe, Apoc. 4.3. Greg.
hom. 8 in Ezech.
with which the throne of God was (as Saint John says) compassed; when he saw
his majesty in a vision, herein as Saint Gregory has very wittily observed,
there be two principal colors, Blewe, and Red, the one is Color of water,
the other of fire, that of water is a Remembrancer of the Deluge or Universal
flood, wherewith for sin God overwhelmed and drowned the whole world; the
other of fire, foresheweth the destruction by fire at the general and last
judgment; This Bow ought to be the object of every Christians eye; for there
is no consideration, that is a more forcible restraint of sin then the
remembrance of Gods Judgments, whether past, or to come, Joseph's mistress
when she first beheld him, shot at him three inchaunting arrows, therewith to
make him a vassal to her pleasure: the first was her Eye: for the text says,
that Genesis 39.7.
she cast her eyes upon Joseph; these were wandering and wanton eyes sparkling
lust; the second was her Speech, for with intising words she said, Come lie
with me: the third was her impudent behavior and continual soliciting of
him: for she did very unshamefastly day by day move and provoke him: Genesis 39.10.
but he hearkened not unto her, to lie with her, or to be in her company;
because he had this Bow continually in his Eye; the sight whereof put him in
mind, Genesis 6.2.
that Lust was one of the causes why the whole earth was ouer-run with waters:
and therefore he was afraid to commit folly, in yielding to her allurements:
besides, he foresawe that such as Eccles. 11.9.
rejoice in their youth and walk in the ways of their hearts, and in the
sight of their eyes, must be brought to judgment: therefore he made
conscience of sin; choosing rather in this life to suffer imprisonment for his
innocence, then at the last day to be condemned to eternal fire for adultery:
if all men had but that grace, as Joseph, had to look continually upon the Two
waterie and fiery colors of this Bow, and remember the Judgments of God;
this entising mistress of ours, the Flesh should not lead so many as she does
daily, Prou. 7.22.
like oxen to the slaughter, and like fools to the stocks.

The second is the Bow of Confidence, or Trust in God, this Bow is made of
the tree of life, for whosoever holds it in his hand shall never see death,
and he that uses it shall never be confounded; It is like unto 2. Sam. 1.22.
the Bow of Jonathan which never turned back, he that makes it his defensive
weapon, shall be ever in the end victorious, and therefore it is called a
strong bow; because it makes such as use it, strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might: what makes the Righteous man to be as bold Prou. 28.1.
as a Lion, but only this Bow? and what is the cause that the wicked flee
when none pursue: is it not the want of this weapon? Math. 13.45.
as then the wise merchant will sell his whole substance to buy a rich pearl,
so ought every Christian to esteem this Bow above all things, because without
it we lie open to the shot of our enemies, the devil and the world: there be
some that have no Bow at all; these be apistoi faithless people, or Infidels;
which neither know, nor believe, nor trust in the living God; some have a
Bow, but it will not abide the bending, these be Duopistoi, men that like
Thomas are hard of belief; and therefore very backward in putting their trust
in God; some have a Bow that will bend, but it is marvelous weak, these be
Oligopistoi, such as are of a little faith, as the Apostles were, when our
Savior said unto them, O ye of little faith; and therefore according to their
faith is their Confidence, small and weak; Lastly, some have a Bow, and it is
strong like Joseph's, these be Megalopistoi, to wit, such as be great in faith,
and therefore their Trust in God is ever firm and steadfast; This is the bow
which the children of God ought to have, by the means whereof they may be
shielded and defended from their enemies: David had this bow, and therefore
he thus says, I will not fear for ten thousands of people, that shall beset
me round about, though an host were pitched against me, my heart should not be
afraid; and Joseph had this bow, and therefore neither bondage, nor
imprisonment did dismaie him, or weaken his faith; for it abode strong.

Secondly, the advancement of Joseph is implied in these words; And the hands
of his arms were strengthened by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, of
whom was the feeder appointed by the stone of Israel; the hand and the arm in
the scripture, signify Power and Might, and therefore God, because he is
powerful and mighty, is said to have an outstretched arm, and so is it here
taken; for as the Chalde paraphrast says, Chal. Paraph. in hunc locum.
because Joseph kept the law of God in secret, and put his firm trust in him,
therefore his arms were adorned with gold, and he possessed a kingdom and
strengehened it: the meaning then of Jacob is this; the hands of his arms were
strenghthened; that is to say, he was promoted and advanced, for he was made
Lord of Pharaohs house, and ruler of all his substance: the history of Joseph's
deliverance and Advancement, is after this manner, registered by Moses: Genesis 41.
when none of the Scothsayers and wise men of Egypt could interpret Pharaohs
dreams; his Chief Butler who had been Joseph's fellowe-prisoner, and whose
dream Joseph had truly interpreted, told Pharaoh, that there was a young man
an Hebrewe, servant unto the chief steward, who had declared unto him his
dream, even as it came to pass: upon this, Pharaoh sent and called Joseph,
and they brought him hastily out of the prison, and he shaued him, and changed
his raiment, and came to Pharaoh: who said unto him, I have dreamed a dream,
and no man can interpret it, and I have heard say of thee, that when thou
hear a dream, thou can interpret it: Joseph hearing this, wishes
prosperity to Pharaoh, and insinuates himself by a dutiful comprecation,
saying, without me God shall answer for the wealth of Pharaoh: hereupon the
King declares his Two dreams, in the first whereof he saw seven fat fleshed
and well favored kine, eaten up by seven poor, very ill-fauoured, and
leane-fleshed kine: and in the second seven full and fair ears of corn
springing out of one stalk devoured by seven ears which were withered,
thin, and blasted with the east wind: Joseph having heard the dreams, first
interpreted them, and secondly gave him counsel what was best to be done;
these dreams, says he, are One in signification, though diverse in respect of
the vision: the seven fat kine, and seven full ears of corne^, betoken
seven years of plenty, and the seven lean, and seven withered ears of
corn, signify seven years of famine and scarcity, and the doubling of the
dream, shows the certainty, and speedy accomplishment thereof.

Now therefore, (says he) let Pharaoh provide for a man of understanding, and
wisdom, and set him over the land of Aegipt, let Pharaoh make, and appoint
officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Aegipt in the
seven plenteous years, and let them gather all the food of these good years
that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh for food, in the cities,
and let them keep it, so the food shall be for the provision of the land,
against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Aegipt, that
the land perish not by famine.

This interpretation, and this Counsel pleased Pharaoh, wherefore he said
unto his servants, Can we find such a man as this is, in whom is the spirit of
God? and thereupon he advanced him, and made him the chiefest of all his
Princes in the land of Egypt; that he might bind them unto his will, and
teach his Senators wisdom.

In his Advancement, we may behold eight prerogatives, which are the
Cognizances and ensigns of his Power and strength.

First by the Judgment of Pharaoh, he was held to be the wisest man in the
land; and therefore the fittest for government; can we find (says he) such a
man as this is, in whom is the spirit of God? this was a glory for Joseph to
be so censured by a King; herein we are taught two things, first what an
admirable endowement or gift wisdom is; it makes poor Joseph to be respected
by a King; and it lifts him up from the dungeon to the throne, and therefore
as the wiseman says, so say I to all men, Pro. 4.5.6.7.8.9.
Get wisdom: get understanding; forsake her not, and she shall keep thee,
love her, and she shall preserve thee, wisdom is the beginning, get wisdom
therefore, and above all thy possessions get understanding, exalt her, and she
shall exalt thee, she shall bring thee to honor if thou embrace her; she
shall give a comely ornament unto thy head, yea she shall give thee a crown^ of
glory. Wisdom makes as great difference between^ man and man, as Reason does
between some men and some beasts: for a man of understanding, learning, and
knowledge, does as far outstrip an Idiot, as an Idiot does some beasts.

Secondly, this Censure of Pharaoh shows, that none ought to have the hands
of their arms strengthened with authority, or to be called to place of Rule,
or oversight, either in the Church or commonwealth, but such as are thereunto
fitted and furnished with convenient and sufficient gifts, and graces of the
spirit: Eccl. 10.16.
woe to thee o land (says the preacher) when thy King is a child; and the
Prophet threatening the people for their sins, says, that women shall reign
over them, as a curse and a punishment: here by a Child and a woman, is meant a
foolish and a wanton governor. By whose indiscretion a flourishing kingdom is
quickly ruinated, now because Joseph was a man of wisdom, therefore Pharaoh
strengthened his arms, in setting him over his house, and giving unto him the
second place in the kingdom.

Secondly, Genesis 41.42.
Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand; here
is Joseph's second prerogative: for he is made keeper of the Kings Seale-ring;
in former times Princes used to wear such kind of rings therewith to seal
their letters, and their edictes; for we read that Alexander the Great, when he
had conquered Darius the Persian Monarch, used two rings: when he sent letters
into Europe, he sealed them with his own ring, but when any were carried from
him into Asia, they were sealed with the ring of Darius. Quintus Curtius says,
that Curt. lib. 6.
the Ring is a sign of government; wherefore this Ring being given by Pharaoh
to Joseph, did not only signify principal honor and dignity, but also
power and authority; for the text says, at thy word shall all my people be
armed; or as some read it, They shall kiss thy mouth, that is, they shall obey
thee in all things: here Joseph's arms are strengthened by his office, and
authority, for whatsoever he seals with this Ring, is accounted the Kings
act, and accordingly obeyed. Pharaoh in bestowing this office upon Joseph,
which never any in the land of Egypt had before that time, teaches Princes
whom to put in trust, not such as Haman (t) to whom Assuerus gave his Ring to
seal letters in the Kings name; Hest. 3.9.
for such as be like unto him be proud, are ever foolish, and such as be
foolish and proud are ever cruel, and being Cruel: they will play the tyrants
in their office; but if Kings make choice of such as like Joseph be wise,
humble, and gentle, then are they sure to be well served, and their kingdoms
discreetly governed.

Thirdly, Genesis 41.42.
Joseph by Pharaoh was arraied in garments of fine linen; or white silk,
whereof there was great store in Egypt, made of certain cotton or bombasine,
Plin. lib. 18.
that came of the Gosipon tree; these white silken garments were only worn by
Princes, and Priests amongst the Egyptians; Pharaoh then in clothing Joseph
with these Robes, does him the greatest honor that can be, for he creates him
one of the Peers of his Realm, and thereby proclaims him also to be as
wise, if not wiser then any of his Priests; Garments in all countries are
ensigns of honor and dignity, Dan. 5.16.
Belshazzer promises Daniel, that if he could read the writing upon the wall,
and show the interpretation thereof, he should be clothed with purple; and
Hest. 6.10.
Assueroh cammandeth Haman to apparel Mordecai in royal Rayments, because he
had discovered the treason of the two Eunuchs Bigtana and Teresh, who sought
to have laid hands on the King; as among the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and
Persians, so likewise amongst other nations, Rich apparel, made of Purple,
Scarlet, and such like stuffes; distinguishes Princes, and personages of
worth, and extraordinary quality, from the base and common sort of people:
wherefore that it might be publicly known to the Egyptians, that Joseph was
both a Prince and a wise Prince, Pharaoh cloatheth him with a garment made of
fine white linen, which was the peculiar and proper habit of Kings and Priests.

Fourthly, Pharaoh put a golden chain about the neck of Joseph; amongst the
Barbarians, the Captains and Soldiers in the time of war, used to wear
chains of gold about their necks for ostentation sake, the Gauls (says
Virgil,) when they beseeged the Capitol of Rome, had their white necks adorned
with golden wreathes; and the Soldiers of Darius, which were by the Persians,
called Immortales, the Immortal Band; when they fought against the
Macedonians, wore about their necks Chains of gold; and the Giants in the
scripture called Anakim were so named, because they did wear Chains, for
Anak^ in the Hebrewe tongue is a Chain. In times past, the Chain was the
proper ornament of such as were valiant in war; and therefore Pharaoh to
grace Joseph for his fortitude, (as indeed he was a man truly courageous; for
as the Poet says, fortiter ille facit qui miser esse potest; he behaues
himself valiantly, that can live miserably,) put about his neck a chain of
gold; Joseph being adorned with these complements of honor, a ring, a fine
linen garment, and a Chain; teaches us, that such ornaments are not to be
condemned by men of honorable place and condition, if these two rules be
observed, first that such things be not ambitiously sought and desired, and
secondly that they be not used for ostentation and vaineglorie,

Fifthly, Pharaoh set Joseph upon the best chariot that he had save one; the
Kings of Egypt had one chariot, which belonged only to themselves, another
for the Viceroye, who was next in authority to the king, we read that Assueroh
minding to honor Mordecai, Hest. 6.^1.
caused him to ride upon his own horse through the street of the city, but
Pharaoh does not so, he places him in the second chariot, and yet he honored
Joseph, as much as Assueroh graced Mordecai: though Pharaoh (God moving him
thereunto) strengthened the arms of Joseph's hands in making him the second man
in the kingdom, which is signified by his riding in the second Chariot; yet he
keeps the chiefest chariot for himself; and holds still the Sovereignty in
his own hands, so should all wise Princes do, they may at their own pleasure
advance whom they will to honor and authority; but yet they must take heed
that they keep their Throne and Scepter to themselves; for if a Subject grown
great by favor, and the accumulation of honors and dignities, do but once
top his Prince, the sweetness of Sovereignty, will cause him to break and
cancel the bond of fealty, and allegiance; wherefore such Kings as like
Assueroh place any of their subjects upon their own horses, in making them
equal to themselves, may be spoken of for their exceeding bounty and favor,
but never commended for their wisdom.

Sixthly, by the commandment of Pharaoh, they cried before Joseph, as he rid in
his Chariot: Abrech, this word has three significations: Hiero. in tradit.
Heb. super. hunc locum. in Genesis 41.43.
first, it signifies the father of the King: whereupon the Chalde Paraphrast
says, that the herold, by crying Abrech, proclaimed Joseph to be the father of
the King; Secondly, it is sometimes taken for a young father: and hereupo^ some
have made this exposition, saying, and behold they cried before Joseph, and
said, Tharg. Hierosoli. in hu^c locum. in Genesis 41.43.
long live the father of the King, who is a Prince in wisdom, and tender or
young in years; Thirdly, it signifies, Bow the knee, and accordingly some
have thought, that the Herolds in the street, in crying Abrech commanded the
people to kneel down and to do honor and reverence unto Joseph; this word
Abrech, being the proclamation of Joseph's authority and dignity, shows, how
his arms were strengthened; First in that he was styled the Kings father, or
principal Counselor; Secondly, in that he was called a young father: for it
is a glory for a man of Joseph's years to be so wise, as to be able to give
counsel unto a king.

Thirdly, in that the people were commanded to bow^ their knees unto him in
sign of honor and reverence.

Seventhly, Pharaoh called Joseph Zaphnath-paaneah; which in the Egyptian
tongue signifies the Savior of the world: because by his wisdom, and
industry he preserved not only Aegipt, but also many other provinces
besides, from destruction in the time of famine: Philo. lib. de Joseph. Joseph
lib. 1. antiq. Chrysostom, and Theodoret. super hunc loc. Genesis 41. August. in
genesis qu. 134. paraph. Chald.
some do interpret this name otherways, and say that it signifies a Reuealer
of secret things, and that therefore Joseph was so called, because he
understood what Pharaohs Dreams did presage; howsoever this name be
interpreted, it agrees with the qualities of Joseph; for he was both a
preserver of Egypt, and a Reuealer of secrets, and yet I think that herein
we are to follow the Egyptian tongue, in which Pharaoh spoke, rather then the
Hebrewe, so says Saint Hierome; Hier: in trad. heb in Genesis cap. 41.
though Saphanath-phaanecha in the Hebrewe tongue signifies a finder out of
hidden things, yet because it was given unto Joseph by an Egyptian, we ought
to have consideration of that tongue, in which these two words Zaphnath-paaneah
signify a Savior of the world; thus did Pharaoh not only strengthen Joseph's
arms by giving him Princely authority, but also by bestowing upon him a most
honorable name: and all these dignities by the appointment of God did light
upon Joseph (as Rupertus says) because of his Confidence and Trust in the
Lord: who thereby did recompense him for his former afflictions; making him of
a Bondslaue, a Prince and keeper of the Kings Ring, giving him in stead of
fetters, a chain of gold; in stead of Rags, garments of fine linen,
changing his Prison into a royal Chariot, the hateful lie of his mistress,
into an honorable acclamation, and the base name of a servant into this
glorious title Zaphnath-paaneah, the Savior of the world; that is of Egypt
and many other kingdoms, in the days of dearth.

Lastly, Pharaoh gave Asenath, the daughter of Potipherah, Prince or Priest of
On, unto Joseph to be his wife, this is an augmentation of his Honor, that the
King will provide a wife for him; Pharaoh did this, as Philo says, the more to
advance and honor Joseph, for Potipherah, Asenaths Father, was one of the
worthiest men among the Aegiptians.

Furthermore, he thought by this bond of affinity and alliance, to tie Joseph
for ever, to make his abode in Aegipt. This Potipherah, the Father in law of
Joseph, was not he that bought him of the Ishmaelites, and whose wife tempted
him to lie with her, as S. Hierome following the opinion of the Rabbines
imagines.

For howsoever S. Augustine thinks, Aug. quaest. in Genesis 136.
that it would have been a glory for Joseph to marry his Masters daughter,
and therefore if it had been so, the scripture would not have concealed an
Accident so memorable, and remarkable:

My conceit is, that such a Marriage would rather have been a Cross then a
Credit unto him, because Potipherahs wife, who must be supposed to be the
mother of Asenath, was an impudent harlot.

Wherefore I subscribe to the opinion of Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Genesis 63.^
who thus says, The King that he might heap more honor upon Joseph, gives
him the daughter of Potipherah to wife. Furthermore, because he that was his
Father in law, and he that was his Master, were both of one name, therefore
the Scripture distinguishes them by this addition; The Prince or Priest of On:
Joseph's master was the chief Steward of Pharaohs house, but his Father in Law
was the chief Priest of On, or Heliopolis; and both of them were called
Potipherah.

It was an extraordinary grace for the Kings of Aegipt, to bestow wives upon
their subjects, to call any of them Zaphnath-paaneah; to proclaim any of
them to be the Kings father; to suffer any of them to ride in the Second
Chariot; to put a chain of gold about any of their necks; to array any of
them in fine linen garments, to commit to their custody the Seale-Ring, or to
make a Bondman a Viceroy; yet all these honors were by Pharaoh given unto
Joseph, being a stranger by birth, by the envy of his brethren a bond-slaue,
and by the hatred of his Mistress, a prisoner. Men (says Gregory) do often
most of all fulfill the will of GOD, when they seem most of all to strive
against it: as Joseph's Brethren, by consulting to kill, and afterward, by
selling him, thought to have prevented his dreams; but all this in the end
wrought for Joseph's preferment and advancement. Gregor. lib. 6. moral.
Though both his brethren and his Mistrisse were Archers that shot at him, yet
his Bow abode strong. And because it did not starte aside, or break,
therefore the hands of his arms were strengthened: that is to say, He was
raised to Honor, by the hands of the mighty GOD of Jacob, of whom was the
Feeder appointed by the Stone of Israel.

Though Pharaoh was the isntrumental cause of Joseph's advancement, yet the
Mighty GOD of Jacob, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, was the primarie
and efficient cause, to whom it principally belongs To cast down and to
raise up whom he will; It was the Stone of Israel; the Rock of Salvation; and
the Fortress of the faithful, powerful JEHOVAH, that appointed Joseph to be
the Feeder, both of his Father, his Brethren, and the Egyptians.

Here we learn, that in one and the same action, Man may aim at one end,
and God at another; as for instance, the brethren of Joseph, when they sold
him, thought to have prevented his dreams; But the providence of God did
thereby procure his preferment. So the Devil, when he had put in the heart of
Judas Ischariot to betray CHRIST, and had stirred up the Jews to Crucify him,
thought himself surely seated in his kingdom, but yet that ignominious death
of our SAVIOVR, was contrary to the Devils expectation, the means whereby
both Hell, Death, and he himself were subdued.

Act. 4.27.28.
As then GOD did not only Permit, but also Decree, the Treason of Judas, and
the iniquity of the Jews, against his anointed SON, as it is confessed by
the Apostles, That Herod and Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel,
gathered themselves together, against the Holy Son of God, JESUS, to do
whatsoever his hand and his Counsel had determined before to be done.

So likewise, he did not only suffer, but also ordain, that Joseph should
be sold by his Brethren, as it is affirmed by Joseph himself, saying thus
unto his Brethren, upon his discovery; Genesis 45.5.3.
Be not sad, neither grieved with your selves, that you sold me hither:
for God did send me before you, for your preservation.

Now then, you sent me not hither, but God, who has made me a Father to
Pharaoh, and Lord of his house, and Ruler throughout all the land of Aegipt.

God did determine before, that Christ should be betrayed and Crucified; and
likewise that Joseph should be sold and imprisoned: yet not in the favor of
the sin committed by the Jews, and Jacobs sons, but for our Redemption, and
their preservation.

As in the History of Joseph's Misery, we did figuratively behold the
Afflictions of the Elect, of whom Joseph was a Type: So in his Preferment,
after the same manner, we may see the Advancement of Gods children, betwixt
whom and Joseph, there is a true correspondencie.

First, as Joseph lay in the stocks, til the King sent and delivered him, and
made him the chiefest of his Princes, so the children of GOD were bond-slaues,
till CHRIST the King of Kings, by his Passion, unloosed the bonds of Death,
wherein Satan by the means of sin, had chained them. Again, as Joseph for
his wisdom was made a Lord and a Ruler in Aegipt, so by Faith in CHRIST
Crucified, whereby a man is made wise unto eternal Life, the Elect are made
Apo. 1.6.
Kings and Priests, being Gala. 4.7.
no longer Servants, but Sons and heirs o^ God, through Christ. Secondly, as
Joseph had a Ring pu^ upon his hand by Pharaoh, Luc. 15.22.
so have the Elect a ring given unto them by God, as a token and pledge of his
Love. This Ring is an assurance that Romans 8.38.39.
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, shall be able to
separate them from the Love of GOD, which is in CHRIST JESUS.

Thirdly, as Joseph was arrayed in fine white linen: So the children of God in
sign of honor, are clothed as Christ was, in Apoc. 7.13.14.
long white rayments, washed in the blood of the Lamb; And therefore, they are in
the presence of the Throne of God, and serve him day and night, in his Temple,
and he that sits upon the Throne will dwell among them. Fourthly, as Joseph
had a golden chain put about his neck: So do the Elect wear chains, as it
is in the Canticles, Cant. 4.9
My Sister, my Spouse, thou have wounded mine heart, thou have wounded mine
heart, with one of thine eyes, and with a chain of thy neck. This Chain, is
Perfection, the Golden linckes whereof be Faith, Hope, Charity, Grace, Peace,
and Mercy: which Chain is put about the neck of Gods children, by GOD
himself. For every good gift is from above.

Fiftlie, as Joseph was placed in Pharaohs second Chariot, whereby he was made
almost equal to himself: So the elect ride triumphantly in Gods second
Chariot, Romans 8.15
which is Adoption: the first Chariot, is Generation, and none sittes in that
but CHRIST, Gal 4.6.
who is the only begotten Son of GOD; but in the second every one has his
place, that is ordained to eternal life. Sixtlie, as the Heralds of Aegipt, by
crying Abrech, commanded the people to kneel down and reverence Joseph; Even
so GOD cries Abrech, or, Kneel down ye Spirits of darkness, to my Joseph,
whom I have chosen and advanced: So then that is verified of all true
Christians, which the Psalmist speaks of CHRIST, saying Psalm. 72.
The Kings of the Earth shall kneel down before him, his enemies shall lick
the dust.

Seventhly, as Joseph had a new name given unto him by Pharaoh; So likewise
have the Servants of Christ a new Name given unto them by him, who is the true
Zaphnath-Paaneah, or Savior of the world, as it is in the Revelation; Apo.
2.17
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Mannah that is hid, and I
will give him a white stone, and in that stone a new Name written: By this
new Name, is meant that Renown and Honor, which God out of his bounty,
bestows upon such as honor, love, and fear him. Lastly, Pharaoh the more to
grace Joseph, gave him a wife of his own choosing, thereby perpetually to
bind him unto himself. The like favor does God show unto his chosen; only in
this there is a difference betwixt Joseph and the Elect, Joseph by his marriage
was made a Bridegroom, and Cant. 4.9
the elect by their marriage, are made Apo. 21.9
the Bride, and Spouse of Christ, which union is most honorable.

To conclude this point, the Genesis 41.46,
afflictions of Joseph and his misery, did continue but for a short time; till
he was 30. years of age, and of them but 14. but his prosperity lasted unto
the day of his death, which was in the hundred and tenth year of his age; Even
so the Saints upon earth wear crowns of thorns upon their heads, and carry
Christ's Cross upon their shoulders, only threescore and ten years, which are
ordinarily (as David says) the days of man, but they shall wear crowns of
gold, and carry Palme-branches in their hands, which are the signs of glory
and immortality for ever; and therefore S. Paul says, Romans 8.^8
I count that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory which shall be show ^^to us, and in another place he says, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Ou^ light afflicti^^ which is but for a moment, causes unto us, a far more
excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.

The third general part of Jacobs speech, being a Benediction or Blessing,
lies in these words, Even by the GOD of thy Father, who shall help thee, and
by the Almighty, who shall bless th^ewith heavenly Blessings from above, with
blessings of the deep, that lies beneath, with blessings of the breasts, and
of the womb; The blessings of thy Father shall be stronger then the blessings
of mine Elders. Unto the end of the Hills of the world, they shall be on the
head of Joseph, and on the top of the head of him, that was separate from his
brethren.

The Blessings that Jacob bequeatheth unto Joseph, are of God, he only being
the Heralde to deliver them. And therefore he says, The Almighty shall help
thee, the Almighty shall bless thee; And these Blessings are in number three.

First, Joseph is blessed with a Blessing from above, or from heaven, whereby is
understood, not only the pleasant showers and Rain, wherewith the portion of
his posterity should be watered, but also the goodness and wholsomnes of the
air, and the sweet influence of the stars, as Moses more at large explaneth
this prophecy, saying Deuteronomy. 33 13.14.
Blessed of the Lord is his land, for the sweetness of heaven, for the dew, for
the sweet increase of the Sun, and for the sweet increase of the Moon.

1. Reg. 17
To want rain, is the empouerishment of the earth; and drought brings Famine.
And therefore, such as will not observe and keep the Commandments of God,
are thus threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.24.23.
The Lord shall give thee for the rain of thy Land, dust and Ashes, even from
heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed: the Heaven
over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee iron.

Of the contrary part, moderate rain and showers ma^e the earth fruitful, and
cause plenty; And therefore the Lord says that unto such as fear him, and
call upon his Name Deuteronomy. 28.22.
He will open his good Treasure, even the Heaven to give Rain unto their Land
in due season.

This then, is Joseph's first blessing, that his Children shall dwell in a Land,
the Climate whereof shall be wondrous pleasant, and the soil very fertile.

Secondly, he is blessed with the Blessing of the Depth, that lies beneath, by
which is meant, the Rivers and Springs, which do arise from beneath and water
the earth.

Such Countries as have store of Rivers and Springs, are ever accounted the
most pleasant, and the most plentiful of all things; and for this cause they
be called Paradises; As it may appear by that description of Sodom and
Gomorrha, made by Moses; where he says, Genesis 13.10.
So when Lot lifted up his eyes, he saw that all the plain of Iordane was
watered every where, For before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha, it was
as the Paradise, or the Garden of the Lord.

Genesis 2.
The garden of Eden, which God planted, and wherein Adam and Heuah were placed,
because it was so well watered, is ordinaarilie called Paradise; which word as
some think, is derived from the Hebrewe word Pardes, which signifies A
Garden, or place enclosed for pleasure.

Some will have it to be a Persian word, Septuag. interp. Iul. pollux. li. 2.
Onoma.
because Xenophon and Philostratus, called such places as were made and planted
for the delight of the Persian Kings, Paradises, and others, (as Suidas) draw
it from the greek verb [Paradeuein,] which is, to water: So every Country
that is well watered and moystened with Springs, as the Garden of Eden was,
with these four rivers, Pishon, Gihon, Hiddekel, and Perath, may rightly be
called a Paradise; both in regard of profit and pleasure, with the possession
of such a Province, (as Jacob says) the Tribe of Joseph shall be blessed and
endowed.

Thirdly, he is blessed with the Blessings of the Breasts and of the womb; God
made the womb to bear, and the breasts to give suck; by these two then, is
signified not only the plentiful increase, and prosperous education of
Children: but the multiplying also of Beasts and cattle. This is one of those
blessings which God promises unto such as cleave unto him, and obey his voice;
So says Moses, The Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of
thy body, and in the fruit of thy Cattle; And the prophet David amongst other
Blessings, reckons up these two. First, the increase of children, for he
says, Psalm. 128 1.2.3.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways, when
thou eatest the labors of thine hands, thou shall be blessed, and it shall be
well with thee, thy Wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the sides of thine
house, and thy Children like the Olive plants, round about thy Table.

And secondly, the multiplying of Cattle, for he counts it a great
happiness, when Ps. 65.13
the Oxen are strong to labor, when the Pastures are clad with Sheep; and
when they bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in the streets.

As the increase of the womb is a blessing, So contrariwise, Barrenness is a
punishment, not only in women, but also in dumb creatures; And therefore
because the Ephraimites did forsake God, and went to Baal-peor, Hoseah the
Prophet prays against them, Hos. 9.14.
O Lord give them, what will thou give them? Give them a barren womb, and
dry Breasts; which is, as if he should have said, O Lord, turn Jacobs
blessing upon Joseph's posterity into a Curse, because of their Idolatry.

Also Moses says, Deuteronomy. 28.18.
If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and to do all
his Commandments and Ordinances, Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy Land, the increase of Kyne, and the flocks of thy
Sheep.

These are the great Blessings given unto Joseph, being so much the greater,
because, as Jacob adds, They shall be stronger then the blessings of mine
Elders. Which is, as if he should have said Chald. paraphr. in hu^c locum.
Let not only those blessings which I bestow upon thee, light upon thy
Posterity, but also all those blessings of mine Ancestors, Abraham and
Isaak, which were such, as great Princes desired to enjoy them.

Furthermore, he prophecieth not only, that they shall be great Blessings,
but also of long continuance. Even to the end of the Hills of the world,
that is; They shall Rab. Kim. in hunc locu^.
continue, as long as the Hills endure, and be upon the head of Joseph, and on
the top of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. Here we must
consider that these Blessings promised to be perpetual, concerning things
temporal, were conditional; namely, if the Children of Joseph would walk in
the ways of the Lord; otherwise, they should be turned into Curses; seeing
then that both the promises of Blessings, and the Threatenings of Curses, are
sealed and signed, upon this Condition Genesis 4.7.
if thou do well thou shall be accepted, and if thou do not well, sin
lies at thy door: the consideration hereof, ought to be a motive unto every
one of us, to be careful, how we live, and to endeavor our selves to observe
and keep the statutes and ordinances of God: in hope to be blessed and
accepted: and out of fear to be cursed and rejected.

As in other things, so in respect of these Blessings: Joseph is a type and a
figure of the Elect; for as his posterity by the providence of God, were to
dwell in a land, the furrows whereof should be watered abundantly with reign
from above, and the valleys with springs from beneath: and where the Breast
should not be dry, nor the womb barren, euenso the Children of God, have
their dwelling in such a land; and this is the land of promise, or the
Catholic Church; herein the Reign that comes from above, is the Grace of
God, the River and spring beneath, is Faith, and the Increase of the Breasts
and the womb, the works of Charity: and all these are heavenly Blessings:
for God is the Causer of them all: as Reign, Rivers, and fruitfulness of the
womb, do every one of them come from God: Ephesians. 4.7.
so, Grace is given from above, 1. Cor. 12.8.
faith is engendered by the holy ghost: Gal. 5.22.
and Charity is the fruit of the spirit: again as the Tribe of Joseph was
blessed with these three Blessings, Reign, Rivers or Springs, and the Increase
of the breasts and the womb, so the elect, and none but they, have these
three heavenly gifts bestowed upon them, Grace, faith, and Charity: and these
three may well be likened to the Reign, to a River or Spring, and to the
Breast and womb of a fruitful woman, in regard of their effects: For first as
Rain moysteneth the earth, and makes it apt to bring forth fruit: so the
grace of God mollifieth the heart of man, which is naturally stony* and
thereby makes it not only fit to receive the Seed of the word, but also to
bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Secondly as Rivers and Springs run
continually and water the Valleys, so faith which is lively and Justifying,
after it is once infused from above, never cease working, but is in the heart
of man, like living water springing up to everlasting life. Thirdly, as the
Increase of the Breasts and the womb, is the Increase of Gods Church and the
commonwealth: so the Charity of the Elect brings forth good works: whereby
God is honored: and the members of Christ relieved: to conclude; Herein only
is the difference betwixt the Blessings of Joseph, and the Blessings of the
Elect: his were conditional: theirs are not, but do continue unto the end of
the hills of the world: that is, Aug. de cor. and gra. cap. 7.
for ever: for Grace, Faith, and Charity, are never finally lost by the Elect,
nor taken away by God, because he bestows, Grace Faith, and Charity only
upon them whom he loves, and whom he loves, he loves unto the end.

THE TWELFTH SERMON OF BENJAMIN.
GENESIS 49.27. Benjamin shall rauine as a Wolf: in the Morning he shall devour
the preye, and at Night he shall divide the spoil.


Benjamin was Rahels second Son, and the youngest of the twelve Patriarchs;
at his birth Rahel dyed, Genesis 35.18.
and when she was about to yield up the Ghost, she called his name Ben-oni;
which name signifies two things.

First, the Son of Strength, and secondly, the Son of Sorrow.

Oleaster
Some think that she by calling him Ben-oni meant that she herself had
showed great Strength in bringing him forth, or else, that he was a Strong
child, and stronger then she was, because he ouerlined her; but I rather hold
with them, which by the Hebrew word On, in this Name, do understand Sorrow;
Being of opinion, that Rahel hereby expresses the ^orrow of
child-bearing-women; and the sorrows of Children when they are borne.

First every Child may truly be called the child of Sorrow, because it is
conceived, and brought forth in Sorrow; and this punishment was laid upon
Heuah and her Daughters, because she was seduced by the Serpent; Unto the
Woman he said, I will greatly increase thy Sorrows, Genesis 3.16*
and thy Conceptions: In Sorrow shall thou bring forth Children. The pains
of Conception be the headache, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 6.7. Arist lib. 7. de hist.
animal. cap. 4.
dizzinesse, abhorring or loathing of meat, ouerflowing of the stomach, and
such like, as Aristotle, and Pliny affirm; Also the pains of Childbirth be
wonderful grievous, and therefore S. Basil, explaining these words of the
Psalmist; The snares of death compassed me, and the pains of hell caught me;
compares the sorrows of a woman in travail to the torments of hell; in
regard of their extremity; and they are the more fearful, because oftentimes
women in travel give up the ghost as Rahel did, and many of them are ripped up
before they can be delivered; After this pitiful manner, were the mothers of
Scipio Africanus, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Julius Caesar, and Manlius used; and therefore our Savior says, Ioh. 16.21.
a woman when she trauaileth, has sorrow, because her hour is come; And the
Apostle when he would express the great pains which the ministers of the
Gospel suffer, compares their travel to the labor of a woeman in childbirth.

Secondly, every man is Ben-oni, the son of sorrow; because his life is a
paineful pilgrimage upon this earth, which is a vallie of tears; so says God
unto Adam; Genesis 3.17.
Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of thy life: And accordingly, Jacob spoke unto Pharaoh, saying, Genesis
47.9. Herod in Terpsich.
The whole time of my pilgrimage, is a hundredth and thirty years, few and
evil have the days of my life been: For this cause the Thracians used to
lament and weep, when their children were borne, but to laugh and rejoice,
when any of their friends died; and the reason hereof is given by Job: who
says, Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of
trouble, he shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down, he vanishes also as
a shadow, and continues not.

Thirdly, every one is the Child of sorrow, in regard of original sin,
Romans 6.23.
the wages whereof is death; this Natural corruption which by the fall of Adam
is transfused upon his whole posterity, makes man not only liable and
subject to infinite calamities in this world, but also to death eternal
hereafter, unless Psalm. 5^.1.
this Sin wherein all men are borne, and this iniquity wherein they be
conceived, he washed away by the blood of Christ; Ephesians. 2.5.
By nature (says S. Paul) we are the children of wrath; that is not by
creation, but by Adams transgression, and so by birth: And Job says; That a
child of a day old is not pure in Gods sight; seeing then that every man is
borne in sin, therefore is every man a Ben-oni, the son of Sorrow, because
Death and Sorrow be the effects of sin.

Rahel having called this son, Ben-oni, in his Name, (as I have said,)
declared, both particularly and generally, the pains of Childbirth, the
sorrows of man's life, and the reward of sin: and thereupon, to give
instance, for the truth of her assertion, she gave up the ghost; proving by
her own example: that women bring forth children in sorrow, that man's life is
a painful pilgrimage, and that the wages of sin is death; these are the
reasons why she called his name Ben oni, the son of sorrow; But his father
called him Benjamin; that is, the son of his right hand. Amongst the ancient
Hebrews nothing was rashly or inconsiderately done, either in the imposition
or Changing of names; Rahel had reason to call her son as she did Ben-oni,
and Jacob likewise had good cause to change his name, as he does, by calling
him Benjamin. It is apparent both out of divine and profane histories; that in
former times, all men had an especial care to give unto their children, fair,
fit, and well-boding names; and they greatly disliked, unpleasant, dismal, and
unlucky names; Herodotus writes, that Cyrus was first called Spaco, which in
the language of the Medes signifies a Dog, and because this was a foul
name, it was changed into Coresch or Cyrus, which in the Persian tongue
sounds a Lord; Theophrastus (as Strabo says) was so named by his Master
Aristotle: Strabo. lib. 13.
in exchange of his filthy name Tyrtanus, and amongst the popes of Rome, the
Changing of names was first brought in by Sergius, who before was called Os
porei, or Swinesnout; so here Jacob does change Ben-oni which is a name of
grief and Sorrow into Benjamin, a name of strength and honor: some think,
that he calls him Benjamin the son of his right hand, because he only was
borne in Canaan, in the south part, which is upon the right hand, if one turn
his face to the sun rising; some, because he was borne in Bethlem, within the
Tribe of Judah. Lyranus is of opinion, that he was so called, because Jacob
bare so strongly and patiently the heavy cross of his Rahels death; and
Oleaster says, that Jacob hereby shows that he had, notwithstanding his age,
strength to beget a child; But it is most probable, that Ben-oni was changed
into Benjamin by Jacob; first least it might have brought still to his
remembrance the loss of his dearest wife; And secondly to show how dear he
should be unto him, both because he was his youngest son, and also for his
mothers sake; In the Scripture, the Right hand has eight several
significations; First by it is meant, strength and fortitude; So does the
Psalmist use it, saying; Psalm. 44.3.
They inherited not the land by their own sword, neither did their own arm
save them; But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou did favor them. Secondly it is taken for help
or aid: as it is in Job; Stretch forth thy right hand to help the work of
thine own hands; Thirdly, for the exuperancie of honor and glory: as it is
in the Psalm; The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand, till I
make thine enemies thy footestoole; Fourthly, it signifies the Sweetness of
Christ's love toward his Spouse, the Church; As it is in the Canticles, Cant.
2.6.
His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me.

Fifthly, by it is understood the abundance of divine and heavenly pleasures;
so says David; Psalm. 16.1^.
In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.

Sixthly, it is used to declare that which is good, just and holy; So says the
wiseman, The Lo d knows the ways which are upon the right hand, but the
ways which are upon the left hand are froward, and perverse.

Seauenthly, it signifies such things as be spiritual blessings; And so does
Solomon apply it saying: The length of his days is in his right hand, and in
his left hand be rich^s and glory. In this speech the Wiseman by the length of
days which is in the right hand of a righteous man, means the eternity of
blessedness in heaven: And by riches and glory, which are in the left hand,
the temporary goods and prosperity of this life.

Lastly, the Preacher says, Eccles. 10.2.
the heart of a wiseman is at his right hand, but the heart of a fool is at
his left hand; the meaning of which words, shows the difference betwixt the
righteous and the wicked: For the cogitations and the actions of the one sort,
are ever Right, that is full of honesty, innocence, and wisdom: But the
imaginations and enterprises of the other, are foolish and wicked, declining
unto the left hand, which leads unto destruction: hence it appears that it
is a sign both of Love and wel-wishing in Jacob toward his son, because he
changes the disastrous name of Ben-oni into the well-portending name of
Benjamin; To be the Son of the fathers Right hand, is a great favor, Xenoph.
li. 8. Cyropaed.
and yet the ancient Persians (as Xenophon reports) used to place such as
they meant to honor upon their left hands; But the Hebrews observed a
contrary custom ^. Reg. 2.19.
for we read that Solomon placed his mother upon his right hand, and at the
general judgment, it is said that Math. 25.33.
Christ shall set the sheep upon his right hand, and the goats on the left;
Therein honoring the Elect, and disgracing the reprobates.

These two names Ben-oni and Benjamin imposed by Rahel, and Jacob, do
mystically decipher the two estates of mankind: The first, under Adam by birth,
and the second under Christ by grace; Romans 5.12.19.21.
for as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death went over all men; for as much as all men have sinned; so by the
obedience of one, are many made righteous; that as sin had reigned unto
death, so might grace also reign by righteousness, unto eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord; by original sin then which is corruption engendered in
our first conception, whereby every faculty both of body and soul is prone
and disposed to iniquity; Every one man is Ben-oni, the son of sorrow; but
through the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, who was borne and died for the
redemption, and justification of the world, every man that truly believes, is
a Benjamin, the Son of Gods right hand.

Benjamin shall rauin as a wolf, etc. The wolf, according to the phrase of
the scripture, is the emblem of four things, Tyranny, Fraudulencie,
Hypocrisy, and Courage; for the first our Savior says unto his disciples,
Mat. 10.10.
Behold, I send you forth like sheep among wolves; these wolves, are bloody
tyrants, enemies of the Cross of Christ; which like the wolves of Africa that
all night long bark at the moon, do continually blaspheme that sacred name,
at the sound whereof all Kings ought to bow; such were the Roman Emperors
successively from Tiberius unto the reign of Constantine the great, and the
first Christian that swayed the Imperial scepter; and therefore their
Succession in regard of Cruelty and Tyranny, is resembled in one of those
visions which Saint John saw, Apoc. 17.3.
by a scarlet colored Beast full of names of blasphemy, which had seven
heads and ten horns; and such a wolf at this day is the Turk; who not only
with his tongue strives to pierce the side of Christ, by calling him in
derision the crucified God; but also by his Sword makes havoc of the poor
members of Christ Jesus; But shall Benjamin be such a wolf? shall his
posterity be given to tyranny, no: for then should the words of Jacob tend
to the disgrace of Benjamin; is indeed they do to the contrary; for there is
no man so odious, and so much subject to hatred, as is he that is a Tyrannical
wolf; such ravenous Beasts are hateful both to God and man; God (says the
Psalmist,) abhors the blood-thirstie and cruel man. And therefore, 1. Reg.
22 34.
He couers him with shame, and cuttes him off for ever; The woluish kings,
Ahab and Herod, and the woluish Queens Iezabel and Athalia, which all of them
imbrued their hands in the blood of Innocence, were by the Hand of GOD, put to
violent and shameful deaths.

1. Reg. 22 34.
An Arrowe shot from the bow of an Aramite, Acts. 12.23.
a Worm, 2. Reg. 11 16.
the Sword, 2. Reg. 9.35.
and Dogs, revenged the blood of the guiltless, which had been by them
unjustly shed; Thus does the rigor of punishment from heaven, plainly
demonstrate, how hateful the Tyrannical Wolf is in the Eyes of him who is
Compassionate and Merciful, our heavenly FATHER.

Seeing then that all men are commanded to be merciful, as the Father in
heaven is merciful; Oh let every one that hops to find Mercy, beware of
being a wolf in cruelty; and strive to be like unto Christ, a Lamb in
meekness and innocence. But alas, Experience proves, that for one Lamb,
that is chosen, there be many wolves, that shall be rejected for their
cruelty; We may know them by their works, Oppression of the fatherles and the
widow, Extortion, the grinding of the poor man's face, and the selling of the
Needy for shoes, art brandes and marks of their woluish profession.

The eyes of these wolves though for a time they swell with fatnes, yet when
the day of slaughter comes, they shall surely be sacr^fices of wrath, because
God hates and abhorres them: neither are they less odious unto men; for who is
it that will not rejoice when a Tyra^t dies? even as the 1. Sam. 18 6.
women of Israel did sing and play upon instruments, when Goliath was slain, so
the people rejoice, when a woluish Giant dies; because by his death, they one
delivered from oppression and wrong. The Romans did not only rejoice at the
death of Nero Caligula, and the rest of their imperious Wolves, but did also
insulte ever their dead bodies, haling them along the streets of Rome; and
hanging them upon Gibbets, as the fittest meat for ravenous fowls.

Hence it comes to pass that Tyrants like Dyonisius, dare never go abroad
without A strong Guarde, because they know that Cruelty causes hatred; and
the hatred of the people, raises reuengefull Rebellions and insurrections.

Secondly, the Wolf is the Emblem of fraudulencie, and therefore the Prophet
Zephaniah calls unjust Judges, such as oppress the innocent, and let the
guilty go free, Wolves, saying, Zeph. 3.3.
Her Judges are as Wolves in the evening, which leave not the bones till the
morrow; Neither does he miscal them. For this name is suitable to the
disposition of such as will be corrupted with bribes; Some Judges and some
Lawyers being weighed, will be surely found to be deceitful upon the
weightes; And these are they which by their subtletie and fraud devour the
afflicted, and eat up the poor from among men.

If in this respect Benjamin had been compared by Jacob to a Wolf, then could
we think no otherwise, but that both he and his posterity were Cursed
creatures, because Psalm. 32.2.
They only are blessed, to whom the Lord has not imputed sin, and in
whose spirit there is no guile. But this is not Jacobs meaning; For in these
words he blesses Benjamin. And so likewise does Moses, saying, Deuteronomy. 32.12.
The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, the Lord shall cover
him all the day long, and dwell between his shoulders.

Now then, if either Benjamin, or his children had been like unto Wolves in
fraudulencie; Moses before his death would never have bestowed such a Blessing
upon them; The fraudulent and the Tyrannical wolf, are like Samsons Foxes,
tied together by the tails: for in the aim and end of their cruel and
deceitful actions, they agree and are combine together like brethren in evil,
to preye upon the poor, and so eat up the innocent and the harmless man.

Thirdly, the Wolf is the figure of Hypocrisy, and so we may gather out of
the words of our Savior, saying: Mat. 7.15
Beware of False Prophets, which come unto you in Sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are Ravening wolves: An Hypocrite is A whited wall, a painted
Sepuleher, and a Wolf in a Sheep skin. Though he have a countenance which
promises goodness, yet is he stonie-hearted; Though he make a glorious show of
Sanctity, yet is his mind full of corruption; And though he seem to be
clad with meekenes and innocence, yet is he proud and cruel: For Matt. 23.14.
under a color of long Prayers, he will devour the House of the Widow: And
therefore in the Hebrew tongue, he is very fitly called Chaneph, which
signifies Impure, or Polluted; and also such a one as boasts of himself,
and braggeth of his own virtue: As the proud Pharisie did, who Luc. 18.11.12,
stood and prayed thus with himself: O God I thank thee, that I am not as
other men, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or as this Publican. I Fast twice
in the Week, I give Tithes of all that ever I possess.

There be many of these woluish Impostors, and deceitful Wolves in the
world, which because of their Sheep clothing, can hardly be known and
discovered from the Sheep of Christ's Fold, unless they be examined by the
Rule of our Savior, which is this, You shall know them by their Fruits; Do
men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of thistles.

The Thorn has fair Blossoms, but it bears no Grapes: the Thistle brings
forth a flower, but never a Fig; So the hypocritical Wolf will transform
himself into the heavenly shape of an Angel, and give goodly words, softer
then oil; but it is as impossible to find a good work done by him, as a
grape upon a thorn, or a fig upon a thistle; Jacob does not liken his son
Benjamin to this Wolf: for if he had done so, then had he exposed both him and
his tribe to the curse of God, fox hypocrites are a Matt. 23.13.
cursed generation, Mat. 3.7
and a generation of vipers.

Fourthly, by the Wolf is signified Courage in fight, for though he be
neither so strong, nor so well armed as the Lion, yet he is as fierce and
resolute as he. And therefore Jacob compares in this place, the Tribe of
Benjamin to a Wolf, in regard of courage and valor in battle, for though the
children of Benjamin were neither so strong in respect of number, nor so well
armed in respect of power and authority, as the Tribe of Judah was, who is
compared unto a Lion, yet they were as courageous in fight as they: Theodor:
vltim. quaest. in Genesis
wherefore this Prophecy shows the warlike disposition of the whole Tribe of
Benjamin; whose children were indeed, as they are called Wolves, as may appear
Iud. 20.15.16.17.
by that fierce battle, which they fought with the other tribes, wherein they
twice overcame them, being but six and twenty thousand men, and seven
hundredth, which fought against four hundred thousand men that drew sword,
even all men of war; and also by the wars which the house of Saul had with
David, and the Tribe of Judah, for the Kingdom. These several conflicts are
sufficient testimonies of Beniamins courage and resolution in Fight; for which
cause he is compared unto a Wolf, that shall rauine, or make havoc of his
enemies, as indeed the children of Benjamin did, for at two several times,
they slew of the men of Israel forty thousand, which could handle the sword.

In the morning he shall devour the Preye, and at might he shall divide the
spoil Of these words there be five several interpretations. First, Rabbi
Solomon says, that hereby is signified Judge. 21.23.
the exploite of the Beniamites, in taking as a preye, the daughters of Silo,
as they came forth to dance, to be their wives, which afterward they
distributed and divided as a spoil amongst themselves. Or secondly, says the
same Author, these words of Jacob may be applied to Saul, who in the morning,
or the beginning of the Israelitish kingdom, preyed upon the Amalekites, and
to Hest. 7.10. and 8.5.
Mordecai, and Hester, being both of them Beniamites by birth, who in the
evening, that is to say, after the decay and dissolution of the Kingdoms of
Israel and Judah, Hiero. in tradit. Hebr. in Genesim.
made preye of Haman, and of their enemies. Thirdly, S. Hierome says, that
some of the Hebrews were of opinion, that by this speech Jacob meant the Temple
of Jerusalem, which was built within the portion or inheritance of Benjamin,
and that therefore it was by him called a Wolf, because it did devour and
spend innumerable sacrifices of beasts, which in the Morning were slain and
offered unto God, and in the Evening divided amongst the Priests.

The Chalde Paraphrast subscribeth to this exposition, Chald. paraphr. in hunc
locum.
for thus he says, Benjamin in his Land the presence of the Divinity shall
rest, and in his possession shall the Sanctuary be built, in the Morning, and
at Evening shall the Priests offer Oblations, and in the evening they shall
divide the remainder of the things that be sanctified.

Fourthly, many of the ancient fathers, as Ambrose, Hierom, Ruffinus,
Chrysostom, and Augustine, thought that this prophecy principally was
fulfilled in S. Paul; and therefore they refer it unto him; because Romans 11 1.
being of the tribe of Benjamin* at the first, as a Ravenous Wolf, he
persecuted the Church before his conversion, Acts. 9.1.
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord; but
afterward, when he was converted to the Faith of Christ, he divided the spoil,
that is to say, according to Rupertus, the word of God, and the doctrine of
Salvation; distributing to his Disciples and auditors this heavenly spoil,
according to their capacity and understanding; for to some he gave Milk, and
to some he gave strong meat. Fifthly, though all these 4 interpretations may in
some sort be received, as consona^t to the Text, because both the Beniamites,
which carried away the daughters of Siloh, as also Saul, and Mordecai, the
Temple, and S. Paul, were a Wolves devouring the preye, and dividing the
spoil; yet if we do but consider that Jacob in every speech, which he
makes to any of his Sons severally, does chiefly prophecy of the state of
their whole posterity, and not of any private person, we must then needs
acknwledge that the exposition of these words by Theodoret, Theodoret. quest.
vltim. in genes.
comes nearest both to the letter, and to the intention of Jacob, which is
this; Benjamin shall rauin as a wolf: that is, the Beniamites shall be a
fierce and courageous people in war. Again, In the morning he shall devour
the pray, and at night he shall divide the spoil: that is, the Beniamites
shall be prosperous and succesfull in battle, for having overcome their
enemies, they shall return home being made glorious by victory and rich by
the spoil.

In this speech of Jacob concerning Benjamin, we may observe three things which
make for moral use, and instruction. The first is this: Rahel called her
youngest son Ben-oni, the son of sorrow, and presently gave up the ghost,
but Jacob changed his name and called him Benjamin, least it might have brought
to his remembrance the loss of his dearest wife, and so have prolonged and
continued his sorrow; This holy patriarch even in the reason of this Change,
teaches us to use a mean and a moderation in mourning for the dead; The name
of Ben-oni tells us, that we ought to mourn; But the name of Benjamin bids us
not to mourn too much. First when any Christian dies we ought to mourn,
because of our sins which have brought death upon all men: As the Apostle
says, Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is death; And hereunto we are drawn by diverse motives;
First mourning for the dead is not only allowed, but also commanded by God,
for the Apostle says, Romans 12.13.
weep with them that weep; And David when Saul was slain, thus spoke unto
the daughters of Israel, saying, 2. Sam. 1.24.
weep for Saul, which clothed you in scarlet, with pleasures, and hanged
ornaments of gold upon your apprell; Furthermore in the book of Leuiticus:
Leu. 21.2.3.
we read that God made a Canon or constitution concerning lamentation and
mourning for the dead; by which the Priests, the sons of Aaron, are forbidden
to mourn over any man, except it be their kinsman that is near unto them, or
their mother, or their father, or their son, or their daughter, or their
brother, or their sister being a maid: for any of these, they were not only
permitted, but also commanded to lament: for in this restraint which is
negative, there is included an affirmative iniunction; As if God should have
said, Let the Priest mourn over his kinsman that is near unto him, as for
instance, his father, and mother, his son and daughter, his brother and
sister, that has had no husband: but let him not defile himself by any other
that is dead among his people, either by touching them, by being at their
burial, or by lamenting over them. Secondly, in this case, there be many
examples of holy men which have mourned for the dead, who in doing so, are not
to be condemned either of Ignorance, or any other sin: Genesis 23.2.
Abraham mourned for Sarah in Hebron, and wept for her, by his weeping, he
showed his affection, and by his mournful voice, he bewailed his own loss.
Genesis 37.
Jacob lamented the death of Joseph many years: 2. Sam. 18.33.
David wept for Absolon: Act. 8.2.
The faithful made great lamentation for Steven: And our Savior Christ when
he saw Marie weep for Lazarus, Ioh. 11.33.
groned in the spirit, and was troubled in himself; The scriptures are full of
such like examples both in the old, and in the new testament; Seeing then that
the faithful by their use and example, do approve of mourning for the dead,
and seeing that Christ, does not only not rebuke, but also by his groaning allow
it; no man can justly deny but that it is a godly duty, one to bewail the
death of another. Thirdly, the holy Scriptures do count it a great plague or
punishment, for a man when he is dead, not to he lamented, and not to be
buried. This appears out of the words of the Psalmist, who making a Catalogue
of ye plagues that God brought upon the Israelites for their Idolatry,
reckons the want of lamentation over the dead to be one of the^; His words be
these, Psalm. 78.63.64.
The fire deuoureth their chosen men, and their maids were not given in
marriage, their Priests fell by the sword, and there were no widows to make
lamentation; Also (b) God commanded the Prophet Ezecheel not to (...) funeral
of his own wife, that thereby as a sign he might teach the rebellious Jews,
that they should perish, and be slain by the sword of their enemies in such
sort, as none should be left alive to bewail them: by these reasons it is
plain and apparent, that mourning for the dead is lawful: being commanded by
God, and approved by the example of our Savior himself, and yet there be^
some that altogether disallowe it; The Stoikes did condemn it, esteeming such
as did lament and weep for the dead, effeminate and weak: and we read of
many, that when their dearest friends died, have abstained from all appearance
of sorrow. Anaxagoras, when he heard news of the death of his two sons,
made no other answer but this; Scio eos mortales esse natos, I know that they
were borne mortal, and when it was told Xenophon, that his son Gryllus was
slain in fight, he being at the sacrifice only for a while, laid aside his
garland, and immediately took it up again: Of this kind there be many
examples, whereby the Stoikes endeavor to make their opinion plausible; but it
is not for Christians, to have minds void of all affections, as these
impassionate Philosophers would have men to be, for he that cannot, or will not
weep for the dead, is like an Idol, that has eyes but cannot see, that he
himself is Ben-oni the son of sorrow, because of his sinful co^ception.
Concerning this matter the son of Syrach gives us excellent counsel, saying,
Ecclus. 38.16.17.
My son power forth tears over the dead, and begin to mourn, as if thou
had suffered great harm thy self, and then cover his body according to
his appointment, and neglect not his burial; make a grievous lamentation, and
be earnest in mourning, and use lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or
two, least thou be evil spoken of, and then comfort thy self for thine
heaviness. Hence we may learn that we ought to mourn, but our mourning must
be mixed with moderation; they that mourn not at all, offer violence to nature,
and they that mourn too much, break the rules both of reason and religion.

Genesis 23.3.
When Abraham had wept over Sarah, he rose up from the sight of the corpse;
least that he might have been overwhelmed with grief, he remoueth the object
thereof. And when Rahel dying, had given her son a sorrowful name, calling
him Ben-oni, Jacob changes his name, and called him Benjamin; least the sound
of Ben-oni in his ^are, should have continually raised up groans from his
heart; and herein they behaved themselves as the Apostle wishes all Christians
to do, saying: 1 Thessalonians. 4 13.
I would not Brethren have you ignorant, concerning them which are a sleep,
that you sorrow not, even as other which have no hope.

GOD by whom Death is inflicted, would have the nature thereof to be such,
that it should bring tears and sorrow, not only unto them which die, but
unto those also, of whom they that die are beloved: but yet he has taken
away the sting of Death, by promising that there shall be a Resurrection of
the Dead, and this promise is an Antidote against the poison of grief.

There is a Law in Deuteronomie concerning the mourning for the Dead whereby
the Israelites are forbidden Deuteronomy. 14.1.
Not to cut themselus, nor make any Baldness between their Eyes for the
Dead; Homer. Iliad.
in imitation of the Gentiles, who having no knowledge, nor hope of a
Resurrection, used to lament and bewail their dead Friends, without any
moderation; shauing themselves, piercing, their left hands with sharp
Arrows, Herod. in melpom.
and killing some of the dead man's Wives or servants, to keep him company.

This kind of mourning has in it no mixture, either of Reason or Religion;
and therefore God made a Law against it.

And it is observed, that Genesis 53.3.10.
the Egyptians mourned for Jacob seventy days, but Joseph mourned but ten:
to show the difference between the excessive grief of men that have no Hope,
and the moderate sorrow of the Faithful. Seeing then that, Not to mourn at
all, is a Stoicall stupiditie, and to mourn too much, is a Heathenish
infirmity; let us take heed of these extremes, remembering always that
saying of Seneca, Nec fluant Ocult, nec sicci sint, Let your Eyes neither be
drowned nor dry.

Let them not be dry at the Funeral of thy Brother, because every man by
birth is Ben-oni, the Son of sorrow; and let them not be drowned with the
excess of tears: because whosoever Belieueth, is by Grace Benjamin, the Son
of GODS right hand.

Secondly, Jacob does not only change the name of Ben-oni, to take away the
object of grief, least in sorrowing for Rahel, he should pass the bounds of
moderation, but he gives his youngest son a Name of strength and Honor,
calling him Benjamin: the Son of his righ^ hand. By the Hand in the
Scriptures is signified strength and by the Right hand, Honor.

In the imposition then of this Name, we may behold A president for all
Parents; who are here taught by Jacob, how to respect and regard their youngest
sons.

It is a Custom as usual as discommendable for Fathers (too fondly) to
cocker and pamper their Eldest sons; but to neglect their youngest children,
esteeming them no better then servants; and herein they show themselves
unnatural. For Children of the same Parents, being all alike in blood, why
should not the Parents use them all alike? A Disparitie in usage and respect,
makes the Elder brother to contemn the younger, and the younger to envy and
hate the elder.

Ambr. in Genesis 37.9.
And therefore S. Ambrose has well noted, that if a Father have more children
then one, he ought to take heed that he show not himself more loving to one of
them, then to another. Fot thereby he may easily spoil that child which he
favors, by puffing him up with pride and contempt, and cause the other to be
inflamed with hatred and envy, in seeing themselves contemned and disgraced.
And therefore as Jacob esteemed his youngest son as well, if not better, then
his eldest, manifesting the same, by calling him The Son of his right hand:
So should all Parents do; looking upon their children with impartial eyes.

It is the bloody policy of the Turkish Emperors, to make only one of
their sons a Benjamin, and every one of the rest a Ben-oni; for it is a
custom among them to stra^gle all the younger sons; and to place the eldest
in the Imperial throne; Such like is the barbarous cruelty of those parents,
which to raise one of their sons to be a ge^tleman, make all the rest
beggars. Let us consider how contrary hereunto is the practice of God; he has
two sons, the Jew and thee Gentile; The Jew is the elder brother, and the
Gentile the younger. Does he therefore place the one upon his right hand, and
the other upon his left? Does he call the Jew Benjamin, and the Gentile
Ben-oni? Act. 10.35.
No; For he is no accepter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears
him, and works ^^^hteousnesse is accepted of him. If the Jew which is the
elder brother, will not believe in CHRIST, GOD will set him upon his left
hand, and say veto him, Depart thou cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his angels: And if the Ge^tile, which is the yo^ger
brother, have a lively faith, and shows his faith out of his works, Matt.
25.41.
God will set him upon his right hand; and say, Matt. 25.34.
Come thou blessed inherit a Kingdom prepared for thee from the foundations
of the world. If the Jew and the Gentile, do both of them believe, either of
them shall be a Benjamin, but if the Jew and the Gentile be both of them
Infidels, then either of them shall be a Ben-oni; This is Gods justice, and this
should be man's equity, God regards not one man more the^ another, but only
in regard of faith and righteousness, so should fathers value and prize their
child^e^; not according to priority in birth* but excellency in virtue

Thirdly, Jacob compares Benjamin unto a Wolf, in regard of Courage in
Fight, and this comparison makes for the praise and commendation of the
Beniamites. It had been a shame for Benjamin; and so likewise is it a disgrace
for all men to resemble the Wolf, either in Cruelty or in Craft, but to be
like the Wolf, courageous and resolute, is commendable and praise worthy.
There be diverse kinds of wolves, of which to imitate some, is a virtue, but
to follow others, a vice.

First, there is one kind of Wolf, called Lupus Canarius, the Dogge-wolfe,
being so called, because he is like unto a Mastiffe; This is a ravenous, a
greedy, and a cruel beast, which forbeareth neither to devour cattle nor
men.

Like unto this Wolf, be Oppressors, Extortioners, and Usurers; which do
not only swallow up the substance, but also the Blood of their brethren. These
he insatiable Canibals, and merciless Men-eaters, hated of all people, and
abhorred of God.

Against there the Prophet Isaiah cries out, saying: Isaia. 5.8
Woe unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there
be no place for the poor to dwell in, that ye may be placed by your selves in
the mids of the Earth.

The second is, the Hyena, Joan. Lec. histo. Afric. lib. 9.
which by the Arabians is called Dabuh, and by the Affricanes Iesef. This beast
is held to be a kind of Wolf, because in bigness and shape it resembles a
Wolf, saving that the legs and feet thereof, be like to the legs and
feet of a man; It is not hurtful unto any other beast, but will rake the
carcasses of men out of their graves, and will devour them, being otherwise an
abject and seely creature, and the Hunters being acquainted with his Den,
come before it singing and playing upon a Drum, by which melody being
allured forth, his legs are intrapped, and so he is drawn out and slain.

Like unto this Beast be all wicked men, that commit sin with greediness,
and take pleasure in filthiness, hungring and thirsting after it: even as the
Hyena longs after the rotten and corrupt Carcasses of dead men; And therefore
as this Beast, so those which have the Greedie-worme of sinning, do as it were
open the graves such as have been heretofore noted for exorbitant sinners, to
find out their vices, and put them in practice: the grave of Caine is dug
up by murderers, of Nimrod by oppressors; of N^bal by merciless cormorants;
of Corah by obstinate Schismatikes; of Delilah and Iezabel by wanton harlots;
of Jeroboam by Idolaters; of the rich glutton by belligods, and drunkards; and
of Simon Magus by such Magi or ministers as creep in at the window, by
buying, by briberie, and by Simonie. But mark the end of these men: the Devil
is their musician, and they dance after his pipe so long, that at length he
ensnares them, and caries their souls along with him into the bottomless pit,
and into utter darkness, where there is nothing but weeping and gnashing of
teeth. The third kind of wolf Solinus. cap. 8.
is this Lynx or Los, which by nature is so envious, that when he voideth his
urine, he covers it with sand, because men should reap no gain or profit
from him. Theophrastus and Pliny affirm, that the urine of the Lynx being
congealed, is like amber, and that it is that precious stone which we call
Lyncurion, and that therefore the Lynx hides it, as repining that any man
should see it, or find it: Like unto this wolf in disposition, be all those
unprofitable servants to whom God gives a Luc. 19.13.
Talent, commanding them to Occupy it till he come, or to emploie and use it
for the good of other men: but they, lay it up in a napkin, and conceal it;
Such a wolf is the Idol, and Idle Shepherd, whom God has endued with
knowledge, and learning, thereby enabling him to reprove, and to instruct, but
like a Isaiah. 56.10.
dumb dog never opens his mouth, but lies, and sleeps, and delights in
sleeping, and burieth his precious Lyncurio^, to wit, the gift of preaching, in
the earth, that is to say, in the affairs of this world. Such a wolf likewise
is the covetous rich man, to whom God has given wealth, and treasures, and
honor, of purpose, that he should cast his bread upon the waters, that he
should strengthen the arms of the weak, and refresh the needy, and such as
be in distress: but he like the Dog in the manger, which will neither eat
haie himself, nor suffer another to feed by him: is unwilling either to do
good unto himself with his goods, or unto the poor. Concerning this wolf the
Wiseman says, Eccl. 6.4.
he comes into vanity, and goes into darkness, and his name shall be
covered with darkness The fourth kind of wolf, is the Those or Thoie, being
so called, because of his swiftness in running; Solin. cap. 13. Aristot. li.
9. de hist. animal. cap. 44.
He lives by hunting, he loves men, and never hurts them, but fights with
dogs and lions. To be like unto this wolf, is to be like unto Benjamin:
Courageous and valiant, which is both commendable and pleasing unto God; For as
God said unto Joshua, so he says unto every man, Josh. 1.6.
Be strong and of good courage, which is as if he should have said, Be strong
to resist and fight against 1. Pet. 5.8.
that roaring lion the devil, which walks about seeking whom he may devour,
and be of a good courage to withstand that kennell of greedy and Impudent
Phil. 3.2.
dogs, which make concision in the Church of Christ; Math. 7.6.
which contemn the Gospel, 2. Pet. 2.^2.
which forsake the faith, Isa. 56.10* 11.
which can never have enough, and which open their mouths wide to bark
against the Truth; these are Schismatikes, Gospel-contemners, apostates or
backeslider, unworthy ministers, and Atheistes, or infidels; They that fight
against this Lion and these Dogs, and overcome them, In the morning devouring
the pray, that is in this life behauing themselves valiantly and courageously
under the standerd of Christ, shall in the evening that is to say, at the last
day, divide the speils, and triumph over their enemies; So says the Prophet
Isaiah; Isai. 66.24.
And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men, which have
transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their
fire be quenched and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh; Seeing then,
that to Resemble the wolf in Courage, is a blessed thing, but to be like unto
him either in cruelty, or greediness, or repining and envy, is hateful and
abominable; Oh let all true Christians avoid the wolves evil qualities, and
embrace that which is good; In him namely, fortitude and valor. Hereunto the
Apostle exhorts all men saying, Ephesians. 6.10.
finally my brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; This
invincible Soldier of Christ S. Paul, according to his own exhortation, 1.
Cor. 15.32.
fought a good fight, for he fought with beasts at Ephesus, and yet he
divided the spoil, and overcame them, by the strength of his faith, and by the
Gospel of Chirst Jesus, which is the power of Gods might; as God assisted him,
so will he aid and help every one that is his Soldier; For he will give them
such spiritual strength, as that they shall break the iawe bones of the
hellish Lions, and dip their feet in the blood of their dogged enemies. To
this immortal, almighty, alsufficient and most merciful God, the Bulwark
and fortress of all faithful Beniamites, be ascribed and given, praise, power
and glory, both now and evermore.

FINIS.
Errata.
Divides folly, read decyphereth folly, p 49. lin. 11. derived of Judah. 1:
Judah, p. 59. lin. 13. kill his son. r. kill his swine, page, 93. li. 11. who
by a double grace read: who be a double grace: p: 94. lin. 25. apollion: read:
Apollyon. page: 86. lin. 5. are therefore but claie: r. are they but claie: page:
118. lin. 1. gorged, read gored: page 119. lin. 31. wine, 1. vine; page: 130.
lin. 4. Syrus: r: Cyrus. page: 133. lin. 18. can the custom, r: can then
custom: page: 138. lin. 28. more equal: 1: made equal: page 139. lin. 37.
entrap souls: r: entrap fowls: page: 147. lin. 7. and S. Peter and S. Jude
witness: read, as S. Peter: etc: page: 168. lin. 4. if then the time, r. so
then the time: page 153. lin. 34. but must to enter combat: 1. must enter
combat: and with all worldly giants, 1: with all worldly giants: p. 196. lin.
6.7. forgotten, r: begotten: page. 197. lin. 11. unto the an occasion of
falling: r: unto them: page 202. lin. 32. the knees: r: her knees: page 205.
lin. 14. Romans, r: Romanus, page 214. lin. 36.


