AN Answer unto a wicked and infamous Libel made by Christopher Vitel, one of
the chief English Elders of the pretended Family of Love: Maintaining their
doctrine, and carpingly answeringe to certain points of a book called the
displaing of the Fam.

Answered by I. Rogers.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate. Anno. 1579.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable, Sir Frauncis Walsingham, chief Secretary unto the
Queens most excellent Maies^y, and of her honorable Council: Grace and Peace,
in Christ our Lord.
Having before this, set forth a small tretise, displaing a sort of men, in
this our country of England, embracing an Author under two letters, H, and N.
about six months ago: I have received since, from the same persons, sundry
letters containing matter against the doctrine publicly taught in the church
of England: and answering certain matters contained in the said book, called
The displaying of the Family of Love, which answers, some I have put in print,
the rest remayn: whereof this Libel is one of the chiefest, and as the same does
witness, is made and compiled by one of the chief of that sect, and the only
man which was the occasion that any of HN his doctrine became conversant with
our native Country people, (a thing greatly to be lamented.)

The name of the party is Christofer Vitel, sometime a Ioyner of London, and
infected with that infamous doctrine of Airius, ^0. years ago* whose cred^^e
among the pretended Family of Love is very great, and therefore I have used
more diligence in answering the same. Being (Right honorable) unboldened to
present the same unto your honor, upon view and taste of your good inclination
toward^s the true Church of Christ and the purging out of the same, all
disorders and discords that therein grows, or which blemisheth that beloved
bride, as much as in your honor lies.

And if herein I shall seem over bold, or presumptuous, considering my rude
and unlearned capacity, I have many examples, which may serve for my excuse.
For, where should men (publishing error) seek defense, but under the name and
protection of such, as (through the Lords dispensatio^, and gift of singular
wit) do understand falsehood at the first sight, and have authority to correct
the same: and hate error and corruption, of a zeal to the glory of god, and a
care of true Religion: and by rate goodness of nature, do love the truth, and
also sufficiently adorned with courage to defend the same.

Accept therefore (most honorable) these my rude labors, in ^^norable part, and
give judgment where truth lies. Accept my ser^iceable heart, to further the
glory of christ his church, and not the simple utterance and small skill, with
les learning, as by the handling appears. Also consider the providence of our
God, which rules his children by his beck, and has appointed your honor as a
special Patron in his Church, to hear the grief and gronings thereof, and
to understand and see that truth be not defaced, trodden down, or spurned at by
heretics, or wicked Atheistes, which the mixed Church is too too full of.

And as the Lord has made your honor to feel the sweetness of his son our
Savior: So I am persuaded that you bend your singular care, and deep
consideration, that this our country of England, might be free from heretics
and deprauers of Christ his glory. And if it might please your honor to
consider the root and ground from whence this strange doctrine grew, the
practices and means by which it is maintained and supported: And by this little
said by me, consider with all, what might be said against this doctrine of H N.
by men of knowledge and skill. And finding the root nothing else but
singularity, ambition, pride, and carnal liberty. The shore and pillars that
uphold it, wrong application of the holy Scriptures, counterfaite shows of
piety etc. your honor shall perceive (I dout not) how little true reason these
men have, or sound argument to prove the particulars of their doctrine: the
body and substance being found in deed but a lump of old worn heresies,
newly hatched by H N. Fidelitas, and ^lidad, men come out of the clouds, as
they would have the world believe.

And as this doctrine has increased and spread it self in many shires of this
Realm. So if I should declare what event does follow in many places, it were
scarce credible. The fountain or foundation thereof, is the opinion that these
men have, that they keep the law of God in every point, as he requires. ^er
of comes their doctrine of perfection, attained unto in this life, and as
they term it, the beginning of immortality: then being made perfect, they
imagine themselves to be Godded with God, or incorporate to God, I will use
their own terms: with whom God in one being of his spirit, is hommisied, or
become man.

Now having once planted this doctrine, what Satan can work with this
persuasion, is easily perceived For when this doctrine is once believed, that
their Elders cannot sin, and whatsoever they commit, it cannot be sin,
because they are guyded by the spirit. And when all fear to offend, or
conscience of sin is excluded: to all boldness and liberty to live after our
liking, a very window is opened.

As there is no reason to maintayn this, nor truth to uphold this: So it is
very necessary that the simple people should be warned to beware of this so
subtle a doctrine: which they like very well of, because their teachers and
Elders, under pretense of plausible precepts, delivered to the simple at the
first taste, of a godly life, which asore any thing they must embrace: with
many shows of mortificatio^. The^ must they grow to the manly oldnes in the
love, which is that perfection which they dream of. But the secret part of
their doctrine is hid from the most part: And all their books are not made
common to all, as containing to strong meat for weak stomaches: therefore
their glass of righteousness few must look into, least their whole vanity, and
corruption should be espied. That book therefore is a rare bird among this
Family. And this suttlety does Satan work to deceive the simple, to keep
certain secret mysteries, and doctrine, to work admiration in the hearts of
deceived people.

Right honorable, I have set down this part of their doctrine, as a taste: what
other matters they maintain, by perusing this small treat^se, shall easily be
espied: how their chief Elder HN. is exalted, and called a Prophet: and that
his prophesies shall be proved true: and also they account of HN. in office to be
a priest, and say that through his priests office, God will receive all men to
mercy: so that our only Lord and Savior, is smally accounted of: his offices
are bestowed upon HN. These things, are too too absurd, Right honorable, and
worthy to be buried in silence: had not Satan raised up his impes to trouble
his Church with these blasphemies: against which, I have bent that poor skill,
and force I have, to displey these men, with their doctrine. There are many,
Right honorable: that could better, and more learnedly have confuted their
doctrine: but it is so vain, and childish, that simple souls, and meanly
exersized in holy scripture, are sufficiently instructed by the Lord, to
manifest all their abhommations.

The simplier sort of these men, I take to be such as have a desire to serve
the Lord: and yet is their simplicitye carried away by the Elder sort, or
stronger men: conference in my opinion, is the best way to help the simple:
which the Elder sort can no^ away withal: least their trecheryes should be
espied. ^dad, one of their writers, gives the^ such a precept in his book,
entitled a fruitful exhortation to the Family of Love: in ^ sextion.

But ye shall not contend, or dispute with the blasphemers, and the tanglers
about the scripture: nor with the apostates, or decliners from us, and our good
doctrine: or with the self conceited wife: nor yet with any of all those, that
bring in variaunce, and make breach, besides our good doctrine of the service
of Love.

It appears Right honorable, by this prohibition of this Elder: that
conference, and disputation is forbidden them: especially the Elder sort: but
the no^ces, which are not enterid into the secret parts of their doctrine: but
are carried away with a show of pietye, and good life, which at the beginning is
opened unto the^: with fly, and subtle persuasions: that nothing else is sought
at their hands, but how the man might be made persite in Christ Jesus: but
after once a step be made toward them, or a taste of this doctrine: then books
are bestowed upon them, which they must read: of HN. as his exhortation, his
dialog, his ^pistles, the exposition of the Lords prayer, with the Articles.
etc. and as they profit in these, books harder to digest: as the Prophecy of
the spirit of Love, a declaration of the Mass: the holy Lamb: the Gospel, or
^uang^ly of HN. etc. and last of all, the glass of righteousness, which few of
this company have: the other books more riser printed as is supposed, in
Flas^ders, and translated by this Libeller, into English: as he himself
confesses.

And here I crave pardon, in that I have bin ouerlong: to trouble your honor
with these repeticio^s: and I would to God, that I had no occasion ministered,
once to name these persons, nor this error: then should Christ his Church, nor
no member in the same, have needed to bend their study, to publish, or manifest
the same. The Lord of mercy, give your honor all increase of faith with the
truth of true pietye: and continue in you a zeal of Christ his Church, with a
care, y^ nothing but truth be taught therein: and that the contemners thereof,
may be put to silence: so as our God may be glorified: his people edified:
error, and heresies subverted, and truth advanced: which the Lord God grant,
for his son, our Savior Christ his sake: to whom be honor* and praise, now
and ever.

Your honor to command, I. Rogers.
To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, thou have to peruse at thy pleasure, this finale treatise,
containing an answer unto Christopher Vitell, the chief ^lder of the
pretended ^am^lye of Love: and because it was directed to me, and aunsereth
certain points of my former book called, the displeying of the ^amily.
Therefore it is very meet and convenient, that since the matter touches me
nearly: and ^harg^th me with much untruth: that I defend the cause, I first
took in hand: which I am verily p^rswaded, is an honest, just, and godly
defen^e of the puritye of doctrine, now taught, and p^blickl^ preached: which
this ^amilye spu^ne egerly against. And although 2. vigilant Pastors, have
lea^nedly confuted the do^t^ine of their Author HN. Yet this little avails to
recall them home, to that found profession, that some of the once ^asted: and
least they should bo^st, or vaunt, that they have written, or compiled
an^thing, which should not be answered, I have thought good once again, to
bend my simple study, to ^nswere this libeller Christopher Vitell: whole cr^dit
among^st the ^amilye is not small. Ma^uel^ not g^ntle reader, that I being the
simplest of many thousands, have a^uentu^ed to meddl^ in these disputable
questions: more ^itter for men of learning, and knowledge (I grant, but since
they have made their inuectiues against me, it behooves me simply to answer:
wherein I confess many thing^s are omitted, which might well have bin spoken
of: and many things are briefly touched, which should have bin dilated, if
leisure had served me: but since I cannot d^e things as I would, thou have my
goodwill, as I could. If thou would profi^e, by reading these conferences,
it is expedient that thou peruse a little book, called ^he displeing of the
Familye, the publishing of which book, was the cause, that this man being
touched therein nearly: has made this L^bell for answer thereunto: excusing
himself of many crimes, and as much as in him lies, keeping up the credit of
their Aucthor HN. who^e the ^amilye would not, that he should be touched, or
blemished: (no not with a venew:) but he that lists to mark how his chiefest
scholl^r, or oldest ^ngli^h Elder, Christopher V^tel, does with might, and
maine, culle^, and hide all the faults of HN. as well his ^octrine, and foul
errors: as his corrupt life, and conue^sation: and how confidently and with a
b^asen face, he avouches, that all is false, and lies, whatsoever is brought
forth never so probably: (ye^) with many witnesses: thou shall or it be long,
have a testimonial out of ^launders of HN his whole life: which if the Family
here in ^ngland, would be ^esolu^d with ^^ueth: shall be upon any o^^asion
published in print: it nothing bl^misheth our ^ause although this rude and
vnl^arned Answer be made unto this slanderous Libell: but our God therein is
greatly magnified: that simple men are su^ficiently assisted with God his
spi^ite to confute and overthrow this blasphemous doctrine of the Familye: so
g^osse, and absurd it is, against all the holy scripture, and against common
reason. And as nothing is more in va^iance between us, then how man is
restored unto that ^lisle, lost in Adam: and his state, (being regene^ate.) I
have simply set down my poor s^ill: and such experience of a regenerat man,
as I find in holy writ^: and feel in my own consci^ence. And also I have
collected, the condition of a regenerat person, by the doctrine of HN. as nee^e
as I could collect by such books of theirs as came to my hands: (wherein) if
the Familye imagine, that I have not rightly set fo^th a ^egene^at man after
their doctrine: let some of their illuminat Elders, (if they please:) set
upright such a one, as they will stand unto.

So shall the controversy between them, and us, sooner come to end, and trial:
which if they refuse to do: then it will appear, that it is not truth they
seek, (but) singularitye. For although in other matters there be difference,
and opinions: yet in ma^s election, salvation, redemption, and regene^ation:
being the pillars, and foundations of our faith: whosoever erreth herein,
cannot be saved. I am also Christian reader, to desire thee to amend, and
correct with thy pen: certain faults, escaped in this trea^ise by the
Printer, and to amend the sense, of some sentences, being not rightly poynted,
which I refer unto thy learned Judgment. The Lord our God bless thee, and
grant us his holy spirit, that we may persist, and abide, in the unity of
his holy Church: and patiently abide the Lord his leisure, in rooting out
errors, and heresies which disquiet thy little flock: They are exercises of
our faith: but yet blocks, whereat the wicked stumble: and hinderaunces of
many a man's conversion, which the Lord our God foretold us of: that in the
latter days such should come: and such dangerous days should be: that if it
were possible, the elect should be deceived.

The complaint of a Regenerate man unto God the Father, showing the
sorrowfulnes of his ha^t.
O Lord God, heavenly Father, tho^ that art not only our God, but the God of
all the world: we thy creatures, the work ^f thy hands, make our humble
prayers and supplications before thy excellent majesty. ^eseeching thee (O
Lord) not to consider us as we a^e of our selves, earth, ashes, and whatsoever
is (...) but as we are in Christ Jesus our Lord, thy sanctified people, whom
thou have chosen before all worlds, to witness thy ^ame in earth: And to whom
t^ou have made manifest thy Son ou^ Savior with an uncovered face to our
great comfort. ^et alas, we unworthy wretches find in our selves such heaps
of sins, and such lumpes, and loades of impieties: that were we not stayed in
thy promyses, we should perish with mistrust in thy mercies. For we know that
thou art a just God and do visit the offenses of thy children with rods,
and their sins with whips: Yet thy mercy does never fail us. Yea although we
sin, yet are we thine.

We have (O Lord) tasted greatly of thy mercies. Many yea^es we have been fed
with heavenly meat. Long time we have enjoyed the benefit of thy gospel (a
blessi^^ of blessings) our own conscience does witness, yea our sins are so
ripe and so outrageous, that they are ascended up unto the heavens, and (...)
for thy justice, which we have sore provoked with multyplying sin upon since.
We have not obayed thy voice. We have not harkened unto thy servants whom thou
have s^^t. We have propbaned thy holy Sabbath with vain spectacles, and
ungodly tragedies. We profess thy name in our word, but deny it in deeds. Our
vanity is too too manifest in our apparrail. Our excess appears in our
banquets. Our small reverence toward thy holy name in our vain other. Our
merciles charity toward thy members is too too manifest. Yea our whole life
is nothing else but abuse of thy creatures, with ingratitude for thy benefits.
So that we thy children are to expect and look for naught else but thy heavy
hand, yea thy judgments in displeasure.

We and our for fathers have sinned. Our Princes and Rulers, our Priests, our
Prophets and teachers. Yea from the greatest to the least, all have followed
the bypath of their own imagination and device* and have not harkned unto thy
word, to make it the lantern to our feet, and the light to our steps. Our
own ways and devises have prevailed.

We therefore O Lord our God, prostrate our selves before thy majesty,
beseeching thee for thy dear Son our Savior Christ Jesus sake, turn not
away thy face from us in displeasure. Bring not upon us wretches, the due
punishments our sins have deserved. Look not upon us as we are of our
selves, but as we belong to Christ Jesus: for whose sake thou have promised to
deny us nothing we ask in his name. Look upon thy wonted mercies of old,
although the cry of our sins be great before thee, yet the righteousness of
our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, is greater: whom we interpose and put
between thy justice, and our deserts. Yea, by him we appear with boldness
before thee this day as children, not as strangers, saying: O Our Father,
sanctified be thy holy name. Let thy kingdom be enlarged in us thy children.
Let thy will be performed in us most obedie^tly, eue^ as thy saints and holy
ones do fulfill the same before thee. Give unto us O Lord all earthly blessings
this day: that we may use them to our comfort, and not abuse them in pleasure.
Forgive us O Lord we beseech thee, our daily sins that we commit against thy
divine Majesty. And give us thy holy spirit that we may forgive all such as by
any degree (...) trespass against us. Lead us not not (O Lord) into trial, nor
temptation above our strength, for then our weakness will appear. Deliver us
(O Lord) from all those evils our sins daily provoke: And from all those
plagues and punishments which thou have threatened to bring upon us at this
time. Deliver us from the mouths of cruel Lions, which daily ga^e to devour
us: From blondy Papists which lie in wait for us, and d^ly conspire to
bereave us of the most comfortable benefit of thy word, and seek to make our
lives a pray unto their greedy desires. Bring (O Lord) their devises to naught.
Let the li^le flock enjoy the sweet comfort of thy gospel, that we may praise
thy holy name in our own land.

Root out all sec^es and heresies which are among us, which Satan has
stirred up to disquyet thy church. And Lord if it be thy will, either to
convert them, or put them to silence for evermore. Preserve O Lord God our
gracious Queen Elizabeth, in thine own bosom Deliver her O Lord from all
conspiracies, treso^s and trecheries, which Satan in his members shall devise
against her. Make void their councils that consult against her, and let us O
Lord, enjoy thy blessing in her long prosperous, and happy days. Give O lord
unto her Counselors wisdom fortitude, and courage, to prevent all dangers,
and unto our bishops and teachers give truth in do^trine, and boldness to
publish the same without (...). And to us thy people give O lord humble hearts,
and obedyent minds that we thy children may now at the last be warned, to
reverence and regard thy holy gospel, and fear thy pu^^shme^t^ forsaking our
vain delites in earthly things, so that our whole life may be a daily watch and
looking for thy glorious coming. So that in our hearts we may daily sa^, Come
Lord Jesus come quikly that we maybe losed f^o^ the woeful vale, wherein we do
nothing but provoke thee with our sins*

Grant (O Lord) we beseech thee, that thy church may long enjoy the liberty of
thy word, and give constancy to thy members our brethren, which suffer any
cross or tribulation ^^her in body or mind, as witnesses of thy truth. Give
them patience we beseech thee, that they may abide whatsoever thy Majesty has
determined, so that even in torments they may witness thy holy name.

Grant us (O Lord our God) these our petitions, or so many as are expedient
for us thy children, for thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake. To
whom, with thee* and the holy Ghost, be al honor, praise glory dominion, and
power, for ever and ever. Amen.

A short reply after the order of a proface. By the means of certain
slanderous words: as follows, from C. V.
THERE IS NOTHING more necessary, for the reedisying of God his Gospel, in a
common wealth, then for every such, unto whom the Pastoral office is
committed. With all expedition to beat down (by the aucthoritye of the same
word) all vpstart heresies. And opinions, by the which the true Church, and
congregation. Is disqui^t^d* of l^te therefore, as one poor member of the same
in a preface. To the tituled work against those which are called the Familye
of Love, liking t^e^ to a Cormorant Foul, was for that I espied. By the manner
of writings, and imaginatiue pr^ctise. Somewhat slyly covered over (as the
Snake under the green herb) from their HN. an Onacratolu^ c^ept in this our
native Country of England through simplicitye. But rather I fear me
hipoc^isie, to the bosome^ of many supposed wise men, the more by the means of
a second Mergus C. V. Whom heretofore by uttered vow at Paul's Cross
^ecanted, as I think the same error which he now stiffely defends:
Nevertheless since which time. Has in co^ners drawn companyes togethers,
of the which some have ref^ained* and others yet t^o many abidi^^. I therefore
somewhat to further the goodwil of the Author against that Familye their error,
and not their p^^sons, and for the hopes sake which is laid up in store,
through Jesus Christ our lord and Saui^ur did by preface* forewarne the vewers
of the said b^oke, to be heedefull of such so pestilent a sect, who under the
title of sundry sentences of holy scriptu^^. Have as in a ma^^ knit fast,
through the web of the Spider. Many ^ely ^lyes, whose unstable minds, more
wavering the^ such slender wings, have been, are, and will be, except the grace
of God, make them more heedefull, so fast tangled, that it will be scarce
possible to pluck them out: I do once again, even as one greatly compelled,
make answer against that which herein follows by those w^ome I hoped their
conversion, and not detection, whose words have said me to be, Diueled with
the Devil, I do consider these words to b^ said to me by the like intention,
as to my L. and master Christ, that he had Bel^ebub the chief Devil yet w^^
^e ^^ue. And the reprouers false. Their words. This blasphamous Batman, with
his slaundering, and ly^ng blasphemeth the holy Ghost for he names the Familye
of Love, a Corniorant Foul. And an sereticall sect: whereas notwithstanding
there is (...) Catholic Church nor comminas^ye of Saints but the Familye of
Love: And herein he condemns the holy Scriptures, the Law, and the Prophets,
as also Christ, and his Apostles: Moreover he says: that the Lord his elected
Minister HN. is of the seed of certain sectaries ^ Whereas his doctrine is
altogether against all Sectaries.

If it be blasphemy to reprove an error, then have I not done well, if it be
lying to detect a falshode, I will reaunswere, if slaundering them, that
slander other, (in one is the fault,) to this first, God his word does teach
me, to defend his Church: the Queens Majesty's laws, her common wealth:
whereto my conscience answers by the truth, that if you take not better
heed, you will fall from heresy, to treason, (and so into contempt of your
religion. Of your loyaltye. And true service of God,) of the which take heed,
for the holy Ghost is judge betwixt us both: I do name the Familye of Love the
self same as before, till I do perceive you to be otherwise minded, except
you use this policye. That when your Religion will hold no longer. you will
then say, we understood not your minds, and so therereby ex^use your follyes:
You say there is no Catholic Church, nor comminaltye of Saints, but the
Familye of Love: surely your love is so secret if we understand it not, you
much less perceive it: but in secluding all that be not of your Family. What
shall be said of all the godly in the world before your HN. whom now to
culler, (do call the holy name.) What say you of our gracious Queen. Her
noble Counsel, the lea^ned Byshop^. And dis^^et preachers of the Lords
Gospel. What think you of the excellent ounces? both Oxford* and Cambridge?
from the which they are not now to learn, of their true love in God. Of your
HN. Neither of C. V. Who cunningly has joined together that which we know
(Christ to be the ou^^commer, The ^h^nin^ing of HN. into a holy n^^^, and C.
Vitell* into an oue^ (...)* is a p^^^e (...), t^ (...) so (...) of (...).
and C. Vitell the Ioyner to be b^t a deceiuer: Your Argument must have an
Inter^ection, when you say. He condemns the holy Scriptures, the law, and
the Prophets: (all which three,) ^^^uerence, love, and ob^y* by the Lord God
his assistance. The Deu^ls d^^^st ne^e^ ^^the the^ fall of Lucifer e^^h^^nge
the^^ names into the d^uine e^^en^e t^ll now. Only (...) I wa^, the Christ the
Ca^penter (...) called, was yet better (...).
(you ad) as also Christ, and his Apostles: is it enough to condemn any before
the cause why* your Vocative, must have a Dative, to your self be all these
except you (...) the greater hee^e: I (...) also vettrly deny your HN. H^rry
Ni^holas to be the Lords elected Minister* otherwi^e, then su^fer^d to pervert
the congregation: And also I say to you Chris^opher Vitell, (...) you (...),
and while there is yet tym^, (...) to God, whom in this ^t^r you have greatly
offended, your Prince much a^used* an^ many your fellow disorderly (...) by
your ungodly collections through which (...), you have continued too long, then
Vitell the ioyne^^ that so pe^eshly has framed wood and clay together.
as to your ease you may think. So to their pain it may be assured. If now
your doctrine be against all Sectaryes. Then be as good as your word, and ^ly
these errors* else, as weeds are cut of with sickle, and sith for hi^ting the
good herbs: so must evil membber from a common wealth.

Fare well.
Fidem fero, mihi fama fuco.
An Answer to a wicked and infamous Libel made by one of the chief english
Elders of the pretended Family of Love.
Vitell.
Testimonies of Sion of the ^^st stone of fou^datio^ laid therein of ^he
judgment and righteousness, and of the holy priesthood and spiritual oblation
through Jesus Christ^ brought fourth through the Lords ^l^c^^d minister HN.

Love. Truth.

BLessed is he which watches for the day of the Lord which shall come as a
thief in the night. Math. 24.1. Thessa* 5. Peter. 3.

For the time shall come that the watchmen upon mount Ephraim shall cry, come
let us go up unto Sion to the Lord our God. Iere. 31. Mich. 4. Zach. 8.

Answer.
TO what purpose these places of holy scripture are collected, I am ignorant
of, because they want dew explication: we know that from Sion came the law of
God, and righteousness, and truth from Jerusalem. But it does not follow that we
knew not these testimonies but by HN. his ministerye: before his new doctrine
was broched, the Church of Christ was not ignorant of that corner stone Christ
Jesus, of his holy priesthod, and of his holy sacrifice: these things were
truly understood and known, although HN. had never written.

Touching Christ his coming as a thief, we know it is meant of his second
coming, although you would gladly have it to be the coming of HN. with his
new blasphemies.

The watchme^ upon mount ^phraim, are the teachers of Christ his Church, of
which number your HN. is none, his cries are from Flaunders and not from Sion.

You place two special virtues, Love, and Truth, as a face and ^ositenaunce to
your doctrine: but if we should examine the same by the word of the Lord, then
your Love is but pretenced. For your Love should be known by loving the Lord
Jesus, who loved us first. But the love of HN. has besotted your hearts, who
by his doctrine is enemy unto our Lord Jesus: who only is to be beloved.

And for truth, you only use the word barely without substance: what truth
you use in this your libell will appear by reading, to every indifferent
mind: if your Love and truth, be no better then is here expressed, then I may
well affirm that little Love, and small truth is to be found in this your
libell.

Vitell.
BEhold I ley in Sion a stone of foundation, a proof stone, a costly corner
stone to a fast foundation, who so believes in him, let him not have. For I
will make the judgment to a measure line, and the righteousness a ballaunce.
Esa. 28. b. Luke* ^0. b. Romans 9. c* Pet. ^.^.

A fals^ balance is abomination unto the Lord, but a full weight pleases
(...) ^^ll* Prou. 11.^.

A ^ight balance* and weight is of (...) Lord* and all pownde^ in the sack*
are his works. Prou. 16. Should I says the Lord Iustifye the unright
balance, and the false waightes in the sack, wherethrough their rich men do
much unright, and their anhabit^untes deal with lies, and have deceitful
tongues in their throats? Mich. 6. b. (...)*

Therefore will I begin to plague you, and make you desolate because of your
sins. Miche. 6.

Awake now all and repent, and remember to be obedient unto the law, and
commandments of the Lord, to the end, that ye in the day of the Lord, be not
found entangled or held captive of your sins, nor plagued with the plague of
the ungodly.

Whosoever now in the (...) Lord, will escape the plagues of the ungodly, and
bide preserved in^the godlynes^* Let him beleve in Jesus Christ^y ei^en as^ the
(...) says, and turn him about (...) of a child, and apply him to be
obedient unto the requiring of the word of Jesus Christ, and of the doctrine of
his lord*

And so let every one come and assemble him to the mount Sion, to the
cominalty^ of Saynte^, and to the stone, the fast foundation which is laid of
God in Sion, and build him thereon to a spiritual house, in all love and
concord, and to an holy priesthod. For to offer spiritual oblacio^s which are
acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 2.

I through the grace of God which is given to me, have laid the foundation like
a wise architect, and an other builds thereon: but let every one take heed
how he builds thereon. For an other foundation can no man ley, then there is
leyd, which is Jesus Christ. 1. Con. chap. 3. b.

This description of Sion, my beloved, have I written (...) give th^^by the
lovers of truth to vnd^^stand whether they have read any of the books of HN or
no^, which are named the most holy service of lou^, and that the scriptures
which the Lord has set forth through his elected mi^ist. HN. are brought forth
out of Sion, according to the promises of the Lord. For it is written that the
Lord will bring forth his love out of Sion, and his word out of Jerusalem, etc.
Also that the same HN* has taught all men to repair to his mount Sion, and
build thereon, the which is in his works declared at large, as is before
rehearsed.

Answer.
HEre is set down a large description of Sion, of the corner stone, and
foundation, and many places of holy scripture heaped together, but to no other
end that can be perceived but to amaze the Reader, that your doctrine should
thereby bear a face and countenance of truth, and come from Sion, and
Jerusalem: but we tell you truly that your new vpstart heresies, with your new
terms, are not testimonies of Sion, but from Bethell, Dan, and Gilgall: your
masking show is now discovered, and your vizards plucked of. Your painted words
are open to the world, and your subtle ^leightes made manifest: here are many
places quoted, but none applied: If we shall assemble to Sio^, as you require,
then must we leave your HN. and your Family. For by Sion is understood the
doctrine of the prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, from which the Lord
assisting us we will never depart: and whatsoever doctrine may be proved by
these^, we reuere^tly embrace, and gladly receive, and what doctrine soever is
contrary here unto, that we reject, and cast of: of which number, the doctrine
of HN. and his Familye are: because it agrees not with yt Prophets, Apostles,
nor Evangelists.

You give the lovers of truth to understand whether they have red any c^ H N.
his booke^ or not, (...) so that there may be ^onets of truth although they
never red H N. nor his books as you grant this unto us now, so you will deny
the same hereafter, as shall appear, you would still have us believe that H N.
teaches no doctrine but builded upon Syon, as appears by his works, his
books are to be seen, his doctrine is out of his own imagination, being
deluded by an erroneus spirit, to disquyet the Joyful proceedinge of Christ
his gospel, and to exercise his church according to this saying, necess^^st
haereses esse etc. It is necessary that heresies be etc.

There was never heresse in the world, but would dispute, argew, and reason,
and deny no conference with any: but this HN. thinks it sufficient that he
tell his Familye, that he has learned his doctrine by gods own mouth, and no
man may speak against him nor his doctrine, but by and by he is condemned for
a blasphemer of the holy ghost. So sharp and quick are these Elders of the
familye in judgment: it is time for you to help your decaying state, with
some face, and show of words. For your Familye and doubt not do espy your
poisoned doctrine, which lay hid from them, under your dark speech, and
vnaccostomed phrases: his works declare his doctrine to come from his
owneacute; brain by illusion of Satan, and none gives testimony of him, but
himself, and you his deceived Elders.

Vitell.
NOw for as much as there are certain which make up themselves slanderously,
and reprochfully, as ignorant of the promises of the Lord, where through they
blaspheme the Lord, and his most holy service of Love, saying it is the most
detestable heresy: and so desame, and slander the Lord his elected Minister
H N. and all those that have therein their exercise^, which seek only there,
through, and through the law of the Lord, how they might live, in that which
is godly, and manly, in all lawful* and dutyfull obedience, both to God, and
governors, spiritual, and temporal, and live peaceably, and deal uprightly
with all men. etc.

Answer.
WHereas some in the fear of God and love to his truth, and in discharge of
their duetye they owe unto his Church, have manifested, and made known to the
world, your doctrine and behavior: we do not herein slander you, we only
seek thereby your amendment and conversion: and give also warning unto the
simple, that they may take heed unto your painted cloakes, by which you shadow
untrue doctrine, to the peryshing of their souls. (...) are not ignorant of
the promises of Christ our Lord: but to our great comfort, we depend thereon,
neither do we blasphem^ the most holy service of Love: if you understand by
(Love) God as often you do confound that word Lou^^ but when we speak against
the service of Love, we mean thereby suc^ service, and vsages as are used
among you, in your private co^ue^ti^les. As for HN. whom you tear me the Lord
his elected minister: we dare not so acknowledge him, neither think him
worthy of y^ name: but a sower of heresies almost worn out of use, but now by
him revived, and blased under new titles, and vnaccusto^ie^ phrases, to amaze
the simple. And for that he calls himself a Prophet, and so is among you
accounted: we tell you, that the more you extol him, and his calling, the
more you extenuate the office of Christ Jesus. If you seek only to serve the
Lord, can not this be done without H N. or his service of Love? We think that
Christ has left us sufficient testimony in his word, how he will be served in
his church if HN, had never written. And for your dewtifull obedience to
Magestrates, spiritual, and temporal, that does little appear: for so much
as you (...) an Author nor allow^d of by any Magistrate, and use your private
(...) forbidden by the Magistrate and both wright, and speak against (...) of
Christ, (...) by the public Magistrate! and for your upright dealing, they
be^^^ now it that are co^uersant amongst you If your private dealinges be no
(...) then your public declarations and I suppose your vprightnes is not
greatly to be boasted of.

Vitell.
ANd yet* are complained of to the Maiestrates with many false brutes and
slanderously reported of where through the Maiestrates are moved to trouble
and persecute the^ and yet their adversaries have not anything worthy of
punishment against them: but I see that the time is now, even as it was when
the Lord Jesus Christ was personally upon the earth: for the Pharesies said
that Jesus was a breaker of the Sabbath; they also found fault with his
Disciples because they going through a corn field pluck^ of the ears and
rubbed out the corns and eat, for they were hungry, eue^ so the Family of love,
going through a corn field have pluck^ of ears of corn and rubbed and eaten
thereof to satisfy their hu^gry souls the which the enuiers of the loves
unity have of pied and are offended at them, and have accused them therefore,
but other matter they have not against them and yet they say they are breakers
of the Law. etc.

Answer.
THe complaynt that good men have made against you is not to slander you but
of purpose to have you and your Family depend upon the Lord and his truth: and
not upon HN. or any, although they boast never so much of the spirit of God:
of trouble and persecution you complain, and yet for your part you are safe
enough, as for some of your Family which have been imprisoned and upon
submission released, therein no cruelty was showed: if nothing could have been
objected against them as you report, then was their imprisonment seueritye? is
it not lawful to chastise heresies, and to punish gainsayers of public
doctrine, in deed so you would have it, that every man might be left to the
liberty of his own will, and so should the world swarine with infinite
dissentio^s and heresies, which y^ devil does more busily stir up now then
heretofore. It is the gospel and the doctrine thereof, that he breaths out
threats against, and stirs up his to spurn against the same very eagerlye,
only because it spoyleth him of his wished pray: through the firm faith and
confidence (...) have in our most tryumphant conqueror Christ Jesus.

Your comparysons are vne^^all, because Christ was accused as a breaker of the
saba^th, and his Disciples found fault withal that in hunger did rub the ears
of corn: even so you, as you would gladly have men believe, are as innocent of
crime as Christ and his Apostles in that you are charged: but we tell you
plainly we find fault with you for satisfying your hungry souls: it is for
the corrupt meat you have chosen, which in deed is very poison, and will bring
your bodies and souls to utter destruction everlastingly (except ye repent)
and because we warn you and will you to be circumspect and take heed of such
poisoned meat in your hunger, you are waspish above measure. If that you be
hungrye in deed, Christ has meat prepared in his holy word, sufficient to
quench the hunger or thirst of any true Christian. But you have chosen meat
prepared by HN. which you like greatly and agrees best with your stomaches,
but we in the fear of the Lord warn you, that you take heed thereof, for it
will bring a surphet incurable unto your souls.

Vitell.
FOr which cause sake I am moved to make a short rehearsal, by what means the
Lord of his good(...) me out of ^hin^ ignorance, and also made manifest unto
me, the life and salvation. More I have r^cyted the names* of two w^iter^,
which have w^^^ten aga^ist the most holy service of love, and against the Lords
minister HN. and also a part of their slanderous reports to the end that the
lovers of truth might pray unto the Lord, that he of his gracious goodness
will give those slaunderers understanding that they might perc^iue and
understand their horrible blasphemy against the Lord and so humble themselves
and repent, for I think it is all out of ignoraunte blindness whatsoever they
have done whereby they might find grace at the hands of the Lord etc.

Answer.
IT were more requisite that you would declare unto us, what was the cause that
moved you, first to embrace that wicked sect of Arrius, and many years became
a leader of many pore souls into that gulf of mischief, and then to show
some reason that moved you to forsake that opinion, and embrace this absurd
impietye of HN. which so greedely you have chosen to satisfy your hunger, and
you call it life and salvation. The two writers will (the Lord assisting us)
verefie continuall^e that in no po^nte we have slaundered you nor your minister
HN. And we refer the judgment thereof unto the lovers of truth, which shall
indifferently view the reasons and allegation^ on both sides, without partiality.

As for the horrible blasphemye against the Lord, wherewith you bitterly charge
us, we deny y^ we have committed any such heinous offense against ^od: whose
reverent name we adore with all humility: and until you can prove us such
blasphemers you will remain in the sight of all God his children, an impudent
liar and a slaunderer. You are one of those illuminate ^lders, which keep all
the commandments of God, and commit no sin: but now it does appear of
what spirit you are, and with what spirit you are led. Can not your cause be
maintained without such contumelious and impudent speech? he that is a
blasphemer of God, is without hope of mercy. Many Divines have studiously
sought what the sin of blasphemy is, but you have with great ease found out
the same to be who so speaks or writes against HN. or his famely: must he
needs be a blasphemer? Temper your humors with more modesty for shame, else men
will think that your HN. has published that of you, which cannot be found in
you, which is, that when you are reviled, taunted, or bitterly used, you as
lambs in patience bear the same, you do evil verefie your authors words.

It is all out of ignorant blindenes what we have done, as you say: are al
blind and ignorant that speak against your pretended family? then are there
many blind and ignorant in y^ world: but I dout your great sight which you
prophetically make a show of in thi^ libell, will declare very notablye your
blindness, though you brag very often of your sight. I would with all your
sight you saw rightly into your selves, the^ should you perceive that your new
covenant of perfection which you dream of, is a moere illusion of Satan, and
no where to be found in the holy scriptures.

Vitell.
IN as much as it has pleased the Lord of his gracious goodness, to make
manifest unto me (as most unworthy) through his most holy service of love, in
misunderstanding ignorance and error, so have I humbled my self before the
Lord and his Minister HN. as the greatest sinner among sinners, desiring the
Lord that he of his goodness would extend his mercy over me, and forgive me al
my offenses, wherein I had lived contrary to his commandments, laws, and
ordinances, so that the Lord at his time when he saw it good, through his
grace released me out of my calamitye, and also made manifest unto me, through
his most holy service of Love, and his elected minister HN. his promises which
he made with Abraham, where through he will bless all the generatio^s of the
earth, and also how, when, and wherein they are fulfilled, etc.

Answer.
H^re is expressed the manner of this man's conversion, and how he came to be of
the Familye of Love: wherein are many shows of piety, and humility requisite
in a Christian, but where he says, he humbled himself before the Lord, and
his cle^ed m^nister HN. therein he bewrays himself: we are taught in all our
troubles to call upon the Lord. Innoca me in die tribul^tionis (...)* to humble
our selves before the Lo^d, it is good and convenient, but before HN. what
warrant have you so to do? why join you HN. and God together in ^our
humiliation? I will not cry out no you do, that this is blasphem^e: yet I
tell you, it is not Christianlyke spoken. I know not how you will qu^li^ie this
your speech, you say that the Lord when he saw it good released you of all
offence^, wherein you had lived contrary to his commandments: but now being
released do you sin any mo^e? ^f you would speak plainlye as you have
uttered your repentance, so now rests that you should also speak of your
perfection, and of the state wherein you now stand. For that is the matter that
we would have you to be plain in: but that is concealed, and kept secret,
least your lybertye should be espied.

^ou say further that through the service of Love, and his elect minister HN.
all the promises made unto ^braham, how, when, and where, they are fulfilled,
and made manifest unto you. And I pray you, could you not embrace the promise
made unto Abraham, without HN. are not the scriptures sufficient to manifest
the same without him? surely this is great pitye that you extol your Aucthor
so above measure, the Prophets have written thereof: Christ and his Apostles,
have opened to us, how, when, and where, those promises are fulfilled
suffice^tly: ^f HN. had never written.

Vitell.
Moreover there was made manifest unto me, through the same service of Love,
and the Lords minister HN. the coming again of Christ with his saints, and
his righteous judgment, wherein he will judge the world, with mercy and
faythfulnes, and erect again his righteousness, and even so aco^plish all,
whatsoever he has spoken through the mouths of his servants, the Prophets:
from the beginning of the world, according to his promises.

Answer.
NOw you affirm that there is made manifest to you the coming again of
Christ with his saints. etc. but because you ad not in the resurrection, we
are doubtful what you mean by the coming again of Christ, least you
understand it a coming in this life: Because you add that there shall be
accomplished, whatsoever has been spoken by the Prophets from the beginning.

^f you had been a true Christian, you needed not HN. to manifest these things,
they are sufficiently opened to us in the holy historye, and by his beloved
Apostle Paul: if you had stayed your self with their manifestatio^, you
should not have looked for your HN. to make known the same: but it is to be
doubted by your speech, that you mean some other coming of Christ in this
life, and not when he shall come, at the general day of Christ his second
coming, when he shall come with glory, majesty, and power to judge the world
with righteousness. You affirm that then he shall accomplish whatsoever he
spoke by the Prophets from the beginning. The Prophets spoke as they were
commanded, to kingdoms, and Cities, certefying of the destruction determined,
and the captiuities whereunto the people should be led: many of their
Prophesyes confirmed the coming of Christ etc. which are already come to pass.
Your meaning I doubt of, but I will not take you so short, nor hunt for any
advantage of words: but I tell you plain, your speech is very doubt^ull.

Vitel.
NOw when the Lord of his goodness, had ^eleased me out of my blindne^, and
opened mine eyes, th^^ saw I, that all people upon earth which were without the
house of Love, were all ^rapped in unbelief: and that there ^as nothing among
them but va^i^un^e, ^tr^fe, and conten^ion, reuiling, blaspheming, misusing,
derid^ng, taun^^ng, and ^hecking, and every one would have right, and be the
comm^^^l^ye of Christ, and condemned all others for heretic^es, and false
Christi^ns, none would be culpable, or bear the blame, but every one put the
fault upon an other.

Answer.
WEre you so relesed of your blindness, that you were not subject to be blind
again? for that is a question. were your eyes so opened as HN. says of
himself in the pre^ace of his p^ophesye: the sight of mine eyes became clearer
then the Crystal, and mine understanding brighter then the sun? ^ou would
feign counterfaite your Aucthor in words, which become neither of you both
with your opened eyes: you saw that all people which were without the house of
love, were wrapped in unbelief: which in plain speech is, that all the world
which hold not your doctrine, nor believe it, are unbelievers. If this be true,
then are you uncharitable to lurk in corners, and hide this doctrine among
yourselues, and will let so few be pertakers thereof: No fear of torment, no
threatninges of men should prevail nor stonish you, if this your saying were
true: is there nothing upon earth but variaunce, contention etc? You speak of
your sight, but you have put on a pair of blind specta^le^, and so see
nothing. For if you saw aright, you should to your comfort, s^e the Gospel
preached, true mortification used among some, and for contentions and strife,
you, and your Aucthor HN. are the cause thereof: who possessed with
fantastical spirits, have troubled the quiet proceeding of Christ his
gospel: in that Satan rayseth up sects, and errors, it is a manifest toke^,
that he enuieth the prosperitye of the same gospel. For in time of Poper^,
when men followed dreams, and illusions, then Satan was quiet: but now the
Gospel is published to the comfort of Ch^istes Church: now ^athan besturres
himself in his members, to move contentious persons, to disquiet the ^oyfull
proceeding thereof. Where wheat does grow, there cockle, and ^arnell will show
it self: you are those that make the contention, and quarrel, and yet cry,
what disssentions are in the world? you say every one challenges to be called
the comminaltye of Christ: Why flee ye the name, Church, putting instead
thereof: comminaltes: but so you may be like your Aucthor in words, you care
not how unlike unto the scriptures you teach.

Vitell.
ANd I saw that by that occasion there was much murmuring, uproar, rebellion,
disobed^ence to God, and to spiritual and temporal governors, and the lord
caused me to see also that there should be no peace erected, which should
remain or continue without the most holy service of love, etc. Also then shall
no kingdom prosper which is against or despises the kingdom of the love For
it is the kingdom of God the Father, of God the Son, and of God the holy
Ghost. For the kingdom of Israel shall be set up again, and the Children of
love shall reign there in with God and all his Saints, unto whom be laud,
honor, and pra^se, from generation to generation, both now and ever, Amen.

Answer.
AFter this man's blindenes was restored, then he saw much murmuring etc. An^
yet you could never se rightl^ into your selves, for if you cold then should
you perceue that you your selves, the Papists, Anabaptists, Pelagians, and
Libertines are those that make the rebellion, and are cause of the dissension
and disobedience to spiritual and temporal governors. And further you saw no
peace should be on earth, or continue without the service of love. The doutfull
signification of this word Love is often confounded among your Family,
sometime you would have it taken for God, sometime for Christ, and sometime
for your wholl doctrine and profession, and sometime for a property or virtue
proceeding from God: but to take it simply as I think you mean it for the
order and manner of your doctrine and service of God: Then we answer, that
Christ his peace we have inioyed in his church, and it has continued with his
church since his assention, and yet I confess that such was his pleasure, to
afflicte his church, to suffer wicked persons to persecute the same, yet his
peace the church never wanted. Therefore your sight was very dim, when you saw
such things.

Moreover you saw that no kingdom should prosper which is against the love:
Kingdoms and nations have prospered, and do prosper by the protection of the
almighty, with his blessing, and yet are against your Family of love. Therefore
clear your spectacles, and look better upon the matter, for surely I think
you were in some dream when you writ this. And where as you would have us
believe y^ kingdom and service of the love, is y^ kingdom of God the father,
the son and the holy Ghost, this you have brought in to make the world
believe that your Family of love is nothing else but the true doctrine sent
from God, but you herein deceue your selves and others, for the doctrine taught
among you, is strange, and no where to be found in the word of the Lord: and
your Author HN. gives testimonye only of himself, without warrant from God,
or his word, therefore your doctrine in the Family of love is not from God the
Father, etc.

If you say that others also give testimony of HN. his doctrine, and name unto
us it is your Fidelitas, who in deed in his book chapter 2. sex. 8. says as
follows.

You shall furthermore understand* that the judgment which the God of heaven
has declared through HN. upon earth, and set forth through the same his
minister, is very true, and that also the same judgment, pronounces and
declares the right form and state of all what is in heaven and upon earth, of
all what is Gods and man's, spiritual and heavenly, and of all what is
natural, right, and reasonable: And that no such wonderful works could be
wrought nor brought forth by any man, unless God were with him, etc.

In deed this fellow Elder Fidelitas, testyfieth much of your HN. But whether
his testimony be true, let us examine it a little. If the judgment which God
has declared through HN. be very true, the^ was there no truth before. For,
HN. teaches such a doctrine as was never heard of in the world since the
creation, especially the doctrine how man is godded with God etc. and tha^ man
and God had all one order, being and nature. Also the doctrine of pe^^e^^^on to
be in this life attained unto, and that the law is possible to be kept, all
which if it be very true what ^N. has declared and set sorth, then does the
holy Ghost in the scriptures teach us contrary, as shall appear more ^n
treating of the particularities of these points.

Moreover if we would give credit to this Fideli^as, he would have us believe
that N^. pronounces, and declares the right state of all, what is in heaven
and upon earth, what is Gods and man's, spiritual and heavenly, natural right
and reasonable etc. Belike he thought his books should never have been perused
by any, but of such as are drowned in the drowsy dremes o^ this fantastical
doctrine. One More of ^u^^er, in ^^^ng ^^wardes days, and one (...) of
Manchester, in this our Queens days, told of such vain and friuolo^s
matters, but they were punished as Lunatikes.

And whereas your Fidelitas, says that no such works could be wrought by any,
unless the Lord were with him, this is as strongly affirmed as the other part
is monstrous and ungodly. For I pray you examine what are the works that HN.
has so notably brought forth, which does manifest y^ God is with him. His
books peradventure you mean^. What his books are, and out of what spirit they
proceed, is easily perceived. A simple wit having such a guide, could devise
against Christ his doctrine as fine riddles as HN. has published: and should
carry a more show of truth then his books do. For scholars and children are
able to confute his follies sufficiently: they carry such absurdities with them,
both against the Scriptures of God, and against all common reason, and nature.

The kingdom of Israel shall be set up again, and the children of love shall
reign therein (you say) but when shall this your prophecy take place you tell
us not. In deed David George told us before the like prophe^y, that the true
house of David should be erected, and the children of love should reign
therein. Why delight you your selves with such speeches? For in this worl^ these
things according to the letter, shall not happen, but they are spoken to
assure us of the resurrection, and to shadow the joys of the kingdom of
heaven, whereby our hearts should be lifted up with expectation of his promise.

Vitell.
BEhold these be the causes wherthrough the lord has moved me to minister the
service of love unto other, wherein I have sought only the honor of God, and
the salvation of al people which hope in god, and long for his righteousness.
Also I have (through the goodness of the lord) met with certan good
willingnons, which have submitted them obediently and faithfully unto the lord
and his gracious word, which also have followed the counsel of christ to the
clensing of their hearts, and therein does their light shine before men, wherein
they seek the laud of the lord and the salvation of all me^.

Answer.
WHen you had seen dissension, vprores, contention etc. in the world, then the
Lord (you say) moved you to minister the service of love unto others, you took
the aforesaid ^robles as a fit occasion given you to begin your doctrine,
surely you bew^ay your self in your speech: You thought it was good fishing
when the waters were troubled, and took occasion to teach false doctrine when
you saw great broiles, and tumults in the world. But where you affirm that the
Lord moved you to do this* whereby shall we know that this your bare affirmation
is true, only because you say so, but the holy Ghost has warned us not to
give credit to such. Ier. 14. ver. 14. says, The Prophets prophecy l^es in
my name, I have not sent them, nether did I command them, nether did I speak
to them, but they prophecy to you a fal^e vision, divination, vanity, and
de^eitf^lnes of their own hearts. Also Eze. 13. ver. 3. Woe be to the foolish
Prophets that follow their own spirit and have seen nothing. We may not believe
every spirit, but try the spirit whether he be of God John. 4.1.

The Lord moved you not to leave your art and calling, and to minister a
strange doctrine to the people: but the spirit of pride and vaynglory, and a
desire of singularity pu^t up your mind. Like as in time past you did as
eagerly maintayn other strange, and monsterous opinions.

The causes that moved you to spread your doctrine, are not sufficient, you have
thrust in your self into a function and calling, nether allowed of god, nor
ordained by m^n, and thi^ your ministry is disobedience to God and the public
magistrate, neither have you herein fought the honor of God* and salvation of
al people, as you af^irm^. If you had sought God his honor your voice should
publicly have been heard and not in corners.

In that you have met with certain good willing ones, which have submitted
themselves etc. therein we beshrew you, and lament that any simple souls are
deceived by your persuasions, and in deed it seems some such there are that
give ear to your sugared words, For, the poison of aspes is under your
tongue. Psalm. 14.

Why come you not ^orth to mayntayn such doctrine as you have taught? why prove
you not your doctrine by the holy Scripture? Why suffer you your scholars to be
troubled and imprisoned? but for your self you are sa^e enough, and when they
should render a reason of their hope and faith, then they utterly deny your
doctrine. It seems that such a principle you have taught the^, to affirm and
to deny, only keeping their conscience secret.

Now where you say that your good willing ones, or scholars, their light has
shone before men, wher^by you would hear us in hand, that your pupil^ be men
of excellent life, and as you set them out, so do they your life as appears by
their letters: so one of you comme^deth and prayseth another, an^ so must you
^eedes do, when you want good neighbor^, y^ best way i^ to praise your selves.

Vitell.
ALso I have given forth certain books, which are translated word for word as
near as we could, out of the books of HN. and some of them have come to the
hands of enuyous persons, which are diuil^ed with the devil, either diuelishly
minded, for they be slaunderers, and li^rs, and also blasphemers, whilst they
have ^la^phemed the holy Ghost, and hi^ most holy service of love. Moreover,
they hau^ ^ayled at, ^euyled, condemned, despised, and blasphemed the Lord his
elected minister HN. If this come not out of envy, although they say nay, then
I know no enuyous spirits. And although there be many enuiors of the love and
her most holy service, yet are the^e two horrible blasphemers of late risen up,
whose books ar^ come to my hands. The one is named Steven Batman, the other
I.R. But they might both be named with one name, Tertullus, if they co^t^nue in
their lying, whereof I must write although I have no pleasure in such workers of
wickedness.

Answer.
THat the books of HN. were translated out of Dutch by you, we knew before, but
in distributing them to the Queens subjects without any allowance of the
magistrate, contrary to law, therein we tell you, you have not dealt li^e a ^rue
subject, nor a christian, you complained of disobedience to magistrates, but
you your self are the most disobedient of all others. And some of those books
have come into my hands, whom you term envious and diuelled with the devil.
Strange Doctrine must needs have strange terms. Your judgment of me and
master Batman we will only answer with this saying. The Lord give you a better
mind, and a more modest spirit. I would you were as free from heresies and
false doctrine, as we are from a diuilish mind.

You affirm we have blasphemed the holy Ghost, and his elect minister HN. Here
is sharp judgment, and such as should not be in any of Christ his church:
this does well become you ^lders in HN. his Family. Surely if there were no
other matter in y^ wo^ld to discern your doctrine by, your own poisoned words
would bewrap your spirit, and of what household you are of. The children of God
do know that you are herein, manifest and wicked liars, but you have no
pleasure in such workers of wickedness, and no maruayle, being come to that
perfection that you are, we poor sinners are despised in your sight: but our
hope is in the lord Jesus, who does not despise sinners, but for us he shed his
blood, and for you which are so righteous, in whom no motion of sin can be
found, I doubt does this saying appertain: I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.

Vitell.
THis blasphemous Bateman, with his slau^dering, and lying, blasphemeth the
holy ghost. For he names the Familye of Love, a cormorant ^owle, and an
heretical sect: whereas notwithstanding, there is no Catholic Church, nor
comminal^ye of Saints, but the Familye of Love, and therein he conde^neth the
holy scripture, the law, the Proph^ts, and also Christ, and his Apostles ^
moreover he says, that the Lord his elected Minister HN. is of seed of
sectaries, whereas his doctrine is altogether against all sectaryes.

Answer.
TO Follow a little of your Rethorick, you forget both Christianitye and
humanitye: so intemperate you are in your blasphemous terms, because Master
Bateman calls your Familye of Love, a cormorant ^owle, does it follow that he
is a blasphemer of the holy ghost? this is such a consequence as best becomes
your school, and your frantic humors are thereby made known to the World.
Men would not think, that such speech should proceed from the ^lders of the
Family: this were two much, ^f your young nouices should in their brau^es, and
con^i^ions use: but you to wright such ungodly, and uncomely speech advisedly,
it cannot be colored by any shadow of words: touching Master Bateman, he is
a learned, reu^rent, and godly preacher, neither can your ungodly terms once
blemish, neither his person, nor his calling. I would you did follow that
vocation, and calling, wherein you were once placed, no worse then Master
Batema^ does his calling, in discharge whereof, you, nor none of your Familye
can justly reprehend him, neither in life, nor doctrine, which is sufficient
testimony of his demeanor: For i^ you had any thing to accuse him of, you
would not conceal it* so bitter are your stomakes, as appears by your
ungodly terms.

Whereas you say, that there is no catholic Church, b^t the Familye of Love:
this is as stra^nge as your other words are horrible, and monstrous. For where
was your Familye before David George, or HN. were borne and some of your
here^ies in de^de, were maintained before, by Pellagians, by ^nabaptistes, by
Papists, and such like: but your general doctrine, was never patcht together,
but of late by HN. in Flaunders: a place as apt to bread errors, as you are to
broch^ them: in condemning HN. you would have the world believe, that Master
Bateman condemns the law, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles. With what
impudent face can you a^o^ch this? must (...) credit your own wo^des, and
testimonies only, because you say your doctrine comes from Sion? Christ has
instructed his Church sufficiently, to credit no such Fables.

An other reason you produce, that Master Bateman does accuse HN. to be of the
seed of certain sectaris, and to clear him thereof, you ^ay that his
doctrine is altog^her against all sectaryes. It is the mann^r of impious
perso^^, to flee the ^anies of the facult^e they use, as the these, the
murderer, the harlot, the dronkerd, or such like, they would not be called by
those names, which vi^es they imb^ace: for it is odious unto the^: so you to
cl^are HN. of partaking with sundry sects do affirm that he is agayn^t all
sectaryes: that he as a master o^ sectaryes might be alone. But this answer
is not sufficient to clear HN. to be void of heresis, and sects, ^t were
expedie^^ sor his purga^ion, that he should publish unto the world, if he dealt
plainly, a book to approve his calling, and show us in plain speech, that his
doctrine is sound, and agreeing unto the scriptures: otherwise he may deceive
irroneous heads, such as you are: but God his children I hope will take heed
of your ^ollyes.

Vitell.
NOw even like as the forenamed Bateman, has slaundered HN. even so do you
also I. R. For you say that HN. was thought to be the chief of David Georges
sect after his death, and so you do slander him by presupposing: for I know
they be false imagi^^tions, all what you imagine of him: for you despise him
because he says, he is a Prophet sent of God. But the time may come, that you
sh^l ^inde his Prophe^ie true, and although you cannot believe it, yet you ought
not to despise it, neither ought you to despise the dutch langua^e, which you
count to be rude: whe^ein the Lord, through his Minister ^N. has brought
fourth his most holy service of love. For I know you never counceled with the
L^^d, and therefore you know nothing of his se^retes.

Answer.
WHerein I have slaundered your Aucthor ^N. in supposing him to be chief of
David Georges sect, you show no reason to the contrary: you affirm that alike
we have slaundered him, and I think even so: For neither of us have slaundered
him in de^d, as ^arre as I can understand: to clear him of accusation, you
only say all i^ false, what I have supposed of him: you think that is enough
among your Familye: for your word among the^ is of some credit: but it
be^oueth, you should by substantial reasons, clear him of such matter as I
have charged him with: your bare denial with us, is not sufficient: for the
cre^ite of your Aucthor* you should say somewhat: by your silence, and bare
denial, men do verily think the supposition is very true.

That he was one of David ^eorges sect, I have laid down the reasons that
moved me so to think, in a little book, called the displaying of the Familye
of Love: amongst other reasons there alleged, I set down certain articles
o^ the coherence, and agreement of doctrine: and how lykely they agree
together, by perusing the same, may be perceived: whereunto this man thinks it
sufficient for him to say, all is false what I have imagined against him: but
your words ar^ no warrantes* you say I despise him, because he a^firmeth that
he is a Prophet sent of God: his person I hate not: only his doctrine, and
vain prophesyes I utterly mislyke: and most of all, because many of this our
native country of ^ngland, are by him, and his vain prophesies deluded, and
deceived: and being moved with zeal for my brethren, and countrymen, I have
bent my self, with such poor s^ill as I have, to utter his follyes, and
vaintyes: there be many learned in Christ his Church, far better ab e to have
written hereof: to whose office it properly belongs: to cleanse the Church
being defiled with heresies: yet I take y^ man to be none* of the Church of
Christ, that thinks he has no office in his Church.

If I dislyke him, because h^ ^arth he is a Prophet etc. I have great reason,
and good warrant so to do. Iere. chap. 23. verse. 16. says, Hear ^ot the
words of the Prophets, which prophecy unto you va^itye, they speak the
(...) of their own ^art, and not the (...) of the Lord: we are also warned by
Christ, and his Apostles, not to give credit to such vain Prophets, and false
teachers. Peter Epistle 2. chap. 12. There shall be false teachers among you,
which privily shall bring i^ damnable heresies even denying the Lord that has
bought the^, with infinite places more. Since Christ our Lord ascended into
heau^^^ office of prophesing* and foretelling of thinge^, have ceased in the
Church, only the Apostles were (...) with the spirit of God, and by the power
of the same spirit, foretold of many things that should happen^ but it ceased
(...), many have risen up, and have prowdly prophessed: but they (...) ben
con^^ned as false Prophets, even as your HN. (...).

^ou say the time may come, tha^ I shall ^inde his prophesies true, you put the
time uncertain: but you have told your Familye in corners, as I am (...)
informed, that many of your prophets sayings, should ear thi^ have bin
ful^^lled, touching the public receiving of your ^octrine, which are proved
false, and untrue: although I (...) believe it, yet I ought not to despise it,
(you say,) why I ought to believe it, you render no reason: we are forbidden to
credit any such, as I have proved. In y^ I ought not to despise it, I pray you
show some cause ^ tho vanitye that be ^ttereth, touching* hi^ ^^^ference with
almighty God* how the power of God compassed him about with a (...) etc. and
again h^ says: the being of God, gave forth his sound and (...), and spoke
unto ^e HN. through the spirit of his Love, all these words, and said: (...)
there was ne^e^ any that writ in Christ's Church, that ever used any such
vain, and proud speech.

I hau^ said, y^ it is requisit^, that HN. if he will neede^ have his new
office of a Prophet to be credited, that he must work miracles* which it
seems he does: as some in your Familye, in sadn^s have told: amongst other
matters, this is avouched, that NH. is not ignorant in any language, no not
the learned tongues, he has written an ^pistle unto the Bishops here in
^ngland in latin. I think he has his knowledge and learning by some bequest,
as a legacy: also it was affirmed to me of credit, that some of the Familye,
going over into Flaunders to him, be told them of all their message, and
instructions before they spoke: such marks and notes, you give out to your
Familye, to establishe your blind Prophet.

You say I ought not to despise the Dutch language, wherein the Lord has
brough^ forth his most holy service of Love.

To despise any language I may not: only in comparison of other learned
tongues, I have said it is rude. And was there no service of God before, among
other nations, but now brought forth in the Dutch tongue: I would that there
were no more heresies brought forth, in the Dutch tongue. but only this of N^.
but it is known to many learned, y^ sundry heresies are written, and published
in that language, to the grief of God his children. You further say, that I
never councelled with the Lord, and therefore know nothing of his secreates.

You sat upon your judgment seat when you writ this: how know you that I never
cou^elled with the Lord? to council with God we may as we are taught, (that
is,) in praying and hearing of his most holy word, which I hope in the Lord,
that ever he will guide me with his holy spirit to do, and perform all the
days of my life: as for your secret Revelations, and Prophesyes, I am utterly
ignorant of, they are things proper to your Familye, but not to the Church of
Christ.

Vitel.
Euangeli^um R^gn^ yet does Saint Paul say, ^f ou^ Gospel be ^id, it is from
them that be lost whole mind the God of this world has blinded etc. For it i^
not written his and you find fault with the poo^e Family of Love, as though
they d^ny it ^i^h their mouth, and keep it (...) in their ha^t^: but you
confess the Lord* (...) your mouth, and your heart is f^ll of bitterness, and
even so you deny him with your heart, and mouth.

Answer.
I Have called a book which H N. HN. had as good right to write and publish a
gospel as that shining vessel S. Paul. Whether will you lift up your prophet?
so high, that with Lucifer he may be cast down as low: we are warned not to
credit any, bringing another gospel, he is accursed as says the holy ghost,
there was never any godly man since the Apostles time, (...)
that durst be so presumptuous, as entitle any broke, and call it a gospel,
'therefore your Author has dealt therein presumptuously and wickedly.

Now, whereas I find fault with the poor Family in affirming and denying. I
would I had not some cause so to do, but where you ad this word poor if it be
so, you are the cause thereof, for with your manyfold collections to set out the
Authors works, you have in d^ede made many an honest and wealthy householder
poor, as I can testify, and name the parties, and you have been charged
herewith before this time.

You say moreover, that I confess the Lord with my mouth, and deny him with my
heart. If this be true, then am I worthy great reprehention, but if it be false,
then are you worthy the reward of a liar and slaunderer.

In deed it is somewhat greenous unto you, and your patience can scarce beer
it, that I have so openly manifested you, and your Author, yet therein I
confess I have done nothing but my duty which I owe unto the church of
Christ, that the simple may be warned of your subtle snares and deceits, where
with you seek to intrappe God his children, to make them be partakers of your
manifest impieties, but the Lord will preserve his evermore,

Vitell.
Moreover, whereas you writ the of his minister HN. and all such things has he
borne in the patience of Christ etc.

Answer.
HN. I have done it by the t^stimony of his honest neighbors who knew hun
better then you, l^nger then you, and before you knew him. Their testimony will
stand for truth, although for his cr^dite sake, you will not believe it, and
account it lies. I never said he was in Munster. I affirm that he went about
to aid his brethren in Munster as was supposed: you say it appears by his
works that he is against all rebelilion and disorder of life: but how does it
appear by you hi^ Family, to teac^ a secret doctrine in corners against the
law, and stir up the people to embrace the same* What wisdom and understanding
was given to him, whereof you boast* Little is showed either in him or you. He
is a wise man that co^tenteth himself with the simple truth, taught in the
scriptures, an^ seeks not by strange deurses to p^blis^ doctrine contrary
th^runto. W^sdome is showed in humility, and not i^ v^rne ostentatio^ and
boasting of the spi^ite of God, and of secret reuelati^^s, where of your Author
is full. A wise man delyteth not in singularity, neither thinks, speaks, nor
boasts of any wisdom in him. If God have bestowed any excellent gift in
man, let it appear to his glory, without ostentation. ^ou make your
compa^^sons unequal, because Christ our Lord untruly was accused to be a wine
bibver, a drunkard, etc. So likewise his minister HN. which he is content to
bear in the patience of Christ.

What patience is in your Author I know not, but if we may discern the patience
of the master by his scholl^rs, then I can testify of many of ^our ^npatience.
What words and blasphemies you have charged me with b^ this your libell
appears, and wh^t taunts and uncomely speeches, mired with manifest slander,
in your letters appears. Besides what private letters and threats I have
received at your hands of the Family, I could here declare, but that you are
so patient, as you affirm your HN. is, I find it not. The Lord give us all
patience, that in seeking his truth, we may imitate his patience which said:
Learn of me. etc.

Vitell.
NOw you say he names John Calvin, Marten Luther, the Papists and the
Anabaptists to be 4. castles which is also false. For there are no such names
mentioned of in all his books, neither is there any such books of his,
therefore Adrian Gisling has told you a lie and you have fortefied i^.

Answer.
of (...). Castells, under the same men's names mentioned, now this man is sure
HN. never writ any such book, and therefore must needs be a lie. I am
credibly informed that HN. has written 27 small treatises and ^pistles, and
this man has seen all as he says, but let the thing be true or false, the
matter is not great: the party that told me is living and of honest credit and
may as well be believed as you: I pray you are there no books called the glass
of righteousness, for he compiled ii. of that title, I never saw any of those
books in deed but if there be no such then HN. has mocked the Family, for he
still in his books refers his reader unto the same book called the glass
of righteousness. And in deed I doubt that book does utter more of your
Aucthors secret doctrine, then his small pa^phlets: Few or none in the Familye
have it that I could ever learn, if you have seen all the Authors works then
you have also seen that, and you keep it secret least your Family should not
or could not well brook the doctrine contained in the same. Let the book be
seen and keep it not hidden, it stands you upon now to let the world taste
the doctrine which you have affirmed Princes and king^omes before this time
should have embraced.

Vitell.
HN. abused a woman, that is a false report, so to report of him for he never
abused any woman neither taught he any other doctrine concerning the
immortality: but the doctrine of Christ. For Christ says he that believes in
me though he were dead yet should he live, and who so lives and believes shall
never dye neither was he accused to the Rulers for any such matter, but he was
complained of by certain enuiou^ persons which affirmed that he was one that
taught a strange doctrine, and the Maiestrates gave credit unto the false
witnesses, and thereupon sought for him, and because they found him not, they
dealt extreemely with his Family and carried away his goods.

Answer.
THat his daughter Mary was HN. nor his doctrine: and therefore, your bare
denial is only heresay: but these are no great matters to stand upon: you
confess that he could not be found, being sought for, then was he fled, before
his accusation was for strange doctrine, and not for a woman, as you avouch:
But certeynly, If the Magistrates should carry away his goods* for an
accusation of strange doctrine, then were they not indifferent, neither can I
be brought to credit your speech, nor think so irreverently of any
Magistrates: but why sied he, if he were not guilty of any crime?

In ^mden men know, that many Religions had peaceable habitation, without
gaynsaying of the Magestrat: If the spirit of God, were so mighty in him, as
he says it is: why did he not stay to render a reason of his doctrine, before
the Magestrate* the perticulers being examined, your simple denial against so
many witnesses, is scarce credible. But at ^mden, from that day to this, openly
he durst not be seen: therefore some other matter was laid to his charge, then
professing a strange doctrine. For his credit sake, it had be^ convenient, to
have given some reason, to prove that he was accused for no other cause: let
the world judge indifferently, where is more probabilitye.

Vitell.
ANd after there was justice desired,

Answer.
THe Mag^strates you say rede^iuered HN. If he would ^ stayed: but the safest
way was to prevent the matter by flight, you are very ^riuye to HN. and his
doing^s, that can so redely tell what was missing: now the Magestrates here
shall know the truth where he is, and where he has made his abode ever since:
but sure it is little to be regarded where he is, and I think the Magestrates
do heartily wish, that he had never ben borne, nor you neither: he for
devising your new familye, and you for publishing the same to our country, and
translating the books, which certainly was not done like a godly Christ^a^,
nor a true ^nglish hearted man. For in ^eede, as I am informed, you are of the
Dutch race your self, and so appear^th by your vain, and curious head; salling
from one error to another, as those countrymen are apt unto.

^f the bo^k^s had remained in dutch our quiet Country should never have ^in
troubled with this new familye, to the grief o^ God his children, which
bewail y^ state, that you have brought many unto at this day: veye well
assured, that although ye lurk in corners, and send fourth your Libels, you
cannot escape his hands, who sees every corner of our hearts. And as HN. by
slight, would not abide the trial of his matter, even so do ye follow the
same course, and sail rightly by his compass: for stand to your doctrine, nor
come to conference you dare not: but privily insinuat your doctrine, where your
words are taken for Oracles.

The Magestrates would gladly that you should give a reason, more agreeable to
truth, of your dealinges, and doctrine: as for HN. where he became, or where he
is, they little pass: and where you say, that to me the truth is unknown, it
may be as you say: neither will I trouble my self much therein: but that you
of his Familye might embrace truth is my chief purpose: which cannot be in my
opinion: holding your selves captive to the illusions of HN.

Vitell.
FVrthermore you say that he does call himself, Restorer of al things whereunto
I answer, that there is no such word written by him, and yet has the Lord
accomplished according to his promises through the ^piri^^ of Christ, in him,
all that he has spoken through the mouth of his seruaunt^s, the Prophets: more
where you say that HN. cannot err or mi^^e the right etc. I know not how he,
or any one should err, whi^h^ is indewed with the holy Ghost, and led by the
spi^ite of Christ, which leads into all truth.

Answer.
contrary to truth: the Prophecyes of such whom the Lord raised up to comfort
the weak estate of his Church, in the time of the law, were fulfilled in their
seasons, especially such prophesyes, as either touched the captiuitye of the
Jews, or the destruction of their City: also many of their prophesies
concerned the coming of our merciful Messiah, the manner of his birth, passion,
death, and resurrection. Now, to affirm that all these are fulfilled in ^^. is
very hor^^ble, and monstrous: but such is your vanitye, that so you may extol
the dignitye of your Aucthor, you care not what untruths joined with
blasphemye you utter: the like speech HN. avouches of himself, saying, what
God has spoken through h^s holy Prophets, Proph (...)
and what is written of Christ, should also in us, and with us be^ome f^l^illed
etc.

^ow you are able by any shadow of truth, to prove an^ of these two sayings
true, it had bin requisite, that you should a showed: for they carry great
absurdityes, both in truth, and reason: Whether do you lift up your Aucthor,
by such untrue speeches? it does appear very lamentable, to all God his
children: this is proud bosting, and exaltation, such as S. Paul did warn
the Church, to take heed of such.

I do much marvel that Christian men, with any face can write thus
presumpteouslye of mortal man, although you would qualisye your saying, that
this is brought to pass, by the spirit of Christ in him: but this helps
not, neither does it stand with the will of God reveled: that any mortal
creature should be so exalted.

For if we should demand of you, how we shall know this to be true: then you
answer, by his works, which I think you mean his books: If otherwise you
mean, some miraculous dealing which you are privy of and not known: it were
necessary for his credit, and your honesty not to hide it any longer: but
simply to manifest the same.

Moreover you say, that none can err which are endued with the holy ghost etc.
We know that the spirit leads into al truth: yet those vessels having by
grace such privilege: do often, in show, and countenance appear as though
the spirit were que^^hed, or as fire raked up in ashes: example here of Peter,
who having the spirit of God, Gal. 2.11.
yet did thing^s contrary to truth, and therefore was rebuked by Paul, and
that worthily: many in Christ his Church, no dout have bin guided by the
spirit of God, and yet sometimes have showed themselves humane creatures: as
wanting that excellent privilege appropriate to Christ, which said, I am
truth: such is our condition, (we may not reach higher,) not to err is a
special title belonging to Christ our Lord: and not to mortal man, although
lightened with the spirit: we must rest content with such honor as it pleases
him to grant, who is Lord of his creatures, and not to reach so high, as
presumpteously to challenge a title, and dignity, far above our capacitye and
not agreing with our frail condition, and nature. But such is our vanitye not
guided by the spirit of God to advance our state, and calling above our
degree, and condition, by the setting on of our enemy Satan.

Vitell.
them humbly, and obediently as serviceable instrum^ts to serve the lord and
their nei^hbour: therefore I would council you, to look i^to your selves, and
mark what (...) good thinking spirits rule (...), wherethrough ye blaspeme,
di^pi^e, and dishonor the t^ple, or taberna^l^ of the Lord.

Answer.
Against the two letters of HN. HN. be a name signifiyng some office, why has
neither he nor you manifested y^ same? but plead ignorance, that it signifies
some h^e misterye which you nor we know not, now as HN. is a name given by the
Lord, as you affirm, according to the work that he will establish by him: so
does his fellow Elder ^idelitas look for like credit, whose words I will
repeat, as they be written in his book called, A dist^nci^e declaration of
the requiring of the Lord etc.

In the First chap. 1^. se^ion, ^e has these words following: but fire, or
bend always, all your sight o^ me Fidelitas, and consider how that the Lord
has chose^ me, even from my very birth, out of my Mothers womb, to the
obedience of the requiring of his word: For that I with you, and ye also with
me, according to the requiring of the testimonies of his gracious word, should
become united therein, and so to grow of one uniform being, with each other in
the same. etc.

You show us in the 29. sexion, that through HN. his priests office, the Lord
will receive all men in mercy: but for Fidelitas office, as yet we know not
what it is, and in deed there were never any, that would challenge such names,
as these elders do: and affirm that they signify their office, and calling:
certain players upon stages would declare th^^r names, representin^ c^rt^ine
^e^^ue^ to se^ out their matters, some w^^e called tru^th, some hope, some
^aithfulnesse: but in sadness, to set ^owne such names to si^ni^^e (...) which
the Lord as y^u affirm, will accomplish by them: is mere imp^etie.

But where the Lord gives names, it appears by their calling, and such a^e
their works, and sayings, as ge^eth testimony s^fficient to their vocation.
^ut ^our HN. c^n show no sufficient marks, whereby any, but seduced persons,
should give credit to his words: only a pa^nted show, and barren heaping up
of wo^des, darkly appli^d without conclusion, or sense, saving you, and such
l^ke, that find great mister^es in his sentences, carrying such credit among
you, as is not seeming Christians The Lord gave names to sundry under the law:
as Isaac, Sampson, John ^aptist, etc. But does it follow, that HN. is a name,
given by the Lord. Prove unto us, that the Lord has established his name: your
frivolous cavil, that HN. signifies (...), will not serve: such bables are
scarce suffici^^t to me^k children: therefore you must devise some better (...).

Some of your Familye have written, that HN. signifie^h some greater matter
then either you* or we can tell of: such incertentyes ho^ you au^uch of your
HN. For uncertain doctrine must have certain ^idden misteryes to amase the
hears minds: or else no doubt* the drift of do^^ me would easily be espied.
Therefore you must de^ise some hidden s^^retes, whereby to carry a show of
prof^^^d m^tter.

That names are given by men in these days and not by God, there is no doubt
or question, but you would said have HN. to be a name given of God to signify
a calling, you give us no reas^n so to think, but would have us believe it is
so, because you say so, then were we vayn heads, and vnc^nstant minds. For we
depend so stricktly upon the scr^ptures of God, that no spirit, no (...), nor
no Angel teaching other (...), can be a co^ted, or believed amongst us, so
ce^tayn is our faith, and so invincible is that truth, which by the Scriptures
we held.

In that you, the Children of y^ love ascribe no names of holiness unto the
outward person, it is a mystery we a^e ignorant of: we simply give names to our
children in baptism, without signification of holiness touching the In^ant, the
names may signify holiness, but that the person carrying the same name shall be
indewed therewith that are we ignorant of. If you have such hidden mysteries
among you, it were good the world should not be ignorant of it. We commit the
success and event of such hidden secrets to the Lord. Of enuyous good thinking
spirits that rule in us, you council us to look to, without your council
(God willing) we mean to follow the council of the Lord our God, which wills
us not to believe every spirit, John. 4.1.
etc. And yet I never heard before of enuyous good thinking spirits. But such a
grace you have, not only to forge new doctrine, but new names of Spirits also.

In speaking against HN. you would insinuate that we blaspheme, despise, and
dishono^ the temple or tabernacle of the Lord. Does it follow necessarily that
they that speak against HN. blaspheme, despise etc. And is he the temple or
tabernacle of the Lord? undoubtedly we are all deceived then: For I assure you,
we take him to be an erroneous spirit, a fantastical head, possessed with pride
of mind: Satan blowing the belowes. The Lord working thereby the exercise of
his church. If you have other opinion of HN. warrant, or ground so to do, have
you none. But because you will not be^eeue the truth, 2. These. 2.1:
therefore are strong illusions sent, whereby you might be deceived. Look into
the holy Scriptures with a more single mind, and it shall be easily perceived.

Vitell.
MOr^ouer you say that the illuminat

Answer.
I Have said that the illuminate Elders in the Family sin not, you

And herein you teach false doc^rine to the people. For your words are false,
that we prevail with God and Christ over sin. Nay, we affirm that we
prevail with God by Christ, which accepts us for his sake, and although you
acknowledge never so much that this is brought to pass by Christ, in us, yet
we tell you plain, that it stands not with his good will and pleasure so to
do: but that contynually we should be petitioners to him for grace to keep
under sin that sin reign not in us, that sin bear not rule in us, Romans
6.12. and 24.
or have dominion over us, as the Scriptures use to sp^ake: but that we
prevail against sin, so that we extinguish it in our own persons. It is a
doctrine of Satan, and not from the Lord. In this and the like doctrine does
your Author and you show a manifest p^oofe whence your errors are sucked, even
from the Pope, who teaches that we may fulfill the law. If it be so, then may
we be righteous by it, and have no need of Christ. Such heretical and imptous
doctrine contrary to the scriptures you teach, and therefore your Author and you
worthily despised.

The Pope in his doctrine of Opera super^^ (...), and you with your doctrine of
perfection to be wrought in us in this life, do so extenuat the death and
passion of our Lord and Savior Christ, that the poor oppressed, and burdened
sinner, laden and ^roning under the burden of sin, can find small comfort.
Therefore the church of christ grounded upon the Prophets and Apostles, Christ
Jesus being the chief corner stone of this foundation, 1. Cor. 3.11.
doubt not in truth and humility of spirit to acknowledge still i^ us while
we are in this life a battle or combat against sin, to strive, to fight,
but not to conquer, to triumph, or to prevail, but by faith in Christ, in
whose person we conquer, we triumph, and we prevail. So that to be overcome,
or be subdued under sin we cannot, because we have a valiant and most
victorious conqueror, who still imputes his conquest and victory ours, yet so
as sin and the motions thereof still remayn in ^s, to our great exercise, that
feeling our w^^knes, our want, and our need, we ^ight in our necessitye, have
rec^^se unto our Captayn, our Savior and delyuerer.

But that we in our persons, should p^euayle (...) sin as you affirmed: is
false, wicked, and damnable doctrine: but such favor has falsed with you that
you greedely embrace this, as though Christ or his Apostles had taught it,
whereas it is against all the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles and against
all examples in the scriptures, Psalm. 130.
David says (...). S. Paul says. Christ Jesus came into y^ world to save
sinners of y^ which number I am the greatest, ^. Tim. 1.15.
if doing our best we must acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants:
Luke. 17.10.
where is become your doctrine of perfection, never heard of in Christ his
Church: our ^umayne state and condition is so lifted up and stast with pride by
your doctrine of perfection that penitent sinners find small grace in whom you
impute scarce hope of salvation, except they attain the perfection, on whom
shall Christ his death take place? and to whom shall the virtue thereof extend,
if none shall be saved but such as be perfect in whom no sin rests or
remains? you take away all comfort from sinners to whom the Gospel
belongs: and our only comfort in distress, the effect whereof by this your
doctrine is denied: miserably do you herein deceive your setu^s and other.

They that have pleasure in sinn^ are servant to sin, as you affirm, but
to have pleasure in sin that sin raygne in us, or have dominion over us
continually we affirm that they are marke^ and tokens not of the children of
good but contrary: yet we doubt not to ^^^irme the remnants the motions lust^
and ro^cupiscence incident to our frail nature still to lurk in our bodies
notwithstanding we be in the favor with God and made righteous by Christ his
death and passion: for so it stands with his good will and pleasure: that his
grace should be made perfect through our weakness. Cor. 2. cha. 12. v. 9.
Therefore you with your doctrine of perfection, do extenuate his death as
much as in you lies. We are not in humbling our selves, enemies unto y^ lord,
but you by exalting your selves, except ye repent, will be taken enemies both
to God and all good men.

Your scholars in the Family do blame us in their wrytings, and affirm that
we in confessing our imperfections* and sins which contynually do assault us
daily and hourly, We are (as they say*) Advocates for sinue, and you, teaching
a perfection, are mainteners of righteousness: but more truly may it be said of
you, that you with your perfection are enemies to y^ grace of God manifest to
us by Christ Jesus our Lord: and do thereby blaspheme (as much as in you lies)
the glory of his passion and death appropriate only to sinners: you may with
the pharasies brag of your perfection and observation of the law, but we
comfort ourselves with these and the like sayings of holy Scripture: Tim. 1.
ch^. John. 3.16.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: So God loved the world that
he gave his only begotten son etc: Behold the lamb of God which takes away
the sins of the world etc.

Vitell.
FArther you say, they may join righteousness until the Lord deliver him from
his unrighteousness, and through his Christ make him righteous: and then may
he say that the Lord is his righteousness.

Answer.


How do you observe the politik ordinance of the Maiestrate, in printing your
books and publishing them to the Queens subjects contrary to the law made in
that behalf? your obedience c^nsisteth in words but not in (...): ^h^refore
with more truth you might say (we will not be obedient to Mai^strates.)

In that you co^descend ^o^ i^ any thing contrary to God etc. Therein you say
well, but I would you were found herein true of your promise, for then your HN.
and his doctrine with his prophesies should not have such credit among you as
appears, if his doctrine be not directly against the Lord our God and his
commandments: I apeale unto the judgment of all God his Children, that
shall read these conferences.

You account none ungodly but such as blaspheme the Lord, and despise his most
holy service of love.

Whom you account blasphemers before is declared: i^ any speak aagaynst your
HN. or your Family of love: Ipso fa^to he is a blasphemer: then all the world
which do despise your Familye are blasphemers, your conclusion must needs
fall out even so: whereby appears what reverent opinion you have of any and
of all that are not of your Family: if you learned this of HN. consider better
of it for very shame of y^ world^ if no reverence, nor fear of God can move
you.

You confess that there is no man righteous, until the Lord deliver him from
his unrighteousness, but how we are delivered you and we greatly vary: we
according unto the holy Scripture do acknowledge Christ to be our righteousness
which he has wrought perfectly in him selse which by faith we apply to our
unrighteousness, his obedience, his love, his patience etc. we by faith apply to
our disobedience, to our hatred, to our impacience etc. all what was in Christ
is made ours by grace, yet still we in our earthen vessels are co^rupt sin^ull
and v^yde o^ any such virtues as the law requires.

But ^ou on the contrary affirm that by Christ working in us by his spirit
we are made righteous, and so cleansed from our unrighteousness that we are
changed into his perfection: so that in all our actions, words, and thoughts
nothing can ^low o^ p^oc^ede from us, but suc^e as proc^ede from Christ,
because we are guyded by the same spirit, but whether you or we speak truth,
let the holy Scriptures bear witness, then may be say that the Lord is his
righteousness, it is very true, but how and in what manner the Lord may be said,
to be our righteousness, is to be understood: we acknowledge y^ he in his own
person, is our righteousness and sanctification: but you will have his
righteousness wrought in you by his spirtie, the difference consists in the
ma^er: we acknowledge in him all strength all piety, all obedience, and in our
selves all weakness all ungodliness, and all disobedience, but you will needs
have all in all to be in us, which to much blemisheth his glory and triumph:
if we should also in our persons triumph: our triumph stands not in doing,
but in believing in him which did. Therefore as you have charged us wrongfully
to be aduocats for sin, so may we rightly call y^u Patrons: for our corrupt,
rotten, and earthen vessels.

Vitell.
will compel men to de^lare their thoughts* which (...) n^^ther p^iestes, nor
Ministers of the lord.

Answer.
TOuching your confession which ^ou HN. does say it is expedient, that they of
his Familye make mani^est, all that has bin committed: (both what it is,) and
whereunto our nature draws us unto: here it apppeareth* if you follow your
Author directly, he leueth the matter not so voluntary, as of necessitye. And
this must be done as you say, unto a p^iest, or Elder: to please the Papitles I
think you have added this word priest: but we tell you, that such manner of
confession the scriptures allow not of: if any be wounded in conscience he may
to his comfort, repair to any godly, or learned preacher, ^o show his grief,
and to receive counsel, and comfort to his consolation by the scripture,
against the prick of conscience, or the law which troubles many mi^s minds:
but that of necessitye he must make manifest all thoughts, all what our nature
does incline unto, there is no warrant what ordinance is in the Church of
England, you have not showed: but that he must of necessitye make manifest his
thoughts, it is untrue: it is left fr^^: only by way of persuasion, men are
moved to repair in such extremity: to their learned and godly pastors, and by
no ordinance: but this appears, that you account not your self as any
member of this Church of England: no marvel: for you hold it more safe, to
profess HN. his Familye, then to be an obedient child of Christ his Church:
Whereof England is a special part.

What the Catholic religion holds touching confession, is no cloak to
shadow your dealinges with all: for we tell both you, and them, that such a
confession, as both you, and they hold, is not agr^eing with truth. The
Papists urge men, and account them heretics that deny it: and you hold it as
an expedient thing: neither have you both, any warrant so to do.

Some do compel men to declare their thoughts, which are neither priests,
nor ministers, as you affirm who they are, you tell us not: yet I suppose you
mean the commisioners, who ^xamining your Familye, touching their faith and
doctrine: found them so subtle by your instructions, that in y^ end they
required the^, to declare their knowledge, what they thought of their Author
HN. and I think the Magistrate authorized by the Prince may in such cases
require us to mani^est: what opinion we have of any Author, or what we think
of him: but you have taught them to say, (we know him not,) and therefore, to
commend him, or discommend him, we may not: such sleightes you devise, when
the Magistrates requires a truth at your hands, and here is also declared,
your obedience to rulers: your Elders are safe, when the poor country people,
are brought before the Magistrates: but when will any of you the ^lders, come
voluntarily, and defend your doctrine, and prove it good by sound argument? it
is not enough to se^d out your Libel^ without name, and ^ide your selu^^ (...),
and say our ri^orous de^ling is t^^ cause thereof? Truel^ i^ you would appo^nt
time, and place, and meet accordingly, I burst undertake to be bound, that you
should, both come, and go safely: where conference might bring truth to
light, if you look for truth, and require to be satis^^^d: for this
wrangling, is not so consonant to Christian pietye* truth* and plain dealing
is ^est, and none that ever held truth, but was desirous of conference: i^ you
refuse it, and mutter still among your selves, when shall truth appear where
it is? For the love of God examine these things, and take better advise.

Vitel.
YOu say moreover, that we affirm

Answer.
THen all is not false y^ I have collected If you keep my commandments etc.
Touching this matter of the possibilitye of the law, I have answered your
scholars to their several Epistles sent to me.

Yet further consider, what (...) nature of the law is: The^ law causes
wrath: Romans 4, v. 15. The law has dominion over man, as long as he lives.
R^m. ^. v. ^^. I know not sin but by the (...). Acts 15. chap. 10. ver* Why
tempt you God, to ley a yoke on the disciples necks, which neither our
fathers, nor we are able to bear? mark therefore what is the nature of the
law: It causes wrath, it has dominion over us, while we live: it brings us
to the knowledge of sin, a yoke importable: now compare this with our frail
state and condition, how by the law the Lord has made our sins known as
appears Romans 11.32, For God has shut up all in vnbelie^^ that he might have
mercy on all. also Gala. 3.22. But the scripture has concluded all under
sin: that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them
that believe:

If by this doctrine we b^ concluded and shut up all under sin: then it
argues a plain impossibilitye to keep the law. If there were in us any
possibilitye to fulfill the law: the^ Christ our Lord dyed in vain, for he
fulfilled (the same for us:) neither was there any mean found, in heaven, or
earth, to pacify the wrath of God, and satisfy y^ law: but the death of that
immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus. For Christ was appointed to fulfill the law for
us, before there was a law given: for if by our infirmitye, the strength of
Christ is made per^te, Cor. 2. chap. 12. verse. 9. So contrary, if we affirm in
us strength to fulfill the law: then is his death extenuat^, and made o^ none
effect. It is no derogatio^ to God, that such a law is given us, which we
cannot keep: but thereby his great mercy and love toward us is showed in
saving us, and delyuering us from the danger thereof by Christ Jesus ou^ Lord.

We reject not the law, but in reu^rence embrace it, as a scholemaster to see
our imperfections, and send us to Christ, such is the nature of the law, and
such is our weakness in performing the same: never was there any that did it,
only ^achary and ^lysabeth are said to walk in all the commandments ^ut how
far? sine querela co^^m (...): without reproose before men. But i^ the Lord
should have entered in^o judgment against them, by the dexterity of his law*
then must they need^ have said, to us is nothing due but confusion and shame,
to thee be honor and glory for ever.

Now you s^e how the law is fulfilled, and sati^fied in the person of Christ
no^ in our persons, but merely by him so that in Christ, and by Christ, have
we fulfilled the law: because his righteousness is made ours by grace, which we
take hold on through faith.

All those places of holy scripture, which command the observation of the law,
do therein set before us marks to level at: so that we must study to come as
near them in our life, as our mortal state and frail condition will permit:
You deceue your selves mightily, when by illusion of Satan, you acknowledge
that you keep the law in every condition as it requires, except ye admit that
distinction the Libertines do, which affirm nothing to be sin except we
make a conscience thereof before it be committed. Much more might be said by
men of better skill, if you require to be satisfied.

Vitell.
FVrthermore you say, that we affirm

Answer.
THat HN. was a Prophet you denied I know not, except you mean his books,
which testify him to be a deceiuer, ^^d an erroneous spirit: he, seduc^d by
Satan, and you by him.

But if you mean by wo^kes some miraculous matter, muttered of you in secret
corners, the^ we tell you plain that neither his books, nor his works can
clear him of false prophesies, and wicked doctrine which you teach the people,
as appears.

You say if any man know y^ truth, he cannot condemn HN. nor his prophecy,
but much more embrace it. If you could make this to be believed, it were
somewhat, but who will credit your saying; being so often taken tardy? There be
many in the world which know the truth undoubtedly, which never heard of HN.
nor any doctrine of his* your saying is very monstrous, many are with the Lord
that have given their lives for the truth, and yet never knew HN. nor heard of
him, if none know the truth but such as embrace ^N. and his doctrine, then wa^
truth hidden before he came into the world, or writ his books: such a gift
you have to avouch a manifest untruth, where all godly Christianes can say the
contrary: Yet to maintain him in his vain prophesying* you let not to ty
truth to his girdle, so that none that knows truth, can condemn HN. So
inuinsible a Patron you have, with long seeking, gotten at last.

I do verily think, for all your great brag, that HN. will be an odious
name, in the mouths of god hi^ children, through all England: now he begins
to be known, and by the great credit, and admiration you have him in, the more
detestable will he be reputed: as a seducer of such men as cannot content
themselves wi^h such truth, as the scriptures contain: but must have a
Prophet, raised up out of Flanders, a banished man, and one that dare not show
his face in any country openly: and you had rather embrace his noueltyes: then
the wholesome doctrine, contained in the old, and new testament.

Vitell.


Answer.
note well what you say: for never any since the Apostles tunes had so impudent
a face, as openly to publish such a detestable lie: if this come not from the
spirit of pride, I know no proud bosting spirits: all the Fathers in the
primitive Church, ever reverenced the holy scripture, and submitted all their
books thereunto.

Austen desired not to be credited, or believed, but as his works might agree
with the holy scriptures: all men in general have ever acknowledged themselves
in their writings: to be subject to error, only the scripture, to be without
blemish: but this man will have HN. and his books of equal aucthoritye with
the scriptures, and written with the same spirit: thus do you run, from one
impietye to an other, and in the highest degree of blasphemye. But I pray you
look upon the matter better: before you say he is a prophet, now his books
are of equal aucthoritye with the scripture: whether will you lift up your HN.
above all condition of frail man: the higher he is exalted, the more grievous
will be his fall, without repentance: it is Luciferian pride, thus to
attribute unto mortal man: but you make HN, to be a name of office, and not of
a creature: such misteryes requires falced: where truth, and simplicitye
imbraceth plain dealing.

Now you say, that HN. does avouch all to be false, whatsoever is taught by any
other: therefore hear his own words, and then discern, and see: God his
truth, and his godly and heavenly works, Prophesi. Chapter. 13 verse.
are unknown unto all flesh, and unto all fleshly, and earthly men: but it is
given to the children of the kingdom, the comminaltye of the Love, to
understand the secret misteryes thereof. You say it will be found true what he
writes: If none but the comminaltye, or Familye of Love do understand the
scripture: then it was not rightly understood, before there was any mention of
your Familye.

Now for commendatio^ of the Pope Cardinals, and Mass, he says, he
commends none, bu^ in his right order: this speech is ambig^us, in his right
order. For simply I think, none of them have any shadow of right order,
neither is their callinges, nor doctrine grounded upon, either right, or good
order. Your Author belyke, allows the Mass, or else he would not have taken
such pains, as to explicat every ceremonye therein: in his book called A
declaration of the Mass but thus with subtiltye of speech, you would feign
say, somewhat to defend your Author, be his sayings never so monstrous.

Vitell.
FOr in that book, named, a joyful message of the kingdom of ^Papa
signifies an old Father in the holy understanding.

Now although he be not endued with the holy understanding, yet is the name not
the worse in it self. For the Lord has ordained governors, spiritual, and
temporal: and they represent the majesty of God: although now certain
governors, govern not according to the rule of righteousness: yet is not
therefore the name euertheles^e of reputation because it is an ordenance of
God: therefore let us despise no name, that belongs to governors, neither
yet also any governor, nor any man else: for we have all sinned, and have need
of the grace or mercy of the Lord.

Answer.
Eua^gelium Regn^, gospel of the kingdom: but this man is the translator
thereof: and has qualified it, calling it a joyful message of the kingdom:
the title is arrogant, and presumptuous, and the doctrine therein worse, as
will appear in print ere it be long: the pope has found among man^ enemies,
one fre^d: although his doctrine is spoken against every where, yet this man,
would gladly keep, and retain his bare name: belonging to a governor in
office: we co^deme not the name, his doctrine not agr^^ing with the word, is by
the same word condemned: and so is yours.

For significations of names* w^e will not contend a part of your deuinity
lies therein: neither do we despise any name: but is evil doctrine be
shadowed or under any name, cloked then we inuey against the doctrine, using
the name: as when inuectiues are made against the Pope, or HN. it is not meant
of the persons but of the doctrine. And surely the Pope did never exercise so
great a Popedom, in the West Church, as your HN. (a new Pope) does among you
of his Familye, and as the papists, which tooth, and nail, seek to maintain
every absurd, and senceles part of the popes doctrine, with all their power,
wit, and skill: Eue^ so do ye of his Family maintain your N^. and whatsoever
unsavory doctrine he teaches, it man not be discredited: nor he cannot therein
err, or miss the right: in such reputation, have you placed mortal man.

You say we all have sinned, and have need of y^ grace or mercy of the Lord: y^
all have sinned, you truly confess: but that all do daily sin, you cannot
believe: especially, you the ^^ders of the holy vnderstandin^: but in humilitye
of spirit, you, and we ought to confess, not only that we have sinned: but
daily, and hourly do sin: and have need, not only of his grace, but his
mercy also: although you speak of grace, or mercy: but we crave his grace,
and mercy: his grace to guide us, and his mercy to deliver us.

Vitell.
his spirit, is hominisied, or become man. And those you call proud speeches,
and because ^N. uses them, ye despise him, although they be no strange words
or speches in the dut^h language* therefore in so doing, you despi^e the Lord.

Answer.
I Am offended in zeal of Gods (...)

Your HN. further says: Therefore it is assuredly all false and lies, (...)
seducing and de^eitfull, what the vngodded, or vnilluminate men out of the
imagination or riches of their own knowledge, and out ^f their learnednes of
the scriptures, b^ing forth, institute, pr^ach, and tea^h etc.

Now look well and behold whether HN. condemn not all others, but his
illumined Elders, who are Godded with God etc. which in d^ede I have rightly
tearme^ proud speeches, such as never any godly writer in Christ his church
durst ever speak or write. ^ou would color the words by the ducth tongue,
saying they be not strange speches in that language, but certainly a strange
and monsterous doctrine is thereby taught, and far disagreeing from the written
word, and far ^nbeseeming any Christian.

And here if I should dilate what a meaning you have in these words, Godded
with God, I should increase this treatise over much: yet I will somewhat touch
it, as you and your Author have expressed it in writing. I will use your own
speech as follows. See and mark (my beloved, A (...) called m^nnes f^lling
away.
) in the beginning when God had made all things well, the was the Lord one Lord
of his kingdom, and one God of his work, and there was also no more but one
God and one man, and they were one* and had in all one orde^, being* and
nature. For God was all that the man was, and the m^ was all that God w^^.

Thus monstrously, and blasphemously you have taught god and man to be one in
nature: now compare this godhead with God or incorporated to God, and easily it
is perceived that you mean God and man to be one: this were worthy to be
buried in silence, but that now the patrons defend such blasphemies, it is time
to clear the Church of Christ that such proud and Luciferian voices should
not be heard, or once named, and yet this man will prove that HN. cannot err,
and none that know the truth can condemn HN. It is a pitiful thing that men
having any sense or feeling of God or godliness, should so vaynely write: or
publish to y^ world such absurd and horrible doctrine, never heard of before
and yet the Aucthor must needs be a prophet, and his doctrine to proceed from
the Lord: now in despising this and the like proud speech of HN of necessity
I am counted to despise y^ Lord thus still you draw HN. and his matters that
who so speaks or writes against him be writes and speaks against God,
whether will you exalt your Au^thor, ye unbelievers, surely, above all that is
called God, but with your father you will be cast headlong so low, Thess^. 2.
ch^p. ^.
where to late you may bewa^l your contempt of God and godliness, look in
time to this and the like part of your doctrine oh ye Ipocrites.

Vitell.
HN. with his priests office, where through, the Lord will receive all men in
mercy, which humble them unto his word of grace: according to the requiring of
his law and ordinances, be erected and remain from generation to generation
for evermore, for love peace, and righteousness shall remain in
eue^lalastingnes.

Answer.
THe Dutch language must now be accounted amongst those learned

I cannot but say (notwithstanding your false Prophesye:) that the Dutch
Language you use, especially in such strange invented words and confused
compositio^, is barbarous, since that ^^rtayne other of your books, that have
learned to speak latin (a tongue by nature and propriety plain, copious and
eloquent) are also new fangled in name, and barbarous in phrase, of purpose to
be blasphemous in doctrine, which you nor any of your Family^ have as yet (as I
think) translated: they want a certain father, and therefore have no certain
names, but borrowed, as Theologica, Germanica, Augustinus, Elutherius, etc.
Their new devised latin words are such as Aegoitas, Ipsietas, etc. Their
doctrine is that, Adam is nothing else but vetus homo, and Christus is nothing
else but Nouus homo. The history of Christ his birth: his miracles, passion,
death resurrection etc. they regard not, but allegor is upon every part
thereof most daungerously and ungodly, teaching^ uncertain significations
without co^^ort, making no account of the history. Confidently to believe the
truth of the history, (they say) is to abide in the letter which kills.

Those books contayn^ plain doctrine which the Libertynes hold, and also the
doctrine of perfection which you hold to be in this life* but especially this
principle, that when this perfection which you dream of, is come to the man,
then is he illuminate and deiffied, and God in him hominified, so that in all
his actions, words, and thoughts he can no more commit sin or any evil
then God or Christ can commit sin or evil: the reason is rendered because God
or Christ dwells in the man, and has the government of all his actions,
thoughts etc. And when ye are pressed in conference to show that man, thus
having Christ dwelling in him, if he at any time do bring forth any evil
that in resemblaunce man appear as sins, they are not so to be^ accounted of
say you, because Christ dwells in the man: which doctrine is wicked, false,
and devilish as I have often told your fellows in other places. Christ
dwells in us by the participation of his holy spirit, and guydeth our
actions, else should we have no strength to resist satan, or flesh, nor the
intisements of the world: but takes not away thereby our humayne imperfections
but he keeps lusts and all wickedness that they reign not over us, or rule
in us, or have dominion over us, yet we cease not to be sinners, or commit
sin, that is your own doctrine, but has no foundation or warrant in the
word.

Other books also are of such like name and doctrine, as Elidad and Fidelitas,
whereof I fear^ me that you were the tra^slator. The doctrine whereof I mean not
to touch in this place, only this is to be noted, that the parties acknowledge
themselves to be fellow Elders with the Elder HN. and magnify his office and
calling about measure, and protest with great vehemence, that such wonderful
works as are brought forth through the same HN. could not be wrought unles the
Lord God were with him. And these strange names of their Elders do maruelously
astonish our English people. Elidad, as I have learned, is an Hebru^ word, and
signyfieth dilec^us Dei. the beloved of God, which is a proper title belonging
to our Savior Christ. This is my beloved son etc. And that we generally are
in him, and by him beloved there is no dout, so is be still the beloved. And
that some of their Elders name themselves Fidelitas, so others that (belike)
are not come to so high degree, name the^selue^ Amatores Charitatis. It is a
world to see how these men delight in such vain shows of piety, and think to
get credit by these colored means, which to the godly seems ridiculous,
and too too fond.

And thus much concerning the books in latin, by occasion of the Dutch, wherein
note this (Christian Reader,) that whereas the Italian Pope would have all in
latin, this other Pope, and dutch Antichrist would have all in Dutch, as a
predestinate tongue to open his prophesies, and mysteries of yt Lord.

All the quotations of holy scripture that HN. uses to prove that he is risen
from the dead to judge the world, do prove in deed that Jesus Christ has
risen from the dead, must they therefore avouch HN. his resurrection? See (good
Reader) the presumptuous spirit of Satan, so settled in these for ^orne
^dames* that through the eating of that forbidden fruit, wherethrough they
would become as god, that is, dei^^ed, they are wholly become sathanified, or
diuilyfied. Strange names I confess, but very significant, and prope^ for such
strange Christians. Was not Christ Jesus mightily declared to be God by the
resurrection from y^ dead? If this resurrection were the mightyest declaration,
or argument, and proof, that Christ was God, judge Christian Reader* if HN.
makes not himself not only God, but Christ, and so the promised seed.

And in deed, you your self Vitell, have affirmed him to be a Prophet before,
in thi^ place you call him a priest: give him also the name of a king, and then
is he Christ a new Messia^, for by his resurrection, he makes him self God.
Such an Antich^ist ^ think, should never have been heard of, if that the
Children of God had not been warned in the gospel, that many false Christ's
should come into the world, and such dangerous day^s, that if it were possible,
the elect of God should be deceived. But blessed be God wh^ ever is ready to
preserve his elect by Christ, s^ that perish in ^ecoiuable waye^ they shall
not, such a care has the Lord over his.

Now HN. and his ^^istes office shall appear, where through the Lord will
receive all men. O impudent wret^hes, have we not a deliverer, even the Lord
Jesus? who does not only receive us, but continually protect us, and minister
to us all things, both heavenly, and earthly, which are expedient for us: but
will you blasphemously open your mouths, that we shall be received by the
Priests office of your HN. No godly Christian can hear this without grief:
What ^erogatio^ is this to our merciful Lord, and Savior? that now a wretched
man, possessed with a lamentable spirit, shall take upon him his office, and
calling, where through we shall be received. Oh manisef^st impietye: Oh
exe^rable iniquitye, which no patience can bear. Seeing you publishe ^uch
doctrine, in writing with deliberation, what doctrine do you te^ch in corners
to your Family, where no man ^are open hi^ mouth against any blasphemy that you
do utter* In such cred^^ are you ^^ept, but woe worth y^ head, that seeks to
(...) the simple, with such horrible doctrine.

Your (...) ^ayd, that I know not HN.: but as it was said to Serinthus the
heretic: I know him to be the first begotten son of Satan. But the Lord
has given his Church the spirit of truth, to dire^^ them from all such v^yne
boastes of iniquitye: So likewise O Lord, give thy holy spirit to the simple,
seduced in y^ Familye* that they may behold the blasphemies, which their
Elders, in wickedness do teach: against the son of God Christ Jesus.

Vitell.
FVrthermore, you write very untruly HN. his books) might be perused of
vnparciall Judges: then your judgment, would be found even like their
judgment which condemned Susanna: but the Lord raised up Daniell, which is the
judgment of God: and delivered the giltles, unto whom we commit our cause.
For he will judge uprightly, and reward every one, according to his deeds.

Aunswe^e.
WHat HN. has pronounced of all Therefore it is assuredly all false, and lies
seducing, and deceitful, what the vngodded, or vnilluminated men: out of the
imagination, or of their own knowledge, and out of the learnednes of the
scriptures, bring forth, institute, preach, and teach: they preach in deed the
let^er, and the imagination of their knowledges but not the word of the living
God. And in an other place ^o diu^* codem cap. (...) the^ esteem themselves, so
holy as they will, they are a false Christianitye, and Devils sinagogue, or
schole. etc. with many other places to like effect: so that HN. still teaches
his Familye that it is given to the Familye of Love, to understand the secrets
thereof.

Now let the indifferent reader judge, whether HN. exempt not all, but him, and
his, from the true understanding of the scriptures: all men which are not
godded, with God, he terms (fleshly minded) and earthly in cogitations: and
entreats whole chapters of such men: he says: That a fleshly, and earthly
man, out of his natural, and scripture learned understanding, has not any
sight, or knowledge at all, thereof he i^ so utterly void of the same, that he
cannot understand the smallest title thereof: much less expound the same,
according: to the truth, to an other etc. So that it appears p^ayne: that
nono but HN. and his illuminat Elders can understand the sam^* ^ according to
truth.

You say, if HN. and his books, might be perused of impartial Judges, then
should his case be found, as innocent, as Susanna. Those vnparcial Iudge^ that
you would have, are you, and your fellow Elders in the Familye. For I do
truly affirm, that no godly, or learned man in all Christendom will allow
your HN. and his books, for true doctrine: you, for your part, have traveled
the most part of this 10. years: and yet I cannot understand of any godly, ^r
learned man that imbraceth your doctrine, only some erroneus spirits, whose
heddes have bin intox^^ated with other horrible heresies, do join with you,
in these your wicked attempes: also certay^^ unlearned country people, with
whom by your sugared speeches, and fair words, you have not a little prevailed
to the destruction of their souls. If you would choose any godly, and learned
men, to hear your reasons, and arguments, the matter might quietly be
debated: you do but in words make a show, a^ though you would stand to
indifferent, and vnp^rciall judgment: But when it comes to trial, you will
be judged, only by your selves, which is the safest way to cloak your
impietyes.

Vitel.
THerefore, consider what you

Answer.


You further discourse of the second coming of Christ: I hope you mean it not
otherwise: but in the resurrection of all fle^^. I writ this because HN. in the
preface of his book, called a good Instruction of the upright says, the 2.
division, says these words. For as much their, as that now in this same
newest day: the coming of Jesus Christ, as a Lord in his majesty, from the
right hand, of God his Father appear^th and becomes manifested unto (...)
with full clearenes of his heau^nly illumination, according to the scrip^^^e.
etc.

Here HN. tells, that Jesus Christ is come, and is manefest to you of his
Familye: and that he is come from the right hand of God his father. Our faith
is, that he shall come from thence in the end of the world: but HN. tells his
Familye, that he is come: therefore your words, and your Authors agree not:
this is very suspicious doctrine, touching the resurrection: and this
augmenteth more suspicion, that one of your Family, being asked before many
witnesses touching Christ's coming to judgment, did answer plain, that he
was already come: meaning his second coming: I could name the party, yet my
hope is, that you teach not so heathnishly of our resurrection, and of Christ
his glorious coming to Judgment.

Vitell.
Moreover you affirm in your selves wounded with sin unto death: but by grace
given from above, that wholesome medecin Christ Jesus whose passion has
purged, whose blood has cle^sed, whose death has cured all your diseases and
maladies etc. So you confess you need not any more, for you are cleansed and
cured of al your diseases, wherefore do you then condemn HN. which does teach
none other doctrine, where through men shall come to life everlasting but
through the passion, death, and blood of Jesus Christ, but you are cleansed as
you say and therefore have you no more need of Christ nor of his safemaking
oil of the godly salvation, for you affirm that ye are all clean: and I
would ye were cleansed through Jesus Christ, for then could ye neither
slander nor lie.

Answer.
^h^ unto death etc. the remedy I hau^ also showed as you have set down, but
your conclusion is false and cannot be collected of my words: that I need
not any more, because I am clense^ and cured, for we need his prouidenc^ still
to protect us, and his grace to defend us in all our actions, for we ar^ still
subject to ^all into sins, not withstanding in the purpose of God we be his
elect, and to our comfort do feel the Lord work in us a hate of sin which
is a testimony to our conscience that we pertayne unto the Lord Jesus yet so as
the dregs of sin with the motions thereof lurk in our bodye^ although you
deny it: our battle against ^inne is continual, and shall never have end
until our earthly tabernacle shall be turned to dust, contrar^ to your doctrine
of perfection: you ask^ why I blame HN. which teaches no other doctrine: I
would be nor you did

You charge me again untruly that because we are cleansed we need no more of
Christ, (this would you have) but our need^ we still acknowledge: our wantes
we utter, and yet doubt nothing of our delivery from sin hell, and death: and
although we acknowledge this our redemption and forgeuenes of our sins, yet
so as the remembrance thereof, still works repentance in us, and also we
often feel the law to press us, the justice of God to terrefie us, our
conscience to accuse us, in such trouble are often the children of God, but
still by grace given us, through faith we acknowledge Christ Jesus who has
interposed himself between us and the law, between us and the Justice of God
etc. with such conflictes does the Lord still exercise his Children, and so
does hereby schole us that feeling our want or need, and our miseries, we
might flee to him for strength, for mercy, and for help but I doubt whether you
in your Family with your presumtuous doctrine of perfection do feel any of these
exercises the godly Christian is partaker of* Now you wish, that I were
cleansed through Jesus Christ: for then could I neither slander, nor lie.

^oe here appears unawares, that you, when you are cleansed, can sin no
more: but for my own part I acknowledge, and I doubt not, but verily believe
through Christ, that my sins by his death are cleansed, and yet subject, both
to lie, and slander. Although I know not, neither is it yet manifest unto me,
that I have wittingly, either belyed, or slaundered, either you, or your
Aucthor, or maliciously have written any thing against you, yet it may be that
I have bin informed otherwise, then truth in some things: yet so, as hitherto
untouched of you, except we should take your bare word, against many witnesses.

Vitell.
FVrther, you write of two men to be of the Fam. of love, what they were, that
is that, but of HN. his doctrine at that time they knew not, and also you
affirm you know what, but seeing you will ^eedes slander us, we will in the
patience of Christ bear that, and h^pe upon the goodness and mercifulness of
the Lord, desiring him to give you a better mind.

Answer.
HN. at that time they knew not, but this is certain, one of them is living,
and knows you but to well, and is a welwiller to your Family, and scoller of
Allin, but what they were, you answer that is that. Such subtle aunsweres are
fittest for men of your profession, you know what they were it seems, and in
deed they were of your hatching, although for further increase of knowledge*
Allin their near neighbor did more instruct them, and lead them forward into
your error. Plain dealing would have put men out of doubt, seeing you know what
they were. But since they have bewrayed your doings* in secret you regard them
not. For some of your Familye have answered, that by compulcion, and threats,
they made their confession, others say plain, they were not of our Family: you
are ashamed of them now that they have disclosed your secret conference.

You say I affirm, I know what: I think you mean touching your own person,
wherein I have uttered you to be y^ only man, y^ has brought this wicked
doctrine of HN. which lay hidden in the Dutch tongue, among our simple English
people, to their everlasting destruction, except the Lord in mercy open their
eyes, that they may see into the wicked, and monstrous drift of your Author HN.
and repent the^, and so turn unto the Lord Jesus from whom they have departed:
following a stranger, an enemy to Christ and his gospel, set up by Satan, who
enuieth the prosperitye thereof. The Lord give you hearts to understand, and
also give every one of you a better mind.

Vitell.
of religions, or chosen God services, sects, or errors etc.

Answer.
TOuching this Christopher Clitel Vit^lus, (or Vitulus:) I have said he is a
ioyner by occupation, a wavering mind, and unconstant, delighting in
singularitys, and always held heretical opinions: almost this 36. years:
wise men have noted 3. evils, being once rooted in man, are seldom or never
void of some spice of y^ same disease: that is Lunasy, Ieolously, and heresye:
and it so falls out by this man's example: who in king Henryes reign, was
unconstant, in king Cowardes reign, a dissembler, and in Queens Maryes reign
a plain Arryan, and now in this our Princes reign, a chief teacher of the
Familye of Love: now he hosteth of nothing: surely there is no cause, but
rather to sorrow, that many poor people, by you are deceived, and abused: and
their simplicitye carried away, by your subtle speeches.

You say, what so is godly, or manly, that is from above: the phrase is
somewhat difficult, I think you mean spiritual, and earthly.

But where you add, what is neither godly, nor manly, y^ comes of the flesh
of sin etc. Here is a distinction more scholasticall, then mean wits can
attain to: if by godly, and manly, you place manly, as contrary to godly, then
is manly taken in the evil part, and so not from above, except you will have
evil things from above, which cannot be. The third distinction is ambiguous:
for of our corrupt nature we bring forth fleshly wisdom, imaginations, etc.
And hereunto, are we by nature subject: if the Lord by his grace, do not guide
us, and lead us, and deliver us, (yea and so delivered, if he still do not
protect and govern us, we shall be ready to fall again, and again: therefore
we daily crave at his hands, saying: deliver us Lord, from such euels, as by
our own corrupt nature, we are subject unto.

Here are also 2. phrases I thought not good to let pas untouched, the one the
man's good thinking, and this is taken in the Family in the evil part. If his
thought be good, it is from above why despise ye it? The other is, chosen God
services. If it be a service of God, then you do not well to place this phrase
with sects and errors. But these men have a delight to publishe strange
Religion, and to set it forth with strange phrases also. For so they may speak
like their Author, they care not how unlike the holy scripture they write.

Vitell.
ANd all these come hereout, because errors, but not out of any other ma^s
council or books.

Answer.
Ammalis homo, the ^leshly minded man, knows not the things that are of God,
yet it is also affirmed that no man can say Abba, Father, without the spirit
of God. This man would persuade that there is now some secret teaching from God
by revelation, which is proper to this Family, and therein they have a special
gift, they little regard the ordinary way and mean to attain knowledge, and
the true sense of the holy scripture.

It is not to be denied, that almighty God has taught his children by his holy
spirit, in revelations extraordenary, but that now the son of God is come
into the world, even the wisdom of the Father with an uncovered face, shall we
now in this light look to be taught by revelations or inspiratio^s? he has by
his wisdom established an ordinarye way of teachinge in his church, whereunto
we must stand ob^dyent, except we will deny his ordynance. Faith comes by
hearing of the word of God, If we have faith, we shall not want other excellent
virtues, she is never alone, but love, chariti^, humility, patience, etc.
wait upon her as handmaydes. Has not the Devil deluded many which only
depend on revelations? And you which brag of your Author, which is (as he
saye^h) taught from god his own mouth, and has hard y^ sound of his voice.
Thus miserably are you car^ed away by illusio^s, and herin you deceive your
selves and many others. Out of the wisdom of the flesh sprange all Christopher
Vitelles ^rrors. Note I pray thee Reader, that this Libeller acknowledges to
have bin in him many errors, comprehended in this word ^all) and anon^ thou
shall find him saying, he was in no error.

In deed the church of Christ has felt to much expe^^ence of your heret^call
head, fraught full of heresies, so that if any newer device should by Satan
heretofore. ^ou imagined your self cleansed, and your h^use swept, but now are
s^uen morse spirits entered into you, as app^areth by your doctrine and you are
become ten sold the child of destruction, more now th^n be^^r^. And except you
repent, your end will be far worse then your beginning.

Vitell.
NEither ^an I blame any man, most holy service of his love, brought forth
through HN. his elected minister, I should have remained without hope of life.

Answer.
Vitell to declare a tragedy of himself, which no man can ga^nsay, being a
thing secret and unknown to the world. For our secret conflictes are
troublesome I grant, when our conscience shall pres us with the greatenes of
our sins, but whether it were so or no who can control him? or else who will
believe his own words, speaking so many things contrary to truth already? But
I must certify that this is a special point of practice in the Family, that
when any in conference do require how they could so easily leave the certainty
of doctrine which once they earnestly embraced, then shall you hear them tell
you of marvelous conflicts, much trouble and veration of mind, and could
never attain to any quietness, until by the doctrine of ^^. they found rest
unto their souls.

But may not this be an illusion of Satan as otherwise, being rightly
examined? for Satan is so subtle, that if he may get possession of any settled
minds, who instructed in godlynes by the scriptures, resist his persuasions,
and so comes to conslict of mind in such troubles* where Satan* by the Lord
his permission, preuayleth: then works he in his a certain security or
peace, and then they think all is well, when ind^de never in worse case then
so captiued in Satan's tyranny.

Now this man, when he has set abroad some of his troubles, you shall see how
he was delivered: by which we may gather what mark he shootes at: namely in
all troubles, and agonyes of mind, all must resort to the service of Love, set
forth by his elected Minister HN. For this man, if he had not taken that
course, he had remained without hope of life: certainly great is the honor,
wherewith they advance this their priest and prophet, above all that is called
God: but my hope is, that with the blast of the Lord his mouth, which he has
published in the scriptures: he shall be confounded and overthrown so low,
that the fall of him, which so exalted himself, shall be to the comfort of all
the Lord his children: for whose ^ake, he now begins to mani^est this lying
Prophet, and will I hope, raise up to his Church, men of zealous minds, which
will both write, and speak against this wicked man of sin: which is in such
credit with deceived people, which the Lord in mercy spedely bring to pass: to
the glory of thy name, the comfort of thy church, and the spoil of Satan, and
his ympes.

Vitell.
committed, therefore I may say a medicine master gets gretest pray^e by
those that have the filth^est and corruptest disea^es, as a leprous person, and
such like. ^uen so have I the gretest cause to land the Lord, and must confess
that he which is mighty has done great things on me, and holy is his name.

Answer.
NOw after this man has showed HN. Now he tells that by yt same he
understood that God would be merciful to al sinners, and I pray you, did you
not know of this mercy but by HN? Were you ignorant ^of the Scriptures before
you came acquainted with him and his books? His mercy and compassion is
plentifully declared in the gospel, which it seems you were ignorant of.
This medicine m^ster HN. has wrought a great cure upon this man. For as one of
your scholars have written in his defense, He teaches with power, and it may
be, the power of Satan which leads men into errors and heresies. Although
you imagine that this is wrought by the mighty hand of the Lord, abusing the
words of the ^anticle, which the blessed virgin did set forth magnifying the
name of y^ Lord thereby.

Touching your diseases which you count to be cured: it is out of dout that you
are more full of infirmities, and desperate diseases then ever you were,
although you feel them not. For a body that feels no sickness, yet infirm,
and weak, is hard to be cured, yea irrecuperable as Physicians prescribe.
Look therefore more rightly into your self, and you that are so whole and
clean you shall find matter of corruption in you, whereupon the true Physician
of our souls Christ Jesus, shall (if you acknowledge your sickness and
infirmity) work thereby such an alteration in you, as heretofore you never had
the like: but if you stand upon your perfection, and integrity, he comes to
such a as terrible Judge, to your confusion: where on the contrary we rejoice
in his mercy, still acknowledging our sins, and our wantes, crying, and
calling upon him all the days of our ly^es with the Prophet David, and saying:
if thou O Lord, look straightly upon our sins, Lord Lord, who shall abide it
etc. Correct us O Lord, but yet in thy mercy, not in thy fury, least we should
be consumed etc. thus we still call upon the Lord for our delivery, and
acknowledge our continual transgressions, which are ever before us, as pricks
to provoke us forward, to do therein our duty, that is, to ask mercy of the
Lord our God: who wills us to call upon him, in the day of our trouble.

Vitell.
FVrthermore concerning Christophers declare best: For he knows, he found me
in no error, and so he there said: neither had he any law, to compel me to
come the^her: but he desired me to come and confess that I held no such
opinion, or error, whereby the false brute might be stayed, which went of me, so
I accomplished his request therein, albeit I confessed, that I had in some
points bin deceived, by certain strangers, etc. now I wish that you would
inquire of my Lord, doctor Grindall: for I think he will testify the matter,
even as it was.

Answer.


Before in the 35. section, you confess, that out of the wisdom of the
flesh, sprang all Christoffer ^itells errors, and now you affirm, that you
were in no error: again in this tractation, you confess, that in some
points, you had bin deceived by certain strangers: and in an other place,
you a^ouch, that by no other men's counsel, or books you were deceived: such a
gift you have to say* and unsay: to affirm, and to deny: but the truth is,
that you were prisoner in the counter in woodstret, by commandment of the
Bishop that then was, and there is your name regestred: and your coming was
not voluntary, as you untruly affirm: but coacted by the law. Mages^rates use
not to desire men to come to public place, to confess their heresies: but the
law it self does urge it, and you, according to the law, for your releasement
out of prison, did recant at the Cross: and named your error, to be
Arrianisme: whether you did it from the heart, that the Lord God knows.

Now consider this man, for his credit sake among his deceived Familye would
persuade, that such a piece of injustice, was showed unto him, as he says: but
he is proved a liar, not only in this, but in many other matters: verefying
the old proverb, mend^cem memorem esse oporte^: a liar had need to have a
good memory.

And where as you so confide^tly affirm, that you were in no error, when you
were at the Cross: the contrary whereof is manifest. I will put you in mind
of the disputations, and conference, that diverse me^ had with you in Queen
Maryes days: M. To. Crowley a reverent and godly preacher yet living who
affirms, yt several, times he disputed with you, concerning the blasphemy of
Arryus, and you continually denied Christ Jesus to be God, equal with his
Father: and immoueably you remained all her reign of that mind: and this M.
Crowley, is ready to avouch against you, whenever you, or any for you: will
require to be certafied: Also one Ione Agar, an old maid, which waited on
those in office for the Cittye, as Mayors, and shrieffes, did declare to M.
Fulkes the Elder, and others, that you Christopher Vitell, whom she named to
be her cousin, had taught her plainly, that Christ was not God: but only a
good man, and a Prophet: and that there were men that she did know living,
that were as good, and as holy men, as he was: and further, that Master
Latimer, Master Ridley, and others (which gave their lyf^ for Christ's cause,)
were stark fools, and did not well in suffering death: such wickedness have
you bin the Aucthor of: and yet now to hold your credit with your Familye: you
would have the world believe, that you were in no error: but you are worthy the
reward of a liar: which is, that when he speaks truth he is not believed.

This man is chosen, and found to be the aptest person, to be an illuminat
Elder in HN. his Family, and of greatest credit, among those deceived souls: a
fitter instrument to bear record of HN. and his doctrine: then to declare the
joyful message of Christ our redeemer, whom he has blasphemed, denying his
diuinitye: worthily are they deluded, that follow such a deceiuer.

That man, that once has made shipwreck of faith and good conscience, and is
possessed with error, it is hard to reclayme him: but that some spice of that
maladye will lurk in him, or a worse: as is proved true by you: you confessed
then, you were deceived by certain strangers: and have you not as great cause
to suspect your self deceived now, by HN. a stranger in nation, and
estraunged from God, and Christ, in his doctrine published: contrary to his
will revealed in the holy scriptures? if you would consider with indifferency,
you were never so notably deceived then, as you are now: for look into all the
works of HN. what do they tend to? but that he is a prophet raised up by God,
and an elected minister, a priest in office, by whom God will receive all men
in mercy. With such like testimonies, does he utter of himself, and his
Familye, do believe the same. I would his credit were not so great with you but
that you could compare his sa^ings with the scriptures, and have an eye unto ^s
collections of the same, and how he follows the grossest ^raslation of the
Bible, delighting in that most specially, and his allegations applied so far
from the sense of the holy ghost, that a man meanly exercised ^n the
scripture, may plainly see his corruption.

Many brutes have bin of you, touching your erroneous spirit, and in deed,
they that have truly noted your disposition, do affirm, that you could never
like of any public doctrine, which was taught: but had always a desire of
singularitye: such a troubler of Christ his Church have you bin: but blessed be
the name of y^ Lord, who has made manifest your her^sies, although you will
not scarcely acknowledge the^: so that the simplest among many thowsandes, is
sufficiently ass^sted by the Lord, to bewray, and display your manifest
impietye, and the Lord has in store of his Church, that will not joy, nor rest
in peace, until all your errors be disclosed, and ^ou, and your fellows be
brought to ^umble your selves before the Lord, without your HN. which the Lord
bring spedely to pass. Amen.

Vitell.


Answer.
THis Libel was not long enough: and your patron HN. should be found lighter
then vanitye it self.

Where you add with the Love and truth (the Love) you so often confound, that
you know not your selves, the meaning thereof: sometime you will signify Christ
by that name (love) sometime a virtue proceeding: sometime a qualitye of the
mind: and sometime for the exercise, which you privately use: where to find
the exposition of this word (Love) you leave it as uncertain: then it shall be
expressed you say, by the light, or Christ, that by you, God his honor is
declared: with the Loves service sincerely: here is Love again joined with
service: which cannot mean (as I think) any thing ^lls, but God his service.
I take it in the best part: if you have any other more secret misterye therein,
I leave to your selves: but touching any service, you do to God: it is
Ipocrysye: so long as you serve him, without Christ: or with any other and
Christ: for he will admit no other to have place in men's hearts, but himself,
he made all, he requires all.

Vitell.
OH what a dangerous time is it

Answer.
HN. and you have raised up. Now you complain, that unregenerate men, have set
up themselves: you mean by unregenerate men, all others which are not
illuminat, nor deif^ed as your Elders are. The children of God, for whom
Christ dyed, whose names are written in the book of life: are regenerate,
although, as I have said before, you account none to be regenerat, but such as
have no motions of sin, or sin not: but you say that the same unregenerate
men, with their good thinking* that same he prayseth, and judges for
righteousness: but who might worse allege the same then you: who c^mm^nd
without reason or cause your Au^hor, and his monstrous do^trin^, which has in
it such gross absurd^^yes, and most contrary to God, and his word: and you are
they that pe^uert the scripture, to set up your Prophet, and his doctrine, and
what is spoken of Christ, do you not wickedly apply the same to your HN. do
you not apply this place of Malarhy. chap. 3. which our Savior Christ verefied
to be propesied of John, behold, Prophecy ^ol. 1.
I will send my messenger which shall prepare the way before me. Again Math.
11. he shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the children, In the pre^^c^ of
the Prophecy Fol. 1.
and the hearts of the children, etc. do you not (I say) apply these places to
signifye your HN. and that it is meant by him? therefore, there are none found
such wresters of the scriptures as you.

And where as you affirm, that the scripture is serviceable unto every one
therein you show what reverence you have unto y^ same: for although you, and
such others do abuse the scripture, contrary to y^ purpose of y^ holy ghost:
yet are the scriptures, y^ wisdom of God revealed to man, and is a perfect law
of righteousness, and not as you ungodly, and irreverently term it,
serviceable unto every one. Your companions the Papists have as you do,
called the scripture a nose of ware, a shipmans hose, etc. but most wickedly,
and falsely, to both your confusions, it is the power of God unto salvation.
Unto them that believe the savor of life, unto life: but unto such as you are,
which so irreverently speak thereof, it is the savor of death unto death: the
scriptures do not maintain pleasant lusts, nor high minds, as you
irreverently suppose: but they are to comfort, and lift up the sorrowful, and
broken minds: and to beat down, and correa, the hauty and proud stomachs.
If ungodly men, such as you are, abuse them to other purposes, the fault is in
the persons, not in the word.

Vitell.
one thinks that he, for his part, has the most best. Behold, with such a
misery is the man plagued, and such manner of good thinking, and unprofitable
burden has he taken upon him, oh that we left all such, and gave over our
understanding captive, either suffered it to be plu^kt under the obedience of the
love of Jesus Christ, and followed after the common brotherly love, innocently,
or vndeceitfully: and continued concordably in prayer unto God, ^l that God
received us to mercy, and released us from the sin of the ignorant knowledge,
and established his promise on us, to the laud, praise, and honor of his holy
name, and to our salvation.

Answer.
IF every one wrest the scripture, where shall we find Christ his that every
one thinks, that he has the best part, (as you say:) For men's thoughts, we
refer to his knowledge that is Scrut^tor cordium, and remum.

Also you affirm, that man is plaged with such a miserye, and burden: but we
rather say, oh miserable man, out of whose corrupt nature springs such
presumption, and wickedness: to be under the obedience of the Love of Christ
Jesus, is our whole care and study^: to him only we cleave: on him we call:
upon his mercy we depend: and carefully seek, and endeavor to be obedient to
his will: for he is our hope, our anchor hold, our mercy seat, our only comfort
in all distress of mind: our phisitio^ in sickness: our governor in health:
our peacemaker: the only purchaser of our health, and salvation: he is all in
all with us, and we enjoy all in all by him, and through him: and if this
says were also planted in you, then would your HN. be banished out of your
hearts, and your perfection would soon quail: and in humilitye of spirit,
you would ^ith v^ fall down before this meek Lamb Christ Jesus, and say,
peccauimus cum patribus nostris, etc. We have sinned with our Fathers: without
which Christ, no flesh, that is, no creature living is justified in his fathers
sight: and Christ his death is proper to none nor b^longeth to none, but
sinners, and such a^ feel sin, or are laden with sins.

What shall then become of you Iusticiaryes with your perfect state which sin
not: to follow brotherly love, is also to be wished: both in you and us, and I
pray you do even the same: the^ shall you not seek out y^ simple people,
whose capaciti is like unto ware, which will easily receive any print or mark:
seek not with your fly, and subtle persuasions, to seduce the^ with your
corrupt doctrine* under pre^ence that you seek, only the godly life which
Christians should follow: whereas in deed you seek to lead the^ from Christ
to HN. from the ^omfort of the holy scriptures: which shows how mercy is
offered to all penitent sinn^rs: unto a perfect state of life, which must be
attained in this world which never any, Christ Jesus except, could attain
unto: and so you corruptly lead them away from all comfort in Christ:
Therefore we will not let to desire the Lord in mercy, to preserve his
children, from your infected poison.

Vitel.
me, and stop their ears that they hear not, and harden their ha^^es as hard
as a diamont. For that they should not be obedi^t to the law and the word which
the lord sends in his spirit through his prophets.

Answer.
TOuching the saying of ^achary, we wish the very same: that every ^ares, who
harden their hearts? Have not you turned from Christ to HN? Have not you stopped
your ears against all wholesome admonition, which the holy Ghost has
plentifully in the holy scriptures set forth? and only bent your hearts upon the
books and wrytyngs of HN? Have you not hardened your hearts and bent your faces
against a manifest truth, and placed HN. a prophet, and priest, by who^ God will
receive all unto mercy? On whom may this prophetical speech or exhortation be
better applied, then upon your selves, and yet will not I go about to excuse
my self and others that we do therein what is required, but only let y^ world
see that these men of the Family cry out, and apply the sayings of the Prophets
against us, and for themselves, they su^pose it belongs not to them, to take
wa^ning thereby, in so perfect a state do they remain.

Vitell.
people to the lowlyn^ss^, that they might stand minde^ in humility to the
Love, and love the coming of thy Christ in his lordl^nes, through whom the
whole earth shall be ^udged with righteousness, which shall move all might and
violence, and bring it under his obedience, and render unto thee, O almighty
God, the kingdom, all power and glory, to the end that thou may be all in
all. O god give this into the hearts of the governors, that they may see it. And
illuminate all kings, princes, Lords, and potentates with thy godly wisdom,
that they may fear thy holy name, stand submitted unto thy Love and her
service, and might turn them from all violence, and misuse, and that the world
may be inhabited to thy praise in the Love, and in all righteousness, and that
all men in true repentance for their sins, might be turned unto thee. And the
horrible plagues of ungodliness, which are come over the world for their sin^es
cause, cease, and have an end.

Answer.


^here as you pray that all kings princes etc. may ^ea^e thy holy name, and
stand submitted to thy love. ^ere is love taken in another sense, therefore you
intricatly use this word Love: whereby your meaning can not easily be found out.

For, here love and her service, is meant such doctrine, and service, ^s you
teach, which you wi^h all princes were partakers of, if your doctrine were a
truth in d^^de, then were your prayer good: but forasmuch as your doctrine is
false, wicked, and fantastical, therefore your prayer is corrupt, and
abominable, and to be despised, and all princes that fear the Lord, will become
utter enemies to you ^ your doctrine, and seek diligently to amend (if it be
possible) your corruptions, and I doubt not but the Lord has in his Church,
men of zealous minds, who will not see the glory of our immortal God, nor the
death, passion, and resurrection of Christ Jesus our Lord, so defaced,
dar^kned, and shadowed. And that his Church may be purged of such corrupt
weeds, which spring up, seeking to destroy that good corn, which is sowed
already.

O Lord God we humble sinners abiding in the unity of thy holy Church do most
humbly, and heartily pray thee eue^ for thy son, our Savior Christ Jesus
sake, that thou will in m^rcy look upon thy poor afflicted Church, and the
members thereof, that by no malice of Satan, no pretense of collored speech,
nor no vanity of mind, any of thy children be carried away, as straying from
thy fould: but that O Lord, they may again be joined to thy flock: so that so
many as pertayne unto that good shepherd of our souls, John. 10.
Christ Jesus, may laud and praise thy name with one voice: and O Lord we most
humbly beseech thee, to cleanse thy Church, from the filthy dregs of doctrine,
which wicked me^, through the malice of Satan have devised to disquiet thy
peaceable Sion: convert thou them O Lord we beseech thee: mollify their stony
hearts, which have set up a Prophet, whom thou O Lord have not sent: let them
O Lord behold how far they have declyned from thy ways, and followed the
doctrine of deceaueable men: let them see from whom they have departed, and to
whom they clea^e fast. And although we O Lord, by our offenses, and the
manyfold transgressions wherewith we provoke thy merci^ull goodness, who do know
thy will, and yet are so slow performer^ thereof, whereby thou O Lord, do
punish our offenses, so that wicked men now set up themselves against us,
accusing us and that worthily, of the breaking of thy holy laws. So O Lord,
although we have thus sore provoked thy goodness by our offenses, yet we beseech
thee consider thy son our Lord and Savior, whose obedience and righteousness
to thy will* thou have by promise made it ours, so that belonging to thy son,
we are shadowed under his righteousness, and covered under his wings in safety
from eternal destruc^ion. But such is thy goodness O merciful God, to try
thy children here in earth, how steadfast we will bid batta^le against Satan
and his impes, and how constant we will abide therein: so that no blast nor
inuation of enemies shall, I hope, shake that foundation of faith that thou
have pl^nted in us, which we most humbly desire thy majesty to increase, and
that we may perseu^re and continue in the unity of thy holy church in this
life, and after we may enjoy the fruition of thy godly mai^stye, and sing
pr^yses unto thee world without end.

Vitell.


Answer.
O Lord we b^seech thee turn the

Reveal unto them O Lord we beseech thee, the office, and death of thy son,
our Lord and Savior: that they tasting the swetenes thereof, may ^orsake the
confidence they have in their perfection, and that we may all acknowledge only
Christ Jesus to be per^ite: and we our selves, dust, and dung, and whatsoever
is vile: let not Satan lead the^ captive, but O Lord we beseech thee, pull them
out of the Lions mouth: and conioyne them to thy holy Church, out of which,
they have wandered over long, in doctrines of men.

Let thy strength appear O Lord, and let our weakness be made open to them:
let the effect of thy Gospel break into their hearts of stone: that they may
taste, and feel, how sw^ete the Lord is in mercy toward sinners: and how
severe to such as justify themselves.

And if it stand with thy good will and pleasure, thus to convert the^, at the
suit of our earnest prayers: we shall for the same, give thanks in thy Church
evermore. But if thy Church shall have thereby, their trial made known to
the world: herein O Lord keep thy children, and such as love the Lord Jesus,
and embrace the joyful tidinges of the Gospel, in thine own bosom: that
they be not led away, with any pretenses of pietye, into error, or corruption:
but defend them as thou have promised: Ps^lme. 1.
that what pittye, a Father has over his children, like pittye thou O Lord
wilt show unto the^: which we beseech thee grant us, for thy son Jesus Christ
his sake: to whom with the holy ghost: be honor, land praise, power, and
dominion: from everlasting, to everlasting, So be it.

The state and condition of a regenerate man, by the rule of holy scripture:
compared with the state of a regenerat man, by the doctrine of HN. in the
Familye of Love.
I Being in my creation at the first, Genesis ^.7. ^^^ans ^^at^ in innocency
in most excellent state, and happiness: having by divine providence, in my
self free choice and will, to choose the good, and refuse the evil:
(described by fire, and water:) I willingly and of mine own accord, gave place
to evil: Man's (...) in ^is ^all.
and so worthily by justice, brought upon my self, the heavy hand of my God:
and the dexteritye of his law* with maledirio^, and curse: where, in ^ had
remained everlastingly: had not the Lord my God in mercy, and of his special
grace, beholding my woe^^^l ^ase, without any desert of mine provided, (...)
15. Gal. 4.4.
and promised a deliverer, a Savior: eue^ the Lord Jesus which in ^ulnes of
time came: whom the Patriarchs hoped after: whom the Prophets foretold of:
Esa^. ^.14. (...) Romans 13.14
which died for my sins, and rose again for my justification: who put out
the hand writing of the law pronounced against me, and ^astened it to his
cross: who suffered for me y^ I might reign with him: Ephe. 1.3.
who left me an example, that I should ^ollow his steps: And which is more,
without condition, promis^d me eternal life: which by the only sacrifice of
his death: he has obtained: and by his paynefull passion, has purchased
freely for me, and all others: (...)
whom he chose before all worlds: to be heirs, and sons of the same
inheritance, by adoption, and grace: which promise, or assurance I hold
^^rmely by faith. (...).


Notwithstanding this his loving kindenes, and mercy showed toward me: R^m.
^.24.
if the Lord my God did not s^ill protect me, guide me, and de^end me I should
anihilat, and make void, this mine estate, or assurau^ce: therefore has he
given unto me, the participatio^ of his holy spirit: renewing me, and working
in me regeneration: which is a detestation, R^m. ^.9.
lothing, and hate of sin, and a mind and will to serve the Lord. Yet so as
there is a kind of rebellion in me: Romans 7.3.
So that the good things I would do, I do not: but the evil I hate, that
do I: (yet not I,) but sin that dwells in me. I feel my flesh lusting
against the spirit, Gal. 5.17.
and the spirit against the flesh continually: so that I cannot do the same
things I would* I feel the law of my members, striving, and rebelling against
the law of my mind.

And further, to make my state, and condition more thoroughly known, I feel
often times sin, ^. Cor. 1^.7.
and the mostons thereof, so strong in me, that I am for a season led captive
therewith, yea, without remorse: so that the spirit seems in me utterly
quenched, 2. Sam. 12.
or as ^ire raked under ashes that is not seen: and sometime I wallow, and for
a season as it were, ^say. 57.^7
forget my God: notwithstanding, this my backslyding I feel again the goodness
of my God, and the working of his spirit renewing me again: then in
sorrowfulnes, and tears, I bewail my self in prayer, y^ I have so long
estraunged my self, and offended my God: then do I feel the comfort of his
spirit: which brings to my remembrance, ^eu^ ^0.1.
the promises of the Lord, pronounced in his word: videliz. Though thy sins
were as red as scarelet: yet will I make them as white as woole: (...) ^.18.
look how far the heaven is, from the earth: so far have I set thy sins
from thee. Like as a Father has compassion on his children: Psalm. 103
even so the Lord, will show mercy on me: for he deals not with us after our
sins, no^ rewards us after our iniquityes* All the day long, he stands
with stretched out arms, ready to receive those that turn unto him. etc.

Then when I feel this, the Lord my God comforting me by his promises: I am
driven by the working of the same his holy spirit, to be partaker of the holy
sacrament of his death: which is to me a seal, Psalm. 116.13.
and pledge, and cognizaunce of my redemption: which to my great comfort, I
receive as a token of his love, and kindenes showed to me: and so, more, and
more, I feel sin, and Satan weaker, and by resisting him daily, I find
him, and his baytes Idle: my flesh, and ^he a^lurementes of the world, less
able to hurt me, or to prevail against me.

And ^ feel in my sel^^ through the working of the same spirit, a redynes to
all good exercises of piety, as hearin^ of the word, Prayer, A^stinence,
Charity toward Christ's members, Love, Peace, Io^, etc. But yet still I feel
finne with her motions, never ce^sing a fresh to assay me, and try me with new
assaults, and sifting me every way again and again, charging me often with
the dexterity of the law, Deuteronomy. 2^.26. (...) 3.10.
with the greatness of my sins, laying them particularly before me with great
horror, and preparing such books and baits for me, that if I were not
preserved by the great goodness of my God, I should utterly despair, and fall
away, but the Lord does comfort me still, 2. Cor. 12.8.
saying: My grace is sufficient for thee. My grace is made strong through thy
weakness. Job. 7.1
Be of good cheer I have overcome the world. In such case I am, and such is my
battle continually, and always fighting this under my graund captain I
prevail and am not vanquished, nor utterly ouercomed, yet again I prepare for
a new skirmish and place my self in y^ foremost ra^k to abide the brunt of the
next incou^ter so that I never look for any rest nor peace whilst I am in this
vale of misery, for my life is a continual warfare:

Yet in this exercise or continual skirmish, ^say. ^^.9
I am at peace in mind and conscience, knowing and firmly believing that my
redeemer lives who has trod the wine press alone, and has offered me the
cup of Salvation, and sealed in my heart the pledge of hy^ love: so that with
confidence and boldness I have access unto my God, and by the mediation of my
Lord and Savior Christ I obtain what soever is necessary or behou^full for
me: for I being thus knit unto my God do boldly make my prayers unto him, yet
in trem^ling and fear I acknowledge my offenses, Psalm. 19.
and say: O Lord my God I daily confess mine offenses, and my sins are ever
before me. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is
righteous Thus daily and nightly I bewail my misery, and confess my ^^nnes
unto the Lord my God, and acknowledge that ^f the Lord should con^ond with me
in justice, Ioh. 9.3.
I were not able to answer.

For what is man that he should be clean, Io^. 15. c^a. 14.^.15. and 1^.
or he that is borne of a woman that he should be just? For he found no
sted^astnes in his saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his sight. How
much more man, which is abominable and filthy, and drinks iniquity like
water. ^sa. 25.11.
Whose very righteousness is like a cloth defiled with the vn^^mely b^^th of a
woman.

Thus considering my state and condition. I rest qu^et in mind, and by faith in
the son of God, Christ Jesus, I dout nothing of my salvation, but accept
gladly the battle and warfare I have with sin and Satan continually, as
tokens of his great mercy and pl^dges of his love, in f^eling the ready help and
speedy delivery of y^ lord, who in time to me unknown, will visit mine
offenses in this life with whips, and my sinn^s with scourges, but his mercy he
will never take from me. And thus being chosen, called, and prepared, he
sanctifies me, and by death makes a wa^ and entrance unto an happy life,
where I shall behold that joyful sight, even the Lamb that was (...) for me.
Reu^ ^.
And shall follow him wh^resoe^er he goes. Singing praise and thanks to him
for ever and ever, Amen.

The state and condition of a Regenera^^ man, after the doctrine and ^eaching
of HN. in the pretended ^amily of Love.
Beloved, This wor^ (...) word (...) of a (...) called Man* falling aw^y, an
(...). 1.
in the beginning when God made all things well, then was ^he Lord one Lord of
his kingdom, and one God of his works. There was also no more but one God and
one man, and they were one: and had in all, one order, being, and nature. For
God was all that the man was, 2. ^la. 9.^^.
and the man was ^l that God was etc.

Thus man became God at the beginning: For God looking upon man, Sexion. 2.
looked upon him self, as the same cleer^nes of his living Godhead.

Sexion. 6.
Also the man looked upon his God, his gentle, clean, and unspotted manhood, in
all fulcomenes, in all honesty and fairenes, in all fashion and being,
according to the same Godhead. And this was also all one, God and the man. etc.

Se^ion. ^.
God gave the man in the beginning none other Laws, Institutions, Judgments,
nor Commandments but to live with joy, naked, or uncovered before him, Man
his innocence.
and to look upon all the works of God, for good, and not for evil, and should
never taste or feel evil, death, or condemnation.

Sexion. 10.
But as the man turned ^way the eyes of his flesh from his ^od, and saw upon him
self that he was not the highest Godhed it self, but that he was also man* then
was he vndersought or tempted to the knowledge of good and evil, to be
therethrough as God.

Then came a blindness over man, Sexion. 11.
and estranged him, or separated him from his God, wherethrough he could not
bear the word or voice of his god, nor shine before him with his naked
manhood.

Man did acknowledge none other God, Sexion. 14.
salvation, nor kingdom of heaven, but through the knowledge that the man had
taken on to him self, which was nothing else but the devil, hell, and
condemnation.

Through this knowledge of Ada^, Sexion. 15.
the generations of men have inherited a consumeable inheritance, wherethrough
men that were made, or shaped to be one with God, and ought to be one with
another, are fallen into many contrarieties, Sexion. 1^.
and hinderlike knowledges.

Thus man being fallen away altogether, destroyed in his understanding and from
the living Godhed, and from the kingdom of heaven straunged, might be brought
again to his upright estate in his God, through his love, according as he had
promised, to the salvation of the manly generation he made one new man after
the same likeness or similitude of his Godhead, The opi^ion that the (...) hau^
of Christ.
and named him Jesus Christus, which does signify unto us the safemaking oil
of God saving being, the same is gone out from God, and has showed himself
upon earth.

He is gone into the knowledge of men, and found all their man knowledges,
Sexi^n. 17.
and their scripture learnednes, in all, in all that they wist, false and lying.

This false knowledge, siting she understands not Gods truth aright, through
her wisdom and Scripture, learnednes, has Christ rebuked, and taken captive
the knowledge of men, and made it through Christ, foolishnes to make them free,
and deliver them in this to coming day of his Lordlines, from all their
foolish knowledge.

M^th. 15.
Even so has Christ done by y^ sin, and the righteousness of men. Luk^. ^3.


He is also gone into the death of men, Sexion. 10.
and has borne thereby one death, namely, his death of the cross: and so
through his death, has taken captive the death of men, because that he in y^
last day in his coming again, may set up the man from death, through the
death of the cross, and make him alive, that he may bring him in his upright
estate to his God.

But now has Jesus Christ the might and Lordship over all destroyed things,
Sexion. 2^.
which burdened the men, and the destructions which were taken captive, and
through the death of the cross, had brought all under him: Even so is he with
his might and Lordship ris^n again from death over the destruction, and
through the declaration of his resurrection, has he showed to his friends and
disciples which bel^eued in him, and has made it known unto them the might
and home, to get y^ over winning against al y^ destroyed things wherewith the
man was incaptiued.

God has ordained a day, S^x^o^. 24.
which is the day of love, in which he will judge the earth with righteousness,
through one man: Which man i^ HN. Published peace. chap. 1. deui. 16.
he has concluded it, which holds belief before every man: seeing that God
has awaked him again from the death.

Hitherto the doctrine of HN. taken out of a book called Man's falling away,
his Lordlines, and coming again.
Documentall sentence^ HN. ch^p. ^. de^^. 4.
THe heavenly being of God, and God his upright righteousness, is become mortal
in us: but yet not for ever, but for a certain season: till the man show forth
upright fruits of repentance.

The man in his youngnes is subject to sin, until he have attained the manly
oldnes in the Love, and the upright freedom: then is the new covenant of
perfection ere^^ed: and all is fulfilled which is written by Moses, ^id^litas.
Chap. 1. ^^ui. ^.
or that God requires through his Prophets: or what is euangelised of Christ.

And if there chance any temptations, Document^ll s^ntence^ chap. 3. d^ui. 7.^.
by our Paramours, which we in times past have loved, to come and assault us:
etc. but if they lay hold on us, with force, and violence: and that then,
although we cry, there comes not any power, or help unto us, for to
withstand them in their force, and violence: and that they even so ravish us,
Libertinisme.
against our will: so are we guiltles of the transgressinges: for we have
cried for to be released from the tyranny of the evil, and there is no help
come unto us: of which guiltles transgressinges, Deuteronomy. 22.
the law witnesses, where it says: a woman that is violently taken in the
field, etc.

The regenerat man, Document, chap. 2. de^i. 1.
from his new birth, is exercised in all well doing and for that cause also, he
cannot bring fourth any thing else: but all good, and Love.

The true, or upright fredome is this: that the man through the ministration of
the gracious word, etc. his heart, spirit, and mind, is wholly released purged,
and purified from all wicked nature, Deuteronomy. 26.
which has reigned over him: and that there dwell, live, nor rule any other
thing in him, Man h^s st^te r^gen^rat.
namely in all his spirit, thoughts, mind, and soul: but alone the true
Godhed, with his lovely being, of the upright Love: and so to be wholly
replenished with all y^ virtues of God: that there flow nothing else in him,
namely in all his spirit, and mind: but the spiritual, heavenly* and living
waters.

Man regenerat, does veare costly treasure in earthen ve^sels: and is of one
mind with the three godly witnesses, that hear witness in heaven.

Document^ll s^nt^nc^s* chap. 2
Of which th^ee godly witnesses: the on^ is the Love, which is God the Father
himself. The second witness is the truth: which is the word of God the Father,
D^u^. ^.
and Jesus Christ himself. And the third wit^es, is the holy spirit of Love,
or of God and of the tru^th of Jesus Christ, which is the everlasting life, and
the inheritance, of all spiritual, and heavenly goods.

Consider where God, with his Christ and spirit, Prophecy* ch^p. 6. D^ui. 9.
has his dwelling i^ any one: and brings forth (...) secret treasures, of
the heavenly goods thereout: even there is then truly his wisdom to be
found, and also the counsel of God according to the truth.

Gather ye now altogether into my house of Love: P^ophesie* chap 7. Diui. 19.
and to my holy tabernacle, or man of God: wherein I as a glorious God, with my
perfect Godhed, as with my Christ at my right hand, and with my holy spirit of
Love, my true being: do live, dwell, and walk: and wherein we as one true
deity, have revealed, and glorified us: to the end, that ye all now may become
consubstantiated, or co^formably united, as one m^n of God in me: and inherit
my rest, with all the children of God.

For when all that, which the Lord requires through his word, and through the
service of his Love, is fulfilled with us all: ^idelitas.
and in us all: so is then also verily with us all: (namely,) by those, with
whom the same is fulfilled: the end of the sin, Chap. 3. d^ui. 15.
and the death of the same, come to pass, or atteyned unto: and the end of the
sin, and her death, is the beginning of y^ eternal immorta^itye: and is also
the upright freedom in Jesus Christ, whereunto all men, Jews, and Greeks,
circumsized, and vncircumsized: wise, and unwise: are called* and bidden by the
grace of God.

Man being thus illuminate, and regenerat: Godded with God: and in whom god in
one power, and being of his spirit, is homini^ied, Vitel* Libell.
or become man: cannot sin, miss the right, nor commit any evil: Sexion.
And is their gen^^^l doctrine
but does Lord, and prevail with God, and Christ over the sin: nothing can
flow from him: but heavenly living, and safe making waters.

A principle in the ^amilye, collect^d by the doctrine
Christ his shape is required to be perfect in us, while we are in this life the
shape is perfection without sin: which shape cannot be in us, if we be
sinners: therefore requisite, that we be pertakers, of the new covenant of
perfection, spoken of by Fidelitas. chap. 1. deui. 8. Fidelitas. Chap. 5. deui.
15.


Let every one take this effectually to heart, and let no man refuse the good
being, whereunto, God has created the man. and called him through Jesus
Christ, and his holy ones: and whereunto he is also presenly loved, by the
comminaltye of the Love. etc.

FINIS.
AT LONDON. Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Anno. Dom. 1579.


