A living remembrance of Master Robert Rogers, Merchant aduenturer and
Leatherseller of London deceased, who declared the fruits of his faith, by his
most christian and charitable works. And left this life at his house in
Bassings-hill the 22. of September. And was buried in Christ-church on Thursday
the 1. of October. 1601.
WHen bad men dye, the memory remains
Of their corruptions and ungodly ways,
As merit to their misapplyed pains,
Out of ill actions, forming as ill praise.
for virtue wounded by their deep disgrace,
Leaves shame to their posterity and race.
When good men dye, the memory remains,
Of their true virtues, and most christian ways:
As a due guerdon to their godly pains,
Out of good actions, forming as good praise.
for virtue cherished by their deeds of grace,
Leaves fame to their posterity and race.
Among those good (if goodness may be said,
To be among the seed of mortal men:
In upright ballaunce of true merit wayed)
This worthy Batcheler esteem we then.
In whom, as in a mirror does appear,
That faith and works did shine in him most clear.
Now let us not, as is our common use,
Measure him by a many other more:
In death, to cover their life's bad abuse,
That then flies out some bounty of their store,
No Rogers was none such, as may appear,
By these true witnesses annexed here.
First, as God blessed him with abundant wealth,
Like to a careful Steward he imployde it:
Squaring his gifts out in his best of health,
As glad to leave it, as when he inioyde it.
Himself prepared every hour to die:
And all in order pointed christianly.
In sundry callings and vocations,
Where he could hear of them were rightly poor:
As men decayed by their occupations,
Yet held by shame from begging at the door,
Such succourd he, as knowing that their need,
Stopped up their mouths, though made their hearts to bleed.
What should I say? to what poor wanting heart,
Was he not liberal in the largest kind?
Such as were hopeful, and had any part
Of christian zeal, felt freely his good mind.
Preachers, poor handy-crafts, and parishes:
From Rogers purse have liberal Legacies.
In Abraham's bosom sleeps he with the blessed,
His works do follow him, his worth suruiues:
The Angels guide him to eternal rest,
Where is no date of time, for years or lives.
You that are rich, do you as he has done:
and so assure the Crown that Christ has won.
Leagacies bequeathed to charitable uses by Master Robert Rogers deceased.
IN primis, to the two Counters, Ludgate, Newgate, Bedlam and the Clinke.
xii.l. Money to be presently distributed to the poor, in the Parish he dwelt
in. x.l. To provide two dozen of bread every Sunday for ever, to be given to
the poor of the said Parish. C.l. To the Parish of Christ-church, to buy
Coals at the best hand for the poor yearly, to continue a stock for ever to
that use: x.l. And money presently to be distriubted to the poor in that
Parish. v.l. To the poor of S. George Parish in Southwarke, the poor without
Newgate, the poor without Cripplegate, and the poor without Bushops gate, to
each Parish xx. Nobles to be distributed in money. xxvj.l.xiij.s.iiij.d. To the
poor of two Towns in the West Country. xiij.l.vj.s.viij.d. To the poor of
the town of Poole where he was borne, to be presently distributed in money:
x.l. More, to build alms houses in the said town, CCCxxxiij. (...)
vj.s.viij.d. With exebition for twelve poor people weekly for ever. To
relieve poor Prisoners such as may be set free for xx. Nobles a man, or under,
so that no Papist nor Athist have any benefit thereof. CL.l. To relieve poor
Preachers of the word of God, not exceeding to any one man, above ten pound.
C.l. To ten poor decayed Artifficers that have charge of wife and Children ten
pound a man. C.l. To the company of Merchant aduentureres, for the relief of
decayed people by him nominated during their lives, and after their decease, to
the use of young men free of the said company. CCCC.l. To the Company of
Leathersellers, to give exebition at the Vnyuersities, to four Scholars
students in Deuinitie for ever viz. Two in Oxford and Two in Cambridge. CCCC.l.
To Saint George Parish in Sowthwarke. xxx.l. To Saint Sepulchers Parish. xxx.l.
To Saint Oliffes Parish in Sowthwarke. xxx.l. To Saint Gyles without
Cripplegate. xxx.l. To Saint Leonards in Shorditch, xxx.l. To Saint Buttolphes
without Allgate. xx.l. To Saint Buttolphes without Bishopsgate. xx.l. Amounting
to 190.l. in all, to make stocks to buy sea-coale or other fuel in summer at
the best hand, for the use of the poor, and to continue for ever in that
manner, leaving stocks in those several Parishes.
To Christ's Hospital (of which he was a governor) to purchase land to the
relief of that house. CCCCC.l. To erect Alms houses within the City of
London, and for exebition weekly for xij poor people to be placed in them.
CCCCCC.l. The whole sum given by Master Rogers last Will to charitable uses.
2960. l. 6. s. 8. d.
Imprinted at London for M. Allde, and are to be sold at her shop under Saint
Mildreds Church in the Poultry.


