A SERMON preached on September the 20. 1632.

In the Cathedral Church of Christ at Canterbury, at the Funeral of William
Proud, a Lieutenant Collonell, slain at the last late siege of Mastricke.

By Francis Rogers, Doctor in Divinity.

2. SAM. 3.38. Know ye not that a Prince and a great man is fallen this day in
Israel?

LONDON, Printed by John Norton, for William Adderton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Bethlem without Bishops-gate. 1633.

To the Honored and Worthy, Sir Dudley Digges, Sir William Monins, Sir Peter
Heyman, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir John Wild, Sir Thomas Wilford, Sir Christopher
Harfleit, Sir James Oxenden, and Sir Edward Masters.
MVCH Honored and Worthy Countrymen, this Sermon was preached at the Funeral
of Lieu-tenant Collonell Proud, our Countryman; who was slain at the late
siege of Mastrick. J know not to whose protection better to commend it, then to
your selves, who are all Gentlemen of good worth, and to whom the chiefest
charge of military discipline for our East parts of Kent is committed. Ye were
all attentive hearers: may it now please you to accept these my poor
endeauours favorably, and to censure them charitably, J have what J desire.
And so wishing all health and happiness to your selves and your families: I
rest, your ever loving Countryman, and faithful Servant in Christ Jesus,

FRANCIS ROGERS.
From St. Margarets in Canterbury, Octo. 29. 1632.
A Sermon preached at the Funeral of William Proud, a Lieu-tenant Colonel,
slain at the last late siege of Mastricke.
2. SAM. 3.38. Know ye not that a Prince and a great man is fallen this day in
Israel?


WE read before in this chapter, that King Saul being dead, there was great
war between Ishbosheth and David for the Crown: Ishbosheth claymed it as
son to King Saul: David did challenge it as anointed by Samuel, and appointed
by God. Abner General for Saul his house, being rebuked by Ishbosheth for
going in to his fathers concubine, took it very indignely, and threatened to
forsake Ishosheth and to unite himself to David, for which purpose he sends
messengers to David to make a covenant with him: David being a wise King as well
as a godly man, thought it no (...) neglect such (...) opportunity, and
therefore he does embrace Abners love, he entertayneth him royally, and
dismisseth him peaceably. After this, Ioab David's General coming to the
Court, and whether out of malice, because Abner had slain his brother Asael,
or out of ambition, fearing that Abner might have his command, or out of
affection to David, being his nephew, he is very angry, and tells David that
Abner came but as a spy to watch David's going in and going out, and therefore
it was not wisdom in David to suffer Abner to depart from him and when he had
done speaking to the King, he hastneth after Abner, who coming to Ioab,
mistrusting no evil, was, under pretense of friendship, most treacherously
killed by Ioab. This murder so odious in the sight of God and man, does
astonish David: for now Benjamin and all Saul's Alies are likely to hate David
perpetually, yea his own servants and kindred have great cause to suspect
David's tyranny: wherefore David, to clear himself from so foul a blot,

First, he detesteth the fact.

Secondly, he wishes a curse upon Ioab and his posterity for the same.

Thirdly, he causes his Nobles to lament, and himself follows Abners corpse
to the grave; he weepeth, and he bewaileth his death: and he says, Know ye
not, that a Prince, and a great man is fallen this day in Israel?

In which words three things are obseruable.

First, that there is a difference and a degree between man and man, in this
title given to Abner, a Prince, and a great man.

Secondly, that Princes and great men are subject to mortality: A Prince, and a
great man is fallen this day in Israel.

Thirdly, notice is more especially to be taken of such men's deaths, Know ye,
etc?

For the first: this difference of man and man, is not in respect of our
Creator, nor in respect of our first earthly father, nor in respect of our
matter, for we are all made of the same earth: but it is in regard of the use
and service of men in a civil state, for parity breeds confusion both in
Church and Commonwealth, and God is the God of order. See this in unreasonable
creatures: The Bees have in the Hiue a master-Bee, whom they observe and
follow: the Cranes march forth in orderly array: yea, among the devils there is
a superiority and an order, for Belsebub is the Prince of them, Acts 17.11.
There are Nobles: these were Noblemen, and there is a degree in Nobility: These
were more noble men then those of Thessalonica: For better understanding this
point, observe four sorts of Nobility.

The first is natural, which is by birth, descending from ancient progenitors,
and God promises Abraham, that Kings shall come out of his loins. I, but the
old Stoickes object, Nature is alike to all, she is a stepdame to none: are not
all borne alike into the world? are not all subject alike to casualties in the
world? and do not all dye and go alike out of the world? where is then any
inequality? Likewise the new Switzers say, God did not make two Adams, one of
silver to beget Gentlemen, another of earth to beget common people: Coats, and
Crests, notos magis facit quam nobiles: they make men rather known then noble.
No more for shame: let not that sin rule among us which Esaias speaks of, That
the vile presume against the honorable: They are, me thinks, as Esdras the
1. book the 3. chapter says, the words of men in wine, who never remember
their King, nor their Governors: doubtless, it is a great blessing of God, to
be borne of honorable parents: for Christ himself, though he lived so poor,
as the Foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, but he had not
where to lay his head: yet he would not be borne base, he would be borne a
Gentle man, he was of the blood Royal, and true heir to the Crown of Judah:
for he descended from the lineage of David according to the flesh. In metals of
the same kind (which Plato resembles to the soul of man) some are far
purer then are others: In plants there is a great difference of seeds and
branches: Est in iunencis, est in equis patrum virtus
Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis.


If a man have a Horse, he esteems him better, according to the sire and
damme he comes from. Even so among men, it does often much avail from what
stock they descend: and the Scriptures call men nobly borne, The famous of the
congregation, The worthies of the land, The glory of the Kingdom, The strength
of Israel: and it was one high degree of sorrow in Judah her captivity, that
her nobles were slain. But Generatio optima, corruption pessima, best things
corrupted, prove the worst: Angels, if they fall, do become devils: and
Gentlemen, if they degenerate, become the utter ruin of the Church and
Commonwealth, they are as so many Lucifers fallen from heaven: Hence we do
learn, not with the Jews to boast we have Abraham to our Father, not to stand
so much upon the blood we have, as upon the good we do. It little benefiteth
a foul river to flow from a clear spring. It is small comfort for a blind
man, to say his father could see well: it is no reputation for a deboshed
liver, to say that he is nobly descended. If we be the children of Abraham, let
us do the works of Abraham: and the better we are borne, the better we must
live. Noblemen must be like trees planted by the rivers of water, which bring
forth their fruit in due season, that their leaf may not fall, nor their name
perish from the face of the earth.

The second kind of Gentry is Civil nobility, which is by riches; shining in
the goods of fortune. Hence Symonides esteemed those to be noble, which in a
long course of time, were descended from wealthy progenitors: and though it
often fall out true, diuites in arca, pauperes in conscientia: Men rich in the
cofers, are poor in the conscience: yet are riches reckoned a part of nobility.

First, because they make it popular.

Secondly, because riches are the instruments by which virtue and Gentry are or
may be maintained.

Lastly, because being gotten, they serve as means for virtue and gentry to
manfiest themselves in action: yet be not proud of wealth, and think not
because thou art rich, that therefore thou must be honored: this is to make
men idolaters, to worship a golden Calfe, or a silver Ass. Riches, says
Bonauenture, are but as a dog following two men which walk together, so long
as the men are together, you cannot discern to whom the dog belongs, but
let them part, and then the dog will follow his true master: so, while man
and the world live together, we do imagine riches belongs to the man, but
if the man leave the world, then riches serves him but a dogged trick, and as
the man did come naked into the world, so his executors will be sure he shall
go naked out of the world, he shall only have his winding-sheete. A man
throws a stone into the water, which begets circle upon circle, and every
one bigger then other, yet suddenly they all vanish away: so is it with riches,
they are quickly gone. As a bird hoppeth here, and there, and no man knows
where she will light: so is it in getting riches, which have wings like an
Eagle, to fly away, Luke 12. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken
from thee, and then whose shall all thy goods be? Strive not thou so much to
be rich in wealth, as to be rich in faith. He in Plutarch which had a golden
shoo, said: I, but no man knows how it wringeth me: so, to have a golden
purse, and a galled conscience, will make all joy and honor to be but a
dream at the last.

The world is as the sea, men as fishers, things as fishes, none can tell what
he catches, till his net come out of the water: neither can we tell until we
are dead, what will become of our souls: then lay up thy treasure in heaven,
and not in earthly possessions. Purse-nobility, though it glitter in the eyes
of worldlings, yet it is seated in the hands of fortune, quae vitrea est, says
Seneca, a very brittle she friend: See in Haman, to day the Kings only
Favorite, yet to morrow hanged. See in Gellinor that puissant Prince of the
Vandals, yet driven so low, as he begged a loaf of bread to slake his hunger,
a sponge to dry up his tears, and an harp to solace him in his misery.
Bellizarius that valiant General, his eyes put out, would cry, Date obelum
Bellizario: Give one poor farthing to relieve Bellizarius. Henry the fourth, a
rich and a victorious Emperor, he had fought fifty two pitched battles in the
fields, yet he was driven to that exigent, as he begged a Prebend in the
Church of Spira to mainetayne himself, and could not obtain it, no, not of
that Bishop whom himself had preferred: but he answered, Per corpus Francisci
non habebis: By St. Francis thou shall not have it. Therefore labor to be
rich in grace: For, not many rich, not many noble, but God has chosen the
poor in this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom of heaven.

The third kind of Nobility is moral, which a man does purchase by virtue,
and good living. Socrates asked what nobility was? said, Est animi corporisque
temperantia: It is a good composure, and temperature of the mind and body.
Aristotle esteemed him a Gentleman, which accounted it a glory to give, and a
stain to his honor to take. And Plato said he was gentle, which is adorned
with his own, not with others virtues: so thou to be truly generous, is to be
in life and behavior well governed, disdayning to become subject to vice, or
to be infected with bad manners, to be just and faithful in promise, patient
in suffering wrong, apt to pardon injuries without revenge, mild in
countenance, courteous in speech, sober in carriage. Nobles may not be like the
noblest trees, for they are the most barren, or without good fruit, as the
Oak, the Beech, the Laurel, the Myrtle. They must not be like beasts, whereof
the noblest are the cruellest: neither are they true virtues of nobility, such
as in these days are used, as to dice well, to drink well, to waste lauishly,
and to wanton it ventrously: this is the way to bring ruin to your selves, for
Now as the axe laid to the root of the tree, every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the fire: and these courses will
bring ruin to your posterity: for the seed of the wicked shall not be
renowned for ever. This moral nobility acquired by virtue, is like Abishai one
of David's Worthies, he was the worthiest of three: so this excels the other
two: but if we compare it with divine Nobility, it is but as Joseph to Pharao,
the second in the Kingdom.

The fourth nobility is divine, to be a true Christian, to be a new creature.
St. Paul a Jew, was a Citizen of Rome, a Pharise, a great Rabbi, brought up at
the foot of Gamaliel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, and circumcised the eyghth
day: being a Christian, he was raped up into the third heaven, yet he did
esteem all as doung, in comparison of being a new creature in Christ Jesus:
for then to be the true servants of God, exceeds all other honor in the
world: Therefore after Moses was dead, God said to Joshua, Moses my servant is
dead. If God had so much regarded worldly titles, he might have termed him
another Noah: for as when all the World was drowned in the Flood, only Noah
and his family were preserved alive in the Arc. Even so, when Pharaoh
commanded all the male children of Israel to be drowned in the river, there
was only Moses preserved alive in a basket. God might have called him another
Enoch, for as Enoch walked with God, and was translated from men: even so Moses
went into the mountain Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, and was never seen more
of men. God might have called him the familiar Prophet, one which spoke to God
face to face, but all this laid aside, God only says: Moses my servant is
dead: to show us, that to be a true Christian, and to serve God, is most
honorable, yea to be Gods servant, is a Title most durable: for if any ask
me what was great Alexander? I answer, that while he lived, he was a
valiant Monarch, one which did conquer the Eastern parts of the world: but if
you ask me what Alexander is now? I say, he is a damned This is said
according to the Tenent, Without the Church is no salvation. As for Gods secret
Council, we may not dare for to meddle with it.
soul in hell. But if you ask me, what was Abraham? I answer, Abraham, while
he lived, was the father of the faithful, and now he is dead, he still is and
ever will be Gods faithful servant in heaven. In divine nobility, will thou
know thy pedigree, and thy kindred? Then know, God is thy Father, Christ Jesus
is thy brother, the Holy Ghost is thy preserver, the blessed Angels thy
attendants, thy food is more precious then Manna, for it is the bread of life
which came from heaven, of which he that eats, shall never hunger, not thirst
any more.

Alexander the great, had a monster brought forth, whose upper parts had a
manshead, and breast, but these were dead: but the lower parts were full of
monsters of all kinds, and these were living: this, said the Southsayers, did
foretell the death of Alexander: So is it in noble houses. The head with a man's
face and breast, is religion: If this be dead, then nothing but all monstrous
sins will appear, which will bring ruin and destruction to all honorable
families: Wherefore let me labor to stir you up to be divinely noble, and to
become true Christians: and because our meeting is to do honor to a worthy
Soldier, and to a brave Commander, give me leave to use for this purpose some
few examples drawn from military discipline.

First, Soldiers in the field may not use their weapons as they will, but as
they are commanded. The Musketeere must not discharge when he lists, but when
the Officer brings him up and says, Present fire: so likewise the
Cannoneere. In our spiritual warfare, Christ is our General, we are his
soldiers to fight under his banner, our weapons are our souls with their
faculties, and our bodies with their members, and these must be used as God
commands, not as we desire. Our understanding must know God aright, our will
must choose what is good, our affections must love God above all: and for our
bodies, we must not abuse them to perform the lusts of the flesh: or make
them brewers horses to bear much quantity of wine and beer: but We must give
up our members weapons of righteousness to true holiness: our tongues must
praise God, or pray to God: our eyes must not look on strange women to lust
after them: our ears must hear Gods Word: our taste must eat Christ's flesh,
and drink his blood, in the blessed Eucharist: our hands must relieve the
poor: our feet must carry us into Gods Temple, and to visit the sick and
such as are in misery: In one word, we must offer up our souls and our bodies
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is our reasonable serving of
God.

Secondly, Soldiers execute what the Commander wills, without arguing and
asking why they should do so: as let the General send to such a Collonell to
enter such a breach, to make good such a place, he presently obeys, for they
know that the General his office is for direction: the Officers and Soldiers
duty is, to put his direction into execution. Even so, look what our General
Christ has commanded in his Word, that must we execute, without discussing by
our natural reason, as did Abraham in offering up Isaac, and as the Jews said
unto Moses, Whatsoever the Lord commands, that will we do. Even so, let us
rather dye, then not perform all God wills and commands us to do.

Thirdly, Soldiers which beleager a Town, use two kind of stratagems.

First, they make themselves masters of the rivers, they cut off all springs of
water which succor the Town, they enquarter themselves and block up the
Town, so that no relief of Ammunition, of Victual, or of men, shall any way
relieve the Town. Even so must we do: sin is our great enemy: then take
heed that we take away from the strength of sin, and flee sin and all
occasion of sin: Add not to our original corruption, evil thoughts, evil
words or evil deeds. If any man had two swords, and being to fight with his
enemy, should lend him one: this were the next way to have his throat cut with
his own sword. Hence every one coueteth to disarme his enemy: so must not we
add sin to sin, this were for to bring final destruction to our own
souls.

Secondly, they do not only endeavor to withhold all necessaries from the
Town, but they use all the means to offend the besieged: for they raise their
batteries to make breaches, they make their approches, build their galleys,
spring their mines, they have ladders to seal the walls, and all this, to force
the Town. Even so, we must not only avoid sin, and weaken our corruption,
but we must take into our hands the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, whereby we may be able to kill all the temptations of the world, the
flesh and the devil.

Fourthly, Soldiers in the field no more fear the report of the Cannon, then
the report of the Musket: as I have heard it related of that true noble Peer,
and valiant Commander, Sir Horace Vere, Baron of Tilbery, that when in the
Palatinate a Council of war was called, and there being debated whether they
should fight or not: some Dutch Lords said, that the enemy had many pieces of
Ordnance planted in such a place, and therefore it was dangerous to fight. That
noble Gentleman replied, My Lords, if you fear the mouth of the Cannon, you
must never come into the field. Even so, often times men fall into diverse and
great temptations: as for to despair of Gods mercies, for to make themselves
away: yea the devil often times tempts men by voice, by appearing in some
shapes and the like. Yet a Christian courage must not be daunted at any
crosses or temptations, but he must endure constant to the end: for God is
faithful and just, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able
to endure. Be we assured, all the temptations of that roaring Lion the devil,
are but like the Frenchmens assaults in war. Prima Gallorum p^aelia sunt
plusquam virorum, secunda minus quam faminarum. At first he does come on like
an Emperor, he charge home bravely: but resist him then: and at the second
encounter he is more effeminate then a woman. Even so, resist Satan at the
first, and he will flee from you: for the devil is but like a coward. If a
coward deal with a man whom he knows he can ouermatch, or be in place
where he is sure he may not fight, then none will give prouder words, nor
make more bragges then a coward: but if he have to do with a man, with whom
what he speaks with his tongue, he must make good with his sword, and if he
be in place where they may conveniently buckle, then none is more base or
submisse then a coward: Even so, resist Satan, and he will avoid thee, but
give the least way to his temptations, and then he will fetch seven other
devils, and they all at once will enter into that man, and make his end far
worse then his beginning. All this that we may better perform, let us take to
us the shield of faith, and pray to God, that all our thoughts, words, and
deeds, may be begun, continued, and ended, to his glory. And so I pass to the
second thing. Princes and great men are subject to mortality.

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede
Pauperum domos, Regumque turres.
Death seazeth on the King in his Palace, as well as on the beggar in his
cottage. It is determined for all men to dye once. Death, Gods Baylife,
returns not his writ with a Non est inuentus in baliuanostra: but death
brings corpus cum causa to the King of heavens bench. A King may love his
friends, and advance his followers to honor, but to adiourne death, or to fill
the empty veins with lively blood, or the dry bones with marrow, or redeem
life from the power of the grave: in these things, nor David, nor any other is
a King, 2. Reg. 5. 7. Am I God, says the King of Israel, to kill, and to give
life, or can I heal Naamans leprosy?

The Uses of this Doctrine are these.

First, let every man persuade himself that he shall dye. This may seem a
paradox: for it any so sottish as to imagine he shall never dye? Beloved, be
not deceived, I am persuaded, few men do dream of their own death: for there
is none so old, but thinks he may live one year longer, and then another,
though in general we say all shall dye: yet in numbering our particular
lives, we think our selves shall never dye. Two ships meet on the sea, they
in either ship think themselves stand still, and the other to be swift of
sail, whereas both sail, though the one faster then the other. Even so, men
are as ships: see we an old man with a staff in his hand stooping downward?
Alas, poor old man, say we, he cannot live long. Hear we a passing bell?
Oh one is going out of the world. Visit we a sick friend? We think he can
hardly live till morning. Thus we imagine, all other men are dying, but we
stand still: whereas alas, they may go a little before, and we are sure to
follow after.

Secondly, let this teach us to prepare our selves to dye, that if death be
sudden to us in regard of expectation, yet death may never be sudden to us in
regard of preparation: death is like the Basiliske: It is reported, if a
Basiliske first see a man before the man see him, that then he kills the man:
but if a man first see a Basiliske, then the Basiliske dies. Thus is it with
death: If death first lay hold on a man before he is prepared to dye, then
death kills that man, body and soul for ever: but if a man first look on
death, and every day prepare to dye, then death is but an entrance into
everlasting happiness.

It is a worthy thing which has been related to me, of that brave soldier,
of a noble Family, Sir John Borough, who receiving a mortal wound in the
Island of Rees, and being advised not to fear death, but to prepare for another
world, he answered: I thank God, I fear not death, and these thirty years
together, I never arose at the morning, that ever I made account to live till
night: so let every true Christian every day when he awaketh, commend himself
to Gods protection, whether he live or dye, and at the evening none knows, if
That nights bed shall be his grave, or That nights sleep shall be his death:
therefore before his eyes do sleep, or his eyelids slumber, or the temples of
his head take rest, make his peace with God for all sins: that whether he
live or dye, he may live and dye to the Lord, and Jesus Christ may be to him
advantage. And so I pass to the last thing. Notice is to be taken of a great
man's death. Know ye not, etc. The death of a great man, and of a mean man is
like the report of a Cannon and of a Musket: a Cannon is heard many miles, but
a Musket for a little space. So, if a great man dye, all men speak of it: as,
such an Earl, such a Bishop, such a Commander is dead. But if a poor man, or
a common soldier dye, few of his neighbors and friends accompany him to the
grave, and there is an end of him. But i^ a great man dye, which is able to do
his Country service, notice shall be taken of it to lament his death: so is
Abner here bewailed both of King and people. In Esaias the 3. chapter, God
threatens it as a plague, He will take away the strong man, and the man of
war. Therefore as Lament. 1.15.16. The Lord has trodden under foot all the
valiant men in the midst of me: for this thing I weep, mine eye, even mine
eye casts out water, because the Comforter which should refresh my soul, is
far from me. God takes away good men, and great men in mercy and in
judgment. In mercy, when God takes away a bad Prince, and gives a better, as
he took Saul, and gave David. He took away from this land Queen Mary and
gave us Queen Elizabeth. Or when God takes away a good Prince, and gives
another good one in his place. Thus he took away Moses, and gave Joshua: thus
from us he took away King James, and gave us King Charles, whom God long
preserve among us: God takes away great men in judgment, either when he
takes good Governors, and rayseth up none in their stead. Thus when all the
Rulers were dead which knew Moses and Joshua, God gave the Jews no Rulers: for
in those days there was no King in Israel, but every one did what seemed best
in his own eyes. Or else God takes away good Rulers, and rayseth up bad, as
he took away Samuel, and gave Saul. Let us consider, if within these few
years God has not taken away many of our brave Gentiles, and worthy
Soldiers: but where have we a succeeding generation? What are our Ships
without Saylors? What are our Gunnes without men? What are our men without
discipline? And how can we have discipline, without brave Commanders, and
experienced Soldiers? Philip, King of Macedon, accounted the Athenians happy,
because they were able every year, to send out ten worthy Commanders, whereas
he only had Parmenio. Hence did this Nation flourish heretofore, and was a
terror to all Nations. Yea Charles the eighth of France attired his soldiers
like Englishmen to make them more fearful to his Rebels: but now alas, of
late God has not gone forth with our armies, but for our sins he has made
us an hissing and a by word to other people. Oh, now Abner has leave to dye,
and men of action by the sword never less regarded, never better spared. Well,
blessed be God for our peace, and pray we all for the peace of our Jerusalem:
Let them prosper which love it: yet let not us be secure. The sons of Zeruiah
may be too mighty for us, though our enemies abroad do sleep, and the Papists
at home are not plotting treasons: yet the devil all this time may rock the
cradle, and God may one day suffer the child to awake: and therefore let not so
many Abners, nor this worthy Abner before us dye, without sense of a public
loss, and an universal condolment of the whole State. For so says my text,
Know ye not that a Prince, etc? A Prince, that is, a prime man, a principal
Commander, a valiant Soldier, and a worthy Warrier. And having finished my
text, give me leave to speak of this present occasion. Ptolomeus asks a
question, What course men noble in birth, and quality of mind, yet oppressed
with poverty, should take to live by, and to be fruitful members in the
Commonwealth? He answered, They may in no wise practice any base or mechanical
trade, but they must addict themselves, either to the service of their Prince,
or be Priests of Gods Altar, or else give themselves to chiualry, and a
military life. This latter kind of calling, our Countryman this noble
Commander undertook. What, to be a soldier?

Nulla fides, pietasque viris qui bella sequuntur. There is neither faith nor
piety in men of war which live by their sword: But Gods Word will gainesay
this. Abraham the father of the faithful, was a soldier, when with 300. armed
men he arose and rescued Lot, and the Kings which were taken prisoners. Jacob
his grandchild was a warrier: for, Genesis 48.22. he gave to Joseph a portion
above his brethren, which, said he, I got out of the hands of the Amorites by
my sword and by my bow. David a godly man was a soldier, for God did teach his
hands to war, and his fingers to fight, and he entered the lists and fought a
private duel with great Goliath, that monster of the Philistines, and he did
cut off his head with his own sword. In the new Testament, the Centurion was
so believing, as Christ said, Verily I have not found so great faith, no not in
Israel. And Cornelius, Captain of the Italian band, Acts 10. was a devout man,
who feared God, with all his household, which did give much alms to the
people, and prayed God continually. Thus we see, soldiers may be, and often
are, very religious. And they are necessary members for the Commonwealth.
Hence Gabriel Simon did picture Julius Caesar standing upon a Globe of the
world, holding in his left hand a book, and in his right hand a sword drawn,
with this Motto: Ex vtraque Caesar: to show that the Empire was gotten, and
held by arms and good letters. And the great Turk, going into his Oratory to
perform his devotions, the Talesman with a loud voice wills him to remember,
that as the Empire was gotten by justice, and military discipline, so it must
be mayntayned by the same weapons: for as in the body natural, if the head
advise never so well, the eye see never so clearly, and the tongue speak never
so pleasingly, yet if the arms be dead or disioynted, the body can neither
offend other, or defend it self. Even so, in the body politic: If the head,
that is, the King, by his Council advise never so well: if the eyes, that is,
the reverend Bishops and Clergy, see never so well, and expel all mists of
error, superstition and idolatry, if the tongue, that is, the learned Judges
and Lawyers administer justice never so uprightly: yet if the Strong men, the
men of war, which are the arms of the Kingdom, be dead, or disarmed, we can
neither offend any other, nor defend our selves from the invasion of an enemy:
All which do show the necessity of the Honorable profession of a Soldier. To
come now to my subject: This valiant Soldier first went for his Countries
service, Portugal voyage. Then he served in the wars of Brittany. Thirdly, He
went Cales voyage. Next the Island voyage. Fifthly, He went into Ireland, where
he was Collonell to a troop of Horse, which being cassier'd, he was made
Lieutenant to a Foote-company. After all these travels, and dangers, he went to
Ostend, the most famous siege that ever was, or I think, ever will be. The
enemy valiantly assaulted, the besieged valiantly repulsed them. The then
General, the honor of our Nation in this latter age, Noble Sir Francis Vere,
employed him being but a private Gentleman, in a sally: in which he got the
first badge of his honor, being shot into the thigh with a musket bullet. And
the General observing his valor, and his stout and discreet answer, took
such liking of him, as shortly after his return he made him a Lieutenant, and
in a little space after, he made him a Chiefetaine, we say a Captain, which
he always to his dying day would acknowledge with a most thankful mind, to
be the ground of all his honor and fortune. And such was his fidelity ever
after, to that noble General, as he would not endure any man to speak basely
of him, or in the least measure to detract from his worth. Having gotten this
honor, he so carried himself, for valor, for diligence, for insight in his
Office, as that the late Prince of Orange of famous memory, and the now
illustrious and victorious Prince, and all the army noted his worth and merit.
And still he advanced himself to higher place, being made a Seriant Mayor of a
Regiment, and after that a Lieutenant Collonell.

Degeneres animos ^imor ^rguit, heu quibus ille
Ia^^^us vemis, quae bella exhausta canebat,
says Queen Dido of brave Aeneas: so this worthy Captain never harbored the
least thought of base cowardice in his breast. How many dangers? How many
battles? How many skirmishes? How many sieges has he past through? yea, with
loss of blood, but always with gain of honor. I may say of him, as is said
of Ulysses, Omnia pericula intrepide pertransit, he ran through all dangers
with an undaunted resolution: and as Seneca of another, fuit vir vere fortis,
gloriam maluit quam vitam, he was a man truly valorous, he had rather
maintain his honor then to preserve his life. And which is more, he did not
abuse Gods blessings, as many do, to riot and waste, but knowing he is worse
then an Infidel, which provides not for his family: yet abhorring a base and
sordid course, he lived in a fit equipage for his place and dignity, and yet
left a large possession behind him for his posterity. So I may truly say of
him, Ille suis maioribus virtute praeterit, he surpassed all his Ancestors in
virtue and valor, and withal non fuit finis, sed principium familiae: He was
not the end, but the beginning and foundation of his family. He has so raised
his house, as that his Heir may live nobly, and consort himself with the
prime Gentlemen of his Country.

Julius Caesar, when he saw great Alexanders Monument, and that it was written
on his Trophee, That at 32. years of age, he had conquered the Eastern parts
of the world: did presently weep, to think, that himself being thirty four
years of age, had done no memorable Act, to purchase honor to his Country, or
to himself. And so me thinks, this pattern of true Nobility before us,
should stir up the brave spirits of our Gentlemen: specially, the younger
brothers of families, not to spend their days in idleness, in a Tavern, or
the like: but they should endeavor by some virtuous profession to augment their
fortunes, and to add luster to their Families.

But to go forward, Abner in my text did fall: so did this our Abner: but as
David said, Dyed Abner as a fool? thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet tied
with fetters of brass. So, did this brave Commander dye like a fool? as a
base man that is whipped in the stocks? or as a malefactor which is led bound
to execution? No surely, but as we say, O portet imperatorem mori stantem: An
Emperor should dye standing. The comfortablest bed for a Preacher to dye in,
is the Pulpit. So, a Soldier should dye honorably in the field. And thus did
this noble Leader dye in the bed of honor, in the field, in the execution of
his Office, and the face of his enemies. And as David, the Nobles, and the
people, buried Abner nobly, and mourned for him: so the Prince, and the whole
Army bewailed this Soldiers death: and they did bury his bowels there, in an
honorable manner. His body is brought to be interred in his own City, and
Country. And as when King Josiah was buried, all Judah and Jerusalem mourned,
and came to his burial: Even so, Sic enim paruis componere magna solebam. all
the Country round about, of the prime rank, for Knights, Clergy, and
Gentlemen, with the grave Citizens and others came to perform their last duty
of civil humanity, and Christian charity, to his deceased corpse, desiring to
give him that honor, which while he lived, he worthily purchased to himself
by his valor. I, but all this may be said of an Infidel, as of Alexander,
Caesar, Scipio, Hanibal. Mark then for his soul, and for him, a true
Christian Noble. His custom, when he came into England was observed, still on
the Sabbath, and on the Lecture days, to frequent Gods Temple, for to hear
Gods Word: and where he lived, I am credibly informed by diverse, that twice
every day in his private chamber, he did use to pray heartily, and fervently
to God on his knees, both for the forgiveness of his own sins, and for a
blessing upon his family: and he did daily use to read in the Bible, and in
other good books. But some week before his death, he was far more devout,
and given to holy exercises then ordinary.

Sic vbi fata vocant, vdis abiectus in herbis,
Ad vada Maeandri concinit albus olor.
As the Swan, so this Christian noble Lieutenant Collonell, ready to leave the
world, did sing more sweetly, then ever he did before. And he carried into the
army, not only sword and spear, weapons for a Soldier: but for his Christian
warfare, he had his Bible, his Prayer book, and other Authors of holy
devotion. What should I say more? He which in his lifetime gave such a
testimony of a lively, and of an vnsayned repentance: and he which dyed in the
quarrel of Gods true Religion, and for his Countries firm Alies: I doubt not
but in the Canon of charity, I may apply to him the saying of S. Paul, He has
fought a good fight, he has finished a good course. Therefore he is now
crowned with glory in the Kingdom of Heaven: where we leave his soul singing
with the heavenly Quire, Amen, Halelluiah, glory, honor, and majesty be given
to God, and to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne for evermore. And we
commit his body to the grave to sleep and rest in peace, till the general
resurrection at the last day: where they which have done evil, shall arise to
everlasting damnation, and they which have done well, shall arise to
everlasting salvation.

Now, God of his mercy make us partakers of this latter Resurrection, for
Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

FINIS.

