THE PROTESTANT CHVRCH EXISTENT, AND Their FAITH professed in all Ages, and by
Whom: With a Catalogue of Councels in all Ages, who professed the same.

Written, By HENRY ROGERS D. D. Prebendary of HEREFORD.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD BADGER 1638.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD GEORGE, LORD Bishop of Hereford, His
Honorable DIOCESAN.
RIght Reverend Father in God, and my Honorable Lord, my book I dedicate unto
God, as I have my self, and all my labors long since. I present it to your
Lordship, as the person to whom under God and the King, I am bound to give an
account of my life, and labors in my vocation. A beneficed man, and a Preacher
I have lived in your Diocese these thirty years; many conferences I have had
with Papists; many small tracts have I written, upon the request of some of our
Church, who desired satisfaction in some points; diverse books have I briefly
answered with marginall notes, or analyticall resolution of their discourse,
intending them for private satisfaction. Only one escaped that happiness of
privacy, a short answer to Mr. Fisher, which I gave, being in London, far from
my books, farther from repose or quietness to study, in a case, which made me
fall on my knees, and pray unto God to keep to me the best things, whereby I
might do him service. In maximis angustiis, I wrote that short answer to Mr.
Fisher. I may call it my Benoni, to which Mr. Fisher, or one for him, made a
reply: and this is my defense of it, and our Church. It is not any great
conceit that I have of my labors, or my own strength, that causes me to
publish it; no, I say to my self, as was said to a weak Soldier, that girte
on his armor to go and fight: Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget --
And, God be thanked, we have many better, and those of late, whose works for
subject, and conformity of opinions, have that correspondency with this of
mine, though for acuteness and learning beyond it, as that, amongst other
motives, caused me to publish it seven or eight years, after that it was
finished. The bragging of the Romanist, their false hopes of the change of
Religion, and the vain fears of others, have made me rub up my old harness,
and to gird me to the battle, not daunted with the insolency of some Papists,
nor disquieted with the causeless fears of some of our side, who, while they
would seem zealous against the Roman party, little consider, by their
injurious traducing the Church they are members of, and the happy government of
it, that they help their enemies more then their most professed Champions. For
my part, as I delivered in a Sermon before your Lordship, at your first
Visitation, I am assured, that while we have the Scriptures, public and
private, in our mother tongue, and solid Catechizing in the fundamental
points, we need not fear Popery. This they well knew, that persecuted with
Fire and Faggot, whosoever had the New Testament, or Old, or as much as the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English Tongue;
they well knew, that to read the Scriptures, and there finding, there is one
Mediator between God and man, the man CHRIST JESUS, would make them that read
it, though simple, to suspect the popish mediation of Saints departed.

2. The learning of the Lords Prayer, with this injunction pray thus, Our
Father, would make the simplest to collect after this manner; if I may go to
God himself, and am so commanded by Christ, and have the example of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles praying unto God, and not unto men or
Angels, with a promise from Christ, Ask and you shall have; and an invitation,
Come unto me all ye that travail, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you;
why should I pray unto Saints without command, promise or pattern, nay,
without faith, how shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? In
quem non crediderunt, Unless they will say, which is a degree beyond ordinary
Popery, that we may credere in hominem, vel Angelum.

3. The Creed being learned would make the simple consider, when he hears of
other Articles of Faith not therein contained, as traditions unwritten equalled
to the words of God, the Popes supremacy, to be the prime article of the faith,
as Bellarmine to Blackwell does call it, transubstantiation, invocation of
Saints, veneration of Images, purgatory, seven Sacraments, Et quicquid novi
semper apportat Roma, new articles, new monsters; to say thus, they are not in
my Creed, it was no part of my promise in Baptism, no covenants of mine: I was
made a Christian, without any such conditions, any such articles.

4. In the Commandments, the simple do find the Papists forgery, if they
blot out the 2d. Commandment, or any part thereof: or their Idolatry in
worshipping Images, if they leave the text whole and uncorrupted.

5. Having the whole Scriptures in their mother tongue, they find the Papists
prohibiting of marriage, and of meats, a doctrine of devils; their exercise of
Religion in an unknown tongue, to be but a tinckling Cymball; Antichrist to
be that man of sin, which exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped, to be the Whore that sits on seven hills, that sits in
the Temple of God, etc. These things being commanded by the King, and earnestly
pressed by the Bishops in their several Visitations; make me confident (as
every moderate person is) that they, whose zeal against Rome is good, do
fear the alteration of Religion without cause; nay, have much to answer for
both to God and man, for cherishing such uncharitable suspicions in themselves
and others.

Three things in your Lordships Visitation, did cause me much to reverence your
person, and place. 1. Your personal presence in most parts of Your Diocese.
2. Your admonition to the Ministers, to study and preach the Scriptures, and to
Catechize carefully. 3. Your Lordships laying of hands upon Children, after
Your Lordship had examined some by Your self, and the rest by Your Clergy; a
thing of late neglected, and therefore lay heavy upon Your Lordship at this
first coming, when there came so many, that Your Lordships spirits were almost
spent, and many were almost crushed with the thronge; I said then to Your
Lordship, it was a great comfort to see the Church thus to suffer violence. And
from all other violence the Lord of heaven deliver us: to whose protection my
prayers daily commend Your Lordship;

Henry Rogers.

The Preface to the Christian READER.
SOme passages between Master Fisher and my self, about twelve years past
were published and Printed without my knowledge. Master Fisher delivered to
diverse Parsonages of good quality, certain propositions concerning the
Protestant Faith, Church, and Succession; to which (though then far from
home, and from my Books) I gave a short Answer, with a Catalogue of Orthodox
Writers, who professed our Faith in the first 700 years. To this Answer of
mine, some years after, a reply was published (whether by Master Fisher
himself, or some other in his behalf, I know not) a sight whereof I could not
get in a year or two after. To that reply of his, I answer in this ensuing
Discourse, with a Catalogue from the seventh Centurie to the fifteenth, of such
as professed our faith; which Catalogue of particular men being finished, I
have added a Catalogue of Councels in all Ages, who professed our faith. This
book of mine was finished seven or eight years past, as a noble personage now
employed by our Sovereign King in foreign parts can testify; who bestowed
some books upon me, which were very useful unto me in this Work, which he
did read; as did also many learned Doctors of our Church of Hereford. D.
Kernit. D. Best. D. Hoskinsed.
I was slow in publishing it, having no desire to be in Print: but the
persuasions of some of our Church, and the brags of some of our Adversaries,
saying that I neither had, nor could answer Master Fisher, caused me to present
it to the licencer. And so to send it into the view of the world, requesting
the Christian Reader, first to peruse the former book printed without my
knowledge. Secondly, to observe how my Adversary does pass by many principal
things, in my first answer, without any mention at all of the same. Thirdly,
that of what he has written against me, I pass not by any one sentence
unanswered.

My Book has two general heads.

First, what our Faith and Church is, and how proved; primarily, and properly
by Scriptures; secondarily, and improperly by reasons and humane testimony.

Secondly, that by this way of a Catalogue of those who taught their faith, or
Trent Creed, as distinct from ours, they cannot prove their succession, for
many reasons alleged by me in the thirteenth Chapter of this book, as first
the uncertainty of humane testimony. Secondly, their purging out of Authors,
that which makes against them. Thirdly, their forging of Authors, and Councels;
fourthly, their slighting and abasing of the Ecclesiastical Historians of the
Primitive Church, example whereof shall be showed as occasion shall be offered.

I will conclude this my Preface with those words of Saint Augustine, Ep. 48.
Necesse est incerti sint qui pro societate sua testimonio utuntur, non divino
sed suo. But let us with St. Augustine cleave to the Scriptures, and say with
him, Ecce ubi didicimus Christum, Ep. 166.
ecce ubi didicimus Ecclesiam, Lo where we have learned Christ, lo where we
have learned to find his Church. Give the glory to God for what is well, and
impute the imperfections and defects to my weakness, who will to my poor
ability be

Thine in the Lord. H. R,

A Table of the Contents.
CHAP. I. THe rules of answering. 1. to lay down his Adversaries words, and 2.
to answer to every particular, Vel concedendo, vel negando, vel distinguendo,
either by granting, denying, or distinguishing; by explicating of ambiguous
terms observed by Mr R. but not by Mr. Fisher, a comparison from the Dog
drinking of Nilus, and Anthony flying from Actium. 1 CHAP. II. 1. The occasion
of this Discourse, 2. Mr. Fishers terms ambiguous, 3. Distinctio vocis, and
definitio rei, neglected by Master Fisher, though requested by his Adversary.
4. These are the grounds of all doctrinall Discourses. 5. Master Rogers answer
to Master Fishers first question. That he will show who professed the faith of
the Reformed Churches in all Ages. 6. Master Fisher cannot show the names of
Jesuits in all Ages. 2 CHAP. III. 1. Master Fishers Rule, That probatio est
affirmantis non negantis. They who affirm are to prove, admitted by Master
Rogers. 2. A Church may be proved, though the particular names not recorded, as
a Christian Church in this Island before Austin the Monk came hither. 3. M.
Fisher does confound two questions, and commits a fallacy, secundum plures
interrogationes. 4. Master Fisher by his rule of names in all Ages, may be
denied to be a man, to be descended of Adam, if he admit no other proof. 5.
Master Rogers Argument to prove himself a Christian confirmed out of
Bellarmine, Baronius, Valenza, etc. 6. What is essential and necessary to an
explicit faith, set down at large. 7. The covenant of faith, the same in all
Christian Churches of the world, Latin, Roman, and Reformed, the Greek
Armenian, etc. 5 CHAP. IV. Of the total object of faith, as it includes not
only the primary essential matters of faith, but also the secondary and
accidental matters contained in the revealed truth. And that from hence
demonstrations may be drawn to prove the Protestants to be a Church. 13 CHAP.
V. Showing out of Saint Augustine, that there is no other way to demonstrate a
Church, to be a true Christian Church, but by the word of God. 120 CHAP. VI.
The Roman polemicke Theologues, likened to the Indian Apes that appeared to
Alexander, and to the Ligurians; the difference between the ancient and
present Church of Rome, between the Ancient Monks, and the present, the title
of Roman Catholic a most impudent contradiction. Two Impostors submitting
themselves as two Patriaachs to the Church of Rome. The whole faith of the
Protestants confirmed by Popish Writers. Yet the Romanists have another new
faith of their own. 32 CHAP. VII. Master Fisher pressed by his own rule to
prove the new Creed, wherein he is Affirmative, we Negative. 2. A member of the
Church of Rome may bear witness against the Church of Rome. 41 CHAP. VIII.
What it is to communicate with others, how far we yet communicate with the
Roman Church, and wherein we refuse to communicate. 45 CHAP. IX. 1. Some
distinctions justified. 2. Master Fisher puts false Titles over his book, as
thus. Master ROGERS his weak Grounds, over his 26 and 27 pages, and yet not
one word spoken in both those pages of any of Master Rogers Grounds. And page
28. Master Rogers most weak Arguments, and yet not one Argument of Master
Rogers mentioned in all that page* Master Fisher changes his terms, for Faith
puts Doctrines. 52. CHAP. X. Master Rogers definition of a Protestant Church
conformed. The same definition agrees with all true Churches in the world, the
rule of defining. Bellarmines definion of the Church confuted; together with
the Romish Doctrine, that none can be saved out of their Church. 56 CHAP. XI.
M.F. puts false Titles upon the pages of his Book, [ As Master Rogers his most
weak Grounds, or Arguments] where there is ^^mention of his Grounds, or
Arguments. The Protestants a true Church, not the true Church. Histories no
good proof of the Church. All Doctrines not points of Faith. M. Fishers
reasons to prove that the Teachers of true and false Doctrine are to be found
in Histories, answered. 71 CHAP. XII. Negatives depend upon Affirmatives;
Master Fishers Tautologies. He says Master Rogers grants what he never did
grant. 86 CHAP. XIII. Four Reasons to prove that Master Fishers proof by
Histories cannot be effectual and satisfactorie. 1. For the uncertainty of
humane Stories. 2. Because of their Index expurgatorius. 3. Because they have
forged many authorities of Councels and Fathers. 4. Because they have excepted
against all the Ecclesiastical Historians of the Primitive Church as
falsaries. 91 CHAP. XIIII. Master Fishers Answer to Master Rogers Arguments and
Grounds, 100 CHAP. XV. The Protestants Faith contained in Scripture. The
Articles of their faith in the Apostles Creed. Master Rogers Arguments
maintained against Master Fishers first Answer by denying the minor. 103 CHAP.
XVI. Master Fishers second Answer by changing Protestant into Catholic,
refuted, retorted; a bold manifest falsehood of Master Fishers. Master Fisher
but half a Papist. 109 CHAP. XVII. The Romanists can bring no Authors for 400
years for their half Communion. Worshipping of Images, etc. nor for any else
in some Ages for want of Wtiters in times of ignorance. No Council, no good
Writers, no good Pope Saculo 9. In which 9 Age nothing was visible in the Roman
Church, but vile and lewd Popes, or Intruders, proved at large out of Baronius.
114 CHAP. XVIII. A threefold Catalogue. 1. Of Latin. 2. Of Greek Authors. 3.
Of Councels, who professed our faith, maintained our sacraments but not the
faith and sacraments of the Roman Church. 119 CHAP. XIX. The distinctions of
Doctrines Accessory and Fundamental, of Affirmation and Negation. 142 CHAP.
XX. The same distinction maintained. John Ellis his comparison. The Ape with
his youngling. The boy with his bodging Verses. Decrees of Councels not
Articles of faith. What makes an Heretic. The Anabaptist (as he is supposed
by Master Fisher) a member of the Church, but membrum non sanum. 148 CHAP. XXI.
Of Doctrine fundamental. The Roman Church the most corrupted part of the
Church. 155 CHAP. XXII. Of Baptizing of children. The error of the Anabaptist,
in practice, not in point of faith. 159 CHAP. XXIII. The Papists affirm all
our faith, but differ in Ecclesiastical Doctrines, which they term points of
faith, in which they want Antiquity, Universality, and Consent. 164 CHAP.
XXIIII. The same grounds of doctrines, accessory and fundamental, of
affirmation and negation, maintained. 2. Negatives in Scripture pertain to
faith, per accidens, not per se. All things revealed in Scripture have equal
truth, but not equal profit, equal necessity of being believed, being
known, but not equal necessity to be known. Negatives not revealed in
Scripture are res fidei, neither per se, nor per accidens. The Church of Rome
most hating, and most hated by all Churches in the world, as Innovators,
Schismatics, and Heretics. The Conclusion of the whole Book. 171
Recensui hunc librum, cujus titulus est [The Protestant Church existent, etc.]
in quo nihil reperio bonis moribus aut sanae Doctrinae contrarium, quo minus
imprimatur, modo id fiat, intra annum proxime sequentem. Secus, ista licentia
effectu carebit.

Johannes Oliver Reverendiss. in Christo Patr. and Dom. Domino Arch. Cant.
Capell. Dom.
Ex Aedi: Lamb. Apr. 15. 1637.
THE PROTESTANT CHVRCH EXISTENT.
CHAP. I. Master Fisher observes neither Art, nor Order in answering Master
Rogers.
MAster Fisher, or whosoever you are, that undertake for him; if you would have
done by me, as I did by Master Fisher; namely, have set down all my grounds,
and answered to them in particular, as I did to Master Fishers Propositions; it
might have given the Reader better satisfaction, who thereby might see, whether
we do agree in any thing that I have written, or dissent in all; whether you
reject all those grounds which I laid, or admit of some; as I did by your
Propositions, approving some, rejecting others; In solutione argumentorum duae
ta^tum solutiones, distinguendo, vel tollendo, Ego autem hic de Propositionibus
loquor.
and in those you reject, if you would have answered to them in their place,
and punctually, and not go roving, so to puzzle the Reader with disorder. I
took those Propositions that were offered to me as they lay, I answered to
every period, vel concedendo, aut distinguendo, aut negando, either granting,
distinguishing, or denying; and where I found any ambiguity in your terms, or
sentences, I desired you to explicate, and clear the same, which you have not
done; yet you know that no disputation may be undertaken, no Argument framed,
no Treatise composed without this; no not so much as one bare Proposition, or
Sentence may subsist with aequivocation, and amphibologie, words or sentences
of double signification, and doubtful sense, until they be cleared by
explications, and distinctions. This you know to be the advice, and practice of
the Philosophers, and Divines which have written. But such are your terms and
Propositions as that they seem to be made of purpose in ambiguous words, or
contexture, so to leave open some starting hole, or evasion, and answering your
Adversary out of order, to draw a curtain before the understanding, not only
of the Reader, but also of your Adversary, Aristot. Elench. 2. We are ignorant
of what we formerly knew when it is misplaced and disordered.
and your self, (...). Thus have I been served by others besides you. Is not
this catching at a word here, and passing by a whole side of a leaf elsewhere,
without saying one word to it? afterward leap back a leaf, or two, and
snarle at an Argument, or snap at a distinction, and so away; Is not this (I
say) like the Dog drinking of Nilus, lap a little, and run away; lap again,
and run away? This was applied by one to Antony, flying after Cleopatra from
the Battle at Actium, who being asked, Quid agit Antonius? Answered, Quod
canis ad Nilum, lambit, and fugit: so much was he besotted with that Harlot.
Thus you the Champion of that Purple Harlot that sits upon the seven hills,
fight her quarrels, a snatch and away, a snap and be gone; or if you make a
short stand, you will but show your teeth, grin, snarle, but hardly bite. That
I may draw you from this course of disorder, I will put down what Master
Fisher proposed, what I answered, and then what this Author replied, or
where he did not reply.

CHAP. II. The occasion, and time when this Author Master Rogers was first
interessed in this matter.
At that time, when our now Sovereign was in Spain, a Gentleman delivered me
those Propositions following, in the presence of diverse, I being then in London
100. miles from my dwelling, and my Books. That night I delivered this answer
following after Master Fishers Propositions. The Gent: was then almost become
Romanist, having been (not many days before) at Mass in the Spanish
Ambassadors house, and Master Fisher coming to this Gent: Chamber left those
Propositions with him.

The like verbatim the Right Honorable Earl of O. did show me, saying, that
it was all written with Master Fishers own hand.

The Propositions are these.
Fisher.

IT being granted that there must be a Visible Church in all Ages, of which
all sorts must learn Faith necessary to salvation.

Rogers in his first Answer.

The perpetual Visibilitie of the Church I acknowledge: but I pray you set me
down what a visible Church is? and what you mean by these words, all
sorts, whether Children dying before they come to years of discretion to
learn this Faith, be not after Baptism parts of the Visible Church?

Secondly, what you mean by learn? Whether 1. An actual explicit knowledge:
Or 2. An habitual only implicit knowledge.

Thirdly, what points of Faith you hold necessary to Salvation.

Rogers second Answer.

That some grounds must be laid for all Discourse, I think my Adversary will
not deny, seeing all discourse is a drawing of Conclusions from some precedent
received premises, whether of Principles naturally manifest, and clear of
themselves, or of some supposed received, and agreed upon. Some grounds I laid,
which Mr. Fisher, or his Second here, would have the Reader believe he has
refuted; for almost every Page has this Title, Master Rogers most weak
grounds. But how effectually he has performed it, shall appear in his place.

The first thing I requested here of M. Fisher, was to define a visible Church,
and to explain an ambiguous phrase, both as necessary grounds as may be for
discourse: for ambiguities are thickets wherein Sophisters do hide themselves,
and the first grand fallacy which they use, who would deceive others, and do
often deceive themselves; neither is the Respondent bound by Rules of Art to
answer such an Opponent.

Aristot. Elench. 2.
(...). It is clear, that an aequivocator deserves no answer. The other ground
which I requested him to lay, was a definition of the visible Church. To this
the Author of this Treatise gives no answer, although if he have any
Schoole-learning, he must confess, that this is the first ground to be laid,
and best means to begin any Treatise, to attain exact knowledge of what we
enquire after, and to resolve all doubts that may arise: Without this all
Disputations are full of difficulties, says Arist. This is the scope of all
Logic, says Zabarel your learned Logic and Philosophy Reader of Padua. You
propose a question, Whether the Protestants be a Church: what more requisite
here, than to explicate your Terms, and define a Church, which I formerly
requested you to do, and now again make the same motion.

Fisher.

The Question propounded by M. Fisher at the entreatie of a Gentleman, who
desired satisfaction, was: Whether the Protestant Church was visible in all
ages? especially in the ages before Luther?

And whether the names of the Professors thereof may be showed in all ages out
of good Authors?



Rogers in his first Answer.

A Church professing the same faith which the Protestants now do, was visible
in all ages: and I do undertake to prove it out of good Authors.

Rogers in his second Answer.

To this M. Fisher or his Second have made no reply, not as much as to say,
whether that will serve their turn, or whether I must show the names of
Protestants in all ages. If this later, then may I require of M. Fisher, or any
other Jesuit, to show me the names of Jesuits in all ages, whose name began
within these hundred years, or not much more, and for defect of such names
argue against them thus: They who are of the Church can show their names to
have been in all ages since Christ.

But no man can show the name of Jesuits to have been in all ages since Christ.

Ergo: No Jesuit is of the Church.



If I should call upon you for the names of Jesuits, I should serve you as you
serve us: but I will not use such poor miserable shifts as these, which are no
other then the cavils of men that have nothing to say that is worth the
hearing, as I will after show in his due place. Let this suffice for this
place; I profess, that if Master Fisher or any other Jesuit can show me, that
a Church professing the same faith which the Jesuits now do, was visible in
all ages, I will be of their faith, though they can not show me the names of
Jesuits in those former times.

Fisher. CHAP. III. M. Fisher undertook to defend the negative part, so as it
did belong to his Adversary to prove the Affirmative.
MAster Fisher explicated the meaning of his Question to be, that first, His
Adversary should set down

Names of men in all ages whom they thought to be Protestants.

Secondly, that they should show out of good Authors proof that they were
Protestants

Thirdly, that they should defend them to hold nothing contrary to the doctrine
of Protestants contained in the 39. Articles, unto

Rogers in his first Answer.

To the First, I will show the names of such as maintained our now Faith in all
ages, and bring good proof.

To the second, the Church of Rome cannot produce Fathers in all ages, who do
not contradict the Council of Trent in some doctrines established in the said
Council.

To the third. It is no prejudice to our Faith, if the same Authors do differ
from us in other opinions not concerning Faith, as long as they maintain our
faith.

Fisher his Question.

Whether the Protestant Church was visible in all ages, especially in the ages
before Luther? And whether the names of the Professors thereof may be showed in
all ages out of good Authors?

Rogers.

Mr. Fisher, you here confound two Propositions, or Questions, delivering them
both as one, whereas they are very different, and may subsist the one without
the other. For a Protestant Church may be extant in all ages, and yet no names
of the Professors to be found for every age; and this existence of such a
Church may be proved by general testimony of History, as that the Christian
Religion was here in Britain before the coming of Augustine the Monk, Hist.
Angl. l. 2. c. 2.
may be proved out of Beda, who makes mention of British Bishops, but names
none of them. In vita Constantini. lib. 3. c. 18.
Here M. Fisher and his Second would say, Show me their names, or I will not
grant there were any. Let us ascend a little higher; we may prove it out of
Eusebius 300 years before that this Country was Christian.

Here Mr. Fisher would say, Show the names of those Christians, or I will not
believe it. So it is plain that these are two Questions; Arist. Elench. 2. c.
17.
(...). It is not well to require one answer to two questions. This is as if a
man should ask whether John a Nox, and John a Styles be at home, when the one
is forth, the other at home; and enjoyne the Respondent to answer to both at
once yea, or no; by which answer he must speak an untruth, because the
questions are two really distinct. This is a trick of Sophistry, M. Fisher; let
me give you one instance more. If I should ask M. Fisher, whether he were a
man, or not; and whether he could show me the names of his Ancestors in all
ages until Adam? would you give me one answer unto both? if affirmative, then
you had a great task, and such as I think you neither can perform, nor would
undertake: if negative were your answer to both, then you are no man. You would
think it unreasonable that I should tie you thus to prove your self a man.
Think it as unreasonable, that you should tie me thus to show my self a
Christian, especially considering this kind of proof is but weak, uncertain,
full of exceptions, and at the most but humane, Cui potest subesse falsum, the
testimonies of men, qui and falli possunt, and fallere, who may deceive, and be
deceived.

You would think it reasonable, that if you were to prove your self a man, a
humane creature, or that you are descended from Adam, I should leave the manner
of proof to your self, and you would go to work a shorter way, and more
effectually thus: Every living creature consisting of a reasonable soul and
humane body, is a man.

I am a living creature consisting of such a soul, and such a body:

Ergo: I am a man.



This would give me satisfaction, I would not reject it, and bid you show the
names of your Ancestors out of Histories in all ages, or you are no man.

You would have me prove my self a Christian: give me leave to choose, and
frame mine own Argument thus: Whosoever does profess that faith which is, and
ever has bin required of those who by Baptism are made Christians, is therein
baptized, and does therein continue, is a Christian.

But I was baptized in that faith, and do therein continue, and profess the
same.

Ergo: I am a Christian.



Will you now, M. Fisher, say unto me, Not so; but you must show me a
Catalogue of those who held your faith in all ages, or you are no Christian,
you have no Church. Is this your charity, M. Fisher? will you not grant me as
a Christian? what I grant you as a man?

Bellarmine, Baronius, Valenza, Aquinas, and ascending higher, Ruffinus,
Cyrillus, Tertullian, Irenaeus, tell me you can require no more for an
explicit faith, such as profession requires, at my hands, then this, which all
children in our Churches are taught to believe, to know, and to profess:
adding this implicit faith, that they, besides the Articles of the Apostles
Creed, are prepared to entertain, and will believe all things revealed in the
word of God. I will begin with Valenza, who says: Tom. 3. disp. 1. c. 1. p. 5.
Nota inter omnes orthodoxos convenire, articulos fidei Catholicis credendos
esse illos qui Apostolorum Symbolo continentur. Note, that it is agreed amongst
all those who are right believers, that the Articles of faith which Catholics
ought to believe, are those which are contained in the Apostles Creed. If there
were any other Articles, he should not have said, these were the Articles, but
some of the Articles. Again, the same Valenza says; Now in the time of grace
there is a command said upon all, that of necessity they must explicit
credere, i. actually know, and immediately believe those Articles of faith which
are contained in the Apostles Creed; Et sic decent communiter Theologi, and D.
Thomas; This is the common doctrine of Divines, and so says Aquinas. But other
truths of faith, which besides those Articles of the Creed, are contained
either in the holy Scriptures, or in the definitions of the Church, Non
necessarium est necessitate medij, ant praecepti explicit credi a vulgaribus
fidelibus: They are not necessarily to be believed by common Christians, either
as a means without which men cannot be saved, or by a necessity imposed, or
commanded. Wherein observe how the Jesuit adds, and paralelleth Definitions
of the Church to the Scripture, whereas Aquinas cited by him says thus:
Dicendum est ergo quod fidei objectum per se, Q 2. Art. 5.
est id per quod homo beatus efficitur, ut supra dictum est. Per accidens autem
aut secundario se habent ad objectum virtutis omnia quae in sacra Scriptura
divinitus tradita continentur, sicut quod Abraham habuit duos filios; quod
David fuit filius Isai, and alia hujusmodi. Quantum ergo ad prima credibilia
quae sunt articuli fidei, tenetur homo explicit credere, sicut and tenetur
habere fidem. Quantum autem ad alia credibilia non tenetur homo explicit
credere, sed solum implicit, vel in preparatione animi, in quantum paratus est
credere quicquid divina Scriptura continet: sed tunc solum hujusmoditenetur
explicit credere, Q. 1. Art. 8
quando hoc ei constiterit in doctrina Fidei contineri. We must therefore
conclude, that the proper object of Faith is that by which a man is made happy,
as we have said before. But accidentally, and secondarily all those things
belong unto the object of that virtue, which are delivered from God, and
contained in Scripture; as for example, that Abraham had two Sons, and that
David was the Son of Ishai, and such like. Therefore as far as concerns
those prime objects of man's belief which are the Articles of Faith, a man must
believe the same expressly, as he must have Faith. But as for other objects of
Faith a man is not bound to believe them expressly, but only implicitly, or in
a preparation of mind to believe whatsoever is contained in the holy
Scripture: but then he is bound to believe those things expressly, when it
shall plainly appear unto him that they are contained in the doctrine of
Faith. Thus far that Schooleman.

To the same effect Carbo the best Epitomizer that I have seen, who in his
smaller Book has all the marrow of Aquinas his Sums. The next shall be
Baronius.

Hoc ipsum Symbolum Catholica Ecclesia semper adeo est venerata, ut in sanctis
Conciliis Oecumenicis, Baron. 44. n. 18.
quasi basis quaedam and fundamentum structurae Ecclesiasticae consueverit,
imprimis recitari. The Catholic Church did always so far reverence this
Creed, that it was a Custom to repeat the same in holy General Councels as
a groundwork and foundation of all Ecclesiastical buildings, (saying
moreover concerning the Roman Church) that it had preserved the same Apostles
Creed, sincere, and illibate, without any addition or diminution, as Ruffinus
has testified in these words: In diverse Churches some things have been added,
but in the Church of Rome, Adjectionem unius saltem sermonis non admittit
auditus, Their ears abhor to hear the addition of one sentence.

Bellarm. Tom. 4. lib. 1. de Iustificatione cap. 9. I am vero quod vetus
Ecclesia senserit, ac tradiderit de fide ad justificationem, and salutem
necessaria; quid ea videlicet sit, and quod objectum habeat non potest clarius
intelligi quam Symbolo fidei, quod Catechumenis initio traditur, ut cum fide
recta, and salva ad lavacrum Regenerationis accedant. Concerning that Faith
which is necessary to Justification and salvation, what was the opinion of the
Primitive Church, and what it did deliver concerning the same; namely, what
Faith is, and what object it has, cannot more clearly be understood then by
that Creed which was delivered to those that were Catechized before Baptism,
that so they might come to the Laver of Regeneration with a right and sound
Faith. Tom. 3 lib. 1. de Baptis. cap. 24. He says that the repeating of this
Creed is the fourth Ceremony of Baptism, of which Ceremony mention is made, as
he there writes, by Clemens, Dionysius, Origin, Cyprian, Cyrill, Hillary,
Hierom, Augustine.

And that the sum, and whole object of Faith is therein contained, though
briefly, Saint Augustine does teach, Sermon. 115. de tempore, besides others
that teach the same, where (says Bellarm:) he does define the Apostles Creed,
in these words, Est inquit Symbolum comprahensio fidei nostrae simplex, brevis,
plena: ut simplicitas consulat audientium rusticitati, brevitas memoriae,
plenitudo doctrinae. The Creed is plain, brief and a full comprisall of our
Faith, that the plainness may help the simplicity, brevitie may help the
memory, and the fullness may provide for the learning of the hearers.

Lib. 1. c. 2. 3. 4. Lib. advers. Praxiam.
Saint Irenaus does expound the rule of the Christian Faith, the same also is
done by Tertullian: but both of them do teach, that nothing else is to be
believed besides the Articles of the Apostles Creed, although they have not the
name of the Creed. So says Bellarm: lib. 1. de Just. c. 9. Leo the first, ep.
13. does charge Eutiches to have made a dissension contrary to the entirenesse
of the Catholic Faith. Est siquidem ipsius Catholici Symboli brevis, and
perfecta confessio, quae duodecem Apostolorum totidem est signata sententiis.
For in the Apostles Creed is contained a perfect confession of Faith. Thus he
is cited by Binius, Tom. 1. Conciliorum page 946.

Baronius Anno 1016. number. 1. says, That one Simeon a holy, man of Armenia
coming to Rome, and there being accused of Heresy, and demanded what faith
he was of? He made a perfect confession of faith, by rehearsing the Apostles
Creed, etc.
Respondens Catholicae, and Apostolicae fidei perfectionem ita confitendo
perdocuit, qualiter per universum orbem, Apostolorum Symbolum in Nicaena Synodo
peroratum clara voce personuit. And by and by after Baronius adds these
words: Innotuit protinus Papae, and omnibus qui aderant virum Dei (scilicet
Simeonem) verae fidei esse professorem. Lastly, the sufficiency of this Creed
is acknowledged not only by those which I have above named, but also the
Council of Ephesus concluding, does repeat this Creed, adding these words:
Huic sanctae fidei omnes affentiantur oportet, est enim pie sufficienterque ad
totius orbis utilitatem exposita. Let all men assent to this holy Faith, for it
is piously, and sufficiently expounded to the benefit of the whole world.

Having thus out of the Fathers, Schoolmen, Councels, and your own Writers
showed the Antiquity, necessity, truth, perfection, sufficiency, and
fullness of my Faith in which I was baptized, and which all we of the
Protestant Churches do profess, how can you say that we are not of the
Church, or require us to add other Articles unto these in which we all have
been baptized, and in which alone, not only we, but all of your Church, and
all Churches of the world since the Apostles times have been baptized, been
made Christians, been admitted into the Church? This is the Covenant of faith
as well in your Church as in ours: for there is no other profession of faith in
Baptism amongst you, but the Apostles Creed; there is no mention there, no
promise, no covenant that we do believe unwritten Traditions, Indulgences,
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, seven Sacraments, worshipping of Images,
Communion under one kind, Transubstantiation, and the Primacie of the Romish
Church. When a Farmour is told, that he has forfeited his Lease, that he has
broken his Covenants; he will ask in what point? and when it is told him in
particular wherein, he repaires unto his Lease, looks upon his Covenants; and
if this which is laid to his charge be not there expressed, he will reply; It
is not h^ere, I am not bound unto it, it is no Covenant of mine; and his
Landlord were unjust to press him beyond his Covenant.

We have made a Covenant with God in Baptism, we are admitted Tenants in his
Church; you say we have forfeyted our Grant, broken our Covenants, we are no
longer Tenants, we are no more of the Church. I ask you, why? you say,
because I will not believe your new Creed, and that the Pope is head of the
Church (for that is your primarius fidei articulus. Bellarm. to Blackwell.
) I reply, there is no such thing in my Covenant; I was baptized in no such
faith, I was made a member of Christ, I was not made a member of the Pope, I
will leave that for you who make him your head. And thus far of explicit
faith, of justifying faith necessary to salvation, of the primary fundamental
propositions which belong to faith per se, non per accidens, out of which I
will collect some few Arguments: Whosoever was baptized into, and still does
profess a whole, full, perfect, true, sufficient faith, is of the Church.

But the Protestants were baptized into, and still do profess a whole, full,
perfect, true, sufficient faith.

Therefore the Protestants are of the Church.



Every word of the Major and Minor is prooved in this Chapter, in that I have
proved all these titles to belong to the Apostles Creed.

A second Argument.

Whosoever do profess that Faith by which men are made Christians, do still
continue Christians.

But the Protestants do profess that faith by which men are made Christians.

Ergo: The Protestants are Christians, and consequently of the Church.

A third Argument.

To prove that those Doctrines of their new Creed can be no Articles of faith,
because the Articles of the Apostles Creed being already perfect and complete,
can admit of no essential addition; and all Articles must be essential, quia
per se.

There can be no essential addition to that which is perfect and complete, as
the Apostles Creed is.

But the Articles of Faith are essential unto Faith.

Ergo: No new Articles may be added to the Apostles Creed, being perfect and
complete.

CHAP. IV. Of the total object of faith, as it includes not only the primary
essential matters of faith, but also the secondary and accidental matters
contained in the revealed truth, and that from hence demonstrations may be
drawn to prove the Protestants to be a Church.
THose things we believe by an infused divine faith, are of two sorts: 1. Some
prime, proper, essential, as those things contained in the Apostles Creed. 2.
Some other secondary, accidental, and common to other habits or virtues
besides faith, to other persons besides the faithful; as moral precepts
belong to Charity properly, and are common to Christians and Infidels,
revealed not only by the supernatural light of Gods word, but also by the
natural light of reason in man, both from God; but the one written by God in
the day of Creation, the other manifested by his Son in the day of
Redemption. Of the former sort are the ten Commandments, which were known
even to the Heathen, Dixitque semel nascentibus author. He that reads Plato,
Lucan.
Aristotle, Tullie, Diogenes Laertius, the Poets, Greek and Latin; the
Latin, Greek, Egyptian, Chaldean, Indian, Ethiopian Laws, may there find,
though not in the same excellent order, nor without some mixture of dross, all
the Decalogue. And so deep was the impression of this Law in the wisest of
those Heathen, that no Oracle could prevail with them to cross, or cancel
what the Law of Nature delivered as Principles (which alone is properly the Law
of Nature.) Excellent in this kind is that speech of Catoes in Lucan, who being
advised by Labienus to consult with the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, said unto him,
What would thou have me to demand of the Oracle; An noceat vis ulla bono?
Fortunaque perdat

Opposita virtute minas laudandaque velle

Sit satis, and nunquam successu crescat honestum?

Scimus, and hoc nobis non altius inseret Ammon.



He that shall read Phocilides, a very ancient Greek Poet, shall there find
a Storehouse of excellent moral Precepts, as consonant to the writings of
Moses and Solomon, as if they had been thence drawn.

Aquinas, Bellarm. Valenza, and alij.
All Divines of greatest note of your own side hold that of the Apostle, Hebr.
11. v. 1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen, to be a definition of faith; and then the proper object of faith
must be non apparentia, non visa, things not evident to the natural man, to
the eye of reason, such as these moral Precepts are which I last mentioned:
Lib. 1. de Iustific. c. 4.
So that howsoever Bellarmine do cavil with that distinction of Historical
Faith, and justifying Faith, yet reason will evince the distinction to be good,
and needful: for those Histories of Esaus selling his Birthright, of Abraham's
two wives, of Dathans rebellion, of David's adultery, although they are not
essential to explicit saving faith, yet those Stories, and whatsoever is
recorded in the Word of God to have been done, or spoken, we believe to have
been done and spoken, although the act sometime be wicked, and the speeches
false and blasphemous; as the murder of Vriah, the railing of Shimei, the
words of the Serpent to Eve: So the belief and credit we give, is not to those
actions or speeches of theirs, as if the one were well done, and the other
truly spoken; for this were to justify the false Prophets, railing Rebels, and
the Devil himself: but we believe that Historical Narration of the Holy
Ghost, that such wicked sins were committed, such false blasphemous words
spoken; and shall we not call this Faith, being a credit we give unto the
Relation, because it is by divine inspiration, in the Penmen, not in the
Actors, or first speakers, Historical. If it be faith, L b. 1. de Iustific.
c. 9.
either a justifying faith, or an historical faith, or some other: but no
other is named, and it is no justifying faith; Ergo, an historical faith. That
it is not a justifying faith, I prove against Bellarmine out of his own
words: The whole object if justifying Faith is contained summarily, and
briefly in the Apostles Creed.

But those Stories of sinful actions, lying Prophets, blaspheming Devils, are
not at all in the Apostles Creed.

Ergo, The relations of them are no object, no article, no part of saving Faith.



If neither of saving Faith, nor any other, then of Historical Faith.

Again, no division of things contained in Scripture is more frequent amongst
Fathers, Schoolmen, and latter Writers, Roman, and Reformed then that of Faith
and life, Credenda, and facienda; what we should believe, how we should live;
and if they be members of one division they cannot be affirmed one of another.

As therefore those Moral precepts are rules of actions, so they belong to
Charity, its their proper place.

As it is related, they came from God, so they are the object of Historical
Faith: So that the Articles of the Creed, wheresoever found in Scripture are
the proper object of justifying Faith. And all things that are registered and
declared by the (...), the Prophets and Evangelists, inspired by the Holy Ghost
are the object of our Faith Historical, I say, the relation, not every thing
that is related, which Historical Faith I define, to be a supernatural
infused assent, or credit we give to the relation of things in the Word of God,
as revealed from him. So that I think, I may say, that rightly understood,
both sides do agree thus far.

1. That the primary, material compounded object of Faith, as the Schoolmen
and Jesuits speak, or more plainly, that the principal propositions of Faith
are in the Apostles Creed.

2. The total object of Faith, are omnes revelationes divinae, as Valenza; or
Verbum Dei, as Bellarmine; or rather, the divine Scripture, as the Fathers, as
Aquinas, Carbo, and the Reformed Churches do say. For Valenza does aequivocate
with his Revelationes Dei, and Bellarmine with his Verbum Dei. Who would not be
glad to read in these two great Jesuits, That such is the nature of Faith,
Tom. 3. di. 1. q. 1.. 4. p. 1.
that it can assent to no Proposition, but as it is revealed by God? So
Valenza, and Faith ought to level at nothing besides the Word of God; for
Faith cannot be certain and infallible, unless it rely upon his authority
who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, So Bellarm: Who (that desires the
peace of Sion) would not be glad hereof? Lib. 1. de Iustif. c. 10.
I did much rejoice when at first I read it, but when I saw that Valenza did
extend his divine Revelations not only to Canonical Writers but also to the
Pope; And Bellarmine to divide Verbum Dei, the Word of God, into Scriptu^, and
non scriptum; written Word, and unwritten Traditions, my joy turned into
grief, and searching better into the Questions, I found these were poor
shifts to hemme in their Pope; for when they are pressed with arguments, or
Authorities of Fathers concerning the fullness, and sufficiency of the Word of
God, Bellarmine comes in with his distinction of Verbum Dei Scriptum, and non
scriptum; saying, that the one alone is Regula partialis, a piece of a Rule;
but both together are Regula totalis, a whole Rule. Tom. 3. d. 1. q. 1. p. 1..
4.
So Valenza deals by revealed verities, Vel per Canonicum Scriptorem, vel per
alium legitimum definitorem fidei, whom he afterward concludes to be the Pope.

I therefore choose to speak as the Fathers do; yea, and as the more Ancient
Schoolmen did, Aquinas, Carbo, and others: That the Scripture is Regula
credendorum, which excludes Bellamines Verbum non scriptum, and Valenzaes
Papal decisions. And to this purpose I will cite such places of the Fathers
which are acknowledged by the Adversaries to be true Fathers, and true
quotations. The sacred Writers, Evangelium in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt
fundamentum, Irenaeus l. 3. c. 1.
and columnam fidei nostrae futuram, have delivered the Gospel unto us in the
written Word to be the foundation, and pillar of our Faith. Here Bellarmines
Verbum non scriptum, his unwritten Word has no place. This Father, who lived
in the first Age after the Apostles, says, In Scripturis, in the written Word.
Here Valenza's unwritten Revelations of Traditions, or Papal decisions being
his definitor fidei, have no place; to reconcile these two, Scriptum, and non
Scriptum, is to overthrow the first fundamental Propositions of all learning
in the world, to reconcile contradictions. The most incompatible opposition
that is; without which being laid as a groundworke, no man may treat of any
thing. Arist. Meta. 4. ca. 10.
(...). It is impossible that the same thing at the same time should be, and
should not be; this no man can be ignorant of, this is the first principle in
Metaphysicke, in Logic, though in other terms (viz.) two contradicting
Propositions cannot be both true, nor both false. This is the first principle
of all other Sciences, as the fornamed Author, Fonseca. Suarez.
as Aquinas your great Schooleman, Fonseca and Swarez, your fellow Jesuits, and
great writers upon Metaphysicke, your learned writer upon the Demonstrations,
Zabarel, and others whom I could name, do undoubtedly teach. Reconcile me
Irenaeus his Scriptum est, and your non scriptum, Bellarm. de Verbo Dei.
and as you have taken away the Rule of divine knowledge, by denying the
sufficiency thereof, by denying it to be a total Rule, but a part, a piece
of a Rule, which is as much as no Rule, as a part, or piece of a man is no man;
so by denying this first principle of all humane knowledge, you take away all
Natural, and Moral Philosophy, all Logic, all Metaphysicke, and then what
remains but that we be no more creatures endued with reason, and your Pope
shall rule us as please him: Sed habebit imperium in belluas, he must
transform us into this beastly ignorance. Thus having taken away your
distinction of Scriptum, and non Scriptum, (which I desire may be observed in
the rest of the Fathers that follow, for I will cite none who use not this word
Scriptures, which is the written word) I will press my Argument thus.

First Argument.

Whosoever does hold the foundation and pillar of Faith, is of the Church.

But the Protestants believing the Scriptures, do hold the foundation and
pillar of Faith.

Ergo: The Protestants are of the Church.

What, will you Master Fisher answer to this Argument? will you distinguish
Verbum Dei with Bellarmine? or Revelatio Divina, with Valenza? ad terminos,
what word in my Syllogism do you distinguish, or what proposition do you
deny.

Lib. cont. Gentes, seu contr. Idola.
The second testimony shall be Athanasius; his words are these, Sufficient
sanctae ac divinitus inspiratae Scripturae ad instructionem veritatis, out of
which I thus argue.

Second Argument.

Whosoever do profess that which is sufficient to instruct them in the truth
are of the Church,

The Protestants professing the Scriptures, do profess that which is
sufficient to instruct them in the truth.

Ergo: The Protestants are of the Church.

Neither is here any place for Bellarmines unwritten word, or Valenzaes
unwritten revelations.

Basil.
It is an Argument of infidelity, and a sure token of pride to reject any thing
that is written, or to bring in any thing that is not written, says Saint
Basil, in his Sermon of the confession of Faith.

Third Argument.

But the Romanists do add unto the Faith, things that are not written.

Ergo, The Romanists are proud Infidels.

The Mayor is Saint Basils, the Minor is your own, not only delivered by
private men, but also enacted by your Council of Trent. Sess. 4. Anno 1546.

Fourth Argument.

Chrysostom.
Whatsoever is requisite unto Salvation, is wholly fulfilled in the Scriptures,
says Chrysostme, Com. in 22. Matthew.

But the Protestants do profess all that is fulfilled in the Scriptures.

Ergo, The Protestants do profess all that is requisite unto salvation; And
doing so, sure they are of the Church, because none are saved out of the Church.

Idem Chrysostom.
Seeing we have a most exact Balance, Level, and Rule of all things, the
sayings of the Law of God, I beseech you all, that forsaking what seems to
this man, or what seems to that man, you would enquire after these out of
Scripture. Thus the same Father, Hom. 13. in 2. Ep. ad Cor. I argue thus

Fifth Argument.

They who profess, and believe the most exact balance, level, and rule, (of
Christians) do continue in the Christian Church,

But the Protestants believing the Scripture, or written Word, do believe a
perfect balance, level, and Rule of all things belonging to Christians.

Ergo, The Protestants are in the Christian Church.

I reverence the fullness of Scripture, Tertull contra Hermog.
Let Hermogenes show me that it is written, if it be not written, let him fear
the woe that is denounced against them that add, or diminish.

Sixth Argument.

They who add to the fullness of the written Word, are thereby subject to a
great Woe,

But the Romanists denying the fullness of Scripture add thereto unwritten
Traditions.

Ergo, The Romanists are subject to great woe.

Seventh Argument.

Diabolici spiritus est aliquid extra Scripturarum Sacrarum authoritatem putare
divinum. It is devilish to account any thing divine that is not in the written
Word. Theoph.

But the Romanists do account unwritten Traditions, and Papal determinations
to be divine.

Ergo, The Romanists are devilish, or have a devilish spirit in them.

I will conclude with Saint Augustine.

Eighth Argument. Aug. l. 3. cont. Petil. cap. 6.


If any one either concerning Christ, or his Church, or concerning any other
matter which belongs unto Faith, or life; I will not say, if we, but as
Saint Paul added; If an Angel from heaven do declare unto you any thing
besides that which you have received in the writings of the Law, and the
Gospel, let him be accursed.

But the Romanists do tell us of unwritten Traditions concerning masters of
Faith and life, besides the written word of the Law, and the Gospel.

Ergo, The Romanists are accursed.

I will add more testimonies out of the same Father, both because by consent
of all Divines that I have read, both Roman and Reformed, he is the chiefest
Divine since the Apostles, and because those things which I shall allege out
of him, being versed in the same Question between him, and the Donatists
concerning the Church, are most proper to this question between us and the
Romanists, whether we be a Church or no, and will answer most doubts and
objections that are made herein: but seeing that this Chapter is grown so
long, I will reserve it for another.

CHAP. V. Showing out of Saint Augustine and others, that there is no other way
to demonstrate a Church to be a true Christian Church, but by the Word of God.
I Desire you Mr. Fisher, and whosoever will vouchsafe to read these my poor
Labors, to take my meaning in citing these Fathers, Schoolmen, and Jesuits
which I have alleged in the precedent Chapters, not to be such, as if by their
authority alone we endeavor to prove our selves to be a Church; but to show
that in matters of Faith, and in this Question of the Church no demonstrations,
no strong, proper, and necessitating Arguments can be made but out of
Scripture. All other Arguments are but probable, without any necessary
illation, and foreign, not proper to Theology: As after I have done with S.
Augustine, I will show out of your own Schoolmen.

This Father is he out of whom our later Writers have had (next after the
sacred Scriptures) most of the excellent, solid, deep Divinity which they
have: This was he that was styled Malleus Haereticorum, the Hammer of
Heretics: Sabellicus
Vir super omnes qui ante eum, and post eum huc usque fuerunt mortales,
admirabili ingenii acumine praeditus. A man (as your Sixtus Senensis writes of
him) endued with a sharpness of wit above all mortals that have been before
him, Bibl. 5. l. 4.
or after him to this time, full of humane learning; but in the divine
Scriptures by far the most learned of all others; and in the Exposition of
Scriptures raised to so high a pitch of incomparable subtlety, or acuteness,
ultra quam dici queat, more than the tongue of man can express. Dr. King.
This was he of whom a learned Preacher, and powerful speaker of ours spoke
in the Pulpit, that he confuted the Heretics so fully, answered all their
objections and demands so weightily, that of him next after the Son of God
himself it may be said, they durst ask him no more questions. And if I in my
poor judgment and reading may express what I have observed, and do conceive,
that was the most fruitful age of Heresies that ever was, and some of those
Heretics so learned, especially Pelagius, the grand enemy of the grace of God,
that if Saint Augustine had not been borne in those times, Pelagius, and many
more had not been confuted. This man amongst other Heretics wrote against the
Donatists, who did appropriate the Church to themselves, as now the Romanists,
or Papists do: so that it is the same question now between us and the
Papists, which was then between Saint Augustine and the Donatists. The
Donatists did tie the Church to Afric, the Papists to Rome; not that either
the one or the other did, or do deny Christians to be in other parts of the
world, but that all men in the world must be of their Church, and hold union
with them, and dependence from them.

The first place that I will cite out of Saint Augustine, shall be his words in
his second Book of Christian Doctrine, ca. 9. All those things which do
contain faith and manners of living, are found amongst those things, quae
aperte posita sunt in Scriptura, which are plainly put down in the written
Word. This does prove what we intend, namely, that this Quaestion of theirs,
if it be necessary, is found in Scripture, and not only so, but in plain
Scripture; which answers the objection of obscurity in the Scripture, that
though it be true, that in Scriptures some things be obscure, some be plain;
yet all necessary things are plain in Scripture.

Ex Augustino lib. de Vnitate Ecclesiae cont. Petilianum Tom. 7. p. 109.

Cap. 2.
Inter nos and Donatistas quaestio est, ubi sit Ecclesia? Quid ergo facturi
sumus, in verbis nostris eam quaesituri, an in verbis capitis sui Domini nostri
Jesus Christi? Puto quod in illius potius verbis eam quarere debemus qui veritas
est, and optime novit corpus suum, novit enim Deus qui sunt ejus.

Cap. 3.
Sed ut dicere coeperam, non audiamus haec dico, haec dicis, sed audiamus haec
dicit Dominus: sunt certe libri dominici, quorum authoritate utrique
consentimus, utrique credimus, utrique servimus: ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi
discutiamus causam nostram: Auferantur ergo illa de medio quae adversus nos
invicem, non ex divinis Canonicis libris, sed aliunde recitamus -- Quaerat
fortassis aliquis, and dicat mihi, Cur ergo ista vis auferri de medio, quando
communio tua etiamsi proferantur, invicta est? Quia nolo humanis documentis sed
divinis Oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari; si enim sanctae Scripturae in
Africa sola designaverunt Ecclesiam, and in paucis Romae Rupitanis, and
Montensibus, and in domo, vel patrimonio unius Hispana mulieris, quicquid de
chartis aliis aliud proferatur, non tenent Ecclesiam nisi Donatista.

Si in paucis Mauris Provinciae Caesariensis eam sancta Scriptura determinat ad
Rogatistas transeundum est. Si in paucis Tripolitanis, and Byzacenis, and
provincialibus, Maximianistae ad eam pervenerunt. Si in solis Orientalibus,
inter Arianos, and Macedonianos, and Eunomianos, and si qui illic alii sunt,
requirenda est. Quis autem possit singulas quasi Haereses enumerare gentium
singularum.

Si autem Christi Ecclesia Canonicarum Scripturarum divinis, and certissimis
testimoniis, in omnibus Gentibus designata est; quicquid attulerint, and
undecunque recitaverint qui dicunt ecce hic Christus, ecce illic; audiamus
potius, si oves ejus sumus vocem Pastoris nostri dicentis, Nolite credere.

Istae quippe singulae in multis Gentibus ubi ista est non inveniuntur, haec
autem quae ubique est, etiam ubi illae sunt invenitur: Ergo in Scripturis
Sanctis Canonicis eam requiramus.

Cap. 4.
Totus Christus caput, and corpus est, quicunque de Christo recte sentiunt, sed
ab Ecclesia ita dissentiunt ut eorum communio non sit cum tota quacunque
diffunditur, sed in aliqua part seperata inveniatur, manifestum est eos non
esse in Ecclesia Gatholica.

Quapropter, quia cum Donatistis nobis Quaestio est non de capite sed de
corpore, id est, non de ipso Salvatore Jesus Christo, sed de ejus Ecclesia;
ipsum Caput de quo consentimus ostendat nobis corpus suum de quo dissentimus,
ut per ejus verbum jam dissentire definamus. -- Prioribus temporibus per
Prophetas sonuit verbum, deinde per seipsum, deinde per Apostolos. -- In his
igitur omnibus quaerenda est Ecclesia.

Hoc etiam praedico, atque propono uti quae aperta, and manifesta deligamus:
quae si in sanctis Scripturis non invenirentur, nullo modo esset vnde
aperirentur clausa, and illustrarentur obscura. -- Seponenda sunt quae obscure
sunt posita, and figurarum velaminibus involuta. -- In talibus figuris nolo
quaeramus Ecclesiam, non quia falsae sunt, sed quia interpretem quaerunt.

Cap. 6.
O Donatistae Genesin legite, Benedicentur in semine tuo omnes Gentes terrae,
Genes. 22. Quid dicat Apostolus audiamus, Gal. 3.
-- In semine tuo quod est Christus -- Ecce Testamentum Dei: quare vos irritum
facitis Testamentum Dei, dicendo nec in omnibus Gentibus esse completum, and
periisse jam de Gentibus in quibus erat semen Abrahae? Quare superordinatis
dicendo in nullis terris haeredem permanere Christum, nisi ubi poterit
cohaeredem habere Donatum? Non invidemus alicui; Legite nobis hoc de lege, de
Prophetis, de Psalmis, de ipso Evangelio, and Apostolicis literis legite and
credimus, sicut nos vobis legimus and de Genes. and de Apostolo; and
benedicentur in te omnes tribus terrae, and in semine tuo.

Date mihi hanc Ecclesiam, si apud vos est, ostendite vos communicare omnibus
Gentibus quas jam videmus in hoc semine benedici --

Cap. 7.
Quid in Prophetis, quam multa, and quam manifesta sunt testamonia Ecclesiae
per omnes Gentes toto orb terrarum diffusae. Isa. 11.
-- Repleta est vniversa terra ut cognoscat Dominum. Isa. 27.
-- Germinabit and florescet Israel, and replebitur Orbis terrarum fructu ejus.
--

Psalm. 27.
Posui te in lucem Gentium ut sis salus usque ad fines terrae. Laetare sterilis
quia non paris, erumpe, and exclama quoniam multi filii desertae, magis quam
ejus quae habet virum.

Comparent isti multitudinem suam in Aphrica constitutam cum multitudine
Iudaeorum per omnes terras quacunque dispersi sunt, et videant, quam sint in
illorum comparatione paucissimi. Quomodo ergo de se dictum assignabunt: multi
filij desertae, quam ejus quae habet virum?

Rursus comparent multitudinem Christianorum per omnes Gentes quibus non
communicant, and videant quam pauci sint in comparatione omnes Iudei, and
tandem aliquando intelligant in Ecclesia Catholica toto orb diffusa istam
prophetiam esse completam. Iam pauca de Psalmis audiamus: Cap. 8.
Dabo tibi Gentes haereditatem tuam, and possessionem tuam fines terrae.

Nonne Apostolus de Praedicatoribus Novi Testamenti dictum exposuit quod
scriptum est in omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, Psalm. 18.
and in fines orbis terrae verba eorum. Psalm. 56.
Et super omnem terram gloria tua: and unde gloria ejus super omnem terram,
nisi quia Ecclesia ejus per omnem terram, and replebitur gloria ejus omnis
terra, Psalm. 71.
fiat, fiat. Ite nunc vos Donatist. and clamate, non fiat, non fiat. Vicit vos
Verbum Dei dicens, fiat, fiat.

Quid ad haec dicturi sint quae commemoravi ex Lege, ex Trophetis, ex Psalmis.
Audiamus ipsius verbi vocem ore propriae carnis expressam: Sic scriptum ect,
and sic oportebat Christum pati, and resurgere a mortuis tertio die.

Hic ipsum caput ostenditur quod ipsum se manibus discipulorum prebuit
contrectandum. Vide quemadmodum de corpore adjungat quod est Ecclesia, ut nos
nec in Sponso nec in Sponsa errare permittat. Et predicari (inquit) in nomine
ejus poenitentiam, and remissionem peccatorum per omnes Gentes incipientibus ab
Jerusalem? Quid hac voce veratius, quid divinius, quid manifestius? Me piget
commendare verbis meis, and haereticos non pudet oppugnare verbis suis. Dicant
ea testimonia quae posui de Lege, and Prophetis, and Psalmis obscura esse, and
figurate dicta, etiam aliter posse intelligi, quanquam and in eis egerim
quantum potui ut nec audeant dicere. Sed ecce dicant nunquid and obscure
dictum, aut aenigmatis velamento adumbratum est quod ipse Christus dixit, quia
sic scriptum est, and sic opportebat Christum pati, and resurgere tertio die,
and predicari in nomine ejus poenitentiam, and remissionem peccatorum per omnes
Gentes. Epist. 48.
Audi dicit Dominus, non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Hilarious, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus, sed dicit Dominus. Quomodo ex divinis
literis confidimus accipisse nos Christu^ manifestum si non inde accepimus and
Ecclesiam manifestam. Necesse est incerti sint qui pro sua societate testimonio
utuntur non divino, sed suo. Nisi cognoveris teipsum non in verbis
calumniosoru^, sed in testimoniis librorum meorum. In Scripturis didicimus
Christu^, Epist. 116.
in Scripturis didicimus ecclesiam. Has Scripturas communiter habemus quare no^
in eis et Christum and Ecclesiam co^muniter retinemus. -- Ecce Scripturae
communes, ecce ubi novimus Christum, ecce ubi novimus Ecclesiam.

Those words of St. Augustine I apply to our present purpose, concluding in the
same manner against the Romanists, as this Father did against the Donatists,
changing only Donatist for Romanist.

Cap, 2.
The Question between us, and the Romanists is, where is the Church? What then
shall we do, shall we seek for the Church in our own words, or in the words
of her Head, and our Lord Christ Jesus? I think we ought rather to seek her in
his words, who is the Truth, and best knows his own body, For the Lord
knows who are his.

Cap. 3.
But as I began to say, let us not hear (these words) I say this, thou say
that; but let us hear this, thus says the Lord, Our master has left books
unto us, to the authority of which Books we both consent, we both believe,
we both submit; there let us seek the Church, there let us examine our cause:
Away with those words from amongst us which we cite not out of the Canonical
Books of God, but elsewhere. -- Some man peradventure will say unto me, why will
you have those things taken away, seeing your cause, though those things were
alleged will stand invincible? Because I would have the Church demo^strated,
not by human reason, but by divine oracles. For if the holy Scriptures have
designed the Church to be in Italy alone, and in those few which concur with
Rome; whatsoever may be brought out of other Books, none but the Romanists do
possess the Church.

If the holy Scripture do limit the Church to a few more of the Province of
Caesarea, we must pass unto the Rogatists. If it be amongst those few of the
Provinces of Tripolis, and Byzacene, the Maximinianists are come unto it. If
only amongst the Easterlings, we must seek for the Church amongst the
Arrians, Macedonians, and Eunomians, and others, if there be any more there;
for who is able to recount the several Haeresies of every Nation?

But if the Church be assigned to all Nations, by divine and most certain
testimonies of Canonical Scripture, whatsoever they shall bring, or whatsoever
they shall recite, who say, Lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ; let us
rather hear, if we be his sheep, the voice of our Shepherd, saying, Believe
them not.

For those several (Sects) are not found in many Nations where the Church is.
But this church, which is every where, is found also where those several
(Sects) are: Therefore let us search for the Church in Holy Canonical
Scriptures.

Cap. 4.
Christ is wholly a Head, and a Body, whosoever have a right opinion of Christ,
but do so dissent, that they communicate not with the whole Church,
wheresoever dispersed; but with some part thereof, severed from the rest; it is
clear, that they are not in the Catholic Church.

Wherefore, seeing the question between us and the Romanists is not concerning
the Head, but the Body; that is, not concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, but
concerning his Church; let the Head, concerning whom we do agree, show unto us
his Body, about which we do differ, that so by his words we may end the
difference. -- In former times this word was delivered by the Prophets, then by
himself, then by his Apostles. -- In all these the Church is to be sought for.

This also I warn aforehand, that we choose such places of Scripture as are
clear and manifest: for unless there were such to be found in the holy
Scripture, there were no means how those things might be laid open which are
shut, or those things made clear which are obscure. -- We must lay aside
those things which are there obscurely set down, or wrapped in the veil of
figurative speeches, not because they are false, but because they require an
Expositor.

O you Donatists (O you Romanists) read Genesis, there you shall find written,
In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. Let us hear what the
Apostle says of this seed, In thy seed, that is Christ. Behold, this is the
will and Testament of God; why do you cancel the Testament of God, in saying
that this is not fulfilled in all nations, and that the seed of Abraham is
perished from amongst the Nations? why do you add unto his Testament, saying,
that Christ has no inheritance in the earth but where the Pope of Rome is his
Copartner? We envy no man; Read us this out of the Law, out of the Prophets,
out of the Psalms, out of the Gospel, out of the writings of the Apostles;
read it there, and we will believe it; as we do read unto you out of
Genesis, and out of the Apostle, In thee, and in thy seed shall all the
kindreds of the earth be blessed. Give me this Church if it be amongst you,
and show me that you hold Communion with all those nations, which now we see
blessed in this seed.

Let us pass from the Law to the Prophets: how many, and how manifest
testimonies are there found of the Church spread through all Nations of the
world. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord. Israel shall
blossom, and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

I have put thee for a light unto the Gentiles, a Savior unto the ends of the
world. Rejoice thou barre^ that did not bear; break forth into singing, and
cry aloud thou that did not travel with child, for more are the children of
the desolate, then the children of the married wife, says the Lord.

Let these (Romanists) compare their multitude in Italy and Spain, and their
scattered Proselytes elsewhere, with the multitude of Jews wheresoever
dispersed through all lands, and they shall see how few they are in comparison
of them. How then can they think the words of the Prophet were spoken of them,
which says, Many more are the children of her that was forsaken, then of her
that has an husband?

Again, let them compare the multitude of Christians through all Nations with
whom they hold no Communion, denying them to be of the Church, as the Greek
Church more large then the Latin, the Southern Churches not inferior to the
Latin, the Eastern Churches more by far then the Greek and the Latin put
together, and they shall see how few the Jews are in comparison of them; and
they may understa^d that this prophecy was fulfilled in that Catholic Church
which is diffused through the world. Now let us hear something out of the
Psalms, I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession. Their sound is gone out into all lands,
and their words unto the end of the world; which the Apostle expounded to be
spoken of the Preachers of the new Testament. His glory is over all the earth,
because his Church is in all the world; let the whole earth be filled with his
glory. Amen, Amen. Let it be, let it be.

Go now (ye Romanists) and cry, not so, not so, let it not be, let it not be.
The word of God has overcome you, saying, Let it be, let it be. What will they
answer to these words of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms? Let us hear
the words of Christ himself, saying, so it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. Here the head it
self is showed unto us, which gave himself to be handled by his disciples.
See what he adds concerning his body, which is the church, that so we may
err neither in the Bridegroom, nor in his Bride. And (says he) that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name through all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem. What can be spoken more truly, more divinely,
more clearly? I hold my words unworthy to commend it, and yet these Heretics
are not ashamed to oppugn it. They may say that those words which I have cited
out of the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, are darkly and figuratively
spoken, and may be otherwise understood; although I have labored herein to
stop their mouths. But say they should say so, I ask again, whether that be
darkly spoken, or shadowed with a veil, as if it were a riddle which was spoken
by Christ himself, that so it is written, and so Christ ought to suffer, and
to rise again the third day, and that repentance, and remission of sins
should be preached amongst all nations in his name. Hear what the Lord says,
not what Donatus, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or Hilarious, or Ambrose, or
Austine do say, How do we trust that we may clearly find Christ in the
Scripture, if we cannot find there clearly his Church. -- They must needs be
doubfull, who use in defense of their society their own testimony, not the
testimony of God. -- Unless thou know thy self, not in the word of cavelling
people, but in the testimonies of my Books. In the Scriptures have we learned
to know Christ, in the Scriptures have we learned to know his Church. We have
these Scriptures common to us both, and why out of these do not we hold Christ
and his Church common to us both. And again, Behold the Scripture common to
both; lo where we have known Christ; lo where we have known his Church.

Reflecting now upon what we have cited out of this incomparable Father, we
may observe how plainly, how frequently, how perseveringly he maintains, that
this Question concerning the Church may be proved plainly, manifestly, clearly
out of Scripture; That he would not have men use Humane testimony in this
question; and they which do use Humane testimonies herein, and not Divine,
stand upon uncertainties: Aquin. 1. q. 1. art. 8. Carbo.
to the same purpose the Schoolmen say, That Humane reasons, in hac doctrina
non valent ad probandum, are not of force to prove: yet it uses Humane reason,
not to prove Faith, and what it believes, but to declare other things as a
foreign Argument, and probable: but it uses Divine Authorities as a proper,
and necessary Argument.

Secondly, let us observe, that this Father writing upon this Question, so many
Books as make more then half a great Tome, yet never used any other Argument
in those Books but Scripture; he never called upon his Adversaries, to show
names of their Professors in all Ages, nor did he attempt that for himself,
but chose rather to cite the same Scriptures, twenty times at least in several
Books of that subject, out of which places I will collect two Arguments;
first, desiring the Reader to observe, That things expressly contained in
Scriptures, and things thence deduced are of a different nature, these later
inferior to those; those are Principles, these are but Conclusions; those
depend upon supernatural light of Divine Revelation, these Conclusions are
grounded upon those Divine Principles which men apprehend by Faith, and then
do search, and find the illation, and consequence of these Conclusions by the
light of natural reason, improved by Industry, and refined by Art: I do not
say that I can show in Scripture, that the Protestants are the true Church,
which were to make it a point of Faith, but out of Scriptures I can prove that
the Protestants are a Church, and so make it a Theological conclusion, and the
Arguments demonstrations; because drawn out of the proper Principles of
Theology or Divinity, thus:

1. Argument.

They who profess that Faith which was preached through the World, are a true
Christian Church.

But the Protestants holding the Apostles Creed, and the doctrine of the
Apostles, do profess that Faith which was preached through the World.

Ergo, The Protestants are a true Christian Church.

2. Argument.

They who hold Communion, and acknowledge themselves to be a part of that
Church which is dispersed through the World, are a true Church.

But the Protestants do hold Communion, and acknowledge themselves to be a
part of that Church which is dispersed through the World.

Ergo, The Protestants are a true Church.

Secondly, out of the same Principles I will prove, that the Church of Rome is
not the Church, as excluding all other Churches, thus:

1. Argument.

The Church does profess that Faith which was preached, and received through
the World.

The Roman Church holding a new Creed of unwritten Traditions,
Transubstantiation, worshipping of Images, etc. do therein not profess that
Faith which was preached, and received through the World.

Ergo, The Church of Rome is not the Church.

2. Argument.

The Christian Church has many more Children then the Church of the Jews.

But the Roman Church has not more Children then the Church of the Jews.

Ergo, The Roman Church is not the Christian Church.

The Major Saint Austine does bring out of Scripture in those words, The barren
has many more children then she that has an husband. The Minor will appear,
if we say unto these Romanist^, as Saint Austine did to the Donatists, Let them
compare their multitude with the multitude of the Jews dispersed over the
world, and they shall see how few they are in comparison of them, the Jews
being by the calculation of the Brirewood in his Enquiries.
most learned in History, and Geographie, as many as will people all Europe.
The Roman Church when it was entire, being not much more then half Europe, if
so much, and now having lost half that it was, is far less. This I shall
enlarge morefully hereafter, when I shall come to maintain my former
Arguments. Now I address my self to Master Fishers Reply.

CHAP. VI.
Fisher. Concerning M. Rogers his Answer to M. Fishers five Propositions.

BY this which has been said against Master Bernard, his Look beyond Luther,
it may be easily seen, that M. Rogers has not sufficiently answered M.
Fishers question aforesaid; for with a bold audacitie he names for
Protestants, famously known Roman Catholics, to wit, these Writers of the
first seven hundred years, and amongst others even Saint Bede, whose Writings,
and profession of life (being a professed Roman Catholic Monk) show him to
be no Protestant.

Rogers.

I can see no such thing in what you have said against Mr. Bernard, neither
have you said any thing there which may touch me, but you have the same in this
your Treatise against me: you have written, not half a sheet, in Reply to Mr.
Bernards Book of eight, or nine sheets, and yet you would have men see in your
short Reply to him, a Confutation also of what I have written.

I have read, that Alexander the Great, seeing a company of Indian Apes
marching along a Hills side, took them to be an army of Enemies, but when he
came near, he found them to be as they were, poor, silly, fearful Apes, that
ran into the woods to hide themselves. He that thinks he sees in your Reply
to Mr. Bernard, a confutation of him, or me, is as much mistaken as Alexander
was in the Apes; the reason is, he looks a far off, as Alexander did, when
he took them for armed men; but he that comes near unto your Writings,
vieweth, and examineth them diligently shall find, that there is no army,
there are no armed men, no sword, no weapon, no Scripture, no reason to wound
us. You strout, and stalk a far off, but when we draw near, you fly into
the thickets of some dark speeches, ambiguous phrases, aequivocating terms,
like those, Liguranes quos major aliquanto labor erat invenire quam vincere. It
is more labor to find you out, then to conquer you. Mr. Bernard, I doubt not,
is able to answer any thing that you have objected unto him, if he think such
poor objections of yours to be worthy of any Reply. I will address my self
unto what you object unto me, you say that I have not sufficiently answered
Mr. Fishers Question aforesaid; For (say you) with a bold audacitie he names
for Protestants, famously known Roman Catholics, to wit, the chief Writers
of the first 700 years. As for Audacitie, I hope to clear my self, by
performing all that I have undertaken herein. And the grounds I laid, do
manifest to the learned indifferent Reader, that I did so entrench my self, so
fortify my cause, as that I fear not any open force of a stronger enemy then
you are. I named for Protestants, known Roman Catholics (say you)
distinguish Roman Catholics, whether you mean the present Roman Church, or
that which was in the first seven hundred years: these two are as different as
Christian, and Antichristian, as Orthodox, Non Apostolici, sed Apostatici. Such
as were fallen from all Christianity. Baron. an. 908. n. 4. speaking of the
Popes of that age.
and Haereticall, as Apostolic, and Apostaticall. I oppose the present Roman
Church, not the Primitive; and therefore I oppose this, because she is so
different from that, and no more like unto those former Roman Catholics, then
those Indian Apes were unto the valiant Porus, and his Indian Soldiers. They
of those first seven hundred years did not equal unwritten Traditions unto
the Word of God, they did not worship Images, nor was your new Creed any part
of their Faith; and this is the reason why we oppose the present Roman Church,
because she has so far declined from what she was.

Return you to that Primitive Roman Church, and we will return to you;
these Writers of the first seven hundred years are ours, and not yours:
insomuch, that I do require you to show me any one Father of those seven
hundred years that held your now Roman Creed, and I will be of your mind. And
whereas you make choice of Saint Bede for your instance, I will pitch upon that
very man, and deny him to be of your now Roman Faith, I mean, as far as
your now Roman Church does differ from other Christian Churches: herein I am
in the Negative, so that it does belong to you to prove the Affirmative.
Whereas you say Saint Bedes Writings, and profession of life (being a professed
Roman Catholic Monk) shows him to be no Protestant; first, for his
Writings, show me out of his Writings, what part of the Apostles Creed he did
deny; I have no other Articles of Faith: if he held these (as I know he did,
and his Writings do manifest it) he is of my Faith, he is of my Church; I of
his, both of one Church, both of that one Faith, which the Protestants do
profess.

Secondly, I believe all the revealed written Word of God, as it was received
in the Primitive Church, does Saint Bede deny any of these? show me where. But
(say you) his profession of life proves him to be no Protestant, for he was a
Roman Catholic Monk. First, as for Roman, I have already answered, that your
present Roman Church differs from that which then was, in all those Doctrines
wherein we differ from you, although it then began in matters of Discipline to
swerve from what it had been, I say in matters of Discipline, not of Doctrine;
if in any Doctrine, not in Doctrines of Faith; they enacted, enjoined,
necessitated no new Articles, as now you have done in your Council of Trent,
whereas you add Catholic to Roman. Hoc est -- Pugnantia secum frontibus
adversis componere, like that of dividing all the world into Kent and
Christendom, or rather to say that Kent is all Christendom. Roman is but a
part of the Catholic Church, and to say as you do, that the Roman is the
Catholic Church, is as if one should say that one particular man were all men,
and that one limb of a man were the man, as the Poet said of Tongilianus:
Tongilianus habet nasum, scio, nec nego nasum,
Nil praeter nasum Tongilianus habet.


The man had a great nose, and therefore the Poet said he was all nose, as if
he had no other parts, neither, eyes, nor mouth, nor hand, nor arm, nor leg,
nor foot. So you, because your Roman Church is somewhat large, you say that
the Church is all Roman: whereas it is not much larger in proportion to the
Catholic Church, then Tongilianus his nose in respect of the rest of the body,
I know you will say that the Roman Church is extended to the East, and West
Indies, and there acknowledged: Alas, that is but by a few of your own
Emissaries cooped up in some small Islands, and Forts in the East Indies, and as
for your West India Converts, Bartholo: Casas in his Spanish colonies p. 1^.
they are such as being forced by the Spanish tyranny do profess a poor
faith being taught to say there is one God, one Pope, one Catholic King. This
is all their Creed, these are the Christians you there make, this is the
converting of Nations you brag of; your imposture, and cousenage in suborning
a couple of unknown fellows to come, and submit themselves to the Roman
Church, Historia Concilij Trident. l. 5.
as if they had been the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Mozall is long since
discovered; so that by these poor shifts to vaunt unto the world, or think
with your selves that the Roman is as large as the Catholic, is as if
Tongilianus sniting his nose upon his garments, and there seeing it sprinkled
here and there upon his legs, upon his feet, should therefore think that his
nose did reach unto his feet: that which you deliver in this kind being but
vaunting of falsehoods and gross lies I may well call the excrements of a
divellish brain, seeing the devil is the father of lies; and yet this must
make your silly, simple, hudwinckt followers think that the Roman Church is
the Catholic Church, and as you afterward say that none can be saved out of
the Roman Church, Aug. ep. 86. Rabanus Maurus 400. years after divided the
Church into East, Greek and Latin. l. 2. c. 34.
Saint Augustine in his time did distinguish between the East, and West
Churches, and then did subdivide the West making the Roman but a part of the
West, yea and distinguishing between some neighbor places, and the Church of
Rome. In those times, and even to this day the Eastern Churches do differ
from the Roman Church in that they fast not upon the Saturday, as also a great
part of the Western Churches even in Italy it self then did. Whereupon one
Vrbicus wrote against those that did not fast upon Saturday, which caused one
Cassalanus a Presbyter to write unto Saint Austin requesting his resolution
herein, who replying unto him says; In those things concerning the which the
word of God does not lay down any certain rule, the custom of Gods people,
the ordinances of their Ancestors are to be held for a law, He did not say
here the decrees, or custom of Rome must stand for a law to all other
Churches. He bids him observe the words of Vrbicus, and you shall see him
(says he) with most injurious terms to abuse pene universam Ecclesiam Christi
ab ortu Solis usque ad occasum, almost all the Church of Christ from the rising
of the Sun to the setting of the same; meaning those who differed from Rome,
so that here this Father did distinguish the universal Church from the Roman,
And again the question is (says he) Vtrum Sabbato jejunandum sit? whether
Christians ought to fast upon the Saturday? which question I would he did so
demand, or so affirm as not openly to blaspheme the Church dispersed over the
circumference of the Earth except the Roman, and some few more of the West. And
again in the same Epistle he says: Non tibi persuade at urbem Christianam sic
laudare Sabbato jejunantem, ut cogaris orbem Christianum daemnare praudentem.
Let him not persuade thee so to commend a Christian City (viz. Rome) fasting on
the Saturday, as to cause thee to condemn the Christian world denying that
day. Here Rome was a Christian City, but the Church besides is termed the
Christian world, Seeing then that the Roman Church is but a part, say not that
it is the whole Church out of which no man can be saved. This was the claim of
Donatus, and some of his distracted followers to style themselves the whole
Church, as you do, they being as you are in proportion to the Catholic Church,
that is the whole Church but frustum de frusto majore precisum, a part of that
Western Church which was but a part of that Catholic Church, of the whole
Church. Do not play with the Church as Martial did with Tongilianus.
Anaxagoras shall sooner persuade me nivem esse nigram, that the snow is black
then you shall make me to deny one of the most manifest principles that are in
the world, which every child understands, and does assent unto: if he be but
seven years old, viz. That Omne totum est majus aliqua sua part; the whole is
greater then any part thereof; a child knows this sooner then he knows the
right hand from the left: divide him an apple, and ask him whether he will
have all or a piece? he will say all, ask why? he will say it is more. Divide
him his bread, and butter in pieces, and ask him whether he will have a part
or the whole? he will choose the whole because it is the bigger. The Roman
Church is not the Ethiopian Church, nor the Greek Church, nor the Armenian,
Nestorian, Indian Church, all these and many more are but parts of the
Catholic Church, Will you say that any part of this whole Church is as big
as the whole? A greater degree of stupidity then this did I never read, or
here of. Would you make us less then children, more simple then infants? When
you tell us of your Roman Catholic Church, in that sense you expound it, not
as concurring with but including the whole Catholic Church: Thus much for
making the Catholic Church to be the Roman Church. Rome was a sound, and
eminent part, and member of the Church before the seventh age, but in that age
it began to be troubled with the headache, when the Bishop of Rome claimed
that proud swelling title of universal Bishop, which Gregory the first so much
condemned; in succeeding times that Church became heart-sick, and more diseased
(I speak as I conceive) then any one eminent member of the Catholic Church;
her diseases, her heresies, her usurpations, innovations, superstitions,
Idolatries we have left, that is her Papacy, not that faith by which she was,
and is a Church though diseased, sick, all over infected with a leprosy; as I
would shun a man that is a leper, and yet not deny him to be a man. But Beda
was a member of the Catholic Church, of the Roman Church such as then it was,
not such as now it is; he was not sick of your greatest diseases.

Neither is your Argument of force as it is drawn from the title of Monk, no
more then if I should conclude him to be of my religion, only by saying that he
was a Presbyter of the English Church as now I am. Let us see your Argument in
form.

All Roman Monks of all ages are of one faith, of one Church.

But Beda was a Roman Monk 900 years past.

Ergo: He is of the same faith, and Church with the now Roman Monks. Thus much
for you.

Now for my self let me make the like Argument from St. Beda as a Presbyter of
the English Church, and you know that title of Presbyter is more frequently
given to Beda, then Monk.

All Presbyters of the English Church in all ages are of one faith, one Church.

But Beda was a Presbyter of the English Church, and so am I.

Ergo, Beda was of the same faith and Church with me, and all other Presbyters
of the now English Church.

This is your kind of arguing, silly, and simple. The major is most false, a
mere aequivocation, the Monks of the Primitive Church agreeing with your
Monks only in name, but not in nature, in signification, in definition.

Zozomen: l. Hist: Eccl: l. 1. c. 13.
The first Monachi were such as in time of persecution fled into the
Wilderness, and there lived; yours contrarily take this order upon them, and
live in cities, and Courts of Princes.

Ibidem and Hieron: ep. ad Pauli: or rather single life.
2. They meddled not with civil affairs, yours, especially your Jesuits are
great States men.

3. They had no vows, yours have vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience
which Bellarmine makes essential to Religious orders, so that they are not of
one nature they differ essentially.

4. They were Lay, and were forbidden by diverse Canons to meddle with the
Priests office. These have intruded so far into the Priests office as that they
must yield the place to them. And your Bishops in your Trent Council did
complain much of them.

Beda was no such Monk as now you have Quibus caruit Ecclesia eo tempore cum
fuit optima. Agrippa de Van. Scien.
Such as the Church had not when it was best. They lived by their labor; yours
by the sweat of other men's brows; they fared hard; Palingenius.
yours duntaxat ventri, veneri, somnoque vacantes. These only eat, and
drink, and whore, and sleep, so that these later Monks are as opposite to
the former as necessitated, and voluntary professions; as retired solitary men,
from Statesmen; as Votaries, from not Votaries; Laymen from Priests; men of
sparing diet, from Epicures. Beda was a Monk before this definition was read.
Monachus est cadaver mortuum, e Sepulchris egressum, pannis funebribus
involutum, a Diabolo inter homines agitatum. A Monk is a dead carcass coming
out of the Grave, wrapped in his winding sheet, driven amongst men by the
devil. Beda lived 700 years or thereabouts before your Pope Pius the 2. said
that a wandering Monk was the devils slave, If you prove St. Beda to be such a
one I will grant him to be yours, but of those Monks, and these I may say, O
quantum hic monachus monacho distabat ab illo, How much does your Parsons, and
other Monks differ from Beda, and those more ancient Friars, or Monks, or
religious Orders, call them as you please.

Fisher.

The like may be said of diverse others, but at this time it may suffice to give
this one example to show that Mr. Rogers naming all those he named spoke
without Book, or without having at hand or looking into his books, and that
he might as well have named the Pope, and Cardinals, and Bishops, Priests,
Monks, and all other religious persons of the present Roman Church to be
Protestants as he names the said ancient Fathers.

Rogers.

And so I will when I come to my Catalogue name Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
etc. for confirmation of my faith whether it be for my Creed which are more
principal, and proper points or articles of faith, or for all those books of
Scripture which I believe, or things therein revealed from God, Because the
testimony of an adversary for an adversary is most strong, and will take away
your personal exceptions, Thus Paul did cite a Heathen to persuade Heathens,
yea the inscription of an Altar dedicated to the unknown God, found amongst
Heathen Idols. Thus the Fathers Augustine, and others in the Primitive Church
did cite the Jews for confirmation of their doctrine, and that they did not
misaleadge the Prophets, and writers of the old Testament.

Iudaei inimici nostri sunt, de chartis inimici convincatur adsarius. The Jews
are our enemies, out of the books of our enemies we convince our adversaries,
Augustine upon the 40th. Psalm, and often in other places. Master Fisher, or
his Second would have exclaimed hereat saying, what meanest thou Augustine,
will thou persuade me that the Jews are Christians? if not why citest thou
their books? nay, what meanest thou Paul to cite the Greek Poets? would
thou persuade me that they are Christians; as if it must follow that they whose
testimony we cite in some things, must be our friends in all.

All the faith of the Protestants is confirmed by the Papists, all their
explicit, all their implicit faith, all that belongs to our faith vel per se,
vel per accidens essentially, or accidentally, primarie, or secundarily, as an
Article of faith, or as an illustration of the same expressed in Scripture: and
yet the Protestants are no Papists, the Papists are no Protestants: because the
Papists have a new Creed, which Protestants deny, and I call God to witness
that I desire to die a thousand deaths rather then to approve it, because I
assure me it is false in all, and in some things blasphemous, The Papists have
such exercise of Religion, worshipping of Images, praying to Saints which I
abhor as being Idolatry. In discipline also they have such tenants of
absolute supreme power over Bishops, Kings, Laws, oaths, as is full of pride,
sedition, usurpation, and impiety.

Now here we differ, here I am in the negative, and so it does belong to you to
prove the affirmative. It is a just law, and your own Master Fisher: for these
I need not produce testimony seeing I do not avow, maintain, believe any such
Creed, any such practice of Religion, any such discipline. But for my faith
either explicit, or implicit all that is revealed by God in his word I may
bring my Adversaries to depose for me; Paul said unto Agrippa a Jew, no
Christian, Iuvenalis.
yea a wicked incestuous King if Roman Authors wrong him not -- incestae dedit
hoc Agrippa sorori. Yet to this bad man, this unconverted Jew, Paul says, O
King Agrippa beleevest thou the Prophets? I know thou beleevest them. And may
not I say Master Fisher, believe you the Apostles Creed? I know you do believe
it, I have no other Articles of faith, no other primarie propositions of faith;
again, for the total object, for the secondary propositions of faith
contained in Scripture, may not I ask you and say, Master Fisher do you
believe the Books of Moses, the Psalms, the Prophets, and all those Books of
the Jewish Canon, as also all the new Testament? I know you do Master Fisher,
why then, herein is my faith limited, whatsoever doctrine is plainly hence
inferred, or out of principles of nature I receive as doctrines, or truths
convincing my understanding, but they are no part of my faith.

After these, all doctrines, and laws Ecclesiastical, or civil in the Church
or State wherein I live, not contradicting the word of God, or my conscience I
receive with humility. May I ask you Master Fisher again, whether the
Apostles Creed and those books of old and new Testament received by our Church
of England had not professors in all ages? nay were not professed, and believed
of the Popes, and Cardinals of all ages; I know you will not deny but they
were so professed; why then may not I vouch these Popes, and Cardinals for my
self, as I intend to do when I come to my Catalogue.

CHAP. VII.
Fisher.

ANd I marvel why having gone half the way (as he says) he makes a stop
there, and does not with the like audacity go on, in naming other famous Roman
Catholics in every of the other ages.

Rogers.

Because Master Fisher offered in like proportion to name, and defend
Professors of Roman religion, holding nothing contrary to the Doctrine defined
in the Council of Trent; these were your words in the first Paper I received
of yours. I have gone half my journey, you not a step; in proportion you
should have gone as far as I did, especially seeing you would have no other
means of trial: whereas I have, and hold other, and better means to prove my
Faith and my Church; yet to satisfy others, to stop your mouth, and to meet
you at your own weapon, I undertook this as a probable, foreign, humane,
uncertain Argument, yet such as makes more for us then for you.

Fisher.

Namely, such as Gualterus in Latin, and the Author of the Appendix to the
Antidote in English, have set down for members in the Roman Church.

Rogers.

If they have done it sufficiently and effectually, it had been the less
labor for you, Mr. Fisher, to have transcribed them; but we may guess what
makes you neither take a Catalogue out of them, nor make one of your own:
after your example, I might transmit you to Illiricus his Catalogus testium
veritatis, or The mystery of Babylon, written by Sir Phillip Morney, the
learned Lord of Plessis, who have performed this for the reformed Churches,
far better then yours have done for your Church.

Yet when I come to the place where you have cited my Catalogue, I will make it
out; but let me ask you why, instead of naming such as professed the Roman
Religion, holding nothing contrary to the Doctrine defined in the Council of
Trent, now you put members of the Roman Church, as if it were the same, a
member of the Roman Church may give testimony against you, and for me;
Caiphas, even then when he persecuted Christ, might prophecy truly of Christ:
Pilate, who did crucify Christ, did write that of Christ which was true, viz.
that he was King of the Jews. Matthew Paris was a member of the Roman
Church, who said that your Church did never reject any that came unto her, if
they brought white or red with them. Silver, or Gold.
This member of the Roman Church, said that a principal member, viz. That Pope
Gregory the seventh did confess on his deathbed, that by the instigation of
the devil he had troubled the world; yet this was such a member, as that
Innocentius the fourth, Matthew Paris.
the then Pope, vvrote of him, that he was vir probatae vitae, and Religioris
expertae, Such a Writer, as that Baronius gives this testimony of him: Take
away from his Book, his calumnies, Anno 996. n. 63, 64.
invectives, taunts, and blasphemies against the Apostolic See, often
repeated, and you will say it is a golden Commentary, taken word by word
out of the public Records, and very well compiled together. Thus far
Baronius. As if a man should except against a witness, and say, you must not
believe him in this which he says against me; but in all things else you may
believe him, he speaks nothing but what is upon public Record.

Cajetane was a learned member of your Church, and yet he held the Canon of
Scripture as we do, contrary to that which the Council of Trent has
defined.

Sixtus Senensis was a member of the Roman Church, and yet he did deny some
part of the Scripture to be Canonical, which the Council of Trent defined for
Canonical, and that after the Council. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 7. I
will fit you with many such members in my Catalogue.

Fisher.

Neither can I see any reason why he did not (with like audacitie) go on in
naming other famous Roman Catholics in every Age, but that, as it seems,
he was not resolved whether he were better to put in his Catalogue, the names
of damned Haeretickes, which disagree in diverse points of Faith from all
ancient, and present Pastors, and Doctors of the Church, even from the
Protestants themselves.

Rogers.

Who you mean by these Haeretickes, I know not, and therefore I need not reply
unto you herein; if you had laid that imputation upon us, I would have enlarged
my self in the defense: but you say they differ in points of Faith from the
Protestants.

Fisher.

Or else to put in names of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monks, and
other religious men, whose Writings and profession of life palpably show, that
they held the present Roman Doctrine, and communicated with the Roman Church.

Rogers.

I have answered you already, that I will name Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Priests, Monks, and others of your Church, and why; but such, as neither their
Writings, nor profession of life do palpably show that they held the present
Roman Faith. If their Writings express what you say, I will yield: but that
their Roman profession of life should include the now present Roman Faith, I
deny: and besides what I formerly spoke concerning your Writers, I will add
some few instances now. Gratian. Can: Comp. de consecr. did. 2.
Gelasius was a Pope, and yet he held your present half Communion to be
Sacrilege, and decreed thus: Aut integra suscipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur; Let them receive the Communion in both forms, or in neithe^.

Nich: Lyranus was a Catholic, and yet he held the Canon of Scripture,
contrary to that of the Council of Trent, as Bellarmine confesses. So did
Hugo, and Thomas de Vio, two Cardinals.

Irenaeus, Basil, Chrysostom, Augustine, and others whom I cited before, cap.
4. were Bishops, and yet they held the fullness and perfection of Scripture,
without the supply of unwritten Traditions, contrary to the Council of Trent.

Jerome was a Priest, and a Monk, yet denied those Books to be Canonical,
which we deny, contrary to that the Council of Trent has taught, and decreed.

As the hand of a man may smite himself, and yet continue a member of his
body; so these might be members of the Roman Church, and yet give testimony in
something against your Church. The Ambassador De Ferrias of France, was a
member of the Roman Church, and a French man; Histor. Council. Trid
when in the Council of Trent, speaking of the miseries of France, he said,
If they should demand why France is not in peace, he could answer nothing but
that which Iehu said to Ioram, How can there be peace there remaining? and
concealed the words following, but added, You know the Text.

The Cardinal of Loraine was a principal member of the Roman Church, and the
second Clergy man in the Latin Church, yet he speaking of the miseries of
France, said in the Council of Trent, If you would demand who has caused this
tempest, and fortune, I can say nothing but this, That this fortune is come by
our means; cast us into the Sea. By Us, he must understand the Roman Clergy.
Judas that betrayed Christ, gave a true testimony against himself, when he
said, J have sinned in betraying innocent blood. And the limbs of Antichrist
may give a true testimony against Antichrist.

Now, whereas you say that they communicated with the Roman Church, I grant
they did in some things, or else they had not been members of that Church, but
not in all; for, not in those things they did disavow, reprove, condemn: and
that this may the better be understood, I will enlarge my discourse herein.

CHAP. VIII. What it is to communicate with others. How far we yet
communicate with the Roman Church, and wherein we refuse to communicate.
COmmunio est multorum unio, Communio quid.
Communion is the union of many. They that agree in one opinion, are so far
united, they are one. They that enjoy any thing in common, are so far united.
Romans 12.
The Church is one body, 1 Cor. 12.
Christians are several members of this one body; as therefore the members
being many, are united in one body, and do communicate in diverse of the self
same things from that one body; and communicate one unto another the service of
those things that are proper unto them as they are several members: So in the
Church, all Christians make but one body collective, which are united together
by many things, some outward, some inward, some both outward and inward,
because it is corpus vivum a living body, wherein there is (says Saint
Augustine) a soul, Augustine. Breviculo Collat. 3. Collat. 9.
and a body: The soul are the inward gifts of the holy Ghost, faith, hope, and
charity, etc. The body are the outward profession of faith, and receiving of
Sacraments. Whence it comes to pass that some are of the soul and of the body
of the Church, and therefore united to Christ their Head both inwardly, and
outwardly; these are most perfectly of the Church, for they are as living
members in the body. Again some are of the soul, but not of the body, as
those which are instructed to believe the principles of Christian Religion, but
are not yet baptized, or those who are excommunicated if they retain faith and
love, which may be done. Lastly some are of the body but not of the soul, as
those who have no inward virtue, but for some temporal ends do profess the
faith, and partake of the Sacraments under the government of Pastors, and such
are as the hair, or nails, or ill humors in man's body, Thus far Saint
Augustine.

This last does make a man to be a part of the visible Church. Bellar. de
Eccl. l. 3 c 2.


As then in man there is the inner, and the outward man; the soul and the
body; the one is visible, the other is not visible: So in the Church there is a
mystical Church which is not seen to bodily eyes, and an outward profession
of Christ, and receiving of Sacraments which makes the visible Church; we can
see the men, we can see them baptized, coming to the Temple, receiving the
Sacraments; we can hear them make confession of the Christian faith, call upon
God the Father by Christ; all these things are sensible and most of them
visible as the men, their meeting, their receiving of the Sacraments, the
lifting up of their hands in prayer, the opening of their lips in confession of
their faith, in prayer, and thankesgiving. Where there is a society of men thus
professing the faith of Christ, and partaking of his Sacraments under the
government of Pastors, there is a visible Christian Church; These do
communicate in the same Sacraments, in the same confession of faith, (and that
makes them to be of one Church, of the visible Church, though they be never so
far remote one from another, and unknown one to another) in the same essence
of faith, the principal, and necessary articles whereof are contained in the
Apostles Creed, in the same essential form of baptism, whereby men are
admitted into the visible Church; we communicate with the Roman Church, and so
do all Christian Churches in the world, that is in all that which must
necessarily be professed, and done to make a Church; Now whereas my adversary
says that those Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, others named by Gualterus, and the
Author of the Appendix to the Antidote did communicate with the Church of Rome;
that will not serve his turn, for so do we communicate with them in many
things in the Apostles Creed, in the principal Sacraments, in the Jewish Canon
of the old Testament, and in all the new, This does make them and us a Church;
in these we have not left them, but in their new Creed, in their books added
to the ancient Canon of the Bible, in their unwritten Traditions, in other
their new false, heretical doctrines, in their superstitious practice of
Religion, and Monarchical discipline, tyrannizing over the families of Christ,
These we hold to be the corruption, sickness, leprosy of their Church, there
we have left viz their Papacy not their Church; we left them as an unsound
Church, not as a Church; Thus the Primitive Church did deal with the Heathens,
Jews, and Heretics, as Saint Augustine writes to the Donatists, they
retained what was good amongst them. These Donatists held their own society
alone to be the Church, and excluded all others: their own baptism to be
true effectual, and no other, so that they rebaptized those which were
baptized by others, in defense of their allegation objected thus.

Vsqueadeo meum est quod a me unicum datum est, nec ab ipsis sacrilegis
iteretur.

Sacrilegus non est qui unicum baptismum; non quod tuum est sed quod Christi
iterare non audet, Etenim Christi est unica in baptismate consecratio.

Tua est unici baptismatis iteratio. Corrigo in te quod tuum est, agnosco quod
Christi est, hoc enim justum est ut cum mala hominum reprobamus, quaecunque in
illis bona Dei reperimus approbamus. Hoc inquam justum est ut etiam in
sacrilego non violem quod verum invenio Sacramentum: nec sic emendem
Sacrilegum, ut in eo perpetrem sacrilegium. Nam sic sunt isti mali in baptismo
bono quemadmodum sunt Iudaei mali in lege bona. Itaque ut illi per ipsam legem
judicabuntur quam malitia sua mala^ fecerunt, Ita and isti per ipsum baptismum
judicabuntur quod bonum mali tenuerunt.

Ergo quemadmodum Iudaeus cu^ ad nos venerit ut Christianus fiat non in eo
destruimus bona Dei sed mala ipsius, Nam quod errat non credendo quod Christus
jam venerit, natusque and passus sit, and resurrexerit hoc emendamus, eaque
infidelitate destituta fidem qua haec creduntur instruimus, Item quod errant
umbris veterum Sacramentorum inhaerendo, dissuademus jamque venisse tempus quo
haec auferenda atque mutanda Propheta praedixerunt demonstramus.

Quod vero unum Deum colendum credit qui fecit Caelum, and terram, quod omnia
Idola, and Sacrilegia Gentium detestatur, quod futurum expectat judicium, quod
vitam sperat aeternam, quod de carnis resurrectione non dubitat laudamus,
approbamus, agnoscimus, sicut credebat credenda, sicut tenebat tenenda,
firmamus.

Ita etiam cum ad nos venerit Schismaticus, vel haereticus ut Catholicus fiat,
schisma ejus, and haeresim dissuadendo and destruendo rescindimus, Sacramenta
vero Christiana si eade^ in illo invenimus, and quicquid aliud very tenet,
absit ut violemus, absit ut si simel danda norimus, iteremus, ne dum vitia
humana curamus, divina medicamenta damnemus, aut quaerendo sanare vulneratum
quod non est, hominem saucium, and ubi sanus est vulneremus. August: Tom: 7. l.
de un. baptis. cont: Petil. cap. 2. 3.

Possunt esse populi boni, ubi fuerint Episcopi mali; sicut potuit esse populus
malus ubi fuit Moses Princeps, and Rector bonus. li. 2. c. E. Parmen. c. 4.

In bonis quibus talia displicent semper manet, and mansit, and manebit
Ecclesia. l. 3.

Nihl aliud est consentire male facientibus; nisi mala facta eorum approbare
atque laudare. l. 1.

Nemo conjungitur cum infidelibus, nisi qui facit peccatum Paganorum, vel talia
facientibus favet: nec quisquam fit particeps iniquitatis nisi qui iniqua vel
agit, vel approbat. l. 2. c. 17.

Vbi Moses, and Aaron, ibi murmuratores sacrilegi, ubi Caiphas, and caeteri
tales, ibi Zacharias, and Simeon, and caeteri boni: ubi Saul, ibi David, ubi
Ieremias, ubi Isaias, ubi Daniel, ubi Ezechiel; ibi Sacerdotes mali, and populi
mali. cap. 7. Et sicut grana inter paleas non videntur, ita pie viventes inter
iniquorum turbas non facile apparent.

My Baptism is such, and so undoubted as that the sacrilegious heretics
themselves will not rebaptize those whom I have baptized, Saint Augustine does
answer thus, He does not commit sacrilege who dares not rebaptize, after that
baptism, which is not thine but the baptism of Christ.

The baptism is Christ's, the rebaptizing is thine, I correct in thee that
which is thine, and acknowledge that which is Christ's; for this is just that
when we reproove the evils of men, we should approve whatsoever good things we
find in them, because they are Gods: I say, this is just, that even in a
sacrilegious person I should not violate that true Sacrament which I find in
him: neither that I should so correct a sacrilegious person as thereby to
commit a sacrilegious sin.

For they are evil, though the baptism amongst them be good, as the Jews
were evil, though the law was good; And even as the Jews shall be judged by
that law, which they (though defiled) could not defile: So (the Donatists) they
shall be judged by that baptism which they could not deprave though themselves
be depraved.

We therefore thus deal with a Jew when he comes unto us to be made
Christian, we do not destroy in him the good that he has from God; but the
evil that he has of himself, for we amend, and, destroy in him his
infidelity whereby he does not believe that Christ is come already, was borne,
has suffered, is risen again: and we instruct him in the faith of these
things.

We also dissuade him from those errors whereby he still sticks to the
shadow of the old Sacraments, and we show unto him that the time is come
already, wherein the Prophets foretold that these things were to be taken
away, and changed. But in that he believes one God is to be worshipped,
which made Heaven, and Earth; that he does abhor all the Idols, and
sacriledges of the Gentiles; that he does expect the day of Judgment; that
he does hope for eternal life, we commend him, approve him, acknowledge him,
wishing him to believe as he had believed, to hold as he had held.

So also when a Schismatic, or an heretic does come unto us to be made a
Catholic; we dissuade; destroy, and take from him his schism, and his
heresy; but as for the Sacraments of Christ if we find them in him, and
whatsoever other truth he holds; far be it from us that we should violate
or minister again that baptism which was once received; least while we cure
the vices of men, we condemn the saving graces of God, and seeking to heal
that which is not wounded, we should wound a man there where he was whole. Thus
far Saint Augustine.

These words of this Father make so plain for our reformed Churches, as that
they need no application, let the Reader understand Papist, where he reads
Donatist, and he shall find the Argument to follow. We so left you as that we
retained whatsoever you had from God, and reject that which was from man: we
retained that which made you a Christian Church, we rejected that which made
you Popish, and Antichristian.

In the former we communicate with you, in the latter we disclaim. So those
whom I have, and shall cite, did communicate with you in some things, but not
in all; for if they had communicated with you in all things they would not have
reproved, Aug. l. 2. cor. op. Par. c. 21.
and disliked so many things. Qui communicate, consentit, qui consentit
corrumpitur. If he communicate, he does consent, if he consent he is
corrupted.

To consent to evil is nothing else but to approve, and commend that which is
evil; neither is there any man joined in evil but he that does commit evil,
or favor it; act it, or approve it. In those good men which are displeased
with those evils, the Church does continue, has continued, and will continue
for ever. And as the grain unwinnowed is hid in the chafe: So the godly do
not easily appear amongst a multitude of the wicked.

The people may be good, where the Bishops are bad; as the people were bad,
though Moses a good man was their Prince: where Moses, and Aaron were, there
also were sacrilegious murderers: Where Caiphas was, and many like unto him,
there were also Zacharias and Simeon, and others like unto them: Saul, and
David were in the same Synagogue, etc. So that I doubt not but some may be
found in all ages, who did not communicate with your new doctrines,
superstitious worship, tyrannical discipline, although they did communicate
with you in the Scriptures, and Apostles Creed, as we and all the famous
Christian Churches in the world do. Know then that whereas you say that the
Fathers and others alleged by some of your men did communicate with the Roman
Church, unless you can say in all things, you conclude nothing: Syllogizari
non est ex particulari; for otherwise I might argue thus, Some living creature
is an Anabaptist,

Master Fisher is a living creature,

Ergo: Master Fisher is an Anabaptist.



Because they communicate with you in some things, thence to infer you are
the same in all things, is fallacia a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter.

CHAP. IX.
Fisher.

AND (as ancient Fathers have done before them) condemned some or other
Protestants Doctrine, even of those 39 Articles of the English Protestant
Church, although they be more craftily composed then the Articles of other
Protestant Churches.

Rogers.

I told you in my first Answer, that it is no prejudice to our Faith, if the
same Authors do differ from us in other opinions, not concerning Faith, as
long as they maintain our Faith, and that the Church of Rome cannot produce
Fathers in all Ages, who do not contradict the Council of Trent in some
Doctrines established in the said Council.

These were my words in my first Answer, to which you reply not at all; to this
purpose I also used that distinction of Discipline, and Doctrine;
and distinguished between Doctrine Accessory, and Fundamental:
Adding also, that matter of Faith consists not in Discipline, but Doctrine;
and that Doctrine not Accessory, but Fundamental. By which distinction I mean
(as I then expressed) the same which Aquinas does by res fidei, Per Se -- Per
accidens.


To this purpose I then distinguished Dogmata, 1 Schola, 2 Ecclesiae, 3 Fidei.


Between 1 Opinions of School. 2 Doctrines of the Church; and 3 Articles of
Faith.


To all which grounds of mine, and more which I th^n laid, you make no reply
at all, saving that some other grounds of mine you cavil at (viz) my
Definition of a Protestant, and my Distinction of Affirmation, and Negation,
which I will justify in their places.


Why would you say nothing to these grounds, Master Fisher? If they were true,
why would you not grant them? If false, why not deny them? If ambiguous, why
not distinguish them? I know no other Answer, but one of these three ways,
Concedendo, negando, vel distinguendo. You will do none of these to my
grounds, and yet write in the top of your Book for diverse pages, these words,
Master Rogers his most weak grounds; viz. page 26, 27. and in both these
pages, not one word spoken of my grounds. Thus would you persuade your silly
Proselytes, who must read no more then the Title of your Books; That you have
answered all, when you have answered nothing, Likewise, page 22. you write over
head, Master Rogers his most weak Arguments; whereas, there is not in that
page any one Argument of mine.

You can pass all those grounds of mine with a trick of Rhetoric, to take
notice of that which you cannot answer unto; and in stead of that, must strike
at a stander by, namely, our Book of Articles; saying, That they be more
craftily composed then the Articles of other Protestant Churches; which I deny,
as most false: neither need it any further Reply, being an indefinite
exception, and as it seems, spoken of purpose to draw me from that matter
proposed, to go a roving as your self have done, with impertinent discourses.

Fisher.

I might therefore without more ado, conclude, that Master Rogers has not
sufficiently answered Master Fishers Question.

Rogers.

With as little ado as you can infer, abrogating a Law from that word which
is the most proper for enacting the same, Decret. 1. part. did. 4. c. 4.
Lugduni Edit. anno 1584. jussu Greg. 13.
Statuimus, id est, abrogamus, We do enact it, that is, we do cancel it;
or as you say, the Roman Church, that is, the Catholic Church, a part, that
is a whole, a piece of man, that is a whole man, this is quidlibet ex quolibet,
from the staff to the corner.

Fisher.

In regard he has neither named Protestants in all Ages, neither has he
sufficiently proved them he named to be Protestants, but by such false
suppositions, and bad definitions, and such other shifts as any Arrian, or
Anabaptist, or whatsoever other absurd Sectary may by the like defend the same
persons to have been of their Religion, or Sect.

Rogers.

The Question was, whether the Protestant Church was visible in all ages? This
I prooved by diverse Arguments to which you have made such answer as we shall
see anon. To this I have not sufficiently answered (say you) in regard, 1. I
have not named Protestants in all ages: As if there were no other means to
decide the question but this, no other proof then induction, or that my
adversary proposing the question, should limit me what kind of proof I must
use: As if the King of France denouncing war against the King of England,
should send him word: If you will war against me, you must do it by land,
not by sea; and you must land in Picardie, not in Normandy, or Britain, or
Poitou; and you must choose your place of battle in large Plains, and fight
with horse, not with foot; and bring no Archers into the field, or else
confess that you are no Warrier, your Englishmen, Scots, and Britains no
Soldiers, your proceedings not justifiable by the law of Nations.

Would Charles of France the Frentick, have sent such a message, such a
challenge to our Henry the fifth?

Yet Master Fisher says, If any Protestant will answer the Premises, let him
set down names of Protestant Preachers in all Ages, who taught the people
Protestant Doctrine in every several Age; or else confess that there were no
such before Luther, or at least, not in Ages to be found in History.

As if I should say, If any Jesuit will answer me, let him show me the names
of Jesuit Preachers in all Ages, who taught the people Jesuitical Doctrine in
every several Age, or else confess that there were no such before Ignatius
Laiola. We will deal with you as Edward the third with Phillip, who presented
himself before Paris; saying, He did call upon him to open fight in the view
of France, and before his great Theater of Paris.

He did not limit him to any one kind of fight, or weapon, he left him to his
choice, so do we with you: prove your selves to be the only Church, and that
all are excluded from salvation unless they hold Communion with, and
subjection to your Pope: prove it by any testimony of Scripture, or
demonstration from the Principles of Scripture, or Reason; frame your Argument
as you think best for your own advantage: there are many places for
Arguments, viz. 24. we exclude none, but will admit them in their degrees,
some as necessary, some as probable. These are places of Art, or Learning: yet
you will exclude us from all these, and bring us ad loca inartificiata, to
testimony.

And whereas those are Divina, of God or Man. vel Humana: of God, or Man.


You will have none but the later, which can be but weak, there being no
Historian or Father but might be deceived, and very few against whom you have
not taken some exceptions.

Of all the forms of arguing, a Syllogism is that principal form which
alone has constringencie, and necessary illation, and to which, all other
forms, as being imperfect, are reduced; this we must not meddle with, but
bring exemplum, or inductio, or at the most, an Enthymeme, which is curtatus,
and imperfectus Syllogismus, all of them unsufficient, parere scientiam, to
work and produce true knowledge, and yet we must use only these. This is, as
if the King of France should have sent to our King, that when he fought, he
should not put on his best Armor, nor use his best Sword. Saint Augustine in
this question excluded humane testimony, yet you will have nothing else.

Non audiamus, Haec dicit Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc. Sed haec dicit Dominus.
Your School also grants that Scriptures are the principles in Theology, and
all demonstrations must be ex proprijs principijs out of proper principles.
Yet you will none of them; only names out of Histories you call for. This was
a kind of proof which I did not approve at first, but denied the consequence
of your 5th. Proposition thus.

The sum of your fifth Proposition is briefly this, If the names of Protestant
Pastors in all ages cannot be showed, then the Protestants are not the true
Church. This I deny to be of undoubted consequence, for that argument
negatively from authority is of no force. In your demand you require the names
of such as taught the Protestant doctrines: whereas all your Propositions
before were of faith: as if all doctrines were points of faith.

I undertook to show a Church professing the same faith, which the Protestants
now do, in all ages; and in all your Propositions you speak of faith, here
you speak of doctrines. You know all doctrines are not articles of faith. I
have named Authors for 800. years, and in this my second Reply I will for the
rest. Was not my request more reasonable to call upon you to go on so far,
it being your own way, it being a course proposed by your self: yet he that
has not gone one mile finds fault with him that has gone 800. because I
have not gone further, whereas I had a nearer, and safer way to my journeyes
end, viz: by Scripture, by demonstration, by confession of my adversaries.

CHAP. X.
Fisher.

NEither did he sufficiently prove them he named to be Protestants but by
such false suppositions, and bad definitions, etc.

Rogers in his 1. Reply.

That my suppositions are false, you say it; I deny it, when you show any
reason to convince them of falsehood, I will disclaim them; If my definition
be bad, you should have mended it, and so much I requested you to do, and do
request it again, and again. But why is my definition bad? why my
suppositions false? and why shifts? because that Arrians, Anabaptists, or
whatsoever other Sectarie may by the like, defend the same persons to have
been of their Religion and Sect. What suppositions you mean I know not, if
you mean my distinctions, I shall answer you when I come to your particular
exception against them: As for my definition it was this, and thus delivered.

Master Fisher, I desire you therefore to express without ambiguity the terms
of this question, whether the Protestant Church was visible in all ages? what
you mean by Church? what by Protestants? what by visible?

I will deliver my opinion in defining a Protestant Church. The Protestant
Church is a society of men professing the faith expressed in the Canonical
Scriptures, acknowledged to be such in the Primitive Church; comprised in the
Apostles Creed, explained in the other two Creedes of Nice, and Athanasius,
ministering the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper by men of lawful
calling, and ordination.

Such a society as this, was in all ages.

Ergo, The Protestant Church was in all ages.

Thus far in my former Reply, this was the definition I brought, and none
other. You say an Arrian may by this definition defend, that those persons by
me alleged were of his Religion, or Sect, so may the Anabaptists, or any
other Sectary as you say; what other Sectaries you mean I know not; as for the
Anabaptist, I will answer you where you have made more full mention of him. As
for the Arrian, because here only you name him, here I will reply unto you
concerning him. You say that my definition may agree with an Arrian, for so it
must if thereby he may prove those to whom this definition does belong to be
of his Religion, then which nothing could be spoken more ignorantly if you
thought as you wrote, or more impudently if you knew the contrary, being so
manifest a truth, as nothing that ever happened in the Christian Church is more
frequent in Ecclesiastical Histories, in Fathers, in Counsels, then that
Arrius was condemned in the Nicene Council; and the more full explication of
the Apostles Creed was made in that Council only to exclude and condemn
Arrius, which explication is commonly called the Nicene Creed: to the same
purpose did Athanasius compose his explication of the same Creed. I make
mention of both these in my definition, saying that the Protestant Church
professes that faith comprised in the Apostles Creed, explained in the other
two Creeds of Nice, and Athanasius; All these three do say, that Christ is
God: Arrius does deny it, these are contradictories, can you reconcile them? if
you can, you will do more then all the Divines, all the Philosophers could
do, nay more then God himself can do. The Apostles Creed says that Christ
is the only begotten Son of God, and therefore God, as the begotten Son of
man is man: the only begotten Son of God, because he alone is the Son of
God by generation, all others either by creation, or by regeneration.

The Nicene Creed says, Christ is begotten of the substance of the Father, God
of God, true God of true God. Athanasius his Creed runs wholly on the same
strain, that Christ is God, that he is uncreate, eternal, incomprehensible,
Almighty; Arrius denied all this in denying him to be God.

This definition I allege, not as proper to the Protestants distinguished
from other Churches, but common to all true Christian Churches, for two
reasons; first my drift is not to prove that only the Protestants make the
Church as I have fully expressed in my first Answer. My words speaking to Mr.
Fishers 4th. proposition, were these, I would gladly know what they mean by
those words (if the Protestants be the true visible Church) whether so as if we
alone (who are called Protestants) were of the Church and no others? we leave
such enclosing of Commons to the Romanists; we challenge it not, we are a true
Church, not the true Church: we are a part, not the whole: we include our
selves, we exclude not others, whether Graecians, Armenians, Aethiopians,
Spaniards or Italians, etc. so they deny no fundamental parts of the faith
either directly or by consequence.

2. Because there can be but one definition of one Church, and such is the
Catholic Church of Christ acknowledged to be, and this one definition must
accord, and may be verified of every particular society, that professes the
faith of Christ, and ministers those Sacraments which were ordained by Christ
as necessary unto all men under the government of lawful Pastors; for these
particular societies are of the same nature as the whole, Parts homogeneae
quarum idem nomen cum toto, and eadem nominis definitio; parts of one kind with
the whole, and one with another, which have the same definition, because they
have the same nature, and essence, as every drop of blood is blood, and every
little piece of flesh is flesh, and have all the same definition. As therefore
when I would prove my self to be a man, I would use no other definition then
animal rationale, a reasonable creature endued with a living sensible body,
Haec Articulis lex definiendi.
for singularia non habent definitionem nisi speciei, particular, and
individual things have no proper, peculiar definition of their own, but all
of one kind, or species, have the same definition; so being to prove my self
a Christian, I will use no other definition then that of Christians in
general, viz. that I hold the faith of Christ, am admitted by baptism into
his visible Church, wherein I do continue under the direction, and government
of my Pastors.

If you should reply, that is no good definition, because it belongs to you
of the Roman Church, to those of the Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian, Indian
Churches, and to all other sects of Christians as well as to me; I answer, that
unless it do belong to all Christians, it were no good definition, as animal
rationale were no good definition of a man, unless it did belong to every
particular man, excluding none; for this is the rule of defining, this is the
direction that is given by the most learned, that we must pass through every
singular, observing what is to be found in them all, and at all times, and put
those things alone in our definition, excluding those other things which we
find in some singulars, or particulars, but not in other, or at sometimes, but
not at other. This is the rule of reason, but you of Rome contrary to this
course in framing your definitions, have collected those things which are to be
found in one particular Church, viz. your own, and wherein you conceive other
particular Churches to be defective, things accidental to the Church, as
without which the Christian Church has been, and may be hereafter; whereas all
those things that belong to the definition of any thing, must be essential,
universal, inseparable; and being taken altogether must show, and explicate
the whole nature of the thing, and exclude all things else of a different
nature or kind: as for example, Bellarmine after a long dispute concerning the
definition of the Church, rejecting all other, concludes thus.

Nostra autem sententia est Ecclesiam unam tantum esse, non duas, and illam
unam, and veram esse caetum hominum ejusdem Christianae fidei professione, and
eorundem Sacramentorum communione colligatam, sub regimine legitimorum
Pastorum, ac praecipue unius Christi in terris Vicarij Romani pontificis. Ex
qua definitione facile colligi potest, qui homines ad Ecclesiam pertineant.
Tres enim sunt parts hujus definitionis, professio verae fidei, Sacramentorum
communio, and subjectio ad legitimum Pastorem Romanum Pontificem. Ratione
primae partis, excluduntur omnes Infideles tam qui nunquam fuerunt in Ecclesia
ut Iudaei, Turcae, Pagani; quam qui fuerunt, and recesserunt ut Haeretici, and
Apostatae. Ratione secundae, excluduntur Catechumeni, and excommunicati,
quoniam illi non sunt admissi ad Sacramentorum Communionem, isti sunt admissi.
Ratione tertiae, excluduntur Schismatici qui habent fidem, and Sacramenta, sed
non subduntur legitimo Pastori, and ideo foris profitentur fidem, and
Sacramenta percipiunt. Includuntur autem omnes alij, etiamsi Reprobi, Scelesti,
and Impij sunt.

But this is our opinion, that the Church is only one, not two, and that one
and true Church is an Assembly of men knit together in the profession of the
same faith with Christ, and Communion of the same Sacraments under the
government of lawful Pastors, and especially under one Vicar of Christ on
Earth the Bishop of Rome. Out of which definition may easily be collected who
are of the Church, and who are not; for in this definition are three parts, 1.
profession of faith; 2. communion of Sacraments, 3. subjection to a lawful
Pastor, the Bishop of Rome. The 1. of these does exclude all Infidells as well
Jews, Turks and Heathens, as Heretics, and Apostates which having been of
the Church departed from it. The 2. part does exclude those Catechumeni that
are instructed in the principles of Christian Religion, but are not yet
baptized, and those that are excommunicate, for the first of these were never
admitted to the Communion of the Sacraments, these latter were admitted, but
are by excommunication excluded. By the 3. part are excluded Schismatickes
which have the faith, and the Sacraments, but are not subject unto the lawful
Pastor, and therefore do profess the faith, and receive the Sacraments out of
the Church. All others are of the Church although they be Reprobates, wicked,
ungodly men. Thus far Bellarmine.

Valenza to the same effect writes thus.

Vera Ecclesia non est alia, Tom. 3. in Tho. pa. 144.
nisi ea fidelium congregatio quae paret Romano Pontifici pro tempore
existenti. There is no true Church but that Congregation of faithful people
which is obedient to the Bishop of Rome for the time being.

Binnius the last, and largest compiler of the Counsels, has this. Illam
dicimus Ecclesiam quae decreta Sancti Consilij Tridentini universalis
aecumenici tenet pariter, and honorat. To. 2. pa. 721 notis in Corc Tolet. 3.


We call that the Church which does hold, and honor the decrees of the Holy
general Council of Trent.

Thus we see, that obedience to the Bishop of Rome is put by your late great
Goliahs in the definition of the Church, and by consequence it is of the
essence, and being of the Church, so that no man can be saved by their
Doctrine, which is not obedient to the Bishop of Rome. Nay, the Christian
Church cannot subsist without the Bishop of Rome, and obedience unto him,
because nothing can subsist without his own being.

If this be a true definition of the Christian Church, then millions of Souls
were damned when the Church of Rome was divided for many years, and many
descents (for there could be but one true Pope at the same time) some cleaving
to one Pope, some to the other, this Schism during seventy years. The want of
this obedience (if their Doctrine be true) has excluded all the reformed
Churches from hope of salvation, which contain many millions of Christian
Souls which receive, and believe the Scriptures of old and new Testament, as
they were received in the first, second, third, fourth Centurie of years;
which receive, and profess the Apostles Creed, are therein baptized, and
receive for Orthodox Doctrine, the Decrees of the four first General
Councels, and some of them receive six of the first Councels, and yet must they
be damned to the pit of hell, because they will not be obedient to the Pope?
Histor. Council. Trid. p. 450.
The Queen of France somewhat above sixty years since, wrote unto the Pope,
that there being none of the Reformed, who deny the Articles of Faith, nor the
six Councels, many thought it fit to receive them into Communion. Let us pass
from the Latin Church to the Greek, a Church larger in extent then the Latin
Church. This, with all the number of Christian Souls therein contained, for
denying the Popes Supremacy, are out of the Church, have lost their hold of
Christ, have no interest in his sufferings, although most of them suffer much
for the profession of Christ under Turks, and Tartars. Let us go somewhat
further, and observe the miserable condition of the Churches of Afric, which
when they were at the best, were three times as large as the Roman Church, and
yet, though the Mahometans have much prevailed against them, not inferior to
the Latin Church; all these are without hope of Heaven, damned for ever to the
pit of Hell, if this definition be true.

Eusebius the compiler of the Ecclesiastical History for the first three
hundred and odd years, assisted therein by Constantine the Great, and esteemed
by him worthy to be Bishop of all the world, writes, Lib. 3. c. 14.
that The Church was dispersed through the world by the Apostles. Then speaking
of the next Age, viz. Anno 137. writes, Lib 4. c 6. c. 28.
that The Churches did then shine like bright stars, through the world; and
the faith in Jesus Christ did flourish in universo humano genere, amongst all
mankind: As in Mesopotamia, in France, in Asia, in Phrygia. Lib. 6. c. 1.
In India, where Pantenus the Christian Philosopher found Christians, and the
Gospel of Saint Matthew in Hebrew, Lib. 5. c. 9. Anno 180.
left unto them by Bartholomew, who preached the Word in those parts.

Irenaeus the learned Bishop of Lions in France, died about these times, and
had heard Polycarpus the Disciple of Saint John (as he himself confesses)
he writes thus; The Church dispersed through the universal world into the
ends of the earth, received from the Apostles, Lib. 1. c. 2.
and their Disciples, that Faith which is in one God, the Father Almighty,
etc. as he there sets it down more at large; cap. 3. he says, This Faith
the Church dispersed through the world, does constantly keep, as if they dwelt
in one house, as if they had but one soul, one heart, one mouth; neither do
the Churches in Germany believe otherwise, nor the Iberians, nor the Celtes,
nor the Churches of Egypt, nor those in the East, nor those of Lybia, nor those
which are placed in the middle of the world.

Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, about the year 234, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 4.
writing to Stephen Bishop of Rome, says, Scias nunc frater, etc. Know now
Brother, that all the Eastern, and those Churches which are more remote, are
at unity. Where he names the Bishops of Antioch, Caesarea, and Jerusalem, of
Tire, of Laodicea, all Syria, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Pontus, Bythinia. Eusebius. de
vita Constantini, l. 3. c. 7.
The Ministers of God came together to the Council of Nice out of Syria,
Cilicia, Phaenicia, Arabia, Pabestina, Egypt, Thebais, Africa, Mesopotamia,
Persia, Scythia, Pontus, Galatia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Phrygia;
thither came the Thracians, Macedonians, Achaians, Epirots, and they whose
dwellings were far more remote.

Much could I cite to the same purpose out of Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, and
other Ecclesiastical Historians, much out of the Fathers, much out of the late
Travelers, but I will make choice of two, or three which show the multitude of
Christians over the world.

It is too true, that about seven hundred years after the coming of our
Savior in the flesh, Mahomet gained much from the Christians, the Turks more,
about four hundred years after that; and the Tartars, I may say, almost as
much as both; the last of these, about four hundred years past, Saving, one
mentioned by Matthew Paris.
subduing the mighty Christian King of Teuduc, became Mahometans, and their
Successors ever since: yet so, as Christians are found in all their dominions
to this day: yea, and within these four hundred years and less, Burchardus
has recorded that in the hither half of Asia, from Tanais Westward, to Imaus
Eastward, and from thence to the South of Asia, there were thirty Christians
for one Mohammedan. I will end this with an Historian, and Traveller of your
own, Andrew Thevet, Cosmographer to the French King in his Cosmographie: I
assure you (says he) that I found at Jerusalem, in the holy (Passion) week,
more then four thousand Christians of several (remote) Nations, my self
being sole with an Almaine of the Roman Church. And anon after he says, All
those Nations do acknowledge neither Pope, nor Cardinal, King nor Emperor of
ours. And again, None can show that the Abyssines, Armenians, Maronits,
Georgians of Persia, Nestorians, Iacobites, Syrians, Iavans, which be of the
Islands next the Oriental India, Burians, Darians, Cephalians, the men of
Quinsay, most remote of all the Oriental India (of all which Nations I saw in
Jerusalem, in the holy (Passion) week) ever learned from us (of the Latin
Church) their Sacred Mysteries (or Liturgy) which they affirm themselves to
have received from the Apostles. Thus far Thevet. Yet by your definition, all
these, so many Christians of several remote nations, are damned to Hell; for
they do not acknowledge the Pope, nor did for one thousand five hundred years.
And must all the Christians for one thousand five hundred years, of so many
several Nations, be damned for not acknowledging the Pope? The devils in Hell
would triumph if this were true: The ten persecutions in the Primitive Church,
and the great inundation of Mahometisme lenarged far and wide, by the conquest
of Sarazens, Turks, and Tartars, did never cut so many souls from Christ,
drive so many out of the Christian Church, and consequently damn them to Hell,
as this definition has done, if it were true. I have read in one of your own
Writers, Matthew Paris, That a Priest deceased, Anno 1072.
about thirty days after appearing to another Priest, his former acquaintance,
bade him give over his function and repent, if he would be saved; and opening
his hand, showed him a writing, wherein the Devil, and all the society of
Hell did give thanks to the whole Order of the Clergy; because, that giving
themselves wholly to pleasure, and neglecting to preach, they suffered more
souls to come to Hell, then had been seen in any Age before.

All the service that the Romish Clergy of those times did do to the Devil,
in bringing infinite numbers of souls to Hell, was nothing to what this
Jesuitical definition, and Doctrine does do.

If this definition be true the judicial proceeding in the later day must be
not as our Savior has laid down in the 25. of Saint Matthew, Come ye
blessed of my Father, Ver. 34, 35, 36.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, For I
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I
was a stranger and ye took me in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and
ye visited me, I was in prison and ye came unto me. But thus it must be, if
this definition be true, Come ye blessed, who have submitted your selves unto
my Vicar general, who have been obedient unto my Bishop of Rome, acknowledging
him to have authority over all Bishops, that he is above Councels, above
Kings, Valenza, Tom. 3.1. qu.. 6. Bellarm. l. 4 de Pont. Romans c. 4, 5.
above Emperors, Lord of all the world, that in him is invested all the
authority of the universal Church; that all the Church, without him, may
err; that he doing the office of a Pastor, or intending to teach, the Church
cannot err.

Our Savior said, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father; but now
the case is altered; Every one that says Lord, Lord, to the Bishop of Rome,
and none but he alone is in the Church, out of which there is no salvation.

Our Savior said, He that does the will of my Father: but these say, He that
does the will of God and the Church, shall be saved; and by the Church, they
understand the Pope.

Must all those remote Nations, amongst whom many millions never heard of the
Bishop of Rome, and those who are oppressed under the Moors, Turks and
Tartars, for the Faith of Christ, must they, I say, be examined in the last
day, in that great Judgment, whether they did obey the Bishop of Rome, or no?
and condemned for not obeying him? If they answer, We acknowledged our sins,
and repented of them, we believed in thy name Jesus, we were baptized in that
Faith, we received thy body and blood, we endured many indignities,
reproaches, impositions; nay, our children are taken from us, if there be any
more hopeful then other, and all because we are Christians. Will Christ
answer them, Away from me; for you did not acknowledge my Vicar general, my
Bishop of Rome to have authority over all Churches, over all Patriarchs, yea
Kings and Emperors in ordine ad Spiritualia: I know you not, you are not of the
Church.

Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 12.
May not the Aethiopians reply, We have received the Faith, first by the
relation of our Act. 8.27.
own Countrymen, who were baptized by Phillip, afterward by the Evangelist
Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 15.
Saint Matthew. We received it by the preaching of Bartholemew, say the
Chrysostom. Hom. 22. de Apostolis.
Armenians. We have received it by the preaching of Andrew, say the Orig. l.
3. in Genesin, and
Scythians. We from thy beloved Disciple Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 1.
Saint John, say the Churches of the lesser Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 1.
Asia: with us he lived, with us he died, to us he vouchsafed to speak in his
Revelations, we received it also from thy Apostle Paul epist. ad Ephesians. and ad
Galat.
Paul, who preached amongst us, and wrote diverse Epistles unto us. From him we
received thy Faith, say the Graecians, Macedonians, Paul ep. ad Roman cap. 15
v. 19, 26.
Illyrians: To us he has vouchsafed to write, say the Thessalonians,
Corinthians, Philippians. Pet. 1. ep. cap. 1. v. 1.
Peter preached in our Countries, and in our neighbor Countries of Anatolia,
as in Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. c. 1.
Pontus, Galatia, Bythinia, Cappadocia, Asia: it was to strangers scattered
amongst us of his own Nation; to the Chrysostom. Hom. de duodecem Apostolis.

The Church of Ephesus instructed by Paul, and afterward continued by S. John.
Iren. lib 3. c. 3. The Gospel of the uncircumcissio^ was committed unto me, as
the Gospel of Circumcission was unto Peter. Gal. 2.7.


dispersed Jews, and not to us of the Gentiles.

We of the higher Theodor. de very. Evang. c. 9. Osorius de rebus Emanuelis.
Socrat. l. 1. c. 15.
Asia received it from Phillip; we from Simon Zelotes, say the inhabitants of
Mesopotamia: we of Parthia, Persia, Media, Brachmania, India, and other
neighbor Nations from Thomas. We Indians also received it from Bartholomew,
who left with us the Gospel of thy blessed Apostle and Evangelist Saint
Matthew: we saw not Peter, we heard not of the I assure you that I found at
Jerusalem, in the holy (Passion) week, more then 4000 Christians of several
(remote) nations hereafter mentioned; my self being sole (amongst them) with
an Almaine of the Roman Church: they do acknowledge neither Pope, nor
Cardinal, King, or Emperor of ours. See more p. 42.

The Christians of Iava, Taprobane, Caephala, Quinsay, and other remote
Countries in the Oriental India; diverse of which, as the Aethiopians, Indians,
Armenians, Graecians, etc. were converted in the Apostles times, and are from
these parts so far distant, as that the Latin Church was for many precedent
Ages unknown to sundry of them till the later times. Brearley, Tract. 3.. 2.
Sub. 1. in his book of the Mass. page 288.


Pope, we knew not Rome; neither, for ought we know, were we known unto thy
Latin Church: and if it be necessary for all men that will be saved, to know
and acknowledge the Pope of Rome, our Teachers have deceived us, the Gospel
which we have received is unperfect, the Scriptures are defective, which make
no mention of the Bishop of Rome; nay, thy Word has misled us, saying, There
is no other name under heaven given to men, in whom and through whom they
attain health and salvation, save only in thy name, O Christ Jesus. We received
not our Religion from Rome, we were not converted by any sent from the Latin
Church. We received it from thy Apostles, say the Theodor. de curat. Grae ca.
affect. l 9.
Tyberines, Hyrcanians, Caspinians, Scythians, Massagets, Sarmatians, the
Serae, Cimicrians, Germans, Britains, the Lagi, Samni, Anasgi, (utque semel
dicatur) omne hominum genus, all mankind may say, we received thy Faith from
the Apostles; sundry of which were unknown to the Latin Church. Yet my In the
Reply to Doctor White and Doctor Fratley, the Author in the second Chapter
says, That out of the Roman Church no salvation: this is the Title and drift
of diverse leaves together.
Adversary here, if he sat in the judgment seat, would do as Bellarmine,
Valenza, Binnius and others have done, condemn them all to Hell, with an Away
with you, I know you not, if you know not the Roman Church, if you live not in
unity with that: And no marvel he is so peremptory, seeing Pope Boniface has
decreed it thus; Declaramus, dicimus, definimus, pronunciamus omnino esse de
necessitate salutis omni humanae creaturae subesse Romano Pontifici. De Major.

We declare, say, determine, pronounce, that it is altogether necessary to
salvation, that every man that will be saved be obedient to the Bishop of
Rome. These are the Laws of Rome, this the doctrine of your Schools, this the
charity of your Religion, to condemn ten times as many Christians to hell, as
ever were of your Church, for not being obedient to him they never knew, they
never heard of.

Arist. Tep. l. 6. c. 1. n. 1. (...).
And because we are speaking of Definitions, let me request you to remember the
laws of a Definition, as first, that it must contain all that is defined, it
must belong to every thing which is comprised under that which is defined.

2. It must belong to nothing else, but that which is truly and properly styled
by the name of that which is defined; as the definition of man must belong to
all men, and to nothing else but man; as every man is Animal rationale, and
nothing but man: the reason thereof is this, that a definition must show, and
express distinctly the proper essence of that which is defined: (...). Artic.
2. Poster. cap. 3.
If proper, then it can belong to nothing else; if essence, it must belong to
all, for nothing can be without his own being and essence. And for the same
reason it is inseparable, immutable, and must perpetually be verified of that
to which it once does belong, as a true definition, which shows the essence
or being of a thing: A definition does make us to know what each thing it.
because nothing can be separated from his own being, unless it cease to be
at all. If then Bellarmines definition, and your tenet, That there is no
salvation out of the Roman Church, which is the fame in effect with the
doctrine of Bellarmine, Valenza and Binnius be true, it must include all
Christian Churches, and it must agree to all the Christian Churches at all
times; but this definition did not agree to all Christian Churches as I have
showed by the testimony of your own writers, and Travelers, for many
thousands of Christian Nations in the world did not acknowledge your Pope; and
many never heard of your Latin Church, neither did the Latin Church know them.

That it did not perpetually belong to the Church will appear in that I think
my adversary is not able to produce any in 1150. years after Christ's coming
in the flesh, (...). Idem Metaph. 2. c. 3.
that framed such a definition of the Catholic Church, so that the learned
must either be ignorant of the true definition, or this must not be it. Is it
likely that all the learned Fathers who wrote upon this subject, disputed upon
this point, Licet definitio and definitum re ide^ sint tamen propositio in qua
definitio de definito praedicatur non est identica, sed doctrinalis, quia in ea
conceptus distinctus de confuso praedicatur. Zuarez.
were ignorant what the Church of Christ was? which is distinctly known only
by (...). Arti. 2. Post. c. 2.
a definition. If this definition, or your tenants were true, all those
Christians who dyed for Christ till Peter came to Rome were out of the Church,
were damned.

Stephen the first Martyr, who dyed for Christ the same year that Christ dyed
for him, and all the world, was out of the Church, was damned, lost his life in
vain, shed his blood to no purpose.

If it were so necessary that there must be a Bishop of Rome to whom all
Christians must submit, why did not the Primitive Christians entreat Peter to
go to Rome that they might have a Church. The believing Jews should have come
to Peter, and said if we die before there be a Bishop of Rome, we dye out of
the Church, we are damned, Definitio est principium, and finis logieae.
Zabarella.
therefore good Peter to Rome with all speed. They of Antioch should have done
the like, and said to Peter, sweet Simon what do thou here, to Rome that we
may have a Church. So should they of Alexandria have told him, to Rome Peter,
what do thou here? Sedit Antiochiae annis 7. Baron. an. 39.25. annis ut
Eusebius. in Chro.
why will thou so long delay the laying of that corner stone in Rome whereon
all must be built, wherein all must be saved? why will thou hazard the
salvation of so many souls as may die before thou have settled a Church at
Rome which must be the Mother of all Churches? Pius 4. his Creed. art. 11.
will thou make thy self guilty of the blood of so many believers as may dye
whilst thou do linger and loyter here.

The Churches of Iudaea, Galile, and Samaria were excluded by your definitions,
Acts 9.10, 11, 12.
and tenants; for Peter had not as yet been out of those coasts: nay, if this
definition were true they were no Churches; but the Scripture says they were
Churches, ergo this is a false tenet, a false definition. The Christians of
Ioppa were to blame to send for him, Acts 9.
to hinder him from a more necessary journey to Rome, and Peter himself much
to blame to tarry there many days. Cornelius the devout Centurion if he had
heard, Acts 10.
and believed your tenants, and definitions, might have stumbled at what the
Angel commanded him do, and he might have said with himself; if there be no
salvation out of the Roman Church what good can Peter do me before there be a
Church there.

If none can be saved but who are in subjection to the Bishop of Rome, what
good can Peter do me, there being as yet no Bishop of Rome. Then when Peter
came unto him, and preached Christ Jesus, and remission of sins in his name;
if these men had been there they would have said: Peter you have forgot one
principal Article of the faith, that which is essential to the Church, the
being, entity, the definition of it. That he must be obedient to the Bishop of
Rome, this might more nearly concern him being Captain of the Italian Band.
But the Scripture says that Peter did tell him that whereby he, and all his
house should be saved, and yet no word of Rome, or Roman Bishop. The Christians
of Antioch by this definition, and tenet, were no Church, though the Scripture
say they were, James the brother of John which was killed by Herod was of no
Church by this definition and tenet, and therefore was damned.

We desire not to be of any other Church then Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, the
Council of Africa, the Council of Nice, the Church of Ioppa, Caesarea,
Jerusalem, Antioch were of. We like no such definitions as exclude the Fathers,
Counsels, the Apostle Saint James, the Martyr Saint Stephen, and damnes them
to Hell. O let me live the life of these, dye the death of these, and rest in
peace with these.

Thus much in justifying my definition, and against your tenet and Jesuitical
definition of Bellarmine, which I briefly urge thus.

That definition which belongs to all Christian Churches, and to none else is
a good definition.

But such is mine,

Ergo: It is a good definition.

That definition, and tenet which excludes and condemns all the Churches of
Africa, Asia, and a great part of Europe, yea Stephen the first Martyr, and
James the brother of John, together with diverse Counsels, and fathers, is
false, and uncharitable.

But such is your definition, such your tenet.

Ergo: Your tenet and definition, are both false, and uncharitable.

CHAP. XI. A true Copy of Mr. Fishers five Propositions.
IT is certain there is one, and but one true infallible faith without which
none can please God.

2. This one infallible faith cannot be had according to the ordinary course of
Gods providence, but by hearing Preachers, and Pastors of the true visible
Church, who only are lawfully sent, and authorized to teach the true word of
God.

3. As therefore this one infallible faith has been, and must be in all ages,
so there must needs be in all ages Preachers, and Pastors of the true visible
Church, of whom all sorts of people have in times past (as appears by
Histories) learned, and must learn in all future times the said infallible
faith.

4. Hence it follows, that if Protestants be the true visible Church of
Christ, all sorts of men who in every age have had the aforesaid infallible
faith, have learned it by Protestant Preachers, whose names may be found in
Histories as the names of those are found, who in several ages did teach, and
convert people of several Nations under the faith of Christ.

5. Hence further follows, that if there cannot (as there cannot) be found in
Histories, names of Protestant Preachers who in all ages did teach all sorts of
faithful people, and who converted several Nations unto the Christian faith;
Hence follows, I say, that Protestants are not the true visible Church of
Christ, neither are their Preachers lawfully sent, or sufficiently authorized
to teach; nor people securely warranted to learn of them that one infallible
faith, without which none can please God, nor (if they so live, and die) be
saved.

Rogers.

Here, (say you) is a true Copy of Master Fishers five Propositions, as if my
Copy were not true. My Answer was printed without my knowledge, yet the
Propositions of Mr. Fisher printed, are agreeing unto these Copies which I
received, and there is nothing more in this your second Edition, then was in
those alleged by me, saving these few words (in Histories as the names of
those are found) which make no sentence nor fill up one poor little line, and
if they strengthen your cause any thing the more, let them come in, and do you
urge them.

Rogers in his 1. Answer.

The 3. first Propositions I admit.

1. That there is one faith.

2. That the ordinary propagation of this faith is by Pastors lawfully called.

3. That there have been, and must be in all ages such Pastors so called.

4. I would gladly know what they mean by those words, (if the Protestants be
the true visible Church) whether so, as if we alone (who are called
Protestants) were of the Church, and no others? we have such enclosing of
Commons to the Romanists; we challenge it not, we are a true Church, not the
true Church; we are a part, not the whole; we include our selves, we exclude
not others, whether Graecians, Armenians, Aethiopians, Spaniards, or Italians,
etc. So they deny no fundamental parts of the faith, either directly, or by
consequence.

An examination of Master Rogers answer to the five Propositions aforesaid.

I find first that he granted the first three without any exception, which I
desire may be diligently noted, and well pondered; for out of these three
grounds, to wit; First, that there is one, and but one Faith necessary to
salvation. And secondly, that this faith (according to the ordinary course of
Gods providence) cannot be had otherwise then by hearing the preaching or
teaching, of lawfully sent Pastors. And thirdly, that this faith has been in
all ages past (as appears by Histories) taught by Pastors of the true visible
Church, who only are lawfully sent. Out of these 3. grounds, I say, evidently
follows that which is Master Fishers fourth Proposition, to wit, If
Protestant faith be the true faith, and their Church the true Church, (or as
Master Rogers had rather say, A true Church) of Christ, then their Protestant
faith differing from the Roman faith has been taught in all ages by lawfully
sent visible Protestant Pastors, whose names may be found in Histories, as
names of others are found who did teach the true faith of Christ in all ages.

This to follow, out of the aforesaid three grounds, is as I said, most
evident, Nego, it is false.
neither does Master Rogers make any bones to grant, save only that it may be
he will make a bogge at the word Histories, as not finding it in his Copy,
nor thinking it perhaps necessary that the names of Protestant Pastors, who
taught the Protestant faith in all ages past be found in Histories; but
understanding the word Histories, as Master Fisher understood it, to wit for
some or other kind of Record, or Monument, as Doct. White also understood it
when he said; Things past cannot be showed but by Histories; I do not see why
Mr. Rogers may not absolutely grant the fourth Proposition, even as it was set
down by Master Fisher himself; for if any visible Protestant Pastors were in
all ages, teaching especially any such Protestant doctrines as now are taught,
they would have been named and spoken of, Rogers all, or some.
and written of as well as others are, who have in all ages past taught all
sorts of true and false doctrines, in regard there cannot be assigned any
reason, either of the part of Gods providence, or humane diligence, why the
name of others, even false teachers in all ages, should be set down, and
preserved in Histories yet extant, rather then the names of such as Protestants
deem to be the only true Teachers of pure doctrine; for doubtless both God,
who is zealous of his honor, and careful to honor and preserve the memory of
them that would honor him, would for his honors sake have procured honorable
memory of such as did, by teaching truth, honor him; and men careful of their
souls health (which they cannot attain according to the ordinary course, but
by hearing such Pastors only who have lawful succession from Christ's
Apostles) have reason diligently to look that memory be preserved of such
Pastors, and of pure divine truth taught by them, then of others, who taught
any other false, and not pure doctrine. Certain therefore it is that the names
(or some thing equivalent to names) and the doctrines of true Pastors who did
in all ages past, teach true divine doctrine, may be found in Histories, as
well as the names, and doctrines of others are found who did teach any other
doctrine. And therefore if Protestants have had any Pastors teaching true
doctrines in all ages, doubtless their names would be extant in Histories yet
extant, which being presupposed, and granted, as Master Rogers seems to
grant, by granting Master Fishers 4th. Proposition I do not see how Master
Rogers can deny Master Fishers first Proposition; for it being supposed that
the Protestant Preachers were, their names would be found in Histories (as
Master Fishers fourth Proposition grants by Master Rogers supposed) it may
be well inferred that if no such men's names be found in Histories, then no
such men were in all ages, nor consequently are Protestants the true Church of
Christ, for it has had such in all ages: I do not therefore see, I say, how
Mr. Rogers can deny Mr. Fisher his first Proposition, supposing he grant as he
grants his fourth Proposition; for although absolutely speaking, an Argument
drawn from negative authority, be (as Master Rogers averreth) of it self of
no force, and so Protestants Arguments which are usually made against us out of
negative authority.

Rogers.

Here Master Fisher I must request you, and the Reader whosoever he be to look
back upon the title of the two last pages which is [Master Rogers his most
weak grounds] then read diligently all that is there written, and see if
there be any mention, any one sentence, any one word of any of my grounds. All
that is here spoken is in defense of Master Fishers own grounds, viz. of his
4. and 5th. Proposition, which in that sense that you enforced them, are most
weak, and more weakly maintained, and therefore the title should have been
thus,

Master Fisher his most weak grounds.

That they are most weak grounds you say truly, that they are your grounds
they manifest of themselves, being your fourth, and fifth Propositions.

Fisher.

I find first, that he grants the first three without any exception, which I
desire may be diligently noted, and well pondered.

Rogers.

How I admitted them appears by my answer, I delivered them more briefly, and
more perspicuously then you did, thus, and in this sense.

The three first Propositions I admit.

1. That there is one faith. 2. The ordinary propagation of this faith is by
Pastors lawfully called. 3. That there have been, and must be in all ages,
Pastors so lawfully called.
This I conceived to be the meaning of your three first Propositions without
any diminution, neither do you except against it; as for your parenthesis,
viz. (as appears by Histories) that is no part of the Proposition, for (...).
That is one Proposition which declares one thing, or whose parts are joined
together, and made one by conjunction: this your parenthesis is no part of the
Proposition, nor made one with it by conjunction.

Fisher.

For out of these three grounds (to wit first that there is one and but one
faith necessary to salvation, Secondly, etc. Evidently follows that which is
Masters Fishers fourth Proposition, to wit; If Protestant faith be the true
faith, and their Church the true Church (or as Master Rogers had rather say A
true Church) of Christ, then their Protestant faith differing from the Roman
faith has been taught in all ages by lawfully sent visible Protestant
Pastors, whose names may be found in Histories, as names of others are found
who did teach the true faith of Christ in all ages.

Rogers.

If it does evidently follow, frame your Argument, make your syllogism,
infer your conclusion I see not the evidence; make it clear unto me, one
short syllogism would make me confess that which you endeavor to prove in
three pages, but prove not at all, only you make one fallacy called petitio
principij, and falsify my words more then once, I will begin with your
falsifications.

Fisher.

Neither does Master Rogers make any bones to grant.

Rogers.

This is your first falsification, that I make no bones to grant your fourth
Proposition: what I granted in your fourth Proposition was this; First, after
the Rules of Art, the practice of all learned men in all professions, and the
only way to wave contention about words, and come to reality; finding an
ambiguous phrase in that Proposition I thus wrote, I would gladly know what
they mean by those words (if the Protestants be the true visible Church)
whether so as if we alone (who are called Protestants) were of the Church, and
no others? we leave such enclosing of Commons to the Romanists, we challenge
it not, we are a true Church, not the true Church; we are a part, not the
whole; we include our selves, we exclude not others, whether Graecians,
Armenians, Aethiopians, Spaniards or Italians, etc. so they deny no
fundamental part of the Faith, either directly, or by consequence.

What Reply have you made to this? have you unfolded your meaning? have you
expounded this dark phrase? have you as much as proved, or disproved my
distinction, or told the Reader in which sense you took it? are you such a
friend to amphibologies, doubtful phrases, and aequivocating terms, that
being requested to open your self, you will not explain your words, your
Propositions and grounds, or Principles to infer other conclusions? Such
obscure phrases of double signification can make no Argument, but a fallacy
which seems to be an Argument, but is none. They cannot be Propositions,
which will not admit of one ambiguous term, one ambiguous simple word. The
only way to avoid this, is by distinction. This distinction I brought, which
you cannot deny; The thing it self is so clear, that there is difference
between a part, and the whole, between a part of a City, and a whole City;
between a part of a Kingdom, and a whole Kingdom; between a part of the
Church, and the whole Church. He that says, I am a Citizen of London, being
made free, wrongs no man; but he that says, I am the only Citizen, and there
is no other, speaks falsely, and wrongs all other Citizens of that society. He
that says Middlesex is a part of the kingdom of England, speaks truly, and
wrongs no man; but he that says Middlesex is the Kingdom of England, as if
there were no other Shiere nor Province belonging unto England, speaks falsely,
and is no less then a Traitor to the King. And he that says the Protestants
are a Church, speaks truly, and wrongs no man, because he excludes no other
Christian Church; but he that says the Protestants are the Church, as you say
of the Roman, excluding all others, speaks falsely, and wrongs all other
Christian Churches of the world, as the Donatists did, which S. Augustine
esteemed Quid hac stultitia imo vero dementia reperitur insanius. lib. 1. cont.
ep. Parm. Credunt ex partibus terrarum periisse Abrahae semen quod est Christus
-- De vestro ista dicitis quia qui loquitur mendacium de suo loquitur, creditur
eis de orb terraru^ quem possidere jam coperat periisse Christus, et quia hoc
credunt cum impudenter dicant, Christiani sumus, audent dicere nos soli sumus.
ibid.
folly and madness, they believe that Christ is lost in all other parts of the
world. This you spoke of your selves, because he that tells a lie, speaks
of himself. You dare say with the Donatists, We alone are the Church; yet
Christ did not say, Rome is the field, but the World is the field: that seed of
the Gospel was sown through the World, we dare not therefore say as you do,
We are the Church, we are the only Christians; for this were a lie, folly and
madness, as Saint Augustine terms it. And yet, as if there were no
difference, you can pass this over with saying, (The true Church, or a true
Church, as Master Rogers had rather say) I had rather say so indeed, because
this is true, the other which you say is false; this is humility, that is
pride; this is charitable, that is uncharitable as the devil; this is injurious
unto none, that to thousands of thousands, millions of millions, shutting them
out of Heaven who believe in Christ, are baptized into Christ, and suffer for
Christ.

Secondly, I observed many needless words in your Propositions, writing thus:
I must desire the Authors not to affect obscurity, nor to alter their words,
which may alter their meaning, as in the fourth and fifth Propositions they
have with the multitude of needless words obscured the matter, the fourth
being briefly and plainly this: If the Protestants be a true Church, their
Faith has been taught in all Ages by lawful Pastors, This I granted, and no
more; this is your first falsification, as if I granted that which I expressly
deny. I deny that we are the Christian Church, which your Propositions lays
down, as if it were our Tenet, and this must be our ground to infer that
Proposition; this is your Petitio principii, you beg a Principle which I will
not grant you, and so the building falls for want of a foundation. Your Argument
is thus: Major. If Protestants be the true visible Church of God, then all
sorts of men, who in every Age had the foresaid infallible Faith, have learned
it by hearing Protestant Preachers, whose names may yet be found in Histories,
as the names of those are found, who in every former Age did teach and convert
the people of several Nations unto the Faith of Christ.

Minor. But the Protestants are the true Church.

Ergo, All sorts of men, etc.



Not to meddle with the sequel of your Major, which is false, as I will show
when I come to answer your reasons for the same; your Minor is most false, we
always did, and ever will deny it; we are A true Church, not The true Church;
a part, not the whole, etc.

Whatsoever is in your Proposition more then what I expressed for the sum
thereof, I granted not; and therefore you have committed so many
falsifications, as there are words in your Proposition more then this (If the
Protestants be a true Church, their Faith has been taught in all Ages by
lawful Pastors:) I never granted that all sorts of men in every Age did learn
their Faith by hearing Protestant Preachers, I never granted that their names,
or the names of all other Preachers were to be found in Histories: yet you say,
I granted all this: Is there no truth, no modesty, no mean, no measure of
falsifying? Are you not ashamed to write, that a man granted that which he
denied so fully, so frequently?

Fisher.

Only it may be he will make a bogge at the word Histories, as not finding it
in his Copy, not thinking it, perhaps, necessary that the names of Protestant
Pastors, who have taught the Protestant Faith in all Ages past, be found in
Histories.

Rogers.

What you mean by Bogge I know not, unless it be a hollow myrie ground,
whereon a man can set no sure, no firm footing; but he that trusting to a
green surface shall walk thereon, sinketh in, and sticks in the mire: such
indeed are humane Histories in matters of Faith. But why should Master Rogers
make the bogge, who proves his Faith and his Church by other Arguments, and
not by these? who out of Saint Augustine has already protested against humane
proof in so divine a Question: Aug. de veritate Ecclesia.
Quia nolo humanis documentis, sed divinis oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam
demonstrari: I would not have the Church demonstrated by humane learning, but
by the oracle of God. And with your School; That nothing but divine
authority, Th. Aquin. 1. quaest. 1. Art. 8.
neither humane reason, nor authority of holy Fathers are proper unto
Divinity, or do properly demonstrate. But you that shun the proving of your
Church, of your Faith by other course, and fly only to Histories, you make
the bogge, and such a bogge whereon you dare not walk, without you fill it up
with the rubbish of some other kind of Records, or Monuments.

If you mean by making a bogge at the word Histories, that I should be afraid
to admit the same now, because it was not in my former Copy; you are deceived,
I fear it not, let it come in, though with a Parenthesis, and let Histories
extend to Records, or Monuments, so they be without exception, I well receive
them in their degree as a humane, probable, uncertain, unnecessitating proof,
and yet such, and so uncertain proof as it is, if you can show me your now
Faith out of Histories for the first four hundred years, which you your selves
do not accuse of error, falsehood, wilful deceit, juggling, partiality,
heresy, I will be of your Faith, of your Church.

Fisher.

Things past cannot be showed, but by Histories.

Rogers.

I have admitted your extension of Histories to Records and Monuments.

Fisher.

I do not see why Master Rogers may not absolutely grant the fourth
Proposition, even as it was set down by Master Fisher himself.

Rogers.

Within twelve lines before, you say ( Neither does Master Rogers make any
bones to grant) and here now you say ( I do not see why Master Rogers may not
absolutely grant it) there you say I did grant it, here you suppose I did not
grant it. You see no reason why I should not grant. If it be evident, it has
reason why it is evident; and being your Proposition, you must show that
reason, and what your reasons are, and how proposed, let us see.

Fisher.

For if any visible Protestant Pastors were in all ages, teaching especially
any such Protestant Doctrines as now are taught, they would have been named,
and spoken of, and written of, as well as others are, who have in Ages past
taught all sorts of true and false Doctrines.

Rogers.

First you play the Sophister, in changing your terms: in your three first
Propositions you speak of Faith, here you leave out Faith, and put in
Doctrines, as if they were the same; whereas you know that the ancient Fathers,
and late Writers of your side and ours do confess, that there are many
Doctrines in the Church of different nature and necessity; but let us see your
proof.

Others, who have in all Ages past taught all sorts of true and false
Doctrines, are named, spoken of, and written in Histories.

Ergo, The Protestant Pastors in ages are named, spoken of, etc.

First, tell me whether your Antecedent be universal or particular; if
particular, you conclude nothing: you know the old rule, Syllogizari non est ex
particulari; or if you will have it in the words of Aristotle, the rule is
this, Arist. lib. Prior 1. c. 19.
If both Premises be indefinite, or in part, it can be no Syllogism; and such
is yours, namely, an indefinite Proposition, which must be resolved either into
universal, or particular. If yours be universal, thus:

All others, who have in all Ages past taught all sorts of true and false
Doctrines, are named in Histories, I deny it. It is related by many
Historians, that there were Christian Churches in Britain in the third, fourth
and fifth Age. But no man has put down all their names, who were their
Bishops, or inferior Ministers: if you can do it, show it me. Again, the
Arrians were so many in the fourth Age, as that a Father says, Miratus est
mundus se subito factum esse Arrianum, The world wondered how it came on a
sudden to be of the Faith of Arrius. And can you, Master Fisher, show me the
names of these Arrian Teachers? I could be copious in alleging diverse false
Doctrines, whose first Authors are not named, are not known, much less all
that taught the same; so that if your Proposition be universal, it is false: I
deny your Antecedent. If particular, thus; Some others, who taught all sorts
of true and false Doctrines, are named in Histories. Ergo, I d^^ie your
Argument, and as well I might say, Some men have no Noses,

Master Fisher is some man.

Ergo, As you infer any conclusion out of your particular Antecedent.



Fisher.

In regard there cannot be assigned any reason either of the part of Gods
providence, or humane diligence, why the names of others, even false Teachers,
in all Ages, should be set down and preserved in Histories yet extant, rather
then the names of such, as Protestants deem to be the only true Teachers of
pure Doctrine.

Rogers.

Yet you are in your indefinite saying (others, even false Teachers) you will
neither add all nor some, to make it universal, thus; The providence of God,
and diligence of man has preserved the names of all false Teachers in
Histories. For then the falsehood would be clear: neither have you made it
particular, thus; The providence of God, and diligence of men have preserved
the names of some false Teachers. Ergo, of Protestant Teachers: for then it
would appear that this were a Non sequitur, that particulars can infer no
conclusion.

Fisher.

For doubtless, both God, who is zealous of his honor, and careful to honor
and preserve the memory of them that would honor him, would for his honor
sake have procured honorable memory of such, as did by teaching truth honor
him.

Rogers.

Ergo, Their names must be found in Histories, Negatur Argumentum. Is this the
honor? Is this the glory that God has provided for his children, to be
recorded by man? It is written as you have cited in your Margin, 1 Reg. 2.30.
Whosoever shall glorify me, I will glorify him; and whosoever shall
contemn me, shall be ignoble. Who ever expounded this place of Scripture to
be meant of humane testimonies, of being recorded in humane Histories, and not
of that honor which is usually termed the state of glory?

The other place cited in your Margin, is, The just shall be had in everlasting
remembrance: Ergo, Psalm. 111.7.
Their names shall be recorded in humane Histories. Who ever made such
collections? God has promised eternal glory unto his servants, and you will
turn it to temporal: for what is humane testimony, and humane glory, but
temporal? which shall end either before, or at least with time.

O presumptuous blindness of man! to accuse the providence of God as
defective, if it record not all their names in humane History, whose names are
written in the Book of Life. I am loath to spend many words in answering such
poor objections, but the impiety, profaneness, Atheism that is implied in
this Argument, opens my mouth to speak somewhat more. Whereas you say, If God
will glorify his servants, he must record them in humane Histories: this must
imply, that God has no other way to glorify his servants, as that there were
no resurrection of the flesh, no immortality of the soul, no Book of Life, no
Heaven, no happiness in another world.

Fisher.

And men careful of their souls health, which they cannot attain (according
to the ordinary course) but by hearing such Pastors only who have had lawful
succession from Christ's Apostles, have more reason diligently to look that
memory be preserved of such Pastors, and of pure divine Truth taught by them,
then of others who taught any other false, and not pure Doctrine.

Rogers.

Here are two tricks of a Sophister, the one to obscure a Proposition with a
multitude of needless and impertinent words; for seeing he was to prove this
plain and short Proposition, That the names of Pastors teaching divine Truth,
are to be found in Histories: and that the Medium whereby he would prove this,
he took from the diligence and duty of Godly men, what needs all those
additions which come in by Parenthesis, viz. (which they cannot attain
according to the ordinary course) but by hearing such Pastors only, who have
had lawful succession from Christ's Apostles. The second trick of a Sophister,
is to speak indefinitely, and so making it doubtful, whether your Proposition
be universal or particular, not joining either all or some unto others, as I
have observed before. Your Argument which I must frame for you (or I am like to
have none) is this:

Men careful of their souls health, have reason to preserve the memory of
their Pastors: Ergo, They did so. Or to make it more large, thus:

Men careful of their souls health, have more reason diligently to look that
memory be preserved of such Pastors, and of pure divine Truth taught by them,
then of others, who have taught any other false, and not pure Doctrine. But
they continued the memory of the false Teachers. Ergo, They continued the
memory of the true Teachers.

First, you conclude not what you were to prove, viz. That the names of all
true Teachers in all ages are to be found in Histories.

Secondly, for your minor, if it be universal, it is false; if it be
particular, it does not infer, it does prove nothing, as I have already
showed more fully.

Thirdly, your Argument has four terms; in the major, your medium is the
duty of men what they ought to do; In the minor you speak of what they did,
and suppose a falsehood, viz. that men careful of their souls health have
recorded the names of all false Teachers, and so you would infer they did
record the names of all true Teachers; and thus to prove the act from the duty
in weak sinful man, is no proof, is like the rest, an egregious non
sequitur. And as well I might argue thus, Master Fisher ought to have replied
punctually in order, and alleging my words in my answer to him: ergo, he did
it. Or thus.

Eve should have abstained from the forbidden fruit: ergo, she did abstain
from it. Or thus:

Adam had more reason to hearken unto God, forbidding him to eat of the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil, then to his wife persuading him to eat
thereof: ergo, he did not hearken unto his wife. Or thus,

Judas had more reason to defend his Master, then to betray him: ergo, he did
not betray him. Or thus.

Peter had more reason to confess his Master, then to deny him: ergo, Peter
did not deny his Master.

If this kind of arguing were good, it were happy for us all in the day of
Judgment, when the Idolater should say, I had more reason to worship God, then
to worship Idols: ergo, I did not worship Idols.

The murderer would say, I had more reason to save, then to kill: ergo, I did
not kill. The drunkard would say, I had more reason to be sober then to be
drunk: ergo, I was not drunk. And so might all other sinners plead, if this
argument were good.

Fisher.

Certain therefore it is, that the names (or some thing equivalent to names)
and the doctrines of true Pastors, who did in all ages past teach true divine
doctrine, may be found in Histories, as well as the names, and doctrines of
others are found, who did teach any other doctrine.

Rogers.

I have showed it to be most uncertain, that as well you might conclude, that
Judas did not betray Christ, or Peter deny Christ.

Fisher.

And therefore if Protestants have had any Pastors teaching true doctrines in
all ages, doubtless their names would be extant in Histories yet extant.

Rogers.

I have already showed your Antecedent to be false, if universal; not to
prove, if particular; and so this conclusion, if particular I grant, if
universal I deny; and say, that an universal conclusion cannot follow out of
particular premises. You know the unquestioned rule, Conclusio sequitur
deteriorem partem.

CHAP. XII.
Fisher.

WHich being presupposed and granted, as Master Rogers seems to grant, by
granting Master Fishers fourth Proposition, I do not see how Master Rogers can
deny Master Fishers fifth Proposition.

Rogers.

I neither supposed nor granted it: what I granted in the fourth Proposition
was this, and no more; If the Protestants be a true Church, their faith has
been taught in all ages by lawful Pastors. What mention is there here of
Names, of Histories, of Records, of Monuments? let the Reader look back to my
former answer, and he shall find that this is all the issue I joined upon in
the fourth Proposition. This is audacity Master Fisher.

Fisher.

For it being supposed that Protestant Preachers were, their names would be
found in Histories, (as Master Fishers fourth proposition granted by Master
Rogers supposes) it may be well inferred, that if no such men's names be found
in Histories, then no such men were in all ages, nor consequently are
Protestants the true Church of Christ, for it has had such in all ages: I do
not therefore see, I say, how Master Rogers can deny Master Fishers fifth
proposition, supposing he grant, as he grants his fourth proposition.

Rogers.

You say that I supposing, and granting your fourth Proposition, I must yield
unto the fifth; I have replied more then once, your fourth Proposition,
especially that which you most insist upon therein, names and Histories I deny,
and this not being granted, your fifth Proposition cannot follow.

Fisher.

For although, absolutely speaking, an Argument drawn from negative authority,
be (as Master Rogers averreth) of it self of no force: and so Protestant
Arguments which are usually made against us out of negative authority; as for
example, the Scripture says nothing of this or that; or the Fathers of the
first 300. years make no express mention of this or that: ergo, no such thing
is, or is of no force.

Rogers.

The subject of our discourse was humane History, and humane authority, and
what I speak you grant; but you extend it beyond the bounds of our then
subject, and more then I will grant, to Divine authority, to the word of God,
to the Scriptures: I say the authority of man is like himself, uncertain; his
works weak, and unperfect like himself; but the word of God is like
himself, certain, strong and full of perfection, and therefore the Argument
drawn from divine authority, is certain, though negatively, in those things
which the word of God proposes, and professes fully to express; but in man
it is otherwise, as in the next Chapter I will express more fully.

Fisher.

Yet when the negative Argument is grounded in an already granted affirmative
proposition, as it is in this our case, the negative argument is of great, and
undeniable force.

Rogers.

This I grant, that negatives are so far depending upon affirmatives, as that
they cannot be understood, they cannot be defined, they cannot be demonstrated
without affirmatives: and so, they may.

Fisher.

As for example, if we did grant this proposition; If such or such a thing
were, holy Scripture would have spoken of it, or the Fathers of the first 300
years would have made express mention of it. If I say we granted this, we
could not deny the aforesaid negative Argument, usually made by Protestants to
be of force against us.

Rogers.

I do not see what I should mislike in this, only it makes nothing against
me.

Fisher.

But we deny, and Protestants cannot prove the said affirmative, and so the
negative Argument has no force against us.

Rogers.

You deny, but we have proved the affirmative, that all things necessary unto
salvation are plainly set down in Scripture, and therefore the negative
Argument is of force against your new Creed, the Articles whereof are not
manifested in Scripture, as I have more fully set down in the fourth Chapter.

Fisher.

Now Master Rogers does not, nor in reason cannot deny Master Fishers fourth
proposition, which is an affirmative, whereupon his fifth negative proposition
is grounded; And therefore Master Rogers ought not to deny, but must needs
grant Masters Fishers fifth, and so all his five propositions.

Rogers.

The Cuckoe, a Bird that makes no good music, and has but one note, yet is
more frequent in venting that, then the Nightingale in tuning her excellent
Music. Master Fisher having nothing else to say in defense of his Church, and
against ours; cries for Names, and Histories; and not being able to prove his
proposition, still sings the same song: Master Rogers does not, nor in reason
cannot deny, ought not to deny, but must needs grant: which being presupposed,
and granted, as Master Rogers seems to grant, by granting I do not see how
Master Rogers can deny; I do not therefore see, I say, how Master Rogers can
deny Master Fishers fifth Proposition, supposing he granted, as he grants his
fourth Proposition, neither does Master Rogers make any bones to grant; I do
not see why Mr. Rogers may not absolutely grant his fourth Proposition; all
these grants are found in one leaf, and half a page, and yet I never granted
it.

Fisher.

Which being granted, if he will make a good answer as he pretends, he must
first set down names of Protestant Pastors in all ages, and not content
himself with naming some whom he thinks to be Protestants, and with saying
he has gone half the way.

Rogers.

Yet more grants, I must again deny the grant, this is right Petitio
principij, a begging of that which is in question; I have often enough denied it,
yet you will never leave begging it; belike you think to wrest it from me with
importunacie: it will never be, I pray you look back, see what I answered to
your fifth Proposition, there you shall read thus.

In the fifth Proposition, I desire to know whether we should show the names
of Protestants, or their faith. This we will show, That we need not, for the
names of Protestants is but arbitrary, and accidental, etc. And within a few
lines after, you shall read thus. But if it be really meant thus; let the
Protestants show that their now faith was taught by lawful Pastors in all
ages: I do (with Gods help) undertake it, and require the same from the
authors of these propositions, and demands.

Have I here granted that the names of all Pastors, and teachers true or false
are to be found in Histories, which is the only ground whence you would
infer your fifth Proposition, which being not granted by me, I needed not to
have set down names of Protestant Pastors in all ages, or in any age: My two
first Arguments, the one, a causis, the other, a signis, might have served the
turn, without the third, ab exemplis; and I might have contented my self with
going less then half that way, which is your way, and not mine; I never took
it for other then an uncertain, dark, slippery, cumbersome way; it was your
only way, and yet you would not go one step.

Did ever any Judge citing a man by writ to appear before him at Westminster,
limit him which way he should come? would you think it reason that a Judge
should command a Herefordshire man to come to London, not through Worcester or
Gloucester, but through Shropshire, Darbyshire, York, etc. The two Evangelists,
Saint Matthew and Saint Luke, deriving the pedigree of our Savior from David,
yet did it by different ways, De Doct. Christiana.
and diverse lines; Saint Augustine says, That two men differing in the
exposition of some place of Scripture, he that erreth, yet if his exposition
lead to charity, he is like unto a man which missing his way, yet comes to
the end of his journey. My journey is to Christ, my scope to bring my faith,
and my Church thither; you might leave me to choose my own way, which was the
way of Saint Augustine, by Scriptures, who does disclaim and dislike your way
by humane testimonies. Yet even in this your own way I doubt not but I shall
go as far as you in a day, and shall come sooner to my journeyes end then
you shall, for the reasons which now I will allege in the succeeding Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Humane Histories no proof of any Church.
YOu would bring this great trial concerning the visible Church to Histories
only, which I might refuse, briefly for these reasons;

First, Histories humane in Divinity are weak, improper, and uncertain proofs.

Secondly, your Index expurgatorius, blotting out of Authors,

Thirdly, You forge Authors, Records, and Counsels to

Fourthly, You slight, and deny the best Authors. Yet to Bodin in that learned
discourse of his, entitled; The Method of Histories, a man of your own, who
also dedicated that book unto the chief President of your Court of
Inquisition, does make four kinds of Histories. First, Humane; Secondly,
Natural; Thirdly, Mathematical; Fourthly, Divine. The first he says is
uncertain and confused; the second for the most part certain; the third more
certain; the fourth most certain, and unchangeable. Yet you Master Fisher in
this divine question refuse the fourth which is divine, most certain, and
immutable, and will have no other proof then the first, which is humane,
uncertain and confused. When Ticonius in the same question did allege Divini
Testamenti tonitrua, those thundering testimonies of the word of God against
Parmenianus the Donatist, Aug. cont. ep. Par l. 1. c. 1.
which we do produce against the Romanists, making the same claim to the
Church which they did, and tying the Church to Rome as the Donatists did to
Africa. Parmenianus on the other side opposes the relation of the Priests of
his own side; say then (says Saint Augustine) that we ought rather to believe
your Colleagues then the Testament of God: shall the smoke of earthly lies
prevail against this light which came from Heaven? If Parmenianus were not in
love with his Episcopal Chair, he would rather choose to believe the written
word of God, then his fellow Bishops.

Thus much, and much more to this purpose in that Book, and diverse other
Books of the seventh Tome: but I will conclude this of the uncertainty of
humane testimony, with the words of that Father in his second Tome, in his 48.
Epistle, Necesse est incerti sint qui pro sua societate, testimonio utuntur non
Divino sed suo. It is of necessity that they must be uncertain, who defend
their society not by the testimony of God, but by their own.

Thus much of the uncertainty in it self, but much more uncertain is all that
you shall allege, since you have by your Index Expurgatorius altered Authors,
to your purpose, at your pleasure.

The Pope himself and the Ordinaries, in their several jurisdictions, as also
the Officers of Inquisition against Haeretickes are careful to prevent the
publishing of any Books, which may seem any way to derogate from the power of
the Pope; Widring. in Apol. pro jure princ. page 343.
and if any such Books be published, they endeavor wholly to suppress the
same, or at the least forbid any man to read them without special license
until they be purged. Thus a Priest of your own has written. These your
purging Tables are of two sorts; some do forbid whole Authors, some do blot
out sentences, or words; so that if any Author speak against you, you will
either deny the whole Book, or produce some Edition, licenced by your
Inquisitors, wherein those words are not to be found, as having passed under
the Purgatory of your pen. Your several books called Indices expurgatorij,
purging Tables printed in diverse places, as at An. 1584.
Madrid in Spain, at An. 1607.
Rome, at An. 1586.
Lions, are witnesses that you have left no witness in the world without
exception.

If Saint Augustine say, Tom. 4 ed: Parisi: apud Catol. Guil. viduam* etc. Anno
1555.
Mortuorum animae non sentiunt res viventi^m, The souls of the dead know not
the estate or affairs of the living: Your Belgian Index does purge out this
with a deleatur, let it be blotted out, fol. 115. litera. l. If Saint Gregory
Nissene say, We have learned to worship and adore that nature alone which is
uncreated, you can purge out this with a deleatur dictio solummodo, blot out
this word (alone) says your Spanish Index, pa. 20. If Saint Chrysostom,
speak for the perspicuity of Scripture as he does in many places, as namely
in his third Sermon upon Lazarus, deleantur, let those words be blotted out,
says your Index of Spain, reprinted at Samiur. If the same Father speak for
the sufficiency of Scripture as he does in his Commentary on the 95. Psalm,
the same Index has a deleatur for it. If he say, the Church is founded upon
the Rock of Faith, and not upon Saint Peter, the same Index has a deleatur for
it, let it be blotted out. Much could I cite to this purpose, but as the rule
is, Qui semel pejerat, etc. He that is once convicted of bearing false
witness, is never after to be admitted for a witness: so he that is once
found to falsify, and blot out Records, loses for ever his credit in any
thing he shall produce out of his own Registerie. Thus much concerning your
Index Expurgatorius, blotting out of Authors, that which makes against you.

Now follows the third exception against your authorities, your forging of
Authors, and Counsels. As Abdias Stories of the Apostles urged by Harding, and
others, censured by your own Sixtus Senensis for fained, and utterly rejected
by Cardinal Baronius. Linus Bishop of Rome, of the passion of the B: Apostles,
Peter and Paul, urged by Coccius, yet acknowledged by Bellarmine, Baronius, and
Possevine to be fained, fabulous, erronius. Clemens his Apostolical
Constitutions, and his Recognitions are urged many times by Coccius, Harding,
and others; the first of these by Baronius, and Possevine, the second by
Bellarmine, Baronius, and Sixtus Senensis are rejected with many more. Besides,
the Fathering of diverse Treatises upon St. Cyprian, upon St. Origin, upon Saint
Athanasius, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, and others, of which I will not
speak, but refer the Reader to your own greatest Writers, Bellarmine,
Baronius, Sixtus Senensis, Possevine, who in diverse places do nail these
Authors to the pillarie, as false, fained Witnesses, and palpable forgerers,
wishing the learned Reader to have recourse unto these, when he reads any
ancient authority, cited and alleged by the Romanists, and he shall find it
usual amongst men of your side to quote, cite, and triumph in such forgeries,
as if they were true and undoubted testimonies: as one of your side, M. Fisher,
did allege 27 Fathers for Invocation of Saints, to which I having made an
answer within the compass of two days, for longer time he would not grant
me, pretending that he must be gone out of the Country: I discovered so many
forgeries and impertinencies, as that in his next Reply he fell off from 27 to
16, and of those 16, some also forged, and very few or none at all to his
purpose. Amongst others, he does triumph in a Quotation out of Athanasius in
his Sermon de Sancta Deipera, the words in that Sermon as he cited them,
besides others, are these: O Mistress, Lady, Queen, and Mother of God, make
intercession for us: then thus he trumphs; How now Master Rogers, are you not
yet contented to pray to Saints? De Scriptor. Ecclesiasticis. 8. an. 48.
Platina, Cusanus, Marsil. Pata. Lauren. Val. Ant. Floren. Otho. Fri. Hiron* P.
Cate. Volateranus, Nauclerus, Capnian. Mullineus, Aeneas Syl.
Shall Saint Athanasius teach you your Ave Maria? whereas this was but a
forgerie, for Bellarmine and Baronius do hold it not to be written by Saint
Athanasius, and do bring many reasons to prove the same: and Bellarmine says,
That it was not a work of that Age, but written after the sixth Council,
which was above 300 years after Athanasius. And to insist no further upon the
forging of particular private men, the most notorious, injurious, incroaching,
impudent forgerie was that of Constantines donation, urged as true and
undoubted by Harding, and the forging of the Council of Nice by Pope Sozimus;
the first of these two, the donation of Constantine, whereby he does give and
grant unto the Bishop of Rome, all Italy, France, Denmark, Sweden, Britain,
etc. with authority and power over all the world, more then that of the Empire
is, and that he be honored and worshipped more then the Emperor. This is
adjudged a forgerie by more then a Jurie of Roman Writers. The other forgerie
was discovered by a Council of Afric, consisting of 217 Bishops, whereof
Saint Augustine was one, who wrote to the Pope thus; Touching that you wrote
unto us concerning the Nicene Council, in the very true Council of Nice,
which we have received from the happy Bishop of Alexandria, and the Bishop of
Constantinople, we find no such matter. Boniface the second was so much moved
hereat, above an hundred years after, as to say, Ep. ad Eulalium.
That all these Bishops (whereof Saint Augustine was one) were all inflamed and
led by the Devil. Thus much concerning your forging Authorities.

But say that we produce some Histories, or Fathers which have not come under
your Index Expurgatorius, nor been refined in your forge; how will you slight,
scorn, abase, deride, slander and revile them? I know not whom of the
Ecclesiastical Historians, nor whom of the Fathers you will admit for a
Witness without exception.

For what Authors, what Records shall serve against them, who with a bold
impudency will deny those Historians, who lived in the fittest time to write
of those things which they have committed to memory, viz. in the Ages next
following; when they neither fear to offend the present, nor with too much
distance cannot discern what is more remote. Such as were the Histories of
Eusebius, Artic. Historiae non minus vetustate, quam novitatae fabulosae, and
injucundae sunt. Bellarm. de Cler. l. 1. cap. 20. Baron. Ann. 324. n. 19.
especially of Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret; yet all these shall be rejected if
they speak any thing that may disadvantage the Papacy, as Socrates, and
Sozomen for relating the Story of Paphnutius speaking for the married Clergy
in the Council of Nice, are thus handled by Bellarmine, Multa mentitur
Sozomenus, Socrates tria mendacia dicit. Socrates and Sezomenus haeretici.
Sozomen tells many lies, Socrates tells three manifest lies; Sozomen and Socrates
were Haereticks. Neither does Baronius handle them any thing more respectively,
saying, Sozomen was not advised; behold, into what errors ignorance has cast
him, n. 22. it does plainly appear how far he was deceived, he did err
concerning the Nicene Council, an. 325. n. 10. Anno 169.
concerning Paphnutius, concerning Arrius, an. 327. n. 7. he was deceived
concerning the Council of Ariminum, and other things, an. 355. n. 27. he does
often relate untruly concerning Athanasius, an. 335. n. 6. an. 354. n. 21. an.
356. n. 85. These were the things of greatest moment in that Age, the Council
of Nice, the most famous that ever was in the world.

The Haeresie of Arrius, the greatest that ever was in the Church; the labors,
troubles and constancy of Athanasius against this Haeresie of greatest note,
and most glorious of any Confessor that ever the Christian Church had before or
since.

Sozomen lived in the fittest Age to be informed of these things, in the
fittest Church, namely in the Greek Church, where these things were done; and
yet is he so full of errors in matters of greatest moment, on which the eyes of
all the Christians in the world stood at a gaze? Is he so full of errors in
these things which were so clear as the Sun in the firmament, so many Records
being preserved of those passages, so many Letters passing from one Bishop to
another? must we think that Baronius, who lived 1200 years after, and no
member, no Inhabitant of the Greek Church knew these things better then
Sozomen did, and kick him off, with saying, He was an impudent fellow? an.
324. n. 19. That he was a Novatian Haereticke? n. 63.

But you would think that Baronius should not thus reject, debase, disgrace
Sozomen, unless he had some other grave Historian of those times to cross
and contradict Sozomen. No such matter: the other famous Historians of that
Age, were Eusebius and Socrates; though Eusebius somewhat more ancient,
beginning his History of the Church from Christ, and continuing it until the
death of Constantine. Socrates and Sozomen, to whom we may add Theodoret, all
three began their History where Eusebius ended, continuing the same unto the
reign of Theodosius junior, which was about the year 400. All these were
Greek Writers, and of the Greek Church, to whom if we add the short
History of Ruffinus, who was a Presbyter of the Latin Church, we have all
the professed Historians of note that I have seen and read for those times; so
that if the authority of these men be slighted, and excepted against as
erroneous, false, impudent, lying Haereticks, I know not what Histories Master
Fisher will produce for the chiefest time of the Primitive Church, the first
400 years. Of Sozomen I have already spoken; the next shall be Eusebius, who
was of that repute in the Age wherein he lived, and the next succeeding Age,
that the other Historians, Ruffinus, Socrates and Sozomen do begin their
Histories where he left, only speaking something more fully concerning Arrius
and the Council of Nice, Sozomen stiling him a man most expert in holy and
humane learning. This man, besides his History, wrote a Chronology, which
Baronius truly styles a Groundwork, Baron. an. 325. n. 213. n. 215.
and foundation whereon the whole fabric and frame of History must rely;
yet herein he is so erroneous, as that Baronius must correct him.

What, so erroneous in the foundation, the whole building must fall then? Thus
Diodorus Siculus, of whom Iustine Martyr the Christian Philosopher writes,
saying, Diodorus Siculus, whom you account the most famous Historian, so
divided his History, as to term his Relations before the Trojan wars, The
Narration of Res and fabulas, matters mixed with fables, because he had no
certain ground how to describe the times.

Varro, a man admired for learning, dividing time into three portions; the
first, before the Flood, which he calls Obscure: the second, from the Flood
unto the first Olympiad, which he terms Fabulous: the third, after the
Olympiads, because of a computation of time he calls Historicum. So great a
matter in History is Chronology; and yet herein Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen,
Ruffinus are charged to be erroneous very often by Baronius; and besides this,
he lays other imputations upon them. Eusebius was an advancer of the Arrian
Heresy, a cunning Juggler; in his History he does favor the Arrians, he does
omit many things, Anno 318. n 79 and 80. an. 324. n. 154. n. 45. n. 144. an.
340. n. 40. n. 38.
he does deal deceitfully, he does falsely relate the time and place of
Constantines baptism, he is false in the story of Estathius; like a
Stage Player, being an Heretic, he acted the part of a Catholic, he was
called the Ensigne-bearer of the Arrians. Socrates dealbat Aethiopem, does but
wash a Blackamoore, in seeking to clear him from the Arrian Heresy; though
he subscribed to the Nicene Council, yet he afterward returned like the Sow
to wallow again in the mire, and like the Dog unto his vomit. He and
Eusebius of Nicomedia, like two Coach-horses drawing the chariot of Impiety,
did run headlong with equal pace and violence to their own destruction, and
the destruction of others, being driven by a wicked Spirit. Thus far Baronius;
saying moreover, That Sixtus Senensis (a learned Writer of his own side) may
be ashamed that he reputed him a Catholic Writer. Does not Baronius rave like
Hercules furens upon the Stage, to deprave a learned painful Bishop, a great
Writer, and the chief Ecclesiastical Historian of the Primitive Church, who
is his chiefest Author for those times, cited by him in his three first Tomes,
700 times at least, so well reputed, that Ruffinus translated his History into
Latin? Sozomen styles him, A man full of Learning, both divine and humane; to
whom these two, together with Socrates and Theoderet, did succeed in compiling
the Ecclesiastical story. The last of these, Theodoret, alleging a large
Epistle of his in defense of the Nicene Creed against Arrius. All these, and
besides them, Acasius, who succeeded him in his Bishopric of Caesarea, do
clear him from such imputations, and did reverently esteem of him; and shall
we think that these men, who lived in the same Age, and within few years
after Eusebius, did not know Eusebius better then Baronius, who lived twelve
hundred years after his time, and more then 1200 miles from the place where
he was Bishop, where he lived and died, and where those occurrences of the
Council of Nice, of Arrius, of Athanasius, were better known then in Rome, a
Church more remote, and of another language, then that wherein that Council
was celebrated, and those Fathers did write? I may not insist much upon the
other Ecclesiastical Writers before named; but they are all reputed ignorant,
false, erroneous; by Baronius.

Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, Baron. an. 34. n. 29.
and they which followed them, erred in the time, and fell into other lies.
Socrates is accused of him for falsehood near twenty times, and most of them
in those matters which were of greatest note, and wherein he and Sozomen do
agree concerning the Council of Nice. Athanasius, Paphnutius, Eusebius, and
Arrius the Heretic; Ruffinus is accused of him for the like falsehood in the
same matters, concerning Arrius, Athanasius, An. 338. n. 2.
as also concerning Saint Hilarie, Gregory Nazianzen, and Basil. He says,
That Ruffinus was an inverter of times, that he was unlearned, that he did
mis-interpret the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice.

I will add one example more. The renowned Athanasius says, That he wrote
his Creed in his banishment. No, says Baronius, Non exul, sed reus tunc Romae
fuit; An. 34. n. 13.
He was not then in his banishment, but called to answer before the Bishop of
Rome, as his Judge. What authority, what reason does Baronius produce? none at
all. And you must believe Baronius, a Sycophant of the Roman Church, before
Athanasius, that most glorious Confessor. Shall we think that he would lie,
who was in trouble 40 years for the truth? or does Baronius, 1200 years
after, without any Author to lead him, know better what Athanasius did, then
Athanasius himself? I should be thought very impudent, if I should say, That
being here in England I did see of my self, and know what Baronius did in his
study in Rome, better then himself. There are not more miles between England
and Rome, then are years from Athanasius his time to Baronius.

Linceus, the Son of Amphiaraus, Valerius Maximus.
that could see through the walls; and that other Sicilian Linceus, who could
number the ships coming out of the Haven at Carthage, himself being at
Litybed in Sicilie, 130 miles off, could not see so well as those men. Honorius
primus, the first Pope of that name, was condemned for an Heretic in three
Councels, accursed for an Heretic by two Popes that succeeded after him; his
own heretical Epistles are found in the Acts of the sixth Council, besides
diverse other Writers, Latin and Greek, that relate it. Yet Bellarmine has the
face to deny all this.

Pope Joane is recorded by Writers of their own, is denied by these late
Romans, that will blush at nothing. When the Carthaginians, in the end of the
second Punick War, sent to Rome to sue for peace, a Roman Senator asked them
by what Gods they would now swear, seeing they had broken the promise they had
formerly made, and swore by the Gods to observe. So I may ask you what
History you will allege for the first 400 years? whose testimony you will
admit? who have rejected and reviled all Historians of those times, calling
them erroneous, partial, false, deceitful, lying, impudent Heretics.

CHAP. XIIII.
Fisher.

AVthoritie; as for example, the Scripture says nothing of this or that, or
the Fathers of the first three hundred years make no express mention of this
or that: Ergo, No such thing is, or is of no force. Yet when the Negative
Argument is grounded in an already granted Affirmative Proposition, as it is in
this our case, the Negative Argument is of great and undeniable force.

As for example, if we did grant this Proposition; if such, or such a thing
were, holy Scripture would have spoken of it, or the Fathers of the first three
hundred years would have made express mention of it. If, I say, we granted
this, we could not deny the aforesaid Negative Argument, usually made by
Protestants, to be of force against us.

Now Master Rogers does not, nor in reason cannot deny Master Fishers fourth
Proposition, which is an Affirmative whereupon his fifth Negative Proposition,
is grounded. And therefore Master Rogers ought not to deny, but must needs
grant Master Fishers fifth, and so all his five Propositions. Which being
granted, if he will make a good answer, as he pretends, he must first set
down names of Protestant Pastors in all Ages, and not content himself with
naming some whom he thinks to be Protestants, and with saying he has gone
half the way.

Secondly, If he will satisfy Master Fishers other Paper, as he pretends to
do, he must prove, and defend them to be Protestants, as Master Fishers Paper
requires; and must bring some or other good Authors, who do clearly show them
to hold all, or some principal points of Protestants Faith, differing from
Catholic Roman Faith; and not to condemn any of the 39 Protestant Articles;
and must not content himself with making such Arguments as he makes, which
are most insufficient either to convince, or probably to persuade, either his
Adversary, or any indifferent judicious Reader; for these be his Arguments.

First, a Causis thus.

The faith contained in the Scriptures, has had visible professors in all ages:

But the Protestant faith is contained in the Scriptures: ergo.

Secondly, a Signis thus.

The faith is that which has testimonies of Antiquities, universality and
consent of fathers, and other writers in all ages.

But the faith of Protestants harh these testimonies: ergo.

Thirdly, ab Exemplis thus.

Names of such as professed the Protestants faith in all ages:

Christ, and his Apostles.

St. John, Ignatius, Polycarpus Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus.

Tertullian, Clemens Alex: Origin, Cyprian, Lactantius.

Athanasius, Cyrill Hierosol: Ambrozius, Nyssenus, Hieronimus.

Ruffinus, Chrysostomus, Augustinus, Cyrillus Alex: Theodoretus,

Fulgentius, Evagrius, Gregorius primus.

Beda; Damascenus, Alcuinus.

Thus having gone half way I conclude with this Argument. The Protestant faith
being that which is contained in Scriptures, was received and taught by all the
Orthodox Fathers.

But the Fathers above named be all Orthodox: ergo.

Now who does not see that these Arguments be most insufficient, and that they
may be most easily answered, by denying the Protestant faith to be contained in
Scriptures, or to have testimony of antiquity, universality, and consent; or to
have been professed by those Fathers which Master Rogers named. Who does not
also see that the same Arguments may be more strongly retorted against
Protestants, by only altering the word Protestant into Catholic? in regard our
Catholic doctrine may be, and is ordinarily proved by plain Testimonies of
Scriptures, and Fathers, even by confession of diverse learned Protestants
themselves. I marvel therefore, that M. Rogers being accounted a worthy
Oxford Divine, would affirm and offer to prove, and defend Protestants to have
been in all ages upon so slight grounds; which if they be admitted for good,
every sect of Heretics may affirm, and prove, and defend men of their sect to
have been in all ages. For trial whereof, I wish it may be imagined that
there were an Anabaptist, (for example) who held all the Protestant faith
saving only some few negatives; and namely, that it is not lawful to baptize
Infants: and that this Anabaptist had framed to himself such false Rules, as
Master Rogers has set down to himself.

Rogers.

I desire Master Fisher, and the Reader to look back to the former page of
the precedent leaf, to which I have already answered; for in matter it was the
same with that which went before, contained in the 26th. and 27th. pages of
Master Fishers Book, against me, which were all spent in seeking to strengthen
his own Propositions, his own grounds, yet the Title he gave unto both those
Pages was, Master Rogers his most weak grounds, there being in both those
Pages not one sentence, nor line, nor word concerning any grounds of mine: so
in the 28th Page of his Book he has put this Title.

Master Rogers his most weak Arguments.

Whereas there is not one Argument, nor one Proposition of mine in all that
Page, as may easily appear to him that will but read the same; only he
speaks something in defense of his own grounds to which I have already
answered. Yet because of the Title, agreeing with the 29 and 30 pages which
follow next after, I have copied them out, and placed them altogether that have
this title, viz.

Master Rogers his most weak Arguments.

Which I think he did to gull his Proselytes, who reading but the Title must
think that Master Fisher has showed my grounds and Arguments to be weak,
when, and where, he has not made any mention of any Arguments of mine.

CHAP. XV.
Fisher.

NOw who does not see that these Arguments be most insufficient, and they may
be most easily answered, by denying the Protestant faith to be contained in
Scriptures, or to have testimony of Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, or to
have bin professed by these Fathers, which M. Rogers named.

Rogers.

I do not think that you did see any insufficiency in the Arguments, or that
they were easily to be answered; for then you would have answered punctually to
every argument apart, and not thus confusedly, and altogether, as if you had
been afraid to come to close fight, but standing a far off, to cast a dart,
or shoot an Arrow. This is,

Pugna levis, bellumque fugax, turmaeque vagantes, Lucan de Parthis.

Et melior cessisse loco quam pellere, miles.
Illica tela dolis, nec Martem comminus unquam
Ausa pati virtus, sed long tendere nervos,
Et quo far velint permittere vulnera ventis.
Light armed men, who flying fight, and never firmly stand;
Better in skipping up and down, then fighting hand to hand.
Their poisned darts they send and shoot, but will not closely fight;
Wounds which they dare not bring themselves, they send by winged flight.
Had the Argument been so easily answered, you would not have answered it by a
manifest untruth, as you have done, by saying, That the Protestants Faith is
not contained in Scriptures, whereas it is one of the greatest Controversies
between you and us, whether the Scriptures be the only rule of Faith? which
we affirm, and you deny; it is the sixth Article in the Doctrine of our
Church of England, the Title is thus: Of the sufficiency of holy Scripture for
salvation.

The Article it self is this:

Holy Scripture contains all things necessary for salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
to be thought requisite and necessary to salvation, etc. To this Article of
ours agrees the Helvetian, Bohemian, French, Belgian, Saxonian, Suevian
confessions. Read the Books of Luther, Brentius, Melancthon, Chemnitius,
Calvin, Zanchie, Whittaker, and you shall find, that they all do profess
this, and write at large in defense thereof. We proclaim it in our Pulpits, we
maintain it in our Schools; we will shed our blood, rather then admit any
Articles of Faith which are not contained in the Scriptures. Is it not strange,
you should have the face to deny that we profess that which is printed in
the Doctrine of our Church, preached in our Pulpits every day, maintained in
our Schools, defended by all, proclaimed to the world? What does Chemnitius
maintain in the first part of his Examen Concilii Tridentini but this? This
the first Controversy which he there handles against you.

What does Calvin labor in his first Book of Institutions? cap. 6, 7, 8 9. in
his third Book, and second Chapter, where he speaks of the nature of Faith,
but this? And it is not a little that he writes to this purpose, in his fourth
Book, and tenth Chapter? Has not Zanchie written a whole Book to this
purpose? Against whom does Bellarmine write his third and fourth Book de verbo
Dei, which tend only to this purpose, to deny the fullness of Scripture, and
to extend matters of Faith to unwritten Traditions, but against the
Protestants? There he puts Luther, and Brentius in the forefront of his
Adversaries. Does not Valenza in his third Tome upon Thomas, disputatione 1a.
quaest. 3a, 4a, 5a, 6a, 7a, and octava, maintain the same Tenet against the
same men? This is the maine Question between your Jesuited Schoolmen and us,
when they write de objecto fidei, what those things are, which are to be
believed with a religious assent of divine Faith? Whether only those things
which are contained in Scriptures, as the Protestants do profess, or also
unwritten Traditions, as the Church of Rome does profess? let us then view the
Argument, and see how you answer it.

1. Arg. First, a Causis thus.

The Faith contained in the Scriptures, has had visible Professors in all Ages.

But the Protestant Faith is contained in the Scriptures. Ergo, The Protestant
Faith had visible Professors in all Ages.

M. Fisher denies the Minor, or second Proposition, which I have proved in the
last Page before, out of the public Doctrine of our Church, and chiefest
Writers of our side and theirs; neither can he be ignorant of the same: but
the Argument troubles him, and something he must say. Neither is he ignorant,
that in this Controversy of the visible Church, between them and us, It is
not the inward habit, but the outward profession of Faith which makes a
visible Church. Ecclesia constat professione ejusde^ fidei, Bellarm. Tom 2. l.
3. c. 2, 3, 4. etc.
and co^municatione eorundem Sacramentorum; The Church does consist in
professing the same Faith, and communicating the same Sacraments. Cap. 9.
And again, the same Author, cap. 10. writes thus; I answer, Formam Ecclesiae
non esse fidem internam (nisi Ecclesiam invisibilem habere velimus) sed
externam, id est, fidei confessionem, etc. The form or essence of the Church,
is not the inward Faith, but the outward profession of Faith, L. 19 c. 11.
which Saint Augustine declares most plainly against Faustus the Manichee; and
experience does testify the same; for they are admitted into the Church who
profess the Faith. Thus far Bellarmine. So then by Faith, in this Argument
of the visible Church, is always understood the outward profession of Faith;
whereas the Protestants do profess, that they believe nothing but what is
contained in the Scriptures: this Respondent has the face to say, we do not
profess it. If but one man should come into the face of a congregation, and
say, I do profess, and believe only those things which are contained in
Scriptures: were not he very impudent, and had a face harder then brass, who
would say to this man, Thou do not profess that Faith which is contained in
Scriptures. That Argument is not easily answered, which drives the Respondent
to such miserable shifts.

We profess no Articles of Faith, but those which are contained in the
Apostles Creed; which of these Articles are not contained in Scriptures? Ad
Parts, Master Fisher, this is the law of answering to a Proposition that has
many members; we profess that with a religious divine Faith, we receive
nothing but what is contained in the five books of Moses, or Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, the two books of Samuel, the two books of Kings, the two books of
Chronicles, the two books of Esdras, Esther, the book of Job, or the Psalms,
or Proverbs, or Ecclesiastes, or the Canticles, or the four greater, or twelve
lesser Prophets; Or in the four Evangelists, or in the Acts of the Apostles,
or the Revelation and Epistles of Saint John, or the Epistles of Saint Paul,
Saint James, Saint Peter, Saint Jude: which of these books is not Scripture?
Thus we profess our Faith; do not we every where profess with Saint
Augustine, De Doct. Christiana. l. 2. c. 9.
and against you; That all things concerning Faith and life, necessarily to be
known and believed, are plainly set down in Scripture? With Saint Basil,
Sermon. de fidei confess. Lib. cont. Hermogen.
and against you; That it is pride and infidelity to add unto the Scriptures?
With Tertullian, against you and Hermogenes, Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis
officina: Si non Scriptum, timeat vae illud, etc. Show where it is written, or
else fear that woe which is denounced against those who add unto the Word of
God. And will you say that we profess any Faith, besides that which is
contained in Scriptures? This is your easy answering, Master Fisher, to deny
that we profess that which we do profess in all our Books, in all our
Schools, in all our Pulpits, in all our Discourses of this subject, viz. What
we ought to believe. You will as easily answer the other Argument; let us see
the Argument, and your answer.

2. Arg. A Signis thus:

The Faith which has testimonies of Antiquity, Universalitie, and consent of
Fathers, and other Writers in all ages, had visible Professors in all ages.

But the Faith of Protestants has these testimonies.

Ergo, The Faith of Protestants had visible Professors in all Ages.

To this you answer, by denying the Minor, or second Proposition thus: The
Protestant Faith has not testimonies of Antiquity, Universalitie, and
consent. Ad parts, Master Fisher, which Article of the Apostles Creed does
want the testimony of Antiquity, Universalitie, and consent? which of those
Books, received for Canonical of the Church of England, and named of me a
little before, want these testimonies of Antiquity, Universalitie, and
consent? Is it Genesis, or Exodus, or any other Book of Moses? Is it the
Psalms, or Proverbs, or Histories that want this testimony? Or is it Esaias, or
Jeremy, or Ezekiel, or Daniel, or any other of the Prophets? Is it Matthew, or
any other of the Evangelists, or Apostles? name the man, name the Church, name
the time; if you cannot, then say, your easy answering is no answer.

3. Arg. Ab Exemplis thus.

Names of such as professed the Protestants faith in all ages: Christ, and his
Apostles.

St. John, Ignatius, Polycarpus, Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus.

Tertullian, Clemens Alex: Origin, Cyprian, Lactantius.

Athanasius, Cyrill Hierosol: Ambrozius, Nyssenus, Hieronimus.









Thus having gone half way I conclude with this Argument. The Protestant faith
being that which is contained in Scriptures, was received and taught by all the
Orthodox Fathers.

But the Fathers above named be all Orthodox. Ergo:

Now what answer do you, Master Fisher, give to this Argument of mine? not a
word, unless to deny the conclusion, be to answer an Argument, I hope you
will not acknowledge your self to be so ignorant in Logic, you know the
Rule: Ex veris possit nil nisi vera sequi

If my Premises be true, my Argument in form; as you neither deny my Premises,
nor except against the form of my Argument, the conclusion must follow, must
be true; for out of true Premises can follow no conclusion, but what is true:
Arist. De Sophist. Elench. c. 17, 18, etc.
this is not easy answering, but not answering. Look into Aristotle
concerning the duty of a Respondent, and the diverse kinds of answering. You,
not being able to answer this Argument, say, I must bring out some or other
good Authors, who do clearly show these before named, to hold all, or some
principal points of Protestant Faith, differing from the Catholic Roman
Faith. I have proved what I undertook, and what is sufficient, by such
Arguments as you cannot answer; you dare not examine, but fly from them,
knowing their strength, and your weakness. But you will have me prove them by
Authors; is any humane authority of a private man better then reason? And what
Authors would you have? will not their own profession, and their own works,
together with the esteem and reputation of Orthodox Writers, which they have
had in all Ages, serve the turn to show what their Faith was? do any men know
what they did believe, or what they did profess, better then themselves? As
for your Roman Catholic Faith, I have already showed, how fond, how vain,
how simple a conjunction you make of them; that no child ordinarily of seven
years of age, understanding the terms, but will wonder with what face you can
say, That a part of a Church is a whole Church, that a part of a Kingdom is a
whole Kingdom, that a part of man's Body is the whole Body.

You say also, that I must prove out of good Authors, that they do not
condemn any of the 39 Protestant Articles: Here you, not being able to answer
(as I think) do dissemble, conceal, and pass by what I did put down in
answer to this demand of yours: viz. 1. It is no prejudice to our Faith, if the
same Authors do differ from us in other opinions, not concerning Faith, as
long as they maintain our Faith. 2. The Church of Rome cannot produce Fathers
in all Ages, who do not contradict the Council of Trent, in some Doctrines
established in the said Council. This you can conceal, and pass over,
knowing that you are not able to perform it, for your Council of Trent. I
undertook for matters of Faith, not for secondarie Doctrines, to produce
Authors in all Ages, professing our Faith, though they might dissent from us in
other Doctrines of an inferior nature, not revealed in Scripture, nor belonging
to the foundation and Principles of Christian Religion. As for the sufficiency
of my Arguments, I have already made it good, for any thing that you have yet
spoken against them. Let us now see what you say further against them?

CHAP. XVI.
Fisher.

WHo does not also see, that the same Arguments may be more strongly retorted
against Protestants, by only altering the word Protestant into Catholic? in
regard our Catholic Doctrine may be, and is ordinarily proved by plain
testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers, A most bold falsehood.
even by the confession of diverse learned Protestants themselves.

Rogers.

All the proof that this man will bring, is ( for ought I can see: or thus
(Who does not see?) I do not see: If it be granted, etc.) as I have observed
before: for if these Arguments might be retorted against the Protestants, by
changing of one word, why did he not perform the same? I must do it for him.

Major: The Faith contained in the Scriptures, had visible Professors in all
Ages.

Minor: But the Catholic Faith is contained in the Scriptures.

Conclusion: Ergo, The Catholic Faith had visible Professors in all Ages.

Here I have only changed the word Protestant into Catholic; and what one
word is here against Protestants, who do hold, and profess no other Faith
then what is contained in Scriptures? as I have already showed out of our sixth
Article; we grant this whole Argument, Major, Minor, and Conclusion: which if
you do grant, I will take the Minor, and infer a dangerous Conclusion
against the Church of Rome thus:

The Catholic Faith is contained in the Scriptures.

The Roman Faith is not contained in the Scriptures.

Ergo, The Roman Faith is not the Catholic Faith.

If you deny this Minor, as it seems by those words of yours before
alleged, you will deny, viz. Our Catholic Doctrine may be, and is
ordinarily proved by plain testimonies of Scriptures, and Fathers, even by
confession of learned Protestants themselves.

I will prove it; yet first let me tell you, that here you deliver a most
gross untruth; if by Catholic you mean Roman, to say that diverse learned
Protestants do confess, that your Roman doctrine may be, and is ordinarily
proved by plain testimonies of Scriptures, and Fathers. This, I say, is a most
manifest and gross untruth, seeing no learned Writers of our side do say so
much. Why does Bellarmine make Scripture a part of the Rule, not the whole
Rule, but to bring in unwritten Traditions? writing a whole Book de verbo Dei
non scripto, of the unwritten Word of God.

And Valenza in his fourth Tome upon Thomas Aquinas is very full in seeking to
prove the same in his first disputation de objecto fidei, delivering these
Propositions, viz.

That the authority to judge in matters of Faith is not contained only in
Scripture, Disputatione prima, puncto septimo, quaestione tertia, Sect. 4. And
again, Sect. 5. The Scripture alone is not the Judge of Faith. As also, Sect.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. As also in the eight question, Sect. 44. in his Tract de
Traditionibus Apostolicis. Neither do I remember that ever I read any of your
late Writers, but hold as these men did: so that in the opinion of these men
you must be but half a Papist, because you receive but half that Rule of
Faith which the Church of Rome receives: for (not to trouble the Reader with
the opinions of private men) it is the first Doctrine, the first Decree of your
Council of Trent, the purity of the Gospel; Fontem omnis salutaris
veritatis, Sess. 4.
and morum disciplinae contineri in libris scriptis, and sine scripto
Traditionibus. The fountain of all saving Truth, and the guide of life is
contained in the written Books, and unwritten Traditions. Have you any other
Faith then the Council of Trent? This is, to be a Protestant in the maine
point, in that which is the Rule of all other points of Faith and life,
necessary for all men to know.

Is this your easy answering, Master Fisher, to grant your Adversary that
which he most desires; to dissent from your Council of Trent? would you but
add this to what you have written, which follows necessarily, I will not
subscribe to Bellarmine, I will not be led by Valenza, herein I will leave the
Council of Trent, I will hold no Doctrine which is not proved by plain
testimony of Scripture, without flying unto unwritten Traditions; I would
rejoice to see you a Protestant in the maine groundwork, and Principle of all
our Religion, hoping, that if you continue in this mind, you will shortly agree
in the rest.

Now let us see how the second Argument may be retorted against the
Protestants, by only changing the word Protestant into Catholic.

2. Arg. A Signis,

The Faith which has testimonies of Antiquity, Universality, and consent of
Fathers, and other Writers in all Ages, had visible Professors in all Ages.

But the Faith of Catholics had these testimonies.

Ergo, The Faith of Catholics had visible Professors in all Ages.

What one word is here against Protestants? we grant both the Premises and
Conclusion, so do not you. For they be your own words within a few lines,
viz. That some points were at first, not held necessary to be believed, even
by Orthodox Fathers, which after by examination, and definition of the Church,
in General Councels, were made so necessary to be believed, as that whosoever
did not believe them were accounted not Orthodox, but Haereticks.

These are your own words; from whence it does follow, that many necessary
points were denied in precedent Ages by Orthodox Fathers; and thence it must
follow again, that they wanted the testimony of all Ages, being denied in
some Ages by the Orthodox Fathers. Such testimonies the Articles of your Roman
Faith may have, yet Orthodox Fathers deny them: and therefore, to frame the
Arguments again, not according to your words, which I have done already, by
changing Protestant into Catholic, but into Roman, for that I think you
understand by Catholic. Let it be thus: The Faith contained in the Scriptures
had visible Professors in all Ages.

But the Roman Faith is contained in the Scriptures.

Ergo, The Roman Faith had visible Professors in all Ages.



Would to God your Minor were true, I would be glad to meet with you in the
Conclusion. But I have already showed out of your own Writers, and Council of
Trent, that you hold the contrary; and your new Creed being examined by
Scripture, will find more contradiction there then proof; unwritten
traditions equalled to the word of God; Seven Sacraments improperly so called;
half Communion; Transubstantiation; Invocation of Saints; worshipping of
Images have neither testimony of Scriptures nor Fathers; this you know well
enough, and therefore you could pass over a great deal of my Reply without
any mention of what I had replied: My words were these; Having gone thus far
at this time, I undertake for the rest, and do require the like from the
Romanists, viz.

That they would show me the names of such as taught the now faith of the
Church of Rome in all ages, and let them set me down the names as I have done.

And for instances in points of Roman faith in all ages, I require these men to
show me the names of those who in the first, second, third Centurie of years,
did preach, or profess unwritten Traditions to be the rule of faith.

Secondly, that the vulgar Latin translation is authentical. Thirdly, that
there are seven Sacraments, improperly so called, and no more. Fourthly, that
the books of Machabees are Canonical. Fifthly, Transubstantiation. Sixthly,
Invocation of Saints. Seventhly, worshipping of Images, etc.

This rule (of showing the names of such as professed the faith in all ages) is
proposed by them, which though it be no necessary consequence of faith, yet it
binds them that propose it to make it good in particular.

Out of their own Position thus I argue.

First Argument.

That is a true Church whose faith has had visible professors in all ages,
whose names may be showed out of good Authors to be such.

The Romish faith had not such visible professors in all ages.

Ergo: The Roman is not a true Church.

Second Argument.

The true faith has the testimonies of Universality, Antiquity, and Consent.

But the Romish faith (as far as they differ from the Protestants faith,
which they do in all the points above alleged, has not testimonies of
Universality, Antiquity, and Consent.

Ergo: The Romish faith in those points wherein they differ from the
Protestants faith, is not a true faith.

Let the Romanists answer these two Arguments in those particular points above
written, and I will be of their Church.

Thus much in my former answer, to which you have made no reply at all, you
have neither given any instance which point of my faith is not contained in
Scriptures, or wants the testimony of Universality, Antiquity, and Consent,
or was not believed, and professed by those Fathers by me alleged.

Secondly, you have not answered to those instances of Roman faith, though I
required it but for three ages, nor to the Arguments which I made against you,
though this were a rule of your own, to show names in all ages, and denied by
me to be a necessary consequence of faith; only this you say, first, that my
grounds are slight, and may fit all sorts of Heretics, and you instance in the
Anabaptists. Secondly, you say my grounds are false, to both which I will reply
when I have made out my Catalogue for the other succeeding ages before Luther.

CHAP. XVII.
THough my faith rely not upon this Catalogue of names, or humane authority as
I have formerly often professed; yet to provoke and draw on the Romanists to
make good what they have undertaken, viz to bring a Catalogue of such good
Authors as they require from us, who did in all ages profess the now Roman
faith contained in the Creed of Pius Quartus, dated at Rome in the year 1564.
Which I assure my self they cannot do, and I do verily persuade my self
never mean to attempt; only because they would say some thing, they will lay
a false ground, and require their Adversaries to build upon those Sands, which
when we have done, they will never proceed to do as much for their faith; but
cavil at others, and never speak any thing in defense of their own faith;
being assured in their consciences that it is impossible they should be able to
perform it. First, for the novelty of those points of faith acknowledged by
some of themselves. Secondly, for the want of learning and good Authors in
many of the succeeding ages. For to speak a little of the first, what Authors
can they find for their half Communion in the first ages, seeing it is
confessed by most of them that ever I heard, or read, that the contrary was
practiced for a thousand years after Christ? This much was acknowledged by
one, who (as I have been since informed) was a Jesuit, in the presence and
hearing of Sir Sa. A. of his Lady, Master Westph. and others. And your most
industrious quoter Master Briereley can find no Author for it before the
Council of Constance, which was 1400 years after the coming of Christ in the
flesh; unless he rely upon the Haereticks, the Maniches. What Authors will
they find in the first ages for worshipping of Images, for Purgatory, for
Invocation of Saints, for Indulgences, etc? as I have before mentioned. If they
be able to descend but three ages from Christ, and produce good Authors which
did believe these, and make them matters of faith, as the Church of Rome now
does, I will be of their Church, I will leave the Church of England; nay, I
will leave (which I will not do for a thousand Empires) my hope of heaven.
This offer of theirs I know to be so vain, false, impudent, and impossible.

Secondly, It is very hard for him that has no other means to prove his
Church, and his faith, then by a Catalogue of names drawn out of Histories, or
other good Authors, to have any certainty of his Church, or faith, because of
the ignorance of many ages, and want of good Authors.

Baronius who spent all his life in this search, Tom. 2. ^n. 1.
and in describing the state and condition of the Church in all ages,
complains of this difficulty, saying, that it is most hard to be known, and
like the way of a ship in the midst of the Sea, and the way of a Serpent upon a
Rock. This is his complaint in the beginning of his second Tome, yet has he
more cause to complain of this difficulty in those succeeding ages, whereof I
am now to give a Catalogue; Canus l. 11. c. 6.
which times the learned Causabon does doubt whether he shall call them times
of ignorance, or times of wonder: S. Tho. Moor in ep. ante Dial. Luciani. In
Chrond.
the most Historians of those times, being but Legendaries of Fables, as is
confessed by many of your own side. Bellarmine says of the ninth age, Vide
seculum infoelix in quo nulli scriptores illustres, nulla Concilia, Pontifices
parum solliciti de Rep. Behold, an unfortunate age in which there were no
famous Writers, no Councels, and the Popes took little care of the common
good. An age says Baronius usually styled, an abscure, a leaden, and an iron
age, as barren of good, as if it had been iron; so loaded with evil, as if it
had been with a burden of lead; and obscure for want of Writers: saying also;
The weak conscience is to be admonished that he be not troubled, if he see the
abomination of desolation, sitting in the Temple. In this age there rose such a
mighty flood of wickedness, as that the ship of Peter might have seemed to
have been overwhelmed with the waves, and forsaken almost of any Governor, n.
2. Certainly the Church never seemed to be in greater hazard, or more manifest
danger of utter ruin then in that age; for the persecutions of Heathens of
Haereticks, of Shismaticks, were but childish sports in comparison of what the
Church suffered in this age, n. 3.

An. 900. n. 1.
Stephen was an invader of the Apostolic See, was driven out, cast into
prison, and there strangled.

An 908. n. 1.
Christopher was violently deposed, bound, cast into prison, and constrained to
become a Monk. After him Sergius, mounteth into the Chair, being powerful in
the forces of the Marquess of Tuscanie. Vitiorum omnium servus,
facinorosissimus omnium, quem constat post malum ingressum deterioremque
progressum, pessimum demum esse consecutum egressum.
This was a man that was the slave of all vices, the most wicked of all men;
bad was his entrance, worse was his proceeding but worst of all was his end;
all men cry him down for no lawful Pope, but for an Intruder. numb. 2.

Diverse of these usurping Popes were to be termed not Apostolical, but
Apostaticall, n. 4. Theodora Scortum impudens, Romanae civitatis Monarchiam
obtinebat, quae duas habuit natas Maroziam atque Theodoram sibi non solum
aequales, verumetiam Veneris exortivo promptiores. Harum una Marozia ex Papa
Sergio Ioannem, qui post Ioannis Ravennatis obitum, Sanctae Romanae ecclesiae
obtinuit dignitatem, nesario genuit adulterio Lutprandus, lib. 2. cap. 13. An.
912. n. 7.
Theodora an impudent Whore did rule all the roast in Rome, she had two
daughters, Marozia, and Theodora, two verier Whores then her self. The first
of these had by Pope Sergius, a son called John, who was afterward Pope of
Rome. She and her daughters were so powerful by their bawdery, and whoredom,
that they placed Popes, and displaced them at their pleasure. numb. 6.

Who considering these things would not think that God had forgotten his
Church. n. 7. So great were the evils of this whole age, ibidem.

The Queen Theodora did raise one John a Minister of Ravennas, (whom she
shamefully loved) to be Pope. Such was the unfortunate condition of the holy
Church of Rome at that time, that all things were governed and altered at the
pleasure of a powerful Whore. Lando was no true Pope, n. 12. An. 915. n. 3.
John the 10, was an Intruder, a Thief, a Ruffian, An. 925. n. 12.
Quo turpior nullus cujus ingressus insamissimus, exitus infandissimus, dignus
quem infamis foemina, infami opere in Petri solium intrusisset: The filthiest
of all men, who entered the Popedom shamefully, and ended wickedly, a fit man
to be thrust by an infamous woman into the Chair of Saint Peter. Note the
visibility of the Church of Rome.
O what was then the face of the holy Church of Rome, was it not most foul and
filthy, when powerful and base Whoores did rule all at Rome? at whose pleasure
Sees were changed, Bishops were made, and which will make a man tremble to
hear, and is more wicked then can be spoken, their lovers falsely termed Popes
thrust into Peter's Chair, who had never been written in the Catalogue of Roman
Bishops, had it not been thereby to reckon the years, and set down the times.
For who can say that these men thrust in by Whoores without Law were lawful
Roman Bishops? There was no man at all of the Cleargies Election or consent,
all Canons were silenced, Decrees of Popes smoothered, ancient Traditions, and
old Customs in choosing the Pope were banished, the holy Ceremonies, and former
use were wholly extinguished. Lust backed with worldly power, mad, Dormiebat,
tunc plane (ut apparet) sopore Christus.
and frantic with a desire of rule, challenged all unto her self. It
appears plainly that Christ was then in a dead sleep in the ship, when the
strong winds thus blowing, the ship it self was covered with the waves. Ista
non vtdere dissimulans.
I say, he was asleep, who dissembling, as if he did not see those things,
did suffer them so to be done, and did not rise to vengeance. And that which
did seem worse, there were no Disciples, who with their cries would awake
their Master, thus sleeping; for they were all asleep, that they snored
again. And what kind of Presbyter, and Deacon Cardinals, shall we think were
chosen by such Monsters, seeing nothing is more firmly graffed in nature, then
this, that like should beget like? And who can doubt, but that these did in all
things consent unto those by whom they were chosen? And who will not easily
believe that they did imitate them, and tread in their steps? And who cannot
understand, that all these did wish that Christ had slept for ever, Anno 912.
n. 8.
and should never wake, nor rise in judgment to examine and punish their
offenses. Thus far Baronius.

But you will ask me, what needs so much labor in showing that we had
some bad times, and some bad Popes? for so you are used to extenuate all that
we allege in this kind. You say, that Christ himself, having but twelve
Apostles, had one devil amongst them. But what I have alleged here, does
show, that diverse of those who supplied the place of Christ himself, his
Vicars general upon earth, as you term them, men to whom the Church is
essentially joined, and must be obedient, were devils, monsters, the dearlings
of Whores, some of them Bastard children of Popes, by these notorious Whores;
and all their Priests, Deacons and Cardinals like themselves, so Atheistical
in their courses and desires, as to wish that Christ might sleep
everlastingly, and never rise to judgment: nay, the visible government of the
Roman Church, which you will have to be the only Church, was not so much in
them, as in these whores, who made and unmade Bishops and Popes, without any
regard of Canons, or Customs Ecclesiastical; and this wickedness was
praevalent, not for a few years, or a few Popes, but for this whole Age, Toto
hoc saeculo, says Baronius, which is for 100 years. Yet you Romanists will
have all Christians in the world to behold, and to be led by the visible Roman
Church, though the face, and whatsoever was visible therein, was most foul and
filthy, not only in him who sat in the Chair of Peter, as you say; but also
in all his Consistory, in all his Deacons, Priests and Cardinals. But you will
say, These were no Popes; then will I say, that by your Doctrine, you had no
Church: for the Pope is now a part of the definition of the Church with you,
and therefore no Pope, no Church. You know the Rule, A part definitionis
negative sequitur argumentum.

Or will you say (for so Baronius does) Shall any man, shall all men in the
world pin their souls upon the sleeves of such Monsters? cleave unto them, and
be obedient unto them, only because they sat in the Chair, though usurpingly?
And will you undertake to prove your Church to have had visible Professors in
all Ages, when in a whole Age there was nothing visible, but what your selves
are ashamed to look back upon? You will have much ado to find a Catalogue of
names in this Age, because you must not go out of the Roman Church: but we
acknowledge the Greek, Ethiopian, Indian, Armenian, Syrian Churches, have a
larger scope, and shall more easily pass through this difficulty, seeing
there was in this Age, in Armenia, one Nico magnus, Baron. An. 961. n. 4, 8,
10. Anno 976. n. 2. 980. n. 7, 8, 9.
and sanctus Orientis Praeco; a great and holy Preacher of the East: and the
Church of Greece had in this Age, two men famous for learning and holiness,
Nilus and Nico, as the same Baronius confesses.

CHAP. XVIII. Showing a threefold Catalogue of Names from the Age wherein my
former Catalogue did end, unto Luthers time, of such as professed and received
the Faith, and Sacraments of the reformed Church, whom the Papists call
Protestants.
MY first Catalogue (Mr. Fisher) shall be of Bishops, Pastors, and Writers of
the Latin Church, such as are acknowledged by your Church for Orthodox, men of
a right Faith.

Ab Anno 800, ad 900.

Agobardus Episcopus Rem. Rabanus Maurus Moganti: Hincmarus Rem. Amalarius
Fortunatus. Leo 3. Episcopus Romans Jonas Aurelianensis. Walafridus Strabo.
Theodulphus Aurelianensis.

Ab Anno 900, ad 1000.

Baron. An. 901. n. 10.
Theodulphus Episcopus legatus Regis Franc. in Concilio Ovetensi.

Ermenegildus primus Archiepisc. Ovetensis in Gallaecia.

Baron. An. 900. n. 10.
Fulco Remensis laudatissimus ille Archiepiscopus, columen Francorum.

Baron. An. 904.
Grimbaldus Presbyter vir magnae sanctitatis in Anglia.

Johannes Papa 9. qui tribus Conciliis a se celebratis summam sibi laudem
comparavit. -- velut alter Ieremias, in cujus Epitaphio inter alia haec
habentur. Conciliis docuit ternis qui dogma salutis, and mox. Et firmata fides
quem docuere Patres.

146. Baron. An. 905. n. 4.
Herveus Remensis, who first converted the Normans to the Faith, and held a
Synod, in which they said, That the Rock whereon Christ promised to build his
Church, was the confession of Peter. At this Council were present also,

Rothomagensis Archiepiscopus.

Rodolphus Landunensis Episcopus.

Trodoardus Hist. Rem. l. 4. c. 13. Baron. An. 930.
Erlimus Bellovacensis Episcopus: aliique multi. Whose names are subscribed.

This Herveus held many Synods.

Vnus Hambargensis Archiepiscopus qui convertit Danos.

Glaber temporis ejus auctor. Hist. l. 2. c. 11, 12. Baron. An. 100 n. 4. Tom.
10. Lib. de officiis Missae edito Parisiis, Anno 1610. Bellarm. de Script.
Ab Anno 1000, ad 1100.

Lebuinus Episcopus in Gallis, qui populum suum ex part deceptum Catholicae
before restituit fidei.

Anno 1000. Baronius, n. 3.

Petrus Archiepiscopus Ravennas qui Vilgardum Haereticum docentem fidei sacrae
contraria damnavit.

Berno Augiensis Abbas qui testatur post Evangelium, in missa recitari Symbolum
Constantinopolitanum, and a Concilio Toletano statutum, id omni die Dominico
secundum morem Orientalium Ecclesiarum decantari. In hoc Authore miror
Bellarmini oscitantiam, ne quid gravius dicam, qui ita scripsit. Ex quo libro,
cap. 2. (viz. Baronius de officio Missae) discimus hoc primum tempore, coepisse
in Romans Ecclesia cani ad Missam Symbolum fidei. Cum contrarium doceat
Walafridus Strabo, lib. de rebus Ecclesiasticis, cap. 22. Qui vixit aliquot
seculis ante Bernonem, obiit enim ut placet Hiltorpio, Anno 849. Berno autem,
Anno 1048. Et ipse ordo Romanus idem doceat apud Hiltorpium, col. 4. Miror
inquam, quod non distinxerit ambiguitatem vocis Romanae, quae pro Latina
Ecclesia saepe usurpatur, cum hic intra urbem, and suburbicanas Ecclesias vel
saltem intra Italiae fines claudatur ut apparet ex Bernone.

Micrologus, whose Books of Ecclesiastical Observations, Pamelius does
prefer before all others that wrote upon that subject; as Amalarius
Walafridus does witness, Cap. 46.
that Creed in Vnum, etc. viz. The Creed commonly reputed the Nicene Creed,
Iuxta Canones in omni Dominica debet cantari, and in omnibus, etc.
according to the Canons, is to be read upon every Lords day. In his 19 chapter
he is very full for communicating in both kinds, citing Ordo Romanus, and
Julius, Papa 36. and Gelasius, Papa 51. very peremptory in this kind. This
Author lived about the year 1080, says Pamelius in his Preface before the
work.

Ivo Carnotensis Episcopus, who speaks of our Sacraments, and of the Apostles
Creed professed in Baptism, Sermon. de Sacramentis. And in his Sermon De
Convenientia veteris, and novi sacrificii, he briefly proves all the chief
heads of Christian Faith; who in the later end of that Sermon speaks of
communicating in both kinds. And in his Sermon De coena Domini, he says, Let
none of the Faithful this day absent himself. Dwell you in Christ, that
Christ may dwell in you, and you be worthy Receivers of his Body and Blood. He
in his Sermon, In Cathedra Sancti Petri, says, That that Feast was in
memorial of that day wherein Peter at Antioch was made Bishop, and Pastor of
Gods people -- And that he was called Peter, because of the confession of his
Faith.

Ab Anno 1100, ad 1200.

Sanctus Bernardus. Rupertus, Tutiensis.

Algerus, who denies your half Communion, citing those words of Pascasius;
under the name of Saint Augustine, Nec caro sine sanguine, Lib. 2. de corpor.
and sang. Christ. cap. 8. Bellarm.
nec sanguis sine carne rite communicatur.

Rich. de Sancto Victore, who refuses your Canon of the Bible.

Hugo de Sancto Victore, who denies Penance to be a Sacrament.

Ab Anno 1200, ad 1300.

Alexander of Hales, who denies the Sacrament of Confirmation, as a Sacrament
to be instituted by Christ, part 4. q. 5. membro 2.

Hugo Cardinalis, Bonaventura,
Both which deny your Canon of the Bible; Hugo, in his Prologue before
Ecclesiasticus, Bonaventura pr. part. q. 89. Art. 8. ad 2. Gulielmus Episcopus
Parisiensis.

Ab Anno 1300, ad 1400.

Lib. 4. Sent. did. 26.
Durandus, he denies Matrimony to be a Sacrament.

Nicholaus Lyranus, he holds the same Canon of the Bible that we do, and
denies yours.

Franciscus Mayron. Qui inter alia scripsit de Articulis fidei.

Simon de Cassia. Qui scripsit expositionem Symboli Apostolici.

Ab Anno 1400, ad 1500.

Dionysius Carthusianus, who denies your Canon of the Bible; Prologo in
Ecclesiasticum.

Gregorius Heymburgensis, who wrote against the Popes Supremacy.

Panormitanus. Picus Mirandula.

Hist. Trid. Concilii. Sleidanus in Commentariis.
Thomas Cajetanus, who had conference with Luther.

All these are Latin Authors, acknowledged by you of the Roman Church for
Orthodox, at least two of them in every Age, which were sufficient; but I can
make it good for all, out of Bellarmine, Baronius, Surius, Hiltorpius, or
Synods, allowed by your Church. Thus therefore I argue: Major: All orthodox, or
right believing Christians do receive and profess the Apostles Creed, the
Books of old and new Testament, received for Canonical by the Fathers of the
first 400 years, together with the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, which the Protestants profess.

Minor: But these Authors aforenamed in my Catalogue, from the year 800, to
the year 1500, are all orthodox, or right believing. Ergo,

Conclusio. All these Authors aforenamed in my Catalogue, from the year 800,
to the year 1500, do receive, and profess the Apostles Creed, the said
Books of the old and new Testament, the two Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, which the Protestants receive and profess.



Or thus: Major: Whosoever receive our whole Faith, and all our Sacraments, are
of our Church, and we of theirs.

Minor: But all these Authors receive our whole Faith, and all our Sacraments.
Ergo,

Conclusio: All these Authors are of our Church, and we of theirs.



But you, having another Faith, a new Creed, new Articles cannot prove these,
or any other to have held that your new Faith entirely; and I have showed most
of these Authors expressly to deny, some one, some another Article of your new
Creed: so that a man may be orthodox, and yet deny your Faith, your Creed.

No man can be saved that denies the true Faith.

But many are saved who deny the Roman Faith.

Ergo, The Roman Faith is not the true Faith.

The Major I know you will not deny. The Minor you must grant, or your Saints,
and greatest Writers were damned for want of your Faith.

A second Catalogue, viz. of Greek Authors, who being of the Greek Church,
did profess our Scriptures, Faith, Sacraments, and Councels: but do reject
diverse points of the Roman Faith, and all the Councels of the Latins since the
year 800; as appears by their profession in the Council at Ferrara, made by
Marcus Bishop of Ephesus, Sess. 5.
in a grave and learned speech, recorded by your own Surius in the fourth Tome
of Councels imprinted at Colonia Agrippina, Anno 1567.

Definitiones, and Decreta aliarum omnium Synodorum recitanda nobis videntur,
ut haec nostra Synodus non solum ab illis non discrepare, verumetiam ipsas in
omnibus imitari velle videatur, quoniam nos firmiter credimus majores nostros
nil prorsus silentio praeterjiffe quod ad nostrum fidei Symbolum spectet.
Marcus Ephesinus in Generali 8. Synodo Sess. 3. apud Surium Tom. 3. Page 375.

Porro autem quoniam de Divinis primi ac alterius Concilii dogmatibus, nil
aliud reperitur nisi duae tantem fidei nostrae expositiones, hoc est, duo
Symbola quae tamen pro uno a caeteris Conciliis suscepta fuerant: idcirco a
recitandis tertii Concilii gestis auspicandum nobis censemus, vobis probare
promittimus Christianorum omnium unam esse, Catholicam fidem, ad quam
accessionem aliquem fieri, aut quicquam ab ea non liceat auferri. In primis
ergo Nicenum Symbolum a trecentis december, and octo Patribus Niceae celebratum,
recitetur. Legatur etiam ejusdem Concilii definitio, ut idem Nicenum Symbolum
immutabile, ac immobile permaneret, neminique fas esset aliam fidem proferre,
Sess. 5. Quartum Concilium, viz. Ephesinum definit, atque determinat, ut aliam
fidem conscribere, aut componere, aut sentire, aut docere liceat nemini.

Concilium 5. viz. Constantinopol. idem definit, and qui aliud Symbolum
docuissent anathemati subjiciunt. Sic etiam 6. Concilium seu Trullanum priora
Concilia and dictum Symbolum amplectitur, and obsignat. Sic etiam 7. ac ultimum
generale Concilium, Hactenus Marcus Ephesians. ibidem.

Ab anno 800. ad 900.

1. Theodotus Melissenus. 2. Johannes Sixtus. 3. Photius.
All these three were Patriarchs of Constantinople, as is acknowledged by
Baronius an. 835. n. 25. All zealous adversaries to your worshipping of Images;
for which Baronius there calls the first Haereticum Iconoclastam, an
haereticall Image-breaker;

The second, Haeresis promulgatorem acerrimum.

The third, namely Photius, held a Council at Constantinople, plane numerosum
admodum Concilium, it was a very full Council, in so much as Michael the
Emperor gloried that it equalled the number of the Fathers of the great Nicen
Council, test Baron. an. 861. n. 1. This was accounted a General Council by
Photius, and by Theodorus Balsamon Comenting upon it, Sic ait Baron: ibid. n.
eodem. In this Council was condemned the worshipping of Images.

Ab anno 900. ad 1000.

Nilus Calaber. Habuit hoc saeculo Graeca Ecclesia duos, doctrina, and
sanctitate illustres, Nilum Calabrum, and Niconem Lacedemon. Baron. an. 900. n.
8.

Nico. Lacedemon. Hic non a Graecis solum, sed etiam a Latinis inter Sanctos
est relatus, Baron. an. 961.

Ab anno 1000. ad 1100.

Simeon Armenus. Vir Sanctus, and verae fidei Professor. Baro. an. 1016. n. 7.
8.

Theophilactus Episcopus Bulgarorum. He in his writings imitateth Saint
Chrysostom, but he is a Schismaticke, says Bellar. de scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis.

Ab anno 1100. ad an. 1200.

Euthimius Zigabenus, who wrote against all Haeresies, and upon the 4. Evangel.
Bellarm. de Scriptoribus Ecclesiae.

Theodorus Balsamon, Who commented upon Photius his Nicene Canon, and diverse
Councels. He was an enemy to the Church of Rome, says Bellarm.

Ab Anno 1200. ad 1300.

Arsenius Patriarcha Constantin: A man for virtue, and the service of God not
far short of the highest perfection, ut Nicephorus Gregor. lib. 3. p. 31.
edit. Basiliensis, an. 1562. cum Caesarea Majest. privilegiis.

Gregorius Patriarcha, Idem Gregor. l. 6 page 80.

Ioannes Glices, Patriarch also of Constantin. a most learned, grave, wise man
above all men, Nicephorus Gregoras, lib. 8. page 123. and. 132.

Ab Anno 1300. ad 1400.

Catechuzenus. Pachimaerus. Nicephorus Gregoras.

These three were Fathers of the 14 age, says Bzonius in the end of that age.
Tom. 13. in his Supplement of Baron. his Ecclesiastical History, an. 1299.
They did teach contrary to the doctrine of the Haereticks (so Baronius calls
us) but I may truly say that the first, and last of the three teach contrary to
their faith, and so the other professed, or he could not be of the Greek
Church, who deny the Popes primacie of power, deny Purgatory, Communicate in
both kinds.

For Catechuzenus, in the election of John Bishop of Constantinople, does say,
that all Bishops of greater, or lesser Cities receive equal grace. Baronius
adds his own Gloss, saying, True equal grace, of Order, not of
Jurisdiction.

Nicephorus in his 10 book, disputes at large against the Latin Church, a
page 230 ad finem ejusdem libri.

To. 6. Bibl. Sanct. page 99. Ep. ad lect.
To these I may add Cabasilas, whom together with Balsamon, Genebrard calls
two famous Greek Fathers, for which words he is blamed by M. De la Bigne, who
calls the same men Schismatics, and enemies to the Church of Rome, Tom. 6.
Bibl. Sanct. page 101. 102.

Gentianus Hervetus, another of your side, does write in defense of Cabasilas,
in his Preface to the Reader, before Cabasilas his book, entitled, A
Compendious Interpretation upon the Divine Sacrifice, extant dicto 6 Tom. Bibl.
Sanctae page 159. But he is thus blamed by your De la Bigne.

Dealbat Aethiopem.
Gentianus laboring to excuse Cabasilas, does but wash a Blackamoore; for it
is manifest he was a Schismaticke, that he burned with hatred against the
Church of Rome, and wrote an Haereticall Book against Tho. Aquinas. Yet he is
placed by Bellarmine amongst his Ecclesiastical Writers, in a distinct Column
also of his Chronology from Haereticks.

Ab Anno 1400, ad 1500.

Marcus Ephesinus, Insignis Theologus, as he is styled in the Acts of the
Council of Florence, Sessione 2. apud Surium, Tom. 4.

Laonicus Chalcondilas, who being of the Greek Church, testifies, that the
agreement made at Florence, was not received in Greece. lib. 1. de rebus
Turcicis non long a principio.

Thus have I finished my Catalogue of Greek Writers, having many more to
insert, if any just exception can be given against these. I will conclude
concerning them, with these two Arguments: the one, to prove that they were of
our Faith and Church; the other, to prove that they were not of the Roman
Faith, or Church, thus: All they that do profess the Apostles Creed, as it
was explicated in the Nicene Council, that receive the Scriptures received by
the Protestants, that receive the four first General Councels, and the two
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist under lawful Pastors, are of the
Protestants Faith, and Church.

But those Authors, as all others of the Greek Church did profess, and
receive the said Creed, Scriptures, Councels and Sacraments under lawful
Pastors.

Ergo, They are of the Protestants Faith and Church.



The Proposition is A definitione ad Definitum, the most demonstrative
substantial proof that reason can find. The Assumption appears by the
profession of the Grecians at Ferrara, whereof I have cited a part above in the
beginning of this Catalogue; and it may be seen more fully in their own
Surius, Tom. 4. Conciliorum loco supra citato.

None of those who deny the Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, Transubstantiation,
and Communion in one kind, are of the Roman Faith and Church.

But all these aforenamed, being of the Greek Church, deny the Popes
Supremacy, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and Communion in one kind.

Ergo, They are not of the Roman Faith, and Church.

A Catalogue of Councels General or Provincial in all Ages, which did
profess our Faith.
TO name particular men in all Ages, who did profess our Faith, receive our
Scriptures and Sacraments, is not to prove our Church extant in all Ages; for
one man is not a Church, no more then one member, as hand, or foot is the body,
or one Citizen is a City, or one subject is a Kingdom. I have therefore
thought it fit, out of my many years reading, observation, and collection, to
prove, that not only some particular men, but also whole Churches, that is, a
society of many men professing our Faith, Scripture, and Sacraments, have
been in all Ages: to this end, I have put down a Catalogue of Councels in all
Ages (which Councels are justly termed, The Church representative) who profess
our Faith, Scriptures, and Sacraments, although the maine proof is in that of
Faith, which includes the rest: for this Faith has no other object then the
Scriptures Canonical, and receives no Sacraments but what are contained in
the Scriptures, and instituted by God. And because all Councels did not record,
nor publish all those things which were done of course, and observed at the
opening, and in the beginning of every Council; I thought it would prove
satisfactorie to the Reader, that he should be acquainted, how they never began
Councels without solemn Prayers, or Mass, as the Romanists call it: and that
in every Mass our Creed is repeated, as appears by their Missals, and those
Authors in the Margin, which are Expositors of the Mass: so that seeing our
Creed is professed in every Mass, and all Councels begin with a solemn Mass,
it follows, that all Councels did profess our Faith. Yea, over and besides
this, I will add other proofs; as 1, an Injunction that it should be so. 2.
Historical testimony that it was so. First, Ordo Romanus, published by
Hiltorpius at Paris, anno 1610. col. 171. in the order for the first day, of
holding a Council after some Prayers which are there set down, concludes
thus; Then all men keeping silence, Tunc tacentibus cunctis ex Niceno Concilio
fides Catholica a Di^cono legatur.
let the Catholic Faith be read by the Deacon out of the Nicene Council: I
believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of all things visible and
invisible. Then the Deacon shall bring forth the Book of the Canons, and read
the Chapters concerning the manner of holding Councels, out of the fourth
Council of Toledo. Thus you see it was commanded, that the Creed which we
profess should be professed in the beginning, and opening of every Council,
since the time of that Ordo Romanus, which, whether it were as ancient as
Charles the Great, in which time it was brought to France, Hitorpius in
praefatione.
or more ancient in Rome, as being for the substance made by Gregory the
first, it will serve my turn for succeeding Ages. But in my Historical
observation I will ascend higher, and to the Apostles times.

This Creed, says Baronius, An. 44. n. 18. Act. Conc. Calce. Ephesians. Constin. 2.
et aliorum.
(speaking of the Apostles Creed) the Catholic Church has always had in
such esteem, as that in all sacred General Councels, it was the custom to
repeat it as a grround-worke, or foundation of the whole Ecclesiastical
building.

All men thought it fit, Prayers being solemnly performed and finished, to make
confession of their Faith after the manner of General Councels. Conc. Tol. 6.
apud Surium, Tom. 2. page 741. col. 1, and 2.

The ancient Decrees of the Fathers were reverently confirmed, in Consilio
Romano more solito, after the usual manner. Vrspergensis, cited also by
Baronius, anno 102. n. 1.

It was required by the Graecians in the Council of Florence, begun at
Ferrara, Sess. 3. apud Surium.
That the Council might begin with reciting the Definitions and Decrees of the
seven precedent General Councels; not only (say they) that it may appear we
dissent not from them, but also that we may imitate them: for we firmly
believe, etc. And, Sess. 5 they cited the Decree of the fifth Council, saying
thus; All men should preserve the foundation of Faith, and observe that Creed
wherein they were baptized; which the Nicene Council commended to posterity,
received by the Council of Constantinople, approved by the Council of
Ephesus, and sealed up by the Council of Chalcedon: all which we also
receive. Thus far the words of the fifth Council, then and there urged by the
Graecians, together with the 6th and 7th Council to the same effect.

Having laid this groundwork, that all lawful Councels, and orthodox,
recieved and published by the Romanists themselves, for such did profess our
Faith, it were sufficient for me to name approved Councels in every Age,
without any further observation in particular; yet for the greater benefit of
the Reader I will do more, beginning even with the Apostles themselves.

A Catalogue of Councels which did profess our Faith in every Age, beginning
with the Apostles; the first Age from the Nativitie of our blessed Savior,
Seculum 1.
to the 100th year.
Act. 1. 1. Council of the Apostles. Act. 6. 2. Council of the Apostles. Act.
15. 3. Council of the Apostles. Act. 21. 4. Council of the Apostles.
IN the year 34, says Baronius, n. 237. for to choose an Apostle into the place
of Judas. Surius, Tom. 1. Conc. p. 17.

Wherein the seven Deacons were ordained the first year after the death of
Christ, says Surius, Tom. 1. Conc. page 18. Anno 34. says Baron.

Concerning Circumcision, and the Ceremonial Law of Moses. This was 14 years
after the death of Christ, says Surius in the place above cited. An. 51. says
Baronius.

Wherein Paul was advised to purify four persons after the Law of Moses, for
to pacify the Jews who were incensed against him, as an enemy to Moses.

The ordinary Gloss, and Surius observe only these four; some add two more,
one Acts 4. another Acts 11. I will add one more, not mentioned in the
Scripture, but mentioned by many Fathers; as Ruffinus, Jerome, Augustine, Leo,
Venantius, Albinus, Flaccus, and alii.

5. Council of the Apostles.
Wherein they composed the Apostles Creed, being now ready to depart one from
another, as a Rule of preaching, whereby it might be discerned who did preach
Christ according to the Rules of the Apostles: so says Ruffinus, who lived
about the year 400.

This assembly is recorded by Baronius, in the year 44. n. 7. which was before
the two later Councels mentioned; the one, Acts 15, and the other, Acts 21. I
think Master Fisher will not deny, but these Councels professed the Apostles
Creed.

From the year 100, to 200. Seculum 2. The 2 Age.

Anno 190. Wherein were Presidents, 1. A Council in Palestina.
Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, and Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius,
lib. 5. cap. 21. 2. A Council in Rome.


Under Victor. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 11. Anno 198. says Baronius.

Wherein was President, 3. A Council of the Bishops of Pontus. 4. A Council
in Gaul.
Palma. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21. Anno 198. Baronius.

Wherein was President, St Irenaeus, whose learned Book against Haereticks is
extant. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21.

Wherein Polycrates was President, who dissented from the other Councels in the
day of celebrating Easter, 5. A Council in the lesser Asia.
and of Fasting, and were therefore excommunicated by Victor Bishop of Rome.

But this pleased not all the Bishops (who were of this opinion) who did advise
him to relish those things which might further peace, unity, and love with his
neighbors; especially the forenamed Saint Irenaeus, who wrote unto him to this
effect, telling him that all these Eastern Churches, dissenting concerning
Fasting, yet did agree in one Faith. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.

From the year 200, to the year 300. The third Age.

Eusebius, lib. 7. cap. 26, 27. Anno 265. 1. 2. Concilium Antiochenum.
against Paulus Samosatenus, who taught that Christ was an ordinary man as we
are. At which Council were present great lights of the Church, Firmilianus
Bishop of Caesarea in Cappad. Theo: Bishop of Caesarea in Palestina, the Bishop
of Jerusalem, etc.

Eusebius, lib. 7. cap. 28. anno 270. (or 272. ut Baronio placet) in which
great Synod of very many Bishops, 2. 3. Concilium Antiochenum.
the said Paulus Samosatenus was condemned and excommunicated, says Eusebius.

1 Concilium Africanum.
Under Saint Cyprian, an. 258. inquit Baronius, n. 6. against the restoring of
Martialis and Basilides, after their fall to Gentilisme, returning again to
Christianity, and desiring to be restored to their several Sees of Leon and
Asturia in Spain. See S. Cyprian, Ep. 68. and Ep. 70. and 72. And concerning
rebaptizing of those that had sacrificed to Idols, says Balsamon in his
Preface before this Council. Which in persecution denied (Christ) says
Nicephorus, An. 258. n. 31, 32, 33.
lib. 6. cap. 2. But therein he lies extremely, says Baronius; for he would
only baptize those who were formerly baptized by Haereticks, an. 258. n. 18.
but herein they used such Christian modesty, as that they did not herein
prescribe Laws to others concerning this, not to be de Fide, a matter of
Faith, for which they that did do otherwise should be termed Haereticks. Thus
far, and much more Baronius. And Saint Jerome against the Luciferians, to the
same purpose speaking of Saint Cyprian: Let them know that he did not publish
this with any Anathema against those who did not follow him, for he held
communion with them who did gainsay his opinion.

The fourth Age.
From the year 300, to the year 400.
Concilium Ancyranum.
About the year 308, says Caranza, or 314, says Baronius. This was a
Provincial Council, but confirmed by the sixth General Council, says
Balsamon and Caranza; at which were present, many Fathers who did good service
in the Council of Nice, says Baron. ibid.

1. Universal Council. Concilium Nicenum.
This was the first, and most famous General Council after the Apostles time,
celebrated in the year 325, or 326, called by that famous Emperor Constantine
the Great. Baron. Caranza, Surius, Bellarm. Binius. These professed the
Apostles Creed.

2. Universal Conc. Constantinop. 1.
This was the second General Council, called about the year 381. as Baronius;
383, as others: this did confirm the Nicene Faith, and a little in exposition
enlarge it, to that which we commonly call the Nicene Creed, one word only
excepted. Surius, Tom. 1. Balsamon, Caranza.

From the year 400. to the year 500. The fifth Age.

This was the third General Council about the year 430. 3. Universe. Council.
Consil. Ephesinum. 4. Universe. Council. Chalcedon.
says Onuphrius, 431. says Baronius n. 41. 434 sait Bellarmine Surius Tom. 1.
Balsamon.

This was the fourth General Council, about the year 451. says Baronius,
and Onuphrius, 454. says Bellarm. See Isidore fol. 83. Balsamon, Binius,
Surius.

Carthaginense, for it has the former Title in Surius, Council. Africanum 2.
Vel Carthag.
Tom. 1. and the latter in Balsamon, in whom it is the second, though Baronius
make it the fifth Council of Carthage, ann. 419. n. 59.

All these three Counsels did approve the precedent General Counsels, as
appears by the Acts of the Counsels in Isidore, Balsamon, Surius and others.

And in this of Afric were forbidden Appeals to Rome, though the Popes
Legates were there, and did labor to the contrary, having a Commonitorie, or
direction from Pope Zozimus, so to do, citing therein a Canon out of the
Council of Nice to that purpose, Balsamon, page 592, 593, To this Alypius an
African Bishop first answered, to which the whole Synod did assent, That they
would reverently observe what what the Council of Nice had decreed, but in
those Copies of the Nicene Council which they had there in Carthage, they
found no such Decree; they decreed therefore to send Ambassadors to the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch for Copies under their
hands, of the Nicene Council.

Two Copies were obtained, and the Popes for ever since were detected of
falsehood, and signified by the Council, Balsamon, page 567.

From the year 500, to the 600. The sixth Age. 5. Universe. Concilium Concilium
Constant.

About the year 550. This also approved of the four precedent General
Counsels. (...). It confirmed the Doctrines of the fourth General Council
says Balsamon, page 354. and Surius Tom. 4. in Concilio Florentino, Sess. 3.
and 5. apud Baron. an. 553. n. 39.

Concilium Toletanum.
About the year 589. against the Heresy of Arrius, which Council made a most
sincere profession of their faith, says Baronius, an. 589. n. 10. wherein also
they approved the four first General Councels. Idem Baronius, n. 30.

And whereas it was also enacted that after the manner of the East, this
profession of the faith, should be made always before the receiving of the
Communion. Idem. n. 39. In the beginning of this Council of all Spain, the
King Ricaredus made confession of his faith, confirmed the four General
Councels, repeated the Nicene Creed, and the Constantinoplitane Creed, and
after subscribed to them, both he, and his Queen, Surius Tom. 2 page 670. for
which the whole Council of the 72. Bishops did glorify God, ibid which faith
the Council does profess, page 671. and promise to preach, and teach.

This is (say they) the true faith by profession of which the Church through
the whole world is reputed and proved to be Catholic, he that likes not this
faith, let him be accursed. He that shall despise the faith of the Council of
Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, let him be accursed, Then
they repeat and record these Creeds, Surius page 672.

From the year 600. to the year 700.
The seventh Age. 6. Universe. Concilium Concilium Trullanum Surius Tom. 2. page
899.
About the year 680, says Baronius, n. 41. their first Canon did decree that
the Apostles Creed should be kept unchangeably without any innovation. Balsamon
p. 360. They confirm the four precedent General Councels, as also the fifth,
and sixth, whereof this was a branch adding Canons to the fifth and sixth, and
therefore called Quinisexta, styled an aecumenicall Council also by Baronius,
and Balsamon.

Concilium Romanum.
Of 125 Bishops under Pope Agatho, who sent their Legates with a profession of
their faith to the sixth Council approving all the precedent General
Counsels. This is recorded in the fourth Act of the sixth Council. See Surius
Tom. 2. page 922.

Concilium Mantuanum.
Which in all things consenting to the fifth General Council were Catholics,
says Baronius, anno 605. numb. 5.

This sixth General Synod is called erroneous by Beda, says Bellarmine,
deservedly. The reason, I take it, was because this Council did condemn
Honorius the Pope of Rome for Haeresie, as appears by Surius, Action 12, 13.
and was found to be contained in his Epistles, the Council using all diligence
in examining the Records of the Church of Constantinople, to see if the
original Epistle sent from Pope Honorius to Sergius of Constantinople, did
accord with the extracts which were produced, and constitit, it appeared to be
so, ait. 12. apud Surium, page 990. Bellarm. lib 4. de Pontifice Romano, cap.
11. and Baron. an. 681. does labor much to excuse this, but with as little
success, as Baronius would clear Zosimus for forging the Council of Nice.
The Council was deceived, says Beda and Bellarmine. The Tract of the Council
was forged, says Baronius, n. 25. Peradventure those Epistles were forged,
says Bellarmine, loco citato.

From the year 700, to the year 800. The eighth Age.

Under Charles the Great, Concilium Francosurtense.
for the Historical and Civil use of Images, but against all religious
worshipping of them. Baron. an. 794. Here began the Greek and Latin Church to
be divided about Images. The Emperors and Councels of the East being sometimes
for them, sometimes against them. And in the West, the Churches of France,
Spain, and Germany under Charles the Great, forbidding them to be worshipped;
the Pope and his adherents of Rome commanding to worship them. Yet all these
three Councels did receive and profess the Faith of the six precedent General
Councels. Balsamon, page 494. cau. 1. Coucil. Niceni, and Baronius, an. 754. n.
30, and Surius, Tom. 3. page 182.

Hence arose the division of the Empire, Baron. an. 726. n. 38.
Pope Gregory the second forbidding the Italians to pay the Emperor Leo
Isaurus tribute for this only cause. For he does commend in the Emperor an
every way right religious, and irreprovable profession of the Orthodox Faith,
in his Epistle to the Emperor, an. 726. Baron. n. 26.

Wherein Cutbert Archbishop of Canterbury, Concilium Saxonum in Anglia. an. 747.
with other Bishops of the Saxons, amongst other things, decreed, that the
Presbyters should in the English tongue learn, and teach the Lords Prayer, and
the Creed, and that Prayers should be made for Kings and Princes.
Malmsburiensis de Gestis Pontificum Anglorum. cap. 1.

The ninth Age. Concilium Aquisgranense.
From the year 800, to the year 900.
Anno 809. n. 52. It received the six General Councels, and did profess the
Nicene Creed, Baron. loco citato.

Concilium Foroniliense.
This did profess the Nicene Creed, and decreed thus; Let every Christian
commit to memory the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, all age, all sex, etc. for
without this none can, and with this, so they abstain from sin, all may be
saved, Surius, Tom. 3. page 262, 263.

Concilium Constantinopolitanu^.
Anno 861. says Baronius, styled a General Council by Michaell the Greek
Emperor, who summoned it, and was present at it, consisting of 318 Bishops,
approving the Nicen Council, as appears Canon 8. and the 6th General
Council, Canon 12. apud Balsamon.

Concilium Parisiense.
Anno 825. which condemned the second Nicene, and an Epistle of Pope Adrian for
worshipping of Images as superstitious, holding it lawful to set up Images,
but not to worship them, Baron. an. 825. n. 4, 5. and an 794. n. 43, 51.

So here are two Councels approved by the Romans, the first and second: two by
them rejected, but received, the one by the Greek Church, the other by the
French Church, but all four professing our Faith; and two of them denying an
Article of the Roman new Creed, videlicet, worshipping of Images.

Tom. 3. page 530.
Histories (says Surius) speak of a threefold eighth General Council held
at Constantinople: the first, that wherein Photius was made Patriarch. The
second, that which restored Ignatius. The third, that which after the death of
Ignatius restored Photius again.

It is worth the note, how Surius can deny, that this Council of Paris under
Lewis, and that of Francford under Charles, did decree against the second
Nicene Council for advancing Image Worship, and charge us with forgerie,
seeing all the Chronicles, and learned men of that Age recorded it. See
Baronius, an. 794. n. 40.

From the year 900, to the year 1000. The tenth Age.

This is that Age which was commonly styled a leaden, iron, obscure Age,
because it was as barren of good, as iron; laden with a burden of
wickedness, as heavy as lead, and obscure for want of Writers, says
Baronius, an. 900. n. 1. An unhappy Age (says Bellarmine in his Chronology)
in which were no Councels, no Writers of note, and the Bishops were such as
took little care for the Church.

Surius in this Age records no Council General, or Provincial; for after
Triburense Concilium, which was celebrated under Arnulphus the Emperor (who
died about the year 899. as Baronius accounts; some years sooner, as
Bellarmine:) Surius has no Council till we come to Alexander the third Pope
of that name, who began his Popedom Anno 1160. that is for two whole Ages and
a half. But Baronius will furnish us with some.

All three Councels held under Pope John the ninth, Council. Romanum. 1. Council.
Romanum. 2. Council. Romanum. 3. Con ilium Suessionen. an. 909. n. 1. Baron.
Council. Constantinop.
who in those three years of his Papacy held three Councels, Ex quibus summam
sibi laudem comparavit; by which he got to himself great praise, says Baron.
an. 905. n. 1. no doubt these were orthodox Councels in the estimation of
Baronius, or else the Pope could not get such praise by them.

Anno 944. reproved by the Romans for deposing of Triphon, not noted of any
error in Doctrine. Baron. an. 944. numb. 1, 2.

Anno 963. called by Otho the second, wherein John the twelfth was convicted of
Murder, Perjury, Sacrilege, Concilium Romanum.
and Incest with two of his own Sisters; which Council Baronius, n. 31. does
confess to have been an assembly of orthodox men, but is much offended with
them for deposing the Pope, calling it Indignum facinus, audax, and insolens.
Bellarmine also says, this Emperor was a godly man, and this Pope was one of
the worst: but he blames them for deposing the Pope, lib. 2. de Pontifice
Romano; cap. 29.

The eleventh Age. Council. in Legione Hispaniae. Council. Aurelianense.
From the year 1000, to the year 1100.
Anno 1012. Baronius, n. 16. who does there allege many Decrees of that
Council.

Anno 1017. Against the Manichees; in which Council there was an inquiry made
of the Clergy, what opinions every one did hold? and whether those things
which the Catholic Faith received from the Apostles, they do unchangeably
keep, and preach? Baron. n. 2, 3.

Council. Basiliense.
Anno 1061. which Baronius reproves for condemning Pope Nicholas, and
disanulling all his Decrees. n. 4.

Concilium Woormatiense Council. apud Buxiam.
Anno 1076 which Baronius also rejects for pronouncing sentence against
Gregory the seventh. n. 12, 14.

Anno 1080. which is also rejected by Baronius, n. 18, 19. for deposing
Gregory the seventh, guilty of many crimes, and an enemy to all godliness.
Quicquid quiet inter pie viventes stare videbatur concussit.

Council. Londinense.
Anno 1075. Malmsburiensis, fol. 117.

The 12 Age. Concilium Romanum.
From the year 1100, to the year 1200.
Anno 1102. Baronius, n. 1, 2. wherein, besides the confirming of the ancient
Decrees of the Fathers, after the accustomed manner they also, etc.

Council. Lateranense 2.
Anno 1116. under Pascalis the second, Baronius, n. 1. calls it a General
Council, and numb. 5. an Universal Council.

Council. Lateranense 3.
Anno 1179. under Alexander the third, this is styled a General Synod by
Baron. n. 1. and by Bellarmine in his Chronology.

Council. Londinense.
Anno 1102. under Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury, Malmsburiensis fol 129.

In this Age, I desire the Reader to observe with me, how well the Popish
Doctors, and Historians do agree in this so great a matter.

Caranza can find never a General Council in this Age; Surius can find one,
namely, Lateranense tertium, sub Innocentio 3. Bellarmine can find three
General Councels, Latera. 1, 2, 3. Baronius can find six, 1. Romanum, anno
1102. 2. Lateranense, anno 1116. 3. Rhemense, anno 1119. 4. Lateranense, an.
1122. 5. Romanum, an. 1139. 6. Romanum, an. 1179.

From the year 1200, to the year 1300. The 13 Age.

Anno 1215. This is received amongst the Romanists for a General Council, and
no one Council is more alleged for Popery, saving that of Trent, then this:
yet in their profession of Faith, cap. 2. I find nothing dissenting from ours,
but only this, that they have added Transubstantiation. But no one of the
other twelve Articles of our new Romish Creed. That there was such a Council,
I grant, but that those decrees, or chapters recorded by Surius were there
enacted, I deny: for these authorities following, Matthew Paris, a Monk of
Saint Albans, who lived in those times, says, that 60, (70 it should have
been, says Mr. Widrington, Discuss dissentionis Decreti. page 4.
a Priest of your own) Chapters were read in full Council, which some liked,
others thought but -- And the same Author in his lesser History, says thus:
This General Council, which after the Papal manner at the first made a great
show, turned to laughter and scorn. The Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Deanes,
Archdeacons, and all that came to the Council being deluded; for they seeing
nothing done, craved leave to depart; and paying a great sum of money,
obtained it. Many things were consulted of (says Nauclerus) but nothing could
be decreed openly. Nothing commendable, or worthy of memory was there done
(says Godfrey a Monk of those times) save that the East Church submitted to
the West, which was never heard of before. Nothing could be decreed, says
Platina* in the life of Innocentius.

This Council was not published for 300 years after, not by Merlyn, who
published later Councels (as that of Constance, and that of B^sil) at Collen,
anno 1530. and now it comes not out of the Vatican, but from one John Cochleus
a German. Thus Widrington. Council Generale Lugdun. 1. Council. Generale Lugdun.
2.


Anno 1244. under Innocent the third, Bellar. de Conciliis. and in Chron.

Sub Gregorio 10. anno 1274. Bellarm. and Baronius. The profession of Faith
sent from the Pope to Michael the Emperor, we receive, but not other
Doctrines there added. vide Baronium. anno 1274, and 1275, and 1276.

The 14 Age. Council. Viene^se.
From the year 1300, to the year 1400.
Anno 1311. This is reputed a General Council by Bellarmine, Baronius,
Caranza, Platina, Onuphrius.

The profession of Faith made by them, as is recorded by Baronius, n 12. we
receive, although we receive not all their other Doctrines and Constitutions.
As that they condemn them for Haereticks, who shall deny the reasonable soul
to be the form of man's body per se, and essentialiter, properly, and
essentially. This may be an error in Philosophy, but no Haeresie, because it
is not in point of Faith.

Council. Bonon. Council. Hispanicum. Council. Provincialia.
This was a Provincial Council, an. 1309. Baron. n. 12.

In ditione Walliselentum, styled a most noble Council by Baronius, anno 1321.
n. 9.

Provincial Councels, and Synods in several Diocesses were held almost every
where by holy men, says Baronius, anno 1309.

The 15 Age. Council. Constantiense, an. 1413.
From the year 1400, to the year 1500.
This is reputed a General Council by the Romanists, Bellarmine, Baronius,
Caranza, Surius, Tom. 3. p. 769.

This Council did profess our Faith, viz the Apostles Creed in Mass before
every Session; although in some other things we refuse them, as in their half
Communion, never decreed before in any Council, and there acknowledged to
differ from the institution of Christ, and practice of the Primitive Church.
Let the Papists give us leave to repudiate this in part as they do, viz. in
their first Decree, Sess 4. That the Council is above the Pope. So Bellarmine,
lib. de Conciliis cap: 6. reckons this amongst the General Councels, partly
rejected, and partly approved.

Council. Besiliense.
Anno 1431. This also is partly confirmed, partly rejected by the Romanists;
for this did depose Popes, and decreed that a General Council is above the
Pope, as appears in Surius, Caranza, and Bellarmine.

Council. Florentinum.
Anno 1439. This is a General Council, approved by the Papists, Bellarmine,
lib. de Conciliis. cap. 5. This Council did profess our Faith, and receive
our Councels and Sacraments, though they added five Sacraments more; read
Surius, Tom. 4. Sessione 3, 4, 5.

Thus have I traveled through Histories, Fathers, Schoolmen, and Councels, to
satisfy the demand of them, who when all is done, will deny all Histories,
Fathers and Councels which make against them. I might have gone a nearer way,
thus:

You baptize Children daily in your Church, and then you profess my Faith, the
Apostles Creed, and minister our first Sacrament. You have your Mass or Common
Prayer, with the Communion often in your Churches, then also you profess my
Faith; read parcels of our Scriptures, and minister our other Sacrament entire
to the Clergy, though by halfes to the Laity. You have published many Missals
under the names of Saint James, Saint Mark, Saint Chrysostom, and others,
every one of these allow and use my Faith, Scriptures and Sacraments. You have
your Ordo Romanus, that approves my Faith, Scriptures and Sacraments. You have
published many writers upon the Mass in your auctionary of Bibliotheca Patrum;
as Walafridus Strabo, Ino Corvotensis, and others named by me in my Catalogue:
all these professed our Faith, and received our Sacraments, and also our
Scriptures. But as for your Creed, it was never professed in Baptism; it is
found in none of those Missals, nor in your Ordo Romanus, nor in any of those
Expositors of your Roman Mass for one thousand five hundred years. Let me
conclude with the words of Vincentius Lirinensis; The holy Church a diligent,
and wary keeper of those Doctrines which were committed unto her, does not
change, add, or diminish any thing therein; it does not cut off any thing that
is necessary, nor add any thing that is superfluous; it does not lose that
which is proper to Christianity, nor usurp that which belongs to other
Sects of Religion in the world.

CHAP. XIX.
Fisher.

1.THat faith is affirmation, and not negation; by which rule it seems he
would not have any negative propositions, although found in Scriptures to
pertain to faith. 2. That they that are in the affirmative, must prove, and
not those who are in the negative; but which seems to follow, that a man who
had time out of mind quietly possessed his land, or Religion, were bound to
prove his right, before his upstart Adversary who denies him to have right,
have given a good reason of his denial. 3. That what was not a point of faith
in the Primitive Ages, cannot after be a point of faith; as if there were not
some points which were at first not held necessary to be believed even by
Orthodox fathers, which afterward by examination, and definition of the Church
in General Councels, were made so necessary to be believed, as that whosoever
did not believe them were accounted not Orthodox, but Heretics. And 4, that
the Anabaptist faith is that which is contained in Scripture and ancient
Creeds: And the Anabaptist Church is a society of men which professes the
faith contained in Scripture, and the ancient Creeds, as (if an Anabaptist may
be Judge) it will be held so to be.

Rogers.

Master Fisher has in many pages written this Title, Master Rogers his weak
grounds, where he spoke not one word of my grounds, and here he does pass over
the most with silence, but he speaks against some few of them. In my former
answer, after my definition of a Protestant, I laid some few distinctions, or
grounds thus, I desire you to distinguish between matter 1. Of discipline and
2. Of Doctrine.


Secondly, to distinguish between 1. Doctrine accessory. and 2. Doctr.
fundamental.


Matter of faith consists not in discipline, but Doctrine, and that Doctrine
not accessory but fundamental.

By this distinction I mean the same which Aquinas does by res fidei 1. Per se
2. Per accidens.


These 3 distinctions pass without exception saving that he makes mention of
the second, viz 1. Doctrine accessorie. 2. Doctrine fundamental.


As if he would overthrow it, but indeed says nothing in the world against it,
nor can; for it is the distinction of Saint Augustine, of Bellarmine, of all
the School, Lib. 4. de verb. Dei. c. 12. In Scripturis plurima sunt quae ex se
non pertinent ad fidem.
being the same with that of Aquinas in matters of faith into res fidei 1. Per
se. in themselves. 2. Per accidens. or, accidentally.


The words of Aquinas, are these, and thus cited by Valenza, Tom. 3. d. 1. q.
1. p. 2. 1. as an undoubted ground, or principle.

Habitus fidei. 1. Per se, and primario respicit ea circa quae distinguuntur
articuli fidei. 2. Alias vero propositiones quae divinis Scripturis continenter
respicit secundario, and per accidens.


The habit of faith. 1. In it self, and principally looks upon those things
which are contained in the Articles of our Creed. 2. Upon other propositions
which are contained in Scripture, it looks accidentally, and secondarily.


This is the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, Non enim unius sunt formae omnia
verae doctrinae capita, All heads of true Doctrine are not of one nature; Some
are necessary to be known, which all men ought to receive as undoubted: there
are others, Quae inter Ecclesias controversa, fidei tamen unitaetem non
dirimant. Wherein particular Churches may dissent and yet not break the unity
of faith. Thus Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 1. n. 22. I could cite Luther, and
others, but I will only cite Saint Augustine, who in his first book against
Julius Pelagius, writes thus, Alia sunt in quibus inter se aliquando etiam
doctissimi atque optimi Regulae Catholicae defensores salva fidei compage non
consonant, etalius alio de una re melius aliquid dicit and verius. Hoc autem
vnde nunc agimus ad ipsa fidei pertinet fundamenta.

There are other things wherein the most learned, and best defenders of the
Catholic Rule may dissent one from another, and one man speaks better and
more truly then another, upon the same subject. But this whereof we now speak
belongs to the very foundation of faith. Thus far Saint Augustine.

This is the first of my grounds that he finds fault with, but not in that
order as I placed them, but after two, or three other grounds of mine, which in
mine answer, were placed after this. Thus he to puzzle the Reader, that he may
not so easily perceive what he does answer, what he does not answer, never
observes order. Yet I, that he may in nothing escape my hands, will follow him
in his order, so that I must answer what he objecteth against this ground in
the next Chapter.

My next ground was this.

I distinguish between 1. Affirmation In those Articles of our English Church.
and 2. Negation. In those Articles of our English Church.


Our Negation is partly a traversing, partly a condemning of your novelties,
and additions, and therefore no part of our faith: for no man will deny his
own faith. To this my Adversary does thus reply.

Fisher.

That faith is affirmation, and not negation; by which Rule it seems he would
not have any negative propositions, although found in Scripture, to pertain to
faith.

Rogers.

You infer that in your conclusion, which is not in my grounds; I say that
faith is affirmation, I do not say that all that does pertain to Faith, is
affirmation; I say that negations are no part of my faith: you say that
negations do pertain to faith. Non facis elenchum, you infer not my
proposition in your conclusion with a contradiction; what you say, is not
contrary to my grounds, for that may pertain to faith, which is not faith; and
that may pertain to faith, which is no part of faith; as that may pertain to
Master Fisher, which is not Master Fisher, nor any part of Master Fisher. The
button of Master Fishers doublet, does pertain to Master Fisher, yet I may not
say Master Fisher is a button, or that this button is any part of Master
Fisher. A joined stool may pertain to Master Fisher, but I will not say
Master Fisher is a joined stool. The distinction of matters of faith out of
Aquinas, and others of that which belongs unto faith properly, from that which
belongs unto faith accidentally, does exclude those things which only pertain
unto faith, from being faith, or any part of faith; You know Master Fisher,
Aristot. Zabarella.
that Propositiones per se habent essentialem connexionem: Man is that which he
is of himself properly, and essentially, a creature, consisting of a humane
body, and a reasonable soul; not that which is accidental unto man, as to be
black or white, to be a Musician, to be a Carpenter, to be a Friar, or a
Priest, a Jesuit, or a Dominican; These things are not man, nor any part of
man. It does not therefore follow, that because negations pertain to faith,
therefore they are faith, or part of faith. Your Argument from Scripture, if I
should grant your medium, cannot infer against my ground, altering part of
faith, into that which pertains to faith. Your Argument in form will
discover it self to be a fallacy.

All propositions found in Scripture pertain to faith. Some negative
propositions are found in Scripture.

Ergo, (If you infer against me, your conclusion must be thus) Negative
propositions are faith, or parts of faith.

This is no Syllogism, here are four terms; there is that in the conclusion,
which is not in the premises: but if you would have all propositions that are
in Scripture to be matters of faith, or parts, or points of faith, then I deny
your major; you know there are many propositions in Scripture delivered by
wicked men, yea, some by the Devil himself, As that which was spoken unto
Eve, you shall not die. Whereas God told them they should die, if they did eat
of the forbidden fruit. And shall these be parts of your faith? will you
believe the Devil when he speaks against God? But of this I have spoken more
fully before, Cap. 4.
proving the contrary to this out of your own men; Yet I will here add some
few reasons, to show that Negations, or negative Propositions cannot be
Articles of faith, or Principles of faith.

Lib. 1. Poster. c. 23.
Aristotle does prove by two Arguments, that an affirmative proposition is
better then a negative.

First, because the affirmative is better known then the negative, for the
negative cannot be known without the affirmative, but the affirmative may
without the negative; as the habit may be defined without privation, but not
privation without the habit; as seeing may be defined without any mention of
blindness, but blindness cannot be defined without mention of seeing.

Secondly, Affirmation does speak of being, Negation of not being; but being
is better then not being. To the same effect in his books, Lib. 2. c. 3.
De Coelo: (...). Affirmation is before privation. He is the same man in his
Metaphisicks, where he puts Negations, inter entia rationis, which have no
being in themselves: if no being, how can they be principles in any Scicence,
much less in Divinity? It is a true note of your Zuarez upon the
Metaphisicks, that Mensura debet and nota esse, and certa: ut sit nota oportet,
ut entitatem habeat; ut fit certa oportet, ut in indivisibili consistat. That
cannot be known which has not entitie, real entitie, says your Suarez, when
any Negation is known, of necessity, we must first know that whereof it is a
Negation. Prima primae q. 72. 63 and secunda secundae. q. 79. 3. Andreas Vega.
Francisc. Hist. Trid. Con p. 1. 179 In Metaph. ^5. c. 7. q. 6.
Idem Suarez

This is the Doctrine of your great Schooleman Aquinas: He was one of your
greatest Divines, who said at your Council of Trent, that no true Negative
has in it self, the cause of his truth, but is so by the trutth of an
affirmative. Negations as negations, nullam omnino dicunt entitatem, sed solam
absentiam ejus quod negatur; they tell of no being, but only an absence of
that which is denied, says your Fonseca.

Seeing then that Propositions of faith, are principles, and principles cannot
be proved, by any thing that is before them, or better known then they; and
that nothing can be known without real being, and that negations are proved by
affirmations; how can they be Propositions, or principles of faith? And lest
you should wander in your Reply, I will press two Arguments out of your own
men.

Entia rationis non sunt principia in ulla scientia, Suarez in his Metaphys. in
fine.
Negationes sunt entia rationis.

Ergo, Negationes non sunt principia in ulla scientia, praesertim in Theologia.

Principia fidei habent causam finalem.

Negationes non habent causam finalem.

Ergo, Negationes non sunt principia fidei.

Propositions of faith are foundations, and a foundation must be positive, or
it will bear nothing upon it: go round about a building, and say a thousand
times over, here is no stone, and here is no stone, and so all along, you will
never lay a foundation; Shall the Mason by saying, I will not lay this, nor
that foundation, come and claim his wages? Shall the Tyler by laying on no
Tyle, say that he has covered the house? or the Carpenter, by squaring and
joining no Timber, build the Walls?

The Articles of our faith are in the Apostles Creed, all affirmative and
positive, there is not one Negation among them.

The question between us is about unwritten Traditions, Purgatory, Invocation
of Saints, Transubstantiation, worshipping of Images, and the rest before
alleged out of Paulus Secundus his Creed; all which I deny, and therefore are
no Articles of my faith, for no man would deny his own faith. All those we
deny, we lay no such foundation, let them which have laid it, maintain it. We
are contented that Purgatory, Transubstantiation, worshipping of Images,
Indulgences, etc. be buried in oblivion, and never mentioned amongst us, which
we would not do, if they were Articles of our faith, for all men ought to be
ready to confess, and profess their faith. It was truly written by one of
your own, Doctor James Gordon Hanley of Scotland, a Jesuit, In Lib. de
Traditionibus cap. 6.
that the whole Controversy between you, and us, is of the unwritten points
of faith, which you affirm, and we deny: as for example, you affirm and
believe Purgatory, I do not believe it; will you say now that Purgatory is a
part of my faith? can that be a part of a man's faith, which he does not
believe? If I do not believe it, it is not my faith, if it be my faith, I do
believe it so. You believe Transubstantiation, I do not believe it, can this
be a point of my faith? Your School says truly, that to believe is the
proper, internal, inseparable act of faith, they go together, they stand, or
fall together: So that I wonder with what face, with what brain, you can say,
or think, that those negations are points of my faith, and I say they are not?
Yet lest you should not take my word, I will add one reason more. I say with
the learned of both sides, that faith is habitus principiorum, is that assent
we give unto revealed principles. And that Negations cannot be principles, I
prove thus.

Arist. annal. (...). cap. 8. etc. 21.
Principles depend upon no precedent proof.

Negations depend upon precedent proof.

Ergo, Negations are not Principles.

Both propositions are Aristotle's. Now let us see what he next misliketh in my
grounds.

CHAP. XX.
Fisher.

MAster Rogers framed to himself false Rules. First, that faith is
Affirmation, not Negation. Secondly, That they which are in the Affirmative
must prove, and not those who are in the Negative.

Rogers.

In my former answer, I said thus, In points of faith I like Master Fishers
Rule, That they that are in the Affirmative must prove. It was Master Fishers
Rule proposed by him, admitted by me: for these were his words in his first
Paper, Master Fisher undertook to defend the negative part, so it did belong
to his Adversary to prove the affirmative. Why now do you say that Master
Rogers does frame false Rules to himself? This is Master Fishers Rule, framed
by him, approved by me. It was a Rule that your Doctor Cole, and others stood
upon in the Disputation at Westminster, In Historia Council. T^id. Per naturam,
factum negantis probatio nulla. 6. q 5. cap. 2. Negationum non sunt causae. gl.
ibidem.
as Bishop Iuel often lays to his charge. Let us add one more of your men,
the forenamed Andreas Vega; No Proposition was ever false, but because another
is true: neither can the falsitie of the one be known, but by him who knows
the truth of the other. Therefore the opinion of the Lutherans cannot be
condemned of Haeresie, until the opinion of the Church be set down; loco
supra citato. Let us see what good reason Master Fisher brings to overthrow
this Rule.

Fisher.

By this it seems to follow, that a man who time out of mind, quietly
possessed his Land or Religion, were bound to prove his right before his
upstart Adversary (who denies him to have right) has given a good reason of
his denial.

Rogers.

Even as the Wheele-barrow goes to rumble, to rumble, so Doctor Eld. W. owes
me two Shillings. His similitude and yours held much alike, Master Fisher. And
yet, if your similitude were good, Symbola non sunt argumentativa: Similitudes
are no proofs, they illustrate and clear obscurities, if they be good and
apposite; otherwise, they do more hinder the understanding, then help it. Who
does strive with you about the possession of any thing that is controverted
between us, to take it from you? Would we take from you to our selves? Or do
we challenge any right, title or portion in your unwritten Traditions? your
invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Indulgences, and the rest of your new Creed?
No such matter: we disclaim from them; we leave them to you: we say they are
yours, yours in possession, yours in propriety of title, take them, hold them,
hug them in your arms, and think as well of them as the old Ape did of her
young one, when she presented him before the Lion, as the goodliest, prettiest,
fairest yongling amongst all the beasts of the field. We in the mean time
smile at your folly, and laugh at such bables; take them unto you, father your
own children, they look as like you as the young Ape did the old. Now let us
see what is next?

Fisher.

The third false Rule framed by Master Rogers is, that what was not a point of
Faith in the Primitive Ages, cannot after be a point of Faith.

Rogers.

This Rule was not framed by me, but it was the Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis,
and so alleged by me in my Answer, confirmed also by their great Schoolman
Aquinas, and something then cited out of both, thus:

Religion, or points of Faith are without addition, as Lirinensis says.
Imitetur animarum Religio rationem corporum, quae and quot parvulorum membra
tot virorum, etc. And as Aquinas says;

The Articles of Faith do grow, quoad 1. Explicationem, non 2. Substantiam.


That which was no point of Faith for the first 1200 years, could be none
afterward; ut supra Vinc. Lirin. and Aquin.

But Transubstantiation was no point of Faith before the year 1200. Scotus.

Ergo, Transubstantiation is no point of Faith.

To all this, contained in my former Answer, is no Reply made: the Authority
and saying of Lirinensis, Aquinas, Scotus, together with my Argument, are past
over with silence, but supplied with two or three falsehoods; 1, by saying that
I framed that Rule which was framed 1200 years at least before I was borne. 2,
By calling that a false Rule, which was received without control, no learned
man having the face to deny it, till the lame Laiola furnished the world with
audacious Jesuits: for never was there a new Creed made before the Council of
Trent. But let us see what reason he has to deny this Rule? His words are
these:

Fisher.

As if there were not some points which were at first, not held necessary to
be believed by orthodox Fathers, which afterward by examination and definition
of the Church in General Councels, were made so necessary to be believed, as
that whosoever did not believe, were accounted not Orthodox, but Haereticks.

Rogers.

A Boy that wanted a couple of Verses to make up his full number, desired one
of his fellows to help at a pinch, no matter whether it were to the Theme, no
matter whether they were good or no, so they filled up the Paper, made up the
number: I care not (says he) though they be all botches, for I hope they will
never be read. One of his fellows, to help him at his need, made this Verse:
Semper, quotidie, sic, jam, nunc, atque profecto.

To which another added,

Aedepol, ecce, quidem, scilicet, inde, procul.



My Adversary at the first made a short weak Answer to what I had written,
such as gave no satisfaction to his own side: (for so Master Waterhouse, who
brought me that Answer, told me.) Being afterward called upon to make a more
full and more satisfactorie Answer, either by himself, or some other of his
fellows, made up this, not so full as he should, for he passes by more then
half my grounds and Arguments with silence. And that which he has answered
is botched up with impertinencies and fallacies, a great many of those botches
I have showed before: as, Who does not see? I do not see: Master Rogers may
grant: If Master Rogers do grant: I see no reason why he should not grant,
etc. And here to my grounds, by which it seems he would not: To my first
ground, by which it seems to follow: To my second ground, as if there were
not some points, etc. To my third ground, and to the fourth: As (if an
Anabaptist may judge) it will be held so to be: And to my fifth: He may be yet
further allowed to reject, etc. Here is neither granting, nor denying, nor
distinguishing, nor arguing, but all is Seeming, and, As if it were; all
concurring to make his learning Sophistry, and himself a Sophister, Arist. in
Elench.
(...). Sophistry is seeming wisdom, and a Sophister is he that seeks for
gain by seeming wisdom, whereas there is no such matter: and where he
seems to argue, it is but the contentious discourse of a Sophister, (...);
consisting of nothing but seeming probabilities, as I have showed in all
instances which I have met with yet, and so will in this. My third ground was,
That what was no point of Faith in the Primitive Ages, could be none
afterward; ut supra Vincentius Lirinensis, and Aquinas. What says he to
this? does he grant it? does he distinguish? does he deny it? No grant, no
distinction, no direct denial, for that he dares not, least he should deny
that ancient Father, and his great Schoolman: yet he says something against
it, or rather makes as if he would. He says, that some points were defined
by Councels, and so made necessary to be believed, which before were not held
necessary, even by orthodox Fathers: Ergo, The Church may make new points, or
Articles of Faith.

His Argument and his Antecedent be both false; his Antecedent is ambiguous:
for to believe, may signify an act either of humane Faith, or religious divine
Faith. If he understand believe in the first sense, I grant his Antecedent,
viz. That we are to give great credit unto the Decrees and Definitions of
General Councels; but yet inferior to that credit we give unto the Word of
God, because he is Truth it self, who cannot err, and they are man who may
err. And therefore to take this, viz That the Definitions of Councels are
Articles of Faith, thence to prove that we have new Articles of Faith, besides
those of the Primitive Church, is Petitio principii, a begging of that for
granted, which he knows we deny: Artic. 21.
it is the Doctrine of our Church, that General Councels may err, and that
the Church ought not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of
salvation. Whereas you say, Artic. 20.
the Decrees of Councels are held necessary, there is a twofold necessity of
different degrees: 1. Necessitas medii. 2. Necessitas praecepti.
This later may belong to the Decrees of Councels, not the former.

Here you might have remembered my distinction of 1. Doctrines of Faith. 2.
Doctrines of the Church; and 3. Doctrines of the School.


Definitions of Councels are Church Doctrines, not Doctrines of Faith; and
therefore have an inferior necessity, without the knowledge whereof a man may
be saved: and thousands were saved before those Councels were heard of; but no
man can be saved without the Doctrines of Faith, known and professed by
himself, if he be in years of discretion, or by his Parents and Sureties if
he be a child.

Whereas you say, that those that refuse the Decrees of Councels, are accounted
Haereticks; and take this for granted, that so you might infer an addition to
Articles of Faith, is the like begging of a Medium, as the former: you know we
do not so define an Haereticke; Iuel in his view of a seditious Bull.
for with us he is an Haereticke, who denies the Articles of the Christian
Faith: and so he is defined by the most learned of your side, holding that
Haeresie does directly, and principally dissent from the Articles of Faith. So
Aquinas, That Haeresie is opposite to Faith. So Widrington, a Priest of your
own, Praefat. ante respond. Apol. pro jure Princ. But with you and your Pope,
all things are Haeresies which you like not; as Paul the second did pronounce
them Haereticks, Platina in vita Pauli ^.
who should from that time forward, in earnest or in jest, mention the name of
Academic: did I think this Decree of your Pope were of force, being an Oxford
man, I should be very sorry for my self and others, who in our oracles do
style our Auditors by no name more frequently then Academici. If you had ever
thought your Answer should have been read, you would never have written upon
the top of your Leaves, Master Rogers his most weak grounds, where there is no
mention made of his grounds; and, Most weak Arguments, where you make no
answer at all to my Arguments, and give no instance to those Arguments which
cannot be answered without instances, nor passed by many Arguments and grounds
without any mention of them; and those you mention, to pass them over with, It
seems, to the first; Seems, to the second; As if, to the third; As if, to
the fourth; He may be yet further allowed, to the fifth; whereof I am next to
speak.

Fisher.

And fourthly, that the Anabaptist Faith is that which is contained in
Scripture, and the ancient Creeds; and the Anabaptists Church is a society of
men, which professes the Faith contained in Scripture, and the ancient Creeds:
as (if an Anabaptist may be judge) it will be held so to be.

Rogers.

I will grant, that the Anabaptist is a member of the visible Church, Ecclesia
verae, quamvis non sanae: and that Church to have been always in Ages whereof
he is a member; yea Membrum verum, quamvis non sanum; a true member, though a
diseased, as a goutie foot of a man, that is otherwise in health, and sixty or
seventie years old, is a true member, though not a sound member of that body
which in all other parts is sound; and this foot thus gouty, though it became
gouty but within a few days before, may truly say, that that body whereof it
is a member, has been 10, 20, 30, 40, 70 years the very same body which now
it is, the very same essentially, though not accidentally; still a body, and
still the same body, though sometimes more healthy then other, and in some
parts more sound then other. Now Master Fisher, to what end is your great
discourse of Anabaptists, seeing I grant him to be of the Church? If he be
such a one as you suppose him, who agrees with me in all things else, viz. in
the Scripture, in the Creed, in the Sacraments, in the essence of the
Sacraments, in their matter and form, in their force and efficacy; only
differs from me in the circumstance of time, namely, when Baptism is to be
conferred, and bestowed upon Children of Christians, whether before, or after
they are come to years of discretion.

CHAP. XXI.
Fisher.

AND fifthly, That having distinguished Faith (as Master Rogers does) into
Doctrines fundamental, and necessary, and Doctrines not fundamental, but
accessory, or not necessary: he may be yet further allowed to reject all
Church authority, and not to be satisfied with what is taught by any Church,
ours or his own, (as Master Rogers confesses he is unsatisfied) and
consequently being left to his own liberty, may apply this distinction as he
shall please, accounting only that to be necessary which he lists so to
account. I wish, I say, that such an Anabaptist were imagined, and that Master
Rogers were to be his opponent: That it might be seen whether this Anabaptist
could not as well by these aforesaid Rules, Definitions and Distinctions,
affirm, prove and defend his Faith and Church to have been always visible,
against Master Rogers; as Master Rogers does, or can by his Rules, Definitions
and Distinctions, affirm, prove, and defend the Protestant Church to have
been always visible, against Catholics: or whether Master Rogers could
better convince such an Anabaptist not to have the ancient Faith, or not to be
a member of the continual visible Church, then a Catholic can convince
Master Rogers.

Rogers.

Concerning this Distinction, I have spoken before, that some Doctrines are more
necessary then others: now let us see whether this man says any thing against
it, and what it is. I do not find he does deny it, or grant it: so that I
know not what he means by the words following, viz. He may be yet further
allowed to reject all Church authority, and not be satisfied with what is
taught by any Church, ours or his own (as Master Rogers confesses he is
unsatisfied.) First, you mightily falsify this Parenthesis upon me, my words
were these; I do confess, that none of your side or ours have given me full
satisfaction in this point: what are res fidei per se? And in the words next
going before, I said thus; Master Fisher, I desire you also, for the avoiding
of confusion, to deliver your opinion: Whether all the Affirmative Doctrines of
the Council of Trent, are matters of Faith per se, fundamental, and
necessary to be held for salvation fide explicita. I speak de adultis quibus
facultas datur discendi, who being come to years of discretion, have capacity
to learn.

This much in my first Answer; to this my request he makes no reply; either he
is ignorant, or dare not express whether all the affirmative doctrines of his
Council of Trent, are matters of Faith, and necessary to be known and
believed: though I then told him I proposed this question, as desirous to
learn. This much concerning my question, and my request. Now to my Assertion,
viz. That none of his side or ours, has given me full satisfaction herein: he
hence infers, that I am unsatisfied without any limitation; or if we will
look back beyond the Parenthesis, as if I were unsatisfied in that which is
taught in any Church, ours or his. This is the right fallacy, a dicto secundum
quid, ad dictum simpliciter: I said I was satisfied by none of theirs or ours,
in the instances of one distinction, what Doctrines were to be reduced to
either member of the Distinction, namely, what Doctrines were necessary, what
not necessary; what was fundamental, what accessory* what matter of Faith
properly, what accidentally: and he would traduce me, as if I were
unsatisfied in all other Doctrines; this is the Devils Logic, Master Fisher,
who is the father of lies, to say I confessed that I never did. As well I might
prove that you have never a nose on your face, or that you are blind, thus: Mr.
Fisher has never a Nose on his breast.

Ergo, Mr. Fisher has no Nose.

As you say, Master Rogers does confess he is unsatisfied in some things
belonging to one distinction.

Ergo, Master Rogers is unsatisfied in any Doctrine.



Or thus: Mr. Fisher does confess that he does not see why Master Rogers may
not absolutely grant his fourth Proposition.

Ergo, Master Fisher does confess he does not see.



Master Fisher, I am satisfied in the doctrines of my faith, in the doctrines
of my Church, in the truth of ours, and the falsehood of yours: as that I desire
to die rather then receive your faith, or forsake any of mine; and I do hold
your Roman Church the most corrupted, erroneous, usurping part, or member of
the Christian Church, that is in the world.

I distinguished between doctrines of Faith, the Church, and of the School.


These latter being private opinions of men in distinguishing, defining, or
arguing, being neither contained in Scriptures, nor delivered by the Church, I
might be unsatisfied in, and the rather, because the greatest Writers of your
side, and ours, do vary herein, or speak indefinitely, which is no
resolution. Thomas secunda, secundae, quest. 2. saying one thing, Occham,
another, and Valenza differing from both, Tom, Lib. 4. c. 11. de verbo Dei.
3 disp. 1. q. Bellarmine speaking indifinitely; some things in the Doctrine of
Christianity, as well belonging to faith as manners, are simply necessary to
all men that will be saved; such is the knowledge of the Apostolic Creed, of
the ten Commandments, and of some Sacraments, non nullorum Sacramentorum, not
defining which, and giving small satisfaction, with his individuum vagum, of
some Sacraments, not telling which; so also amongst our Writers, Calvin,
Hooker, Doctor Field, Doctor Usher, do all thus distinguish, but when they
come to express what belongs to either member, they do not all speak
alike. Calvin. Institut. l. 4. cap. 1. n. 12. says some things are necessary
for all men to believe, as that there is one God, that Christ is God, and the
Son of God, that our salvation consists in the mercy of God, and similia,
and such like; This word similia leaves it undetermined.

Hooker holds these three to be fundamental, necessary, and essential unto
the Church, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, but under that of faith, he
understands as necessary the Articles of the Apostles Creed; so that he, and
Doctor Usher, differ very little, or nothing at all. Doctor Field is somewhat
more full in his third book of the Church, the fourth Chapter; yet not in
real addition but in explication, so that they all receive the distinction
which you would seem to reject: as if the admitting of that distinction did
infer a liberty to reject all Church authority, and not to be satisfied by
what is taught by any Church. How this does follow, I know not, I think it is
as far from due consequence, as to say. I have my poake full of plumbes,
therefore that is the way to London. It is my hard hap to meet with an
Adversary which has so little honesty, as to falsify my words, so little
learning, as that he has not, and it seems he cannot frame one Argument. I am
loath to take the pains to add form to such rude matter, to draw the line of
reason, and measure with rules of Art, such rotten stuff, such incohaerent
disjoynted speeches, as that himself was afeard to insert the note of
illation, Ergo.
therefore, but I will do it for him.

Master Rogers has distinguished between Doctrines fundamental, and
necessary, and Doctrines not fundamental, but accessorie.

Ergo, Master Rogers may be further allowed to reject all Church authority, and
not be satisfied with any Church Doctrine.

Negatur Argumentum, Master Fisher, for if it be a good Argument, let me urge
it thus; Aquinas, Occham, Espenseus, The Master of the Sentences, Bonaventure,
Durandus, etc. a world of Schoolmen, and other Writers do make the same
distinction.

Ergo, Aquinas, Occham, Espenceus, the Master of the Sentences, with the
Schools in general, are allowed to reject Church authority, and Church
Doctrine, if the Argument were true, thus it must follow.



I was so far from accounting that to be necessary, which I list so to
account, as that I desired of you my Adversary to be informed, and directed
herein.

Whereas you object, that an Anabaptist might prove his Church to have been
always visible by my Rules, definitions, and distinctions, is most untrue: one
of the Rules or Medium, by which I did prove my Church, was Antiquity,
Universality, and Consent; will you grant that this Medium does agree to the
Anabaptist in that point, which especially gives him that name, viz. in denying
Baptism to children? It seems you have little regard what you say, that you
will thus strengthen the Anabaptist in his error, as if he had Antiquity,
Universality, and Consent, for his excluding children from Baptism. Or if by
his negative, he put me to prove the affirmative, that children are to be
baptized, I will prove it by the testimonies of Antiquity, Universality, and
Consent. But I am not now to deal with Anabaptists, but with a Papist.

CHAP. XXII.
Fisher.

FOr proof whereof, let it be supposed that Master R^gers could (as he cannot)
produce out of Scriptures, and Fathers, other Writers in all Ages as many, and
as plain, and repugnant affirmative sentences against the negative Doctrine of
Anabaptists, as Catholics ordinarily do against Protestants negatives: And
then I ask Master Rogers, Whether this Anabaptist may not (as usually
Protestants do) take one, or other exception either of Argument, or Book, out
of which the sentence is cited, as if it were not undoubtedly Canonical, or
Authentical, or against the Translation, or Transcript, or Printed Copy, as
not certainly known to be conform to the first Antographon, or Original, or
against the interpretation, and sense of the words, or the consequence gathered
out of them, as if some other sense were intended by the Author. Or if none of
these exceptions can be made, whether he may not at least say, that it is not
the faith, or consent of all Antiquity, which does hold such an affirmative,
contrary to his negative Doctrine, but only the opinion of some one, or few,
whilst others hold the contrary, or seem doubtful. Or if it be showed to be
the general Doctrine of all who had occasion to write of that matter, without
any one teaching contrary, whether he may not deny the point to be
fundamental, and say, that they differ not from him in Doctrine necessary, but
only in Doctrine accessory, and that notwithstanding this difference, they
may, and are possessors of his faith, and members of his Anabaptist Church.

All this doubtless he may say, and so defend ancient Fathers to be of his
Faith and Church, as well as Master Rogers can defend them to be of his faith
and Church. Neither can Master Rogers disprove what the Anabaptist averreth,
but with the same breath he disprooveth his own Book, and makes it appear
to every judicious Reader, that he neither can truly name, soundly prove, nor
in any good sort defend either the Ancient Fathers, or any other Orthodox whom
he names, or any lawful Pastors, or others, Catholics, or Heretics before
Luther, or indeed Luther himself, to have held the entire Protestant faith; for
if all Protestant Doctrines, which be different from the faith of the Roman
Church, may be called Doctrines of Protestant faith, it may be evidently
showed, that none of the aforesaid did in all points of faith agree with the
English Protestant Church, whose Ministers are bound to subscribe to the 39
Articles above mentioned.

Rogers.

All this wild discourse is to overthrow my Grounds, by showing that they may
agree with an Anabaptist, who, as he supposes, is not of the visible Church,
and takes it as granted by me, wherein he is deceived. For I hold the
Anabaptist, though I condemn his error in denying Baptism unto children, to
be a member of the visible Church, though diseased as the Papist is, and less
diseased then he: his Argument which comes from him as a Bears Whelpe, or
worse (for ever it wants some principal limme) being formed, is this.

Those are no true Gounds, Distinctions, Definitions, or Arguments, an
Anabaptist may prove himself to be of the Church.

But by Master Rogers Grounds, Distinctions, Definitions, and Arguments, by
which an Anabaptist may prove himself to be of the Church.

Ergo Master Rogers Grounds, Distinctions, Definitions, and Arguments, are no
true Grounds.

I deny his major, which he takes as granted, committing his old fallacy of
Petitio Principii, begging, and supposing that for a medium, and principle
which is denied, or at least questioned: and spends himself wholly in proving
the minor, which I grant, not for any proof that he brings, but for diverse
other reasons which I can allege, as namely these amongst others.

An erroneous opinion in matters of practice and moral praecepts, does not
exclude out of the visible Church, but error in matters of faith.

The error of the Anabaptist is in matters of practice, not in matters of
faith.

Ergo, His error does not exclude him out of the visible Church.

They do not deny Baptism, nor any thing that is substantial in Baptism, but
only err in a circumstance of time, denying that unto children not
absolutely, and for ever, but until they come to make profession of their
faith.

Shall this exclude them, and their Children out of the Church, and why?
because by this delay, many children dying without Baptism, as you suppose are
damned, but I deny. If the delay of seven or eight years for Baptism, do
exclude them out of the Church, because many thereby are deprived of Baptism,
then a shorter delay of forty days, or eighty days, should exclude men out
of the Church, because many children may die at twenty or thirty days old, and
yet we know many Churches in the world, as the Coftie in Egypt, do not baptize
their children before the fourtieth day, though they should die without
Baptism. Th. a Ies. lib. 7. p. 1. c. 5. So Th. ibid. c. 6. Leo primus.
The Maronites whose Patriarch resideth in Syria, Baptize not their male
children till forty days, nor their female till eighty days after their
birth.

He was a Pope of Rome which commanded, that Baptism should not be ministered
at any other time then at Easter, and Whitsontide, and can we think but that
many children in the mean space did die. Socrates Scholasticus, testifies,
Hist. Eccl. 5. c. 21. l Tom. 4. disp. 4. puncto. 4.
that in Thessalie, by reason of deferring of Baptism until Easter, it
happened that many, yea, the most dyed before Baptism. Your Gregory de
Valenza, does confess, that in the Primitive Church many holy, and godly men
did defer their Baptism for a long season.

Disp. de Sacramentis Tom. 1. Council. in decretis Leonis primi Can. 6.
And your Suarez, and Binius do say, that the former custom of the Church, and
Decree of Pope Leo, were changed by the Church, because of the danger which by
so long delay did ensue.

If therefore the Anabaptist be excluded from the visible Church, because of
the danger which by delay of Baptism, does ensue to children; Then Pope Leo
the first for Decreeing a delay of Baptism, with the like danger, and a great
part of the Christian Church, for observing the same, were excluded out of the
visible Church. This was it you should first have proved, that the Anabaptist
is out of the Church before you took it as a premise, or undoubted Proposition,
thence to infer a Conclusion; let me propose the Argument again in that
form which you most affect with Iffs and Ands.

If Master Rogers Grounds be true, the Anabaptist receiving the Scriptures,
Apostles Creed, and agreeing with the Protestants in all things, saving this,
that he will not Baptize children, is of the Church.

But such an Anabaptist is not of the Church.

Ergo, Master Rogers Grounds be not true.

Negatur minor; you have not spoken one word to prove that such an Anabaptist
is not of the Church, which till you prove, your conclusion cannot follow; all
that you say is in proof of the major which I grant.

Whereas you say, and would have it supposed, that I cannot produce as many
proofs against this Negative of the Anabaptist, as the Romanists do usually
produce against Negatives, is most false; for instance, if you will bring me
one Author for your half Communion, your Transubstantiation, the Books of
Machabees, Irenaeus, Origin. Cyprian. confessed by Bellarm. lib. 1. de bap.
cap. 8.
to be Canonical; in all which you are Affirmative, and I Negative; I say, if
you bring one Author in the first 300 years for these your affirmatives, I
will bring three to one for our Affirmative of Baptizing In the same time.

I will produce for this my affirmative, Antiquity, Universality, and Consent;
do you the like for your Affirmatives, and I will be of your Church. All the
rest of your frivolous chat, concerning the Annabaptist, what he may say, what
exceptions he may take against Authors, against Translations, is nothing
against any thing that I have written, you name no Authors, you name no
particular exceptions. So you cavil again with my distinction of Doctrines
fundamental, and doctrines accessory, not being able to produce one Argument
against them; and ignorantly, or impudently deny a destinction delivered by
Saint Augustine, received by your great Schoolman Aquinas, by your great
Jesuits, Bellarmine and Valenza, acknowledged by the Divines of our Church, as
I have formerly showed out of these Authors, and the thing does manifest it
self, do not some things that are contained in Scripture more nearly
concern our salvation, then others? Can any man be saved without knowing
Christ to be the Savior of the world? And may not a man be saved without
knowing that Jacob loved Rachel better then Leah? Or that Pharaoh dreamed of
fat and lean Kine? To what tends your School distinction;

Of 1. Fides explicita. and 2. Fides implicita.
of necessitas. 1. Medii. 2. Praecepti.


And their large disputes, what are to be believed, necessitate medii, without
which a man cannot be saved; and what necessitate praecepti, things that they
ought to believe, and offend if they do not, but not with so great danger, as
if they believe not the former: What mean these two Distinctions? and that
which I cited out of Aquinas, and by which I explicated my own distinction of
fundamental, and accessorie, I mean res fidei Per se. Per accidens.


If this be answering to except against the Grounds of Fathers, Schoolmen,
Jesuits, and reformed Divines, without framing one Argument against them, it
is easy answering indeed.

Whereas you say that none of the Authors by me alleged, not Luther himself
held the entire Protestant Faith, is untrue: and you bring no proof, but a
false supposition, that all Protestant Doctrines different from the faith of
the Roman Church, may be called Doctrines of Protestant faith, this I formerly
denied, and you bring no reason to the contrary, yet still you urge it as your
only medium, or principle. I have showed you reasons to the contrary, which
when you answer, I will eat Paul's Steeple, one thing which I delivered in my
first Answer, makes it clear: the question between you and me, is of
Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Indulgences, worshipping
of Images, etc. Which you affirm I deny, and therefore they are no points of
my faith, for no man would deny his own faith, I will reduce it into form.

No man will deny the points of his own faith.

But we Protestants deny Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory,
and all your new Creed.

Ergo, Neither Transubstantion, nor Invocation of Saints, nor Purgatory, nor
any part of your new Creed, are points of Protestant faith.

And they being your faith, you are bound by the rule of Saint Peter, to give
an account of your faith, 1 Pet. 3, v. 15.

CHAP. XXIII.
Fisher.

BUt if all Protestant Doctrines which be different from the Roman Church her
faith, be not Doctrines of Protestant faith, I require Master Rogers to show me
which (in particular) be, and which be not Doctrines of Protestant faith, that
it may be discerned, who did, and who did not hold the Protestant faith, and
that withal he give me a substantial ground well proved out of Scripture, why
those particular points which he shall assign, are points of Protestant faith,
rather then others, contained in the 39 Articles; If he say (as he has already
seemed to say) that none of their negative Doctrines pertain to their faith,
and that all which is affirmed by Protestants is affirmed by Roman Catholics,
and that this affirmative Doctrine only does pertain to faith; it will follow
that Protestants have no faith different from Roman Catholics; out of which it
will follow that those English Protestants, who shall hold some of the 39
Articles, and deny the rest, may be said to have no faith different from those
which subscribe to all the 39 Articles; which last Consequence, if Master
Rogers grant, I ask why the book of the Canons does excommunicate ipso facto,
such half Protestants? Why do their Bishops imprison them as Heretics, and
not account them members of their Church? And why may not Roman Catholics, by
as good, or better right accouunt Protestants (who deny so many points defined
in both ancient and recent General Councels) to be Heretics, excommunicaeed,
and no members of the ancient, and present Catholic Church.

Rogers.

That which you require here, I performed in my first Answer in my definition
of a Protestant, or else it had been no good definition, had it not contained
all that is essential, this you know well enough, but because you have nothing
to answer, you will demand the same question again. Look into my definition,
there you shall find it; and I made the same request unto you for a definition
of the visible Church, and what points you hold to be fundamental; to which
you make no answer at all.

I there also undertook to prove all our Affirmations which you deny, so you
do the like, by your Affirmations which we deny, my words were these in my
former answer.

Rogers in his first answer.

In all these I defend the Negative; and so it does belong to you to prove the
Affirmative, which when you shall do by testimonies of Writers in all ages, I
will yield unto you: for you proving the Affirmative, the Negative will fall of
it self, as for example; The first instance of Negation in our Articles, is
part of the sixth Article concerning those books of Esdras, Tobit, Judith, etc.
which we receive not for Canonical: you do, the proof is on your side.

What I require of you I will perform on our side, whatsoever is affirmative
in our Articles, I will maintain to be affirmed, and taught in all Ages, as
the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Articles, the Affirmative part of the 6, the 7, 8, and so in
the rest, or I will yield unto you.

Give me instance what Affirmation of our Articles you deny, and I will prove
it in all Ages. And I desire you to set down withal, which of your
affirmative Articles you receive, and whether we agree in the Articles of the
Creed, or not.

I will do the like by you, and give you an instance in our Affirmatives, Show
me who in every Age did receive the books of Esdras, Machabees, Tobit, Judith,
etc. for Canonical in the 1, 2, 3, 4, Centurie of years; This is one of the
first points of your Tridentine faith.

Master Fisher, I desire you also for the avoiding of confusion to deliver your
opinion; whether all the Affirmative Doctrines of the Council of Trent, are
matters of faith per se fundamental, and necessary to be held for salvation,
fide explicita? I speak, de adultis quibus facultas discendidatur, Thus far
in my former Answer, to which you have made reply; you have neither showed
which of our Affirmative Articles you deny, nor which you receive, nor have you
proved one Instance I gave of your Affirmatives, nor as much as expressed what
you hold for matters of faith, but dissembling all this, pass it over with
silence; unless you had thought as the Boy did by his bodged verses, that what
you wrote would never be read, but that men would read the Titles, and number
the Pages, and there find written over head, Master Rogers weak Grounds,
Master Rogers weak Arguments, would take the rest upon trust; would you ever
have put Pen to Paper, and yet in matters of Controversies, never express what
your self held; nor tell us, being requested, what your own faith is, or to
give a reason of your own faith; nor to define your own Church: And answer
formally, and punctually to no one Argument, and frame no one Argument of your
own; Hominis est vehementer abutentis and otio, and literis. That a man should
offer to write a Tract, and that in so sacred a profession, as Divinity, and
that in a question of so high a nature, as these are, what is the Christian
faith? what is the visible Church? and herein not answer one question, not to
bring one Distinction, or Definition, or frame one Argument in form, or like a
Scholar, is a mispending of time, wasting of Paper, and abusing the very name
of Learning. Divinity, as all other Sciences, consists of Principles, and
Conclusions; the Principles received on both sides, are the Scriptures (to
which you would add unwritten Traditions) you bring not one place of Scripture
to maintain those Affirmative Tenants of yours, which we deny, you account
Articles of faith. And as for Theological conclusions, you infer none; you
frame no Argument, you make no Syllogism, you give no reason of your faith,
though Saint Peter require it whom I thought of all the Apostles you did most
respect; what shall we think then, but that you have neither Scripture, nor
reason for your faith, I mean in your new Creed in which you dissent from us.

Fisher.

I require withal that he give me a substantial ground well proved out of
Scripture, why those particular points which he shall assign, are points of
Protestant faith, rather then others contained in the 39. Articles; if he say
(as he has already seemed to say) that none of their Negative Doctrines,
pertain to their faith, and that all that is affirmed by Protestants, is
affirmed by Roman Catholics, and that this Affirmative Doctrine only does
pertain to faith, it will follow that Protestants have no faith different from
Roman Catholics.

Rogers.

He calls unto me to distinguish between points of Protestant faith, and
other points contained in the 39 Articles and yet in the next word he is feign
to confess that I distinguished (if he say, as he has already seemed to say)
that none of their Negative Doctrines, pertain unto their faith. This I had
delivered in my first Answer, and yet he still calls for it, yet he must
mince it a little, and say, I seemed to say; so great a friend he is to
seeming, that he will never leave it, knowing it to be essential to the
definition of Sophistry, and a Sophister.

You might have left out your seeming, and written plainly that I said so;
seeing in my Answer to your first Paper, I spent nere a page in explicating,
and exemplifying this Distinction, and in my Answer to your second Paper, which
was delivered me as the work of five Jesuits, then conversant about Gondamors
house: I wrote thus; As I did admonish Master Fisher to distinguish between
Affirmation, and Negation, so I do these men, and that faith is Affirmation,
not Negation, for no man believes what he denies.

Secondly, In points of faith I like Master Fishers Rule.

They that are in the Affirmative must prove.



Now all that we affirm, they affirm; as one God, three persons, all the
Creed. So that we need not prove what our Adversaries do confess.

But in those points in variance between us, they are to prove; because they
are Affirmative, we Negative: as unwritten Traditions, Latin Service,
Invocation of Saints, etc. Thus far in my former Answer. This is saying
plainly, this is not seeming. Whereas you infer, that seeing all which is
affirmed by Protestants, is affirmed by Roman Catholics, and this Affirmative
Doctrine only does pertain to faith, it will follow that Protestants have no
faith different from Roman Catholics. I grant the Consequence; what is this to
the question, whether we are of the visible Church or no? this which you would
infer, does rather prove us to be a part of the visible Church, then any way
gainsay it. Thus They which have no other faith then that of the Church of
Rome, are parts of the visible Church.

But the Protestants have no other faith then that of the Church of Rome.

Ergo: The Protestants are a part of the visible Church.



The minor Master Fisher would infer out of my Grounds as if I would deny it;
no, I grant it, and so I hope will he the major, then the conclusion must
follow.

We differ from you in Ecclesiastical Doctrines, and Discipline, which you
term to be points of faith, but we deny.

They are corruptions of faith, Innovations, Idolatrous, Antichristian
Doctrines. You would force them upon us, as points of faith; we refuse them,
because the Scripture does not express them, the Primitve Church did not know
them, and the greatest part of the Christian Church to this day does not
approve them; And your own writers are distracted into many and diverse
opinions concerning them. Paulus venet. l. 1. and 2
What Antiquity have you for your half Communion, Worshipping of Images, etc.
What Universality, seeing the Church of Greece of Syria the Georgians,
Circassians, Mengiellians, Breitenbachius Purgr. c. de Iacobitis. Vitrivius
Histor. orientalis c. 76.
the Moscovits, and Russians, the Christians of Babylon, of Assyria,
Mesopotamia, Parthia, Media, of Cassar, Samarcham, Charcham, Chinchtalis,
Tanguth, Suchir, Ergimal, Tenduck, Caracam, Mangi, the Iacobits, whose Sect is
extended, and spread abroad in some forty Kingdoms, (which I assure my self
is more large then all the Roman Church) do communicate in both kinds, worship
not Images, deny Purgatory, and (which with you is more then all the rest) deny
the Popes Supremacy. So you have neither Antiquity nor Universality, (to which
I might add) nor Consent among your selves in those additions of yours,
contained in your new Creed. As for one Instance, the Council of Trent has
made the books of Machabees Canonical, Melitus Sav. Origenes. Athanasius.
Hilarious. Epiphanius. Cyrillus. Nazianzen. Amphiloch. Hieronymus Ruffinus.
which is left out of the Canon by ten Fathers, that is, I take it, by all the
Fathers that dyed within 400 years after the Incarnation, and wrote of that
subject. Your Nicholaus Lyranus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo, and Thomas de
Vio, Cardinals: whereof this last was one of the most learned that ever the
Church of Rome had, insomuch that in the Council of Trent it was said; I think
no man here does think himself so great a Divine but that he might learn of
Cajetan. All these, I say, of your side exclude those Books from the Canon as
we do: yet will you not say, they were of another faith then the Church of
Rome which you must say, if your new Creed, and Decrees of Councels, be points
of faith, as you here say. And lest you should escape with your wandering
discourses, and your flying from the question, I will press my argument in
form.

Whosoever denies the new Creed, or any Articles thereof, the Council of
Trent, or any Doctrine thereof, is an Heretic, and denies the faith.

But Carthusianus, and Thomas de Vio Cajetan, both Cardinals, deny some
Articles of the new Creed, and some Doctrines of the Council of Trent.

Ergo: Lyra Carthusianus, and Thomas de Vio, are Heretics, and deny the faith.

I am sure you will hold this Conclusion to be false, if so then, one of the
premises must be false, not the minor, ergo, the major, which is your Tenet
whereby you would prove us to be Heretics, and to deny the faith.

Fisher.

Out of which it will further follow, that those English Protestants who shall
hold some of the 39 Articles, and deny the rest may be said to have no faith
different from those which subscribe to all the 39 Articles.

Rogers.

I grant it does follow, so that those same Articles which they deny, be not
those Articles which concern the Unity of the Godhead, the Trinity of
persons, and all those things which are contained in the Creed; I say therefore
they differ in Ecclesiastical Doctrines, or Discipline, not in faith, so they
receive the Scriptures and Apostles Creed.

Fisher.

Which last consquence, if Master Rogers grant, I ask why the books of Canons
does excommunicate, ipso facto, such half Protestants.

Rogers.

They may be excomunicated for gain saying Ecclesiastical Doctrines, or the
established Discipline of the Church, they may be excommunicated as erroneous
Shismaticks.

Fisher.

Why do their Bishops imprison them as Heretics, and not account them members
of their Church.

Rogers.

Andrews in his Defense of the Apology for the other. Bilson in his
perpetual government of the Church. Carleton against the Appeal.
They must be imprisoned as Schismatics: Our Bishops do all profess that
there are no Puritan Doctrines, that the difference is only in matter of
Discipline, they count them neither Heretics, nor wholly excluded out of the
Church: here you have supposed two falsehoods in two lines; those learned
Protestants from beyond the Seas, whose Discipline does somewhat vary from
ours, do testify that the purity of Doctrine does flourish in England purely,
and sincerely; So Beza from Geneva, that by Queeene Elizabeth's coming to the
Crown, God again had restored his Doctrine, and true worship; So Zanchius,
that the whole compass of the world has never seen any thing more to be
wished, then is her Government; So Daneus.

Fisher.

And why not Roman Catholics by as good, or better right account Protestants
(who deny so many points defined in both ancient, and recent General Councels)
to be Heretics Excommunicated, and no members of the Ancient, and present
Catholic Church.

Rogers.

If we did the one, you may do the other: but I have showed the falsehood of
your supposition, that we count them Heretics, who descent from us in any of
our Articles, they may be erroneous in a lesser nature then Heresy, and
turbulent in those errors; they may be Schismatics disobedient unto
Government, and so excommunicated, and imprisoned for either of those, without
Heresy.

If all Decrees of Councels be Doctrines of faith, as you affirm, your
Cardinal Bellarmine is deceived who says that in Councels the greatest part
of those things which are done do not belong to faith, neither the
Disputations concerning faith, nor the reasons which are added, nor those
things which are brought for explication, and illustration, but only the very
naked Decrees, and not all those, but they alone who are proposed as matters of
faith. To this subscribed Widrington, in the Preface above alleged, and he
voucheth Canus for the same opinion.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Fisher.

I Ask what Scripture, or reason assures that no Negative Doctrine pertaines
to faith? for Scripture having in it so many Negative sentences which are to be
believed, assures the contrary; neither is there any reason which can assure a
man that he is freed from believing: for example this Negative, Deus non
mentitur, God does not lie; rather then from believing this Affirmative, Est
Deus Verax, God is a true speaker, for both being said by one, and the same
God, our Lord, Truth it self, and both being propounded by one and the same
Catholic Church his Spouse, assisted by his Spirit, the Spirit of truth, as
spoken by God in holy Scripture, both are equally to be believed; neither can
any without danger of eternal damnation deny, or doubt of either those or any
other, even the least point of Catholic faith, as we may learn out of Saint
Athanasius Creed, saying, that, Whosoever will be saved, it is needful that he
hold the Catholic faith, which unless each one hold entire (that is in all
points) and inviolate (that is, in the true uncorrupted sense of the Catholic
Church) without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. So as whether the Doctrine
be Negative or Affirmative, whether fundamental, or accessory, supposing it to
be a Doctrine propounded by the Catholic Church, as revealed by God, it must
be believed explicit, or implicit, and may not rashly, or (which is worse)
advisedly be denied, or doubted of, and much less may the contrary be
obstinately maintained against the known judgment of a lawful General
Council, or the unanime consent of the Pastors of the Church, in regard our
Savior has expressly averred, That he who despises them, despises himself,
and him that sent him, to wit, God his Father. And again, he that will not
hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen, and Publicane. All which
shows that such as do obstinately deny, or doubtingly dispute against any the
least point known by Church proposition to be a point of Catholic faith, is
worthily accounted an Heretic, a despiser of God, an excommunicated person,
and no member of the true Catholic Church, and one who if he so live, and die
without repentance, cannot be saved. But (as Athansius without any want of
charity pronounces) he shall without doubt perish everlastingly.

Rogers.

I have answered you more then once, and given you reasons more then one, or
two, why Negations are not matters of faith, per se. fundamental, and
necessary, for I brought this distinction of Affirmation, and Negation after
those distinctions of Doctrine.

1. Accessorie, of res fidei per se and res fidei per accidens. 2. Doctrine
fundamental of res fidei per se and res fidei per accidens.
Then I added this distinction of Affirmation and Negation, so that my meaning
appeared by the connection it had with that which went before, that Negations
are not points or Articles of faith, are not fundamental doctrines, are not
res fidei per se, I did not say but they might be res fidei per accidens, as
all propositions revealed in Scriptures, whether affirmative, or negative are,
besides those Articles of faith. Here then you do not dispute, ad idem, non
facis elenchum, you prove what I do not deny, you prove that Negatives
contained in Scripture, pertain to faith, which I do not deny, but you do not
prove that they are points of faith, fundamental Doctrines, res fidei per se,
things proper and essential unto faith, as your great Schooleman Aquinas, your
Bellarmine, and Valenza have written, cited by me before; where I have also
showed the difference between being a matter of faith, and pertaining to
faith, neither do I say that any man is freed from believing this Negative;
God does not lie, or any other Negative revealed in Scripture, but that an
implicit faith may serve in all Negatives, as well as those Affirmatives which
are not Articles of the Creed, I say again that,

Negatives in Scripture are res fidei per accidens non per se.


They are accidental unto faith not essential.

There is no general necessity to believe them, fide explicita, so to believe
them as actually to know them, but it is sufficient to believe them, fide
implicita, with a mind prepared actually to believe them, when they do
appear unto us actually to be revealed in Scripture.

All things revealed in Scripture have aequalem veritatem, non aequalem
utilitatem.


They are equally true, but not equally profitable.

For these propositions, God is not a liar; God is not as man, the heathen has
no knowledge of his Law. Pharaoh was not obedient. And all that are Negatives
in Scripture, being put together, cannot inform a man in that saving truth
which is sufficient for his souls health to believe; but a few Affirmatives,
twelve Propositions contained in the Creed can do it.

Again I say that,

All things revealed in Scripture have aequalem necessitatem credendi, non
aequalem necessitatem cognoscendi.


It is not a like necessary for us to know all things revealed in Scripture:
but it is a like necessary for us to believe them when we know them.

As you have falsified the predicate of my Proposition, by changing points of
faith unto that which pertains unto faith, fundamental into accessory;
proper, and essential into that which is accidental; so have you falsified
the subject of the same Proposition: for immediately after that distinction of
Affirmation, and Negation, my words were these; In those Articles of our
English Church, our Negation is partly a traversing, partly a condemning of
your novelties, and additions, and therefore no part of our faith, for no man
would deny his own faith. Thus far in my former Answer, as also in a few
lines after, my words were these, The first instance of Negation in our
Articles, is part of the sixth Article concerning those Books of Esdras,
Tobit, Judith, etc. whereby it appears manifestly, that I spoke not of
Negatives revealed in Scripture, but of Negatives in Doctrines Ecclesiastical.
Now that you should argue from Negatives in Scripture to Negatives out of
Scripture, is a baculo ad angulum from the staff to the corner, my Tenet
therefore is that,

Negatives revealed in Scripture are res fidei per accidens, non per se,


Negatives not revealed in Scripture, are not res fidei vel per se, vel er
accidens,


Are neither essentially nor accidentally the object of faith.

That which you allege out of Athanasius; I willingly embrace, I receive his
Creed, I have often professed it in public, but what is that to your new
Creed? I find in Athanasius his Creed, neither Purgatory, nor Indulgence, nor
Transubstantiation, nor Invocation of Saints, nor seven Sacraments, nor
worshipping of Images.

Whereas you say I must hold it in the uncorrupted sense of the Catholic
Church, I do embrace it, but I will not understand the Church of Rome, or the
Pope for the Catholic Church as you do. The Catholic Church never received
your Purgatory, your half Communion, your worshipping of Images, as I have
showed already; I will obstinately maintain nothing contrary to the known
judgment of a lawful General Council, but your Councels of Trent, and
Lateran are no such, they are but fopperies, and the juggling tricks of the
Popish faction to cozen the world. Whatsoever we deny, when you prove it out of
Scripture, we will believe it; here is no obstinacy. Whatsoever is determined
by Councels, we will receive, fide humana, but not divina, as the saying of
Reverend men, but not as the Oracles of God. So also we approve the unanimous
consent of the Fathers, in receiving all revealed truth, we are far from
Heresy: in submitting to the Catholic Church, and Decrees of Councels, we
clear our selves from being Schismatikes: in following the unanimous consent of
the Fathers, we show our selves to be no Innovators; but you by worshipping of
Images, show what respect you have to Scripture; by your new Creed you show
what reverence you have to General Councels, seeing the Council of Calcedon
decreed, having repeated that which is commonly called the Nicene Creed,
Isidor. fol. 83 and urged by the Grecians in the Council of Florence. Surius
Tom. 4. Ses. 5. Ferrariae habita. Lib. 7. c. 1. de loc. The. page 422, 423. De
rebus Muscovitarum page 38. In apara. Sacr. in Diamperi. Conc.
that no man should write or say other Creed, and whosoever did, if Bishops and
Clergymen, let them be deposed; if Monks, and Lay men, let them be
accursed. What regard you have to the unanimous consent of the Fathers,
appears by your Doctrine, that the Virgin Mary was conceived without
original sin, contrary to Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard, and all
the holy men that made mention of that point, as your own Canus confesses:
and so you are Innovators, Schismatics, and Heretics, despised, and
excommunicated by all other Christian Churches in the World. By the Graecians,
as appears by Posevine your own Jesuit; by the Indians, as is acknowledged
by the same Author; by the Coftie of Egypt, and consequently by all the rest
of the Iacobites the Aethiopians, and others acknowledging all subjection unto
the Patriarch of Alexandria, so that upon you alone that curse is fallen.

Nec amet quenquam, nec ametur ab vllo. You hate, you condemn all Churches of
the World; and they condemn you, you account them for Schismatics, and
Heretics, and they you for Schismatics, Heretics and Idolaters; your
worshipping of Images, hinder the conversion of the Jews and Turks, who for
this cause esteem you for subtle Atheists, and heathenish Idolaters, falling
down to a block, and worshipping the work of men's hands. We worship God.

Fisher.

Whereas therefore it is certain that Protestants hold diverse Negative
Doctrines, not only not found in, but contrary to Scriptures, Councels, and
Fathers, and other Orthodox Authors in all Ages; It evidently follows, that
Master Rogers has not yet named, nor can name, nor has proved, nor can prove,
or defend any of those he named, or undertaketh to name, to have been visible
Protestants in all Ages before Luther, and consequently he cannot be said to
have made any good answer, either to Master Fishers Question, or to his five
Propositions, or to his other Paper, written to explicate the sense of the said
Question.

Rogers.

What you say, certainly is most false, that Protestants hold diverse Negative
Doctrines contrary to Scriptures, Councels, and Fathers, if you understand
General Councels, and unanimous consent of Fathers. We hold many Doctrines not
expressly set down in Scriptures, but none contrary to Scriptures, neither do
we count any thing matter of faith, but what is expressly contained in
Scriptures. Whereas you say, that I have not yet named, nor proved Authors of
the Protestants faith in all Ages, the present discourse will show to be false,
which I refer to the Reader.

Deo gloria in aeternum.
FINIS.

