MILES CHRISTIANVS OR A just Apology of all necessary writings and writers,
Specialie of them which by their labored writings take pains to build up the
Church of Christ in this age And in a public, and diffamatorie Epistle lately
set forth in Print, are unjustly depraved.

1. Tim. 5. 20. Them that sin rebuke openly, that the rest also may fear.
Allowed by auctority.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop, right over
against the great South door of Paul's. 1590.

To Miles Moss, Minister of the Word, and Bacheler of Divinity
Miles Christianus wishes more soundnes of judgment, more substance of
learning, with more wisdom and discretion in all his actions.

YOu have published of late, Master Moss, a little Treatise entitled, A
short Catechism, etc. you foresaw I doubt not, whither it should go, from
what, into whose hands it would come, how many eyes would see, and how many
ears hear it, and hear of the same: and therefore upon mature deliberation
(for may I think otherwise?) you commended it ( yet the work of other heads)
and your self withal ( the corrector and abridger thereof) with many titles
and notable words unto the present age, and posterity to ensue. Of which Book
I have nothing, or very little, but of the Preface, or dedicatorie Epistle of
yours (which I would to God had never been written, or more Christianly,
soberly, and advisedly penned) I have many things to say.

Now that you may perceive my quarrel against you is just, not picked by me,
but ministered by your self, I have sette-downe all your words, without either
adding unto, or taking from them any whit: and where you say well, you shall
have the praise due for good deseries, but where you have slidde from the
truth, and broached unsound and noisome assertions, I have both laid them
open, and confuted them also, for your own good, if admonished you will see
your faults, and reform your judgment; and for the common benefit of our
Church and Country, to whose service, I have dedicated my self and studies.

And this have I done (as he knows to whom the very ground not of mine
only, but of your writing also is known) not of any settled ill will to your
self, to whom I wish all good, but through an utter detestation of your
Paradoxes, which neither for me had been confuted in an open book, had not
they by your self to the great dishonor of God in a public writing, and
vulgar tongue both in Town and Country, been dispersed.

I am no adversary to your person, but to your opinions, which if you change,
I am changed; if not, assure your self to hear that you would not, when you
will persist to hold that you should not maintain.

Miles Moss.
To the right Reverend Father in God, Edmond, by Gods permission Bishop of
Norwich. etc.

There is no end of making many books, says the Preacher. Eccle, 12. 1^.
And he spoke the truth, whether we respect the varieties of matter and
invention, whereof there was never measure in any age Untrue. ^er man ^o age^
had no writings at all.
, or whether we respect the multitude of writings which have ouerflowed all the
banks of modesty and discretion in this present age: The one I ascribe unto
the variety of wits: The other to the iniquity of the time.

Miles Christianus.
THere is no end of making many books, said the Preacher: and he said truly:
and his end in saying so was exceeding good, and neither to discourage men
from wry^ing, nor to es^range any godly man or woman from reading holy books.
He was no adversary unto any good help unto godliness, whether it be writing
or preaching, much or little: and his own practice, which uttered three
thousand Proverbs, and made a thousand and five songs, 1. King. 4. 32.
and diverse books besides The Proverbs. Preacher. Canticles.
, and the practice of the Prophets after him, and of the Apostles, Evangelists,
and other holy men after them also do show both the good use, and great need
men have of books in every age.

But what is your end M. Moss in alleging this saying of the Preacher There
is no end of making many books? I fear me you aim not at that mark which
the Preacher did: you have another end then he had, and therefore your meaning
is corrupt.

Indeed the variety of matter and invention in all ages has been
wonderful: yet can you not say, and say truly, it was without measure,
unless you condemn simply the variety of wits, and invention, which are the
worthy gifts and graces of almighty God, bestowed upon man, nor that this
variety of matter and invention has been manifested in all ages by written
books. For both the heathen people were a long time without the benefit of
books, and the Jews, and Church of God, till Moises days (which was many
ages from the creation of the world) utterly void of all help of the written
word. And say you not your self within a few lines Contrariety.
after, the writings of the ancients were few? If few, how were they without
measure? And if beyond all measure, again how were they few?

Last of all, interpreting the saying of the Preacher so as if he spoke only
of this present age, and latter time wherein we live, you mistake him much. For
albeit he foresawe the multitude of writings that were to come abroad in the
latter days, yet, no doubt, he meant properly the writings which he saw were
attempted in his days, or extant in the world before his time, which neither
can be said to ouerflow, or to have ouerflowed the banks of modesty and
discretion, because there be multitudes of them: that is no sufficient cause,
yea no cause at all. Of good things the more, yea the greater multitudes, the
better, and there be multitudes of writings, which you dare not without
impudency avouch to have ouerflowed the banks of modesty and discretion. And
of such books it is not the iniquity, but the felicity of the latter time to
have good store.

Miles Moss.
The Writings of the ancients were Vn^ue.
few, but such as were an honor to themselves, and benefit to posterity. The
writings of this time are many, but Vn^e*
such as disturb the Church; and foam out their founders shame.

Miles Christianus
You write your pleasure of all writers both ancient, and of this time: but
untruly of each, unsoundly of all. And that you may palpably see and perceive
both the truth of mine, and the falsehood of your words, I will before your
eyes place some propositions pregnantly arising from your very speech.

Miles Moss.
The writings of the ancients were few.

Miles Christianus.
You do no sooner see this, but me thinks, the red color comes into your
cheeks. Were the writings of the ancients but few? What ancients mean you that
were but few? The Schoolmen and others, immediately before our time, or the
Fathers, and other writers before them? Or the Apostles, Evangelists, prophets
before them? Or the Ancient Heathen, whether philosophers, orators,
historiographers, or poets? If you mean the School men, and our immediate
predecessors, read our country man Bale, only for English writers, I. Bale de
Scrip. Anglicis
and he will confute you: If the Fathers of the Church, read Gennadius,
Gennadius de illust. viris
S. Jerome, Hieronimus de eccl. scrip.
Tritenhemius Tritenhemius de eccl. scrip.
and they will confute you: If the prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles,
consider their works, their persons, their preachings, compare the number of
them which wrote, with them that preached and wrote not, and all of them with
the learned men, and writers of our time, and you will say, all thing waied,
that both their examples are prouocations, for all able men to write, and that
neither the writers, nor writings were few: If the ancient philosophers, and
such like, if you call into mind either the famous library of K. Ptolomie in
Egypt replenished with seventy thousand volumes of writings Dion. Carthu^. de
vi^ Ch^. l. 2. ar. 17. reg. ^*
, or that other Library at Alexandria, wherein were contained four hundred
thousand books, all at one time by a mischance of fire consumed Paulus Orosius
hist. l. 6. c. 15. Plutar. in Caesar. and in Dion. l. 4^. Bodinus meth. Prefat.
, or the six thousand treatises which Diomedes wrote De re Grammatica (g) you
will not say, I think, their books and writings were but few: If these you
mean, or any of these, or any other Ancients besides these, both the common
voice of all learned men, and the public writings of Gesner Gesnerus Biblioth.
, Simler Simlerus. Biblioth.
, and many more will say that Miles Moss is little seen in the writings of the
Ancients, if he say the writings of the Ancients were but few.

Miles Moss.
The writings of the Ancients were an honor unto themselves, and a benefit
unto posterity.

Miles Christianus.
This is untrue, if you mean generally all the Ancients, if some of them, it
is also untrue in many respects, unless you understand by Ancients only the
ancient Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, the very penners of the Canonical
Scriptures. For the other Ancients for the most part either by all their
doings, or by some things which they wrote, purchased small honor, or none
at all unto themselves, and benefited no jot the posterity by their writings.
Look into the writings of the ancient whether Schoolmen Erasmus in sua
Theol. ver^ meth.
, Heretics D. August. de h^resious. Epiphan. de h^resious. (...) de h^resious.
(...) de h^resious.
, or Fathers, whereof none were free altogether from errors, and ill opinions
Ecclesiast. ^ist. singul^s centurij^ praete^ primam. c 4.
and you shall find it true.

Miles Moss.
The writings of this time are many.

Miles Christianus.
This is another untruth being uttered, as it is, comparatively, and in respect
of former days and times.

I showed you before of one man which of Grammar wrote six thousand books:
Origin wrote as many Tritenhem. ^. de ec. scrip. Acontius Stratagem. Satanae
li. 6.
, yea a thousand more Acts and Monu. vol. 1. ^. 79.
though of other matters, S. Augustine wrote so many books that Tritenhemius
is of belief, that no man is able either to read them, or to come by them Lib.
de Ec. scrip.
. I told you also of one library that had in it at one instant four hundredth
thousand volumes of several writings. Can you name, I say not that man which
of Grammar, but that man which of any matter within this age has written and
published seven thousand books, or so much of his own doing as no one man in
his whole life is able to peruse? And where in England, yea in all Christendom
will you find in one Library, I had almost said in all the public Libraries
four hundred thousand books, as was in that one at Alexandria? And that at
such a time as there were not so notable means by printing speedely to spread
abroad and disperse the labors of men, as now in these days? And yet is it
true that the writings of these days be many, and of the Ancients, few?

Miles Moss.
The writings of this time disturb the Church, and foam out their founders
shame.

Miles Christianus.
Had you not left-off quite to blush, you would have been ashamed ever thus to
have written. These words they deserve not by writing to be confuted, they
would publicly by authority be corrected. Do the writings of this time
disturb the Church, and foam out their founders shame? True it is in deed of
those writers whereof both Cornel. Agrippa in his Epist. ad I. Capel.
, and M. Calvin in his Prae^at. in Gal. transl. Bibliae a P. Rob. editam. in
Ca^. Epist. f. 391.
, and of our Country both M. Ascham in his time In his Sc^ol master page 26
, and M. Rainoldes of later time ^raefat. ad* Acad. Oxon* ^a fixa the* sibus
suis.
has complained: true also of the writings of Martin Marprelate and such like,
which all good men do abhor, they disturb the Church, and foam out their
founders shame. But will you argue thus, Some writings of this time disturb
the Church, etc. therefore the writings of this time do disturb the Church,
and foam out their founders shame? Do you so malice, or detest some, that
because of them which you like not, you will utterly condemn all, as did Herod
all the Infantes of two years old and under, because he hated Christ Matthew. 2,
16
? Or rather think you in good earnest, that the writings of this time disturb
the Church, and foam out their founders shame? If you think as you write, most
wicked you of all men, that so do think: worser, that so dare write: If you
think not so badly of the writings of this present time, as you do write,
then dissembler you that write otherwise then you think, and of all most
foolish, that no better do consider what you do write?

I thank God, Miles, I have received that sweetenes and profit by the
writings of this time, that I think it no small portion of happiness both of
this time to have them, and of mine to hear and read them, and can not with
patience endure to hear them so in public writing defaced. And therefore in
the zeal and courage of a Christian Soldier I write it, and write unto you,
either revoke these words, and give a better testimony of them by whom both
you, and the whole Church is the better, or assure your self you will hear of
this Heretical blasphemy, where and when you would not.

Miles Moss.
If the Heathen Philosopher lived, which inhibited his Scholars the first
seven years from speaking: how sharply would he censure many hasty heads
of our days, which take pen to write, before they know to speak, I say not
learnedly as Scholars, or religiously as Christians, but sensibly as men of
reason and understanding.

Miles Christianus.
These words be yet more moderately spoken than the former: howbeit not truly
neither, unless you understand them of public writers. Now if any thing come
abroad that is so far from being learnedly and christianly, that it is not
sensibly done, the boldness of them is great that so dare write, but the
negligence of them greater that should, and will not either restrain such
works before they come abroad, or punish the authors for publishing their
follies. And an heavy account are they to make which either diuulgate, or
suffer any thing to come abroad unless it be both sensibly, Christianlie, and
in some measure scholerlie performed.

I am a plain fellow, Miles, and get not my living by dissimulation, I tell
you as I think, had some men done their parts this Pistle of yours had never
come abroad.

Miles Moss.
The Apostles rule is quite forgotten, Be swift to hear, and slow to speak:
and men are become like windy instruments, ready to speak as soon as they
receive breath, though they give an harsh and uncertain sound: whereof it
comes to pass, that many read much, and learn little, because many that
know little, have presumed to write much.

Miles Christianus.
The Apostles rule is quite forgotten, you say: but you have quite forgotten
your self in saying so. His rule is both known and practiced of some, or else
you condemn even all the Militant Church in this world: but of some, indeed,
it is better known then practiced, and of some so forgotten, as if it had
never bin known, the more is the pity.

In these words you note three sorts of men, Speakers, Readers, and Writers:
the first, that will speak before they have learned: the next, that read
much, and learn little: the last, that know little, and yet presume to write
much. Now had you as wisely, as you have roundly delivered your mind, your
words had been to be accounted of, but seeing you so write of all three, as
no man can tell against which, or what, or upon what ground you write, blame me
not though I do deem you none of the wisest Writers. And be your self judge
whether you were with or besides your wits when thus you wrote. And me^ are
become like windy instruments, ready to speak as soon as they receue breath,
though they give an harsh and uncertain sound. Whereof it comes to pass, that
many read much, and learn little: because many that know little, have presumed
to write much. All out of iointe. The first sentence agreeing nothing with that
going before in your Epistle, in which you spoke wholly of writing, and in that
of speaking: the next answering nothing unto the other, where you enter into
the speech both of reading and writing, and utter nothing of speaking, and yet
all so with Conjunctions either copulative or causall are linked together, as
if they depended directly one thing upon an other, when they do nothing less.
You are not to write against insensible Writers, that write so without sense
and reason your self. Howbeit, whatsoever your delivery be, your meaning is
to point at the corruptions of Speakers, Readers, and Writers in this age. And
surely, I commend you for your integrity in this respect that you will not so
write against one, but you will also by the way speak of other faults. Yet
two things I cannot but mislike in you, one is, that you delight so in
Generalities, that what is the true sense and meaning of your words cannot be
understood: which is surely a great fault in a Writer (a special grace of
writing being perspicuitie) the other is, that vainly, I will not say
enuiously, you speak of some things as faulty, when they are not so. But you
shall see your self.

Miles Moss.
Men will speak before they have learned.

Miles Christianus.
I take it by Speakers (...) you mean Preachers, yet not all, but some who are
become, you say, like windy instruments, ready to speak as soon as they
receive breath, though they give an harsh and uncertain sound. Which, had you
uttered plainly, as you do it as other things, covertly, you had spoken well,
and with commendation, for there be such indeed, and they deserve to be
touched, and sharply to be taken up. Against whom, as well as your self, I
could say much, but I spare them at this time in some respects. Many good men
cry out of them. There is little difference between some of our Sermons, and
the bare reading of ignorant Ministers, says one T. W. Upon certain verses
Romans 8 p. 11.
. Such cry out for a learned Ministry, themselves being unlearned, says
another T. C. In his admon. to the people of Eng. 1. 47.
. There be too too many, who to avoid the infamy of unpreaching Ministers,
are bold beyond their strength to fly without wings, to the great dishonor of
the name of God, offense of his people, and encouragement of the adversaries of
his truth, says a third Sophronistes.
. Nominatim aliquos refer possem, says Melancthon Ad Matt. Sideman* epist.
. So say I, some such I could name: and I could name some, otherwise of
name, who, not because they want learning, but for that they are too careless
and negligent, handle the word but too irreverently. Such men, though they
preach much, yet they profit little, nay, do great hurt by their example.
The young Cocks learn of the old to crow.

Miles Moss.
Many read much and learn little.

Miles Christianus.
Them which read much, and learn little, blame not: For Learning, whether it
be great or small, is no reproach. It is the greater praise I grant, to read
much, and learn much: yet are they praise-worthie that learn any thing,
though it be but little, by their reading.

They which read much, and learn little, are to be praised, and pitied:
praised, for their painful reading, pitied, because they read and profit no
more. Yet are they not to be dismayed from reading, but to be encouraged
thereunto, and withal, advised in their much reading, to use more diligence.

If many that read much, learn little, I marvel how many which read little,
can learn much: he can never be well learned, which is not well read.

Blame them not which read much, but blame them who have no care to read. It
is no fault to read much, but to read little or nothing, if we can and may
read, is an heinous fault.

I wot well, a man may be a good christian, though he can not, and therefore
do not read. For, Romans 10. 17
Faith comes by hearing ordinarily, and not by reading: yet can I not see
without a miracle, how any man can prove a good divine, without good reading.
The same Spirit that says ^. Tim. 4. 2
Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season: the same does say,
1. Tim. 4. 13
Give attendance to reading, that is, read much.

They do well then that read much, but they which can and may, and ought, and
yet will not read, and read much, offend the Lord. God in his righteous
judgment gives those men up many times to follow the fancies of their
frantike brain, because they like better of their own idle speculations, then
to be conversant in the writings of holy men.

Never look that our Church shall be free from these hostile dissentions, till
either many that preach much, do read more, or they of the Ministry which
read much, be the Preachers.

Miles Moss.
Many that read little presume to write much.

Miles Christianus.
It is of Writers as of Speakers many times, the more ignorant, the more
impudent. The emptiest vessels make the lowdest sound: and the Parrat will
prate when the Nightingale will not sing.

Those men that will either speak or write before their time, I mislike and
condemn so much as your self.

Of idle we have but too much, but of learned and godly writings, we have but
too few, and can never have too much.

It were a golden world, if men would do that good unto the Church and Common
weal which they are bound. The world is not of gold now, but of earth.
Seeing the best learned in these days take not the most pains: and good men,
though of inferior gifts, do their best endeavors to do good, be thankful
unto these, by whom you do or may reap commodity, but blame those for not
doing their parts.

He is a fool that will no silver because he can get no gold: and they are no
wise men that despice the mean graces of God, (if any grace of God be mean)
seeing they can have no use of the best men's gifts, or more truly of the more
notable gifts in worser men. For I count him the best man, not which has the
most and best gifts, but which imployeth his talents to the greatest advantage
of his Master.

And take heed how you despice any wisdom and knowledge offered you from the
Lord, by a man whose learning is but little, and his writing much, or because a
man knows little, and yet writes much, except you can show that his
knowledge or writing is not sincere. Least by the judgment of the Almighty
(who even so punishes commonly as we do offend) it come to pass, that you be
despiced your self, seeing other me^ of greater learning, and more gifts, are
either silent, or more sparing of there speech then your self. Which that you
may avoid, make more precious account of them which write much, though they
know little, their little knowledge for substance being the knowledge of Gods
Church, and their manifold writings consonant unto the holy Scriptures.

Miles Moss.
And yet as the Grecians entitled their writings (...), as if Plinius secundus
ad diuum Vespasianum.
when a man took their books in his hand, he tasted an honey Comb with his
lips: so these men omit no titles for their books, which may express either
the excellency of the matter, or the conceited wit of the author. But Prou. 25.
4.
a man that boasts of false liberality is like clouds, and wind without
rain, says Solomon.

Miles Christianus.
And is it a fault in your opinion to give apt Inscriptions unto excellent
matter? or to give witty titles unto ingenious writings? you are sharp
sighted, and very self conceipted, if you can see more then all wise men can,
but very singular in condemning that which all wise men do commend.

A good part of the piety of the ancient Patriarchs appeared in the good
titles which they appropriated unto their children* Writings are the fruit of
men's industry, as children be of the body. Blame not the parent if he give
his child a good name in whom he knows nothing but well.

If ever the wit of our first parent Adam, appeared excellent, it was when he
ascribed to every creature a proper name manifesting the disposition thereof ^.
Chrysostom in Genesis h^il. 14.
. They are not vain which imitate his wisdom, but unwise are they that
follow not his steps.

But happily you dislike not them which give apt titles unto good matter, but
which adorn ill matter with good titles. If such you mean, then know you that
you are not the first, nor alone in so doing. For many mislike them so well as
your self. The Arrians, and their imitators the Papists, are not more infamous
in the Church, for terming themselves Catholics, and yet be not so, nor they
more odious before God, which say they are Jews, and be not Revel. ^. 9,
, then they are condemned both of God, and his Chnrch which attribute good
titles, unto bad matter.

It is not the fault of books only, but of many men too, whose credit were
nothing, were they not fronted with titles: Which being taken away, they are as
bad as the worst men. And as many chains are but of copper within, though they
be gilded without: so many beautified with glorious titles, are quyte
destitute of the riches of true wisdom and holiness, Paul's without, Saul's
within, like this your Epistle carrying a show of substance and sincerity, and
yet is very Moss.

Miles Moss.
Augustine Untrue. Augustine did not, but the Pagans did observe so much. De
consens^ Euan lib. 1. cap. 7.
observed that our Savior Christ preached much, but wrote nothing. Many
Untrue. There be v^i rye few.
that have the room of Christ at this day, are given to write Untrue. They
writ^ but little. 1. Cor. 1. 17*
much, though they Vntr^.
preach little. And yet as Paul said, He was not sent to baptize but to
preach, though both were necessary duties of his calling, so must it be said
of Paul's successors, preach they much in season, and out of season, write they
need not, but as opportunity is offered, and occasion does serve.

Miles Christianus.
You prosecute poor writers very hardly. Yet are they not charged with any
thing erroneous, or otherwise offensive, ^hy them published. That which
hitherto you misliked is their very writing, and their writing much, and
brandishing their writings with excellent and witty inscriptions. Whereby you
have showed your young head, but no learning at all. You have yet more to say
for the dissuading men from writing, which I will particularly discuss that
you may see the iniquit^, or more truly the iniustnes of your complaint.

Of S. Augustine, which was the most mighty hammer to break the brains of
heretics into peeccs, in S. Bernards Super C^ tica ser. 80.
, for his sound judgment in religion the Prince of all ancient Divines,
whether Greek or Latin, in M. Bezaes judgment In ^. c. epist. Pauli ad Romans
which expounded the scriptures, no man so profoundly, which taught Christian
behavior, no man so profitably which defended the Catholic faith, no man more
zealously Tritenh^. l. de ^c scrip.
, of this S. Augustine, I say you write too abiectly, when you say, Augustine
observed, as ^f he were but Moss. But I marvel not you write no more
reuerendly of him, which is but one, (though a notable star in the Church)
seeing you eclipse the glory of all writings and writers in this your Epistle.

Your citing of S. Augustine shows plainly how well you read, ^f ever you
read S. Augustine. He writes indeed in that place by you quoted how Christ he
preached, but wrote nothing, yet mark the place well, and you shall find, how
it is no observation of his, but an objection of Pagans, who to discredit the
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles (as you do the writings of good men,)
objected, even as you do now, Christ he preached, but wrote nothing, which S.
Augustine does answer.

Miles Moss.
Christ preached much, but wrote nothing,

Miles Christianus.
Christ he preached much, it is true. For he taught in the Temple Luke 20. 1.
John 7. 14.
, in the day he taught Luke 2^. ^7.
and daily he taught in the Temple Luke 19. 47.
, and on the Sabbath days Luke 4. 31.
he taught, and went about all Galile Math. 4. 23.
and all cities and towns Math. 9* 35.
, teaching in their Sinagoges, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom. But
that he wrote nothing, it is untrue. For he wrote more books than Paul, as he
baptized more Disciples than John did John 4. 1. 2.
, though neither he baptized, nor did write, but his Disciples for him, and in
his name. For as it was not the Disciples that spoke, when they preached, but
the Spirit of their Father in them (l): So was it not the Disciples, Math. 10.
^0.
and Apostles which wrote, when they did write, but the holy Ghost sent in
Christ his name, brought all things to their remembrance John. 14. ^
, which they did write. So that the works and writings of the Apostles, are
undoubtedly the works of Christ. And therefore the Apostles writing much, you
can never in truth say, Christ preached much, but wrote nothing. For he both
preached, and wrote much, though he wrote not by himself as he ^id preach.

You say Christ he preached much, but wrote nothing, you may as well blame the
Apostles, and all the Fathers, as any able man in these days for writing. For
if every action of Christ is necessarily to be imitated of his ministers, then
did both the Apostles, and the Fathers ill, for writing, which Christ did not,
and for writing much, when Christ preached much, but wrote nothing. And thou
(holy Father S. Augustine, which have out-gone all writers, (of thy coat since
the Apostles time) both for number of books and for profitable writings
Tritenhe^. l. de ^c. S^ip.
even thou have finned, and shall answer for thy payns, (though of never so
good an intent) undertaken for the benefit of the Church, seeing thou have not
followed the example of Christ, who preached much but wrote nothing, and thou
have written much, whatsoever thy preaching was.

Christ preaehed much, but wrote nothing, say you. So said the Paganes before
you D. August. de Consens^ Euan. l. c. 7.
accusing the good Disciples of sin, as presuming to do that which Christ
the wisest man did utterly avoid. Christ preached much, but wrote nothing, say
you. So say the Papists to draw all credit from the holy Scriptures, unto
their unwritten blasphemies, and traditions. For, says one of them Viguer^
Instit. ad C^. Theol. 10. c. ^. v. 10. f. 8^. ^
Christ outwardly did not write, nor commanded the Euangelical Gospel to be
written, but only to be preached, and published: and another says Costerus
^nchirid. Co^ trou^. c. 1. p. 4^.
It was not the will of Christ that his Church should rely upon paper
writings, nor that his mysteries should be committed to parchement: plainly
showing that the Apostles sinned in writing as they did. For they did more then
they were enjoined to do, and contrary to the will of Christ when they
occupied themselves in writing, whereas they would have preached much, (after
his ensamples) and written nothing.

It may be you dislike not, you have in reverend estimation the writings of the
Disciples and Apostles of our Savior Christ, I hope so to: how be it he that
shall mark your words advisedly: can never think your meaning to be sincere.
The Arrians thought well of the holy Scriptures too: yet they abolished utterly
both the decrees of the Nicene Council Soxo^. l. 4. ^. ^6.
and the most profitable writing of the holy Fathers Athanasiu^ in Apolog.
Theodo^ it. l. 1. c. 11.
. The Anabaptists think well of the Scriptures too, but they burned al their
books Sleidan. Common. de stat^ Rel. and Rei^. l. 10.
were they never so good. If you so commend the writings of the Apostles and
Prophets, that you condemn the worthy labors of other learned men, though you
are no Papist, because you prefer the Scripture, yet you come near them in
this point, which hinder the growth of true religion, so well as Papists.

To conclude, if you are of mind that men are not to wr^, because Christ wrote
nothing, or any way raise a disliking of good men's works in the minds either
of Students, Gentiles, or common people, assure your self, he that wrote
nothing but preached much, will by the writings and preachings of his servants
discover your folly, and otherwise pursue you with his judgments, unless you
repent.

Miles Moss.
Many that have the room of Christ at this day, are given to write much,
though they preach little.

Miles Christianus.
Now you are come unto the ministers of the word which be writers, of whom you
deliver three things. First that there be many of them: next, that they write
much: lastly, how they preach little. And none of these things are true, if you
mean the ministers of the word, which are public writers. For the private
writers who knows? I trust they are many, and I pray God increase the number
of the studious so they write and study for the Churches quietness. For sure I
am their labors are most blessed of God, and liked of his Church, which study
and write most for the common good. But cursed is he, (whereabout soever he be
employed) which does the work of the Lord negligently Ier. 48. ^.
. Now consider your assertions.

Miles Moss.
Many Ministers of the word at this day, are public writers.

Miles Christianus.
The Ministers of the word that be writers at this day, though they may be
many, I grant, if you set them apart by themselves, yet are they few, very
few, even too few in comparison of those Ministers, which either preach, but
write not, or neither preach, nor write. I am sure you can not reckon of an
hundred one Minister, that takes pains in writing, and call you those many?

Not to speak of other places, the state of our Church for public writers,
is reasonably well known unto us both, and know we so many Ministers that be
writers in the same? He is a friend of ours that was wont to say in his
Sermons (which I have not heard a great while) that your Townsmen of Bury are
such diligent hearers of the word on the Monday exercises, that they may easily
be singled-out from other men: surely the writers of our Church all of them may
easily be singled, and numbered, they are not so many (and yet too many by some,
like your self, unless they exercise their style in more necessary matter
than they do).

I take it all Cambridge at this hour has not four, nor all Oxford fine, nor
all London six, nor all Suffolk (a County most replenished with Ministers of
any Shire or County in England, Northfolke and Lyncolnshire excepted See M. Ca^
dens Britan.
, nor some whole Diocese so many (I put not every publisher of a Catechism
in this number of) approved writers, and some Cuntries, shires, and Diocesses
both in Ireland, Wales and England too, none at all: and of these, some not
these two, some not these three years and upward have committed any thing
unto the press: and yet shall it publicly in print, and as a reproach, a
lasting reproach of our Ministry, be delivered, that the writers, the
Ecclesiastical Ministers that write, be many?

Miles Moss.
Many Ministers of the word write much.

Miles Christianus.
Blame not Ministers for writing much, which in truth is little to that which
both others before them have done, and they are bound unto.

It is no reproach to our Church that any able men do write, but it is a great
reproach that either there be no more of them, or that they write no more.

And our Divines have a great account before God to make (so many parishes
remaining without preaching Pastors, and so many adversaries on all sides
arising to the great annoying of the whole Church in every corner) that yet sit
still beholding the house of God miserably wasting into ashes, partly by the
flames of inward contentions, partly by barbarous ignorance, and will not set
their hands to their books, and by their labored writings quench the same,
and bring them out of danger that be ready to perish. But more to blame are
you, and such as you are which neither do good that way your selves, nor like
of them which be industrious and painful for the common good, but think that
much (I am affraide too much) which is bestowed in writing.

Assure your self some Citizens, Physicians, Lawyers, Gentlemen, and Courtiers
shall be renowned in the Church of God, when a number of idle-bellied Ministers
shall perish in oblivion. For they have taken time from their worldly affairs
and pleasures to encounter with the Familists, Brownistes, Martinistes,
Atheistes, the monsters of our days, when these have suffered them to rage and
make their pray, either with none at all, or with cold resistance, they have
cut the throats of those spiritual Harpies, and brought them to their bane,
when these have either nourished or encouraged them by their silence.

Miles Moss.
Many Ministers of the word write much, but preach little.

Miles Christianus.
If Ministers by their writing neglect not their duty of preaching, produce
them not as offenders either for their preaching or writing, whether it be much
or little. If they do their parts, let their pains then in writing and
preaching, ^e as quick spurs to prick them forward either which preach
little, to preach more, or which neither write nor preach unto one of them, or
which preach much, but write nothing, unto more diligence.

It is a praise for a Minister either to write or preach, if he can do either
and not both of them, but to write and preach too, as it is a double labor, so
it deserves a double honor: as neither to write nor preach (if men be not
otherwise by the Church profitablie employed) is a double sin, and so
brings a double shame.

Note them not, as faulty, that write much, and preach little, but blame them
which preach little or nothing, and play much.

Were some (whom I could name) in their studies writing, when they are either
at the Pondes with their Spaniels ducking, or in the Allies with their mates,
bowling: I am sure they would think them much injured, that privily, much more
in public monuments, are disgraced as faulty, which bestow that time
profitably in writing for a general benefit, which others bestow vainly
(often times wickedly) for a short and private pleasure.

And yet is it an untruth, that They which write much, preach little. For
howsoever it be true in some, which either will not, or cannot preach: (and I
would to God, they which cannot do both, would yet do the one, and which
cannot do the one, would do the other at the least) yet true is it not in all,
nor in the most and best approved Writers, who I am sure both ordinarily in
their own places every Sabbath day, and extraordinarily too, when either by
authority or friends they are called forth, do preach, and that as often, and
as commendably as other men which do not write, but only preach. And they by
good experience do find, that writing is no hinderance, but a furtherance
unto preaching.

Would you cast your eyes from vanities, upon the labors either of Master
Calvin, Beza, Mus^ulus, Bullinger, Sadeele, and other famous Writers abroad,
or of some of your painful brethren at home, you would be enforced to
confess, not that they which write much preach little, but that they which
write much (so God blesses their good endeavors) do preach much, and be as
glorious lights unto the Church by their preaching, even most profitable
preaching much, as by writing.

Miles Moss.
And yet, as Paul said, He was not sent to baptize, but to 1. Cor. 1. 27,
preach, though both were necessary duties of his calling: so must it be said
of Paul's successors, preach they must in season and out of season: write they
need not, but as opportunity is offered, and occasion does requeire.

Miles Christianus.
Yet Paul said, He was not sent to baptize, but to preach. And yet Saint
Paul was sent both to preach and to baptize, and as well to write as either to
baptize or preach. And as he had not done his part, if he had neglected either
preaching or baptizing, so had he not done his duty, if he had not written.
For the same God which elected him to preach, and minister the sacraments,
appointed him also to write. (...).


S. Paul's successors are to follow his steps. Your self does say, They
need not write, but as opportunity is offered, and occasion does require:
Therefore when opportunity is offered, and occasion does require, they not
only may, but must also write.

I wot well, as all the Disciples and Apostles were not, but some were: so are
not all ministers of the word, but some to write. Now when is not opportunity
offered to write? The end of all writing is, either to instruct the rude, or
to reproo^ the froward, or to confute the adversaries, or to admonish the
unruly, or to exhort the godly, or to some such good end or other: and when
is there not just opportunity offered, and occasion given for some or others
to be occupied in these matters? The more that either ignorance and wickedness
is rooted, and adversaries do arise, the more earnestly ought men to exercise
themselves herein. If at any time, men have no we both matter and occasions
manifold to employ their gifts and talents for the public benefit.

Thus in few shordes you have overthrown whatsoever in your former words you
have uttered against the multitudes of writings in these our days. He that
will write upon no just occasion, is a fond man, but they that can, and may,
and will not write upon just occasion offered, is both wicked against God, and
injurious to the Church.

Miles Moss.
My fellow Ministers, therefore I entreat, that they consider seriously how
far the lively voice exceeds the dead letter: the other I leave to the
censure of authority.

Miles Christianus.
This is your conclusion, wherein you make a request, which is, that Your
fellow Ministers would seriously consider, namely, how far the lively voice,
that is, preaching, exceeds the dead letter, which is, writing.

I also entreat your fellow Ministers, and your betters, and your inferiors,
and your self, and all men to consider your words, and that seriously. For my
part I have seriously considered of them, and I observe some things in them
worthy due and serious consideration.

First I note therefore that you so write, as if by evident demonstration you
had proved, that Preaching far away surpasses writing, whereupon you say,
My fellow Ministers therefore etc. which is nothing so, you have insinuated
such a thing, but not proved it.

Next I note, that you, who so basely have spoken of books Contrari^
and writings in the premises, are now by the force of truth driven to say
and confess, that the benefits of writing are exceeding great: howbeit the
lively voice, that is, preaching, far exceeds the dead letter, that is,
writing.

Other things are besides to be considered, which in the discussing of your
assertions shall be revealed.

Miles Moss.
Preaching does far exceed writing.

Miles Christianus.
He is very blind, that sees not, much unthankful, that will not
acknowledge, most impudent, that dare deny the benefits of writing and
preaching to be exceeding great: but whether that preaching exceeds, yea as
you affirm, far exceeds writing, and the voice of man the books written
by man would seriously be considered.

For my part, I can not but think your position diverse ways to be unfound.
For though some preaching exceeds some writing: yet shall you never be able
to prove that preaching simply exceeds writing. Nay, if you deny that some
writings, exceed for goodness some Sermons, you have a face of brass, and
are again contrary to your self, who confessed Contrariety.
before, That men are become like windy instruments, ready to speak as soon as
they receive breath, though they give an harsh, and uncertain sound, which you
can not affirm simply of writings. For albeit some writings, like this your
Epistle, are windy, without substance, and some are vain and erroneous: yet
all are not so. And those writings that are studiously, and according to the
prescript rule of Gods word, and of the commendable sciences exactly penned,
must needs be, not only equal, but far more excellent besides than those
Sermons which either be like windy instruments, and give an harsh and
uncertain ^ound, or otherwise erroneous.

And as some preaching is not better than all, but far inferior to some
writing: so some writings are both equal to some, some better than many, some
more excellent in some respects than all Sermons, and whatsoever proceeds
from the mouth, which you call the lively voice of man: and of this last sort
are the written Sermons, and other books of the Prophets and Apostles, called
usually the holy Scriptures, whereby we are bettered when we are not by the
lively vey^e of those men, the Apostles I mean and Prophets, and whereby the
controversies of all times are to be determined, when they are not by the
voices of any men, be they never so lively. Other writings of holy and
learned also in diverse respects exceed preaching. For books will teach, and
counsel, and comfort, and strengthen, and confute, and do those and the like
duties both for the instruction of the ignorant, conversion of sinners,
overthrowing of Heresies, when, and where, and in such sort as happily no man
can, and some men will not, or dare not. And so writing is not always
inferior, but sometime exceeds, yea far exceeds preaching, understanding
by preaching the utterance of Gods word and will by the lively voice of an
Ecclesiastical and lawful Minister: for otherwise the holy writings of good
men are very preachings. And therefore well said one (whom not your self
only, but the whole Church of God this day has in honorable remembrance)
Paul did preach the Gospel also by writing, and the people did hear the
Gospel by reading D. Fulke ^ against the Rheam. Test* fol. 238.
Besides, the Scripture says Acts. 15. 21.
How Moses is preached, seeing he is read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day:
and the Church of the Thessalonians were taught as well by the Epistles, as
preachings of S. Paul 2. These. 2. 15


Miles Moss.
Books are but dead letters.

Miles Christianus.
You would have it again seriously to be considered, that Books and writings
are but dead letters. Which if you speak not in good sooth, it is fondly, but
if seriously you think as in plain terms you write, it is erroniously, not
to say blasphemouslie set down.

You term books and writings Dead letters. The Papists call the holy
Scriptures (which are books) A black Gospel, Inky Divinity Eckius. vide
Kemicium in Exam. Council. Trid. p. 32. etc
, A leaden rule Maioranus clyp. milit. ec. l. ^ c. 1. p. 82.
, A nose of wax, A dumb Judge Pighius controuers. d^ Ec.
consider seriously what companions you have in this assertion, and be ashamed.

The holy Scriptures which both the Papists term, A dumb Judge etc. and
you, (for he that thinks all books and writings, dead, excepteth none) A
dead letter, the holy Ghost terms the same Scriptures, The word of God 1.
Pet. 1. v. 23. 24. Revel. 1. 2.
which I am sure (whether read or preached) is a word of power 2. Cor. 6.
, of life 1. John. 1. Phil. 2.
, of comfort Heb. 13.
, immort^l seed 1. Pet. 1. 23.
, lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, entering
through even unto the dividing asunder of the soul, and the spirit, and of the
joints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the
heart Heb. 4. 12.
. You that shall term the holy Scriptures either weak, that are so mighty,
or blunt, that are so sharp, or dead that are immortal, you show your self to
have small sense, or feeling, or life of truth in you.

Again, the cause of error and spiritual mortality, is not simply the want of
preaching, but the ignorance of the Scriptures Math. 22. 29.
which you call the dead Letter. And whereas often we are advised to beware of
Dog^, of idle workmen Phil. 3. 2.
of false Prophets Mat. 7. 15.
and foretold of an heap of vayn Teachers 2. Tim. 4. 3.
we are never dehorted from reading the holy Scriptures, but charged as well to
regard the good instructions written by the pen 2. These. 2. 15.
as preached by the mouth of the Apostles, and promised blessing not only for
hearing, but for reading also the works of holy men, the Prophets of God
Revel. ^. 3.
whose labors do engender faith John, 20. 31
, and hope Romans 15. 4.
, and bring unto perfection 2. Tim. 3. v. 16. 17.
, salvation 1. Tim. 4. 13.
, and life everlasting John. 5. 39.
. And therefore without impiety cannot be blazoned for dead, and basely called
A dead Letter, effecting so divine things in us, and for our welfare.

But be it you exempt the holy Scripture out of the number of dead letters: yet
can you not truly call the written labors of other holy men, Dead letters. For
what does preaching (be it spoken without derogating any whit from the majesty
of the preached word) what does preaching which books by the cooperation of
the holy Ghost do not bring to pass in the heart of man.

Does it teach? They teach. and what teaches any man by mouth, which another
will not teach by pen? your self, and we all may ascribe the learning that we
have as well I am sure unto the writings, as preachings of man.

Does it reprehend? what does more forceably? what will so plainly reprove as
books? (writings will speak when men either will not, or dare not, or cannot.)
The working of this my writing in your heart will tell you, when I cannot, how
you hold a Paradoxe, in thinking writings to have no life.

Does it convert? I think it no error to hold that writings may convert. Sure
I am Hilarie Hilar. lib. 1. de Trinit.
and others Acts and (...). ^. 965. Jews Euan^ in his Castle of Christianity.
have delivered that by reading they have been converted. I grant ordinarily
it comes not to pass, but by preaching (which is therefore of al most highly
to be accounted of) yet God will have it now and then appear that by the
working of his holy spirit in the readers and hearers, books can raise from
the death of sin unto y^ life of righteousness, to the and the writings of
his children should be esteemed, and known to be of more force then dead
letters. And whether they did convert or no, God he knows from whom no
secrets are hid, yet certain it is they wrought mightily in men's hearts, when
for an english book some have given five marks in money, some a load of haie
for a few chapters of S. James or S. Paul's Epistles Acts and monu. f. 945.
.

Does it confute? Were they dead, and had no force and power to overthrow the
kingdom of errors, and Antichrist, our adversaries the Papists would never
proceed so hardly against our writings, as they do. He foresaw somewhat, who
The Vicar ^ Croydon.
at Paul's cross in London publicly did say, we (meaning the Papists) either
must root out printing, or printing will root out us Acts and Monu. f. 838.
They also foresaw somewhat who at the late and last Council holden at Trent,
so carefully decreed, for the publishing of some, and prohibiting of other
books Conc^l. Trid. Se^. 4. decr. de editione and vsu S. lib. and Ses. 18.
decr. de librorum delectu.
who by their open writings have condenmed a great number of our labors, as
heretical and dangerous: and miserably shaven, mangled, depraved (which they
call censuring and purging Index Expurgatorius
the worthy monuments both of the ancient Fathers, and best noted writers of
this age, they foresaw that our writings, though they may be reputed but dead
letters, yet would give a deadly blow unto popery, which thing M. Luther also
foresaw, as his Epitaph does witness Theol. Wi^temb. contra Bellar. p. 314.
.

Pestis eram viuus, moriens ero morstua, Papa. They are not dead which bring
the Pope unto his death. He was a Bishop of Portingal, that durst not send unto
another Bishop, as rank a Papist as himself, one of our books (being yet a
confutation of an Epistle of his) without the special favor of a Cardinal
O^orius in Had. l. 1. p. 44
Impossible was it for one of the vulgar people to come by one of those books,
when a Bishop might not read it (no not when it concerned himself) but by the
lic^nce of a Cardinal. What thought they it would work in the simple peoples
mind, when they doubted it might infect a Bishop? And if you mark it well,
our home Papists, which will hear the Sermons of some Preachers, will never or
very hardly be drawn to peruse any of our books, neither may they Council.
Tride^. Ses 4. decr. de editione and vsu S. librorum.
. It seems therefore that in our writiggs there is life, when they hate our
books as monsters.

O that Gods children were as careful to keep men from bad, every word of
some of them being warrants unto Par^ies treason. p. 17.
devilish minds to commit sin ( g), as the wicked are politic to keep ill
men from good books: and that we made as much conscience not to read theirs
as they do not to read our writings: if we did, sure I am as there be few
Protestants among them, so would there be less Papists, and Traitors, and
other wicked men among us, neither would so many of us revolt unto their
idolatry, being bewitched by their inchaunted books, seeing so few of them
turn unto the true religion, because they will not acquaint them selves with
our books, containing sound and forcible persuasions unto the truth. For they
know ours unto that which we hold, as we know theirs to be perswasiue unto that
which they maintain: and both they and we, and all men know that books well
and pithily penned are not dead letters which can not move, but of great force
to persuade either unto sin or virtue.

Miles Moss.
My self though I have always desired to benefit the Church as I could, and
have found by experience, no one thing more necessary for the benefit thereof,
then a sufficient form of teaching the principles of religion: yet to publish
one of mine own I durst not, partly, because it is a thing which craves the
consent of many, partly because the world is scarce able to contain the
Catechismes already printed.

Miles Christianus.
Now you speak of your own experience. We will therefore consider it the more
seriously. But what is it which by experience you have found out? Namely, that
no one thing is more necessary for the benefit of the Church, then a
sufficient form of teaching the principles of religion. This you speak of a
public wr^ting, and a sufficient prescribed form of catechizing to be
published, as this whole section does plainly demonstrate.

Now surely Master Moss, I would you knew your self. In the sentence next
immediately going before, you entreated all your fellow Ministers, to consider
seriously how far the lively voice, namely, preaching, does exceed the dead
letter, Contrariety*
that is, writing: here you sing a Contre-tenor, and say, ye by your
experience ye have found, that No one thing is more necessary for the benefit
of the Church than a sufficient (published) fo: me of teaching the principles
of religion. If no one thing, and so not preaching, by your ^lone experience,
is not more necessary for the benefit of the Church, then, a certain
prescribed Catechism, which is a book or writing, then re^oke your former
saying, that Preaching does far exceed writing: for some writing is as
necessary for the benefit of y^ Church as preaching. But if preaching does
far exceed writing, then renounce this saying, No one thing is more necessary
for the benefit of the Church, than a certain sufficient Catechism. For if the
one be true, the other must needs be false. Again, if true it be, that the
lively voice exceeds far the dead letter: and a Catechism, being a
printed Book, is but a dead letter, then true it is not, that a certain
prescribed Catechism, which is a dead letter, is as necessary as the lively
voice, which is preaching: and if the lively voice far exceeds the dead
letter, then is not a Catechism, which is but a dead letter, as necessary for
the benefit of the Church as preaching, which is the lively voice.

Hereof it follows, that either in this you affirm more than ever you found
true by your experience, or, in the other said more than you could affirm by
any certain knowledge: either your knowledge is better then your experience,
or your experience to be praised before your knowledge. Either your experience
is ill, and your knowledge good, when you say preaching does far exceed
writing, and the lively voice, the dead letter: or your knowledge is not
sound, and your experience good, saying, that for the benefit of the Church,
a certain prescribed form of Catechism is as necessary as preaching, and
the dead letter as the lively voice.

A sufficient form of Catechizing is necessary, you say, Master Calvin
approoues it Epist. ad D. Prot^ct. Regi^ Edw. 6.
, I grant it. But you are much insufficient, either to invent, or appoint that
same sufficient Catechism for all Churches. That belongs not unto you, and a
few like your self, but unto public authority. And yet (such is your
Spirit) you insu^uate that you would so do, were it not partly that it
requires the consent of many, partly, that, there be very many Catechismes
already: the one manifests either your stomach, that you will not ask, or
your own weakness that cannot attain the consent of many thereunto, the
other some arrogancy in you, that being but one private man, would yet
prescribe unto all Churches a certain form of Catechizing, were there not too
many already.

The consent of some, though they be many men, is no cause to undertake such a
work, except that some be of authority: the multitude of Catechismes is not
let on the other side, but that one of many, or one Catechism for all may be
appointed to all and every Church, by those that have the government of us all.

Miles Moss.
This Catechism has been about these twenty years extant in the Church,
and had in it at the first the consent of diverse great Divines in the
University of Cambridge: whereof some have yielded to nature, and some
continue to this day. The one shall excuse me of novelty, the other of
singularity.

Miles Christianus.
You that have condemned al writings before, do now commend a writing unto our
Church: and you which preferred preaching far above writing, and termed all
books but dead letters, do now extol one book, as a thing so necessary for
the benefit of the Church, as preaching, and the lively voice of any minister
of the word.

Diversely have men been and are affected toward books, that which one
commends, another does condemn, and contrari-wise: again, some which like
many well, yet, like one above all.. Tarquinius Priscus was ravished with the
works of Sibyl Amalthea Lactan de falsa. Rel. c. 6.
, S^ipio Africanus with Xenephon de Cyri^paedia Cice^o l. 1. epist. ad Q.
Fratrem.
, Cardinal Poole with Ciceroes book de Reipublica Ascham. epist. l. 1. p. 37.
, Cyprian with Tertulian Tritenhem de ^c. scrip.
, Hierome with Origin upon the smaler Prophets (...). historiae Cen. ^. c. 10.
, Carolus Magnus with S. Augustine de Ciuitate Dei Ibidem Ce^. 8. c. 6.
, Thomas Aquinas with Chrysostoms imperfect work upon Matthew Di^n. Carthes.
de 4. Nouis. ar. (...)
, Miles Moss with this Catechism, the^ which no one thing, no not preaching
is more necessary for the benefit of the Church in your judgment.

This Catechism you commend, first for the long time it has continued in the
Church, even about these twenty years. Next for the good approbation which it
has received from diverse, and they great divines in the University of
Cambridge. The one whereof shall excuse you, so you say, of nouelty, the other
of singularity.

No Miles, the goodness of the Book, and approbation given thereunto by great
divines, as you term them, can, much less, shall, and I think will never
excuse you either of nouelty, or singularity. For is it not nouelty (let those
reverend, whom you call great, and all Divines be judge) to commend that unto
the public Church now, which at the first, and ever since for these twenty
years, til this your publication, was but for private householders A short
Catechism for private householders was the wonted title.
. And for one private man of a selfe-wil, uncommanded, or without the license
of his Superiors underhand, to derive that into public Churches and
Schools, which was made but for private families, especialie when Catechismes
already by lawful authority be appointed both for Schools M. Now^ls Catech.
and Churches Q. Iniunct. 44. The Rub. after the Catec. in the book of Com.
prayer.
, I think no wise man (judge you thereof as you list) but will judge it
singularity.

Miles Moss.
Since the publication hereof, it has been before this, four times
imprinted, which argues the good approbation which it has received, as well
from those in authority, as from the particular Churches of this land.

Miles Christianus.
The praises of this book have not yet an end, but you further commend it from
the often imprinting of the same. For since the publication thereof, say you,
it has been before this, four times imprinted. Be it so, which argues, you
say, the good approbation which it has received asvvell from those in
authority, as from the particular Churches of this land.

But you are deceived much. The often imprinting thereof does no whit argue the
good approbation which public authority does give unto a book. I could name
books unto you (within less than twenty years) four times imprinted, which
yet never by public authority were approved. It follows not, A book is
often imprinted, therefore it is allowed by authority. You know, or at least
may know, that Printers commonly do gain most by those books which are most
forbidden. Whereby you may note into what a perverse and froward generation we
are fallen, wherein men most earnestly desire, though they buie the^ most
dearly, the things which by wholesome statutes and Proclamations be most
straightly prohibited to be either bought or sold. I say not that this
Catechism is so. Yet must I tell you (howsoever you say it is by authority
approved, because it has been four times imprinted) I have seen diverse
impressions of the same, and could never yet see, as in authorized books (
Seen and allowed, or any thing to that effect) till this last impression, and
publishing thereof by your means.

Neither does it follow, It has been four times within these twenty years
imprinted: therefore the particular Churches of this land do approve it. You
are never able to prove that the particular Chuches of this land have
approved the same. I think your meaning is, it has been approved by all
because it has been taught in some particular Churches. Which is as weak an
argument as the former. For the teaching of it in some, argues not that it is
approved of all. Now unless all have approved the same, never say, The
particular Churches of this land have approved it. And when our prudent
Governors have so approved, that they do commend it unto all Churches to be
taught, then as some few Churches already, (by the toleration of our mild
Governors) have, so all Churches of this land will in deed approve the
same. In the mean season you cannot but by Supposition, which is deceiptfull,
say, that it is, or ever has been approved by the particular Churches of th^s
land.

Miles Moss.
And yet it has fallen (as it sometimes happens with a Trauailar) into the
hands of evil company. Some have abridged it of the right: some have
bolstered it out with more than the own. In both, they have been very
prejudicial to the authors.

Miles Christianus.
You have showed the good, now you declare the ill success that this Book
has found. And yet it has fallen into the hands of evil company, you say.
If it have done evil men good, it was well for them, that it happened so: but il
for it, if it have been abused in their company.

But what has fallen out? Some have abridged it of the right: some have
bolstered it out with more tha^ the own. In both, they have bin very
prejudicial to the authors. Had you showen either what they had left out,
which should not be omitted, or what they had put in, ye might not be added,
you had done well, and might justly have thought them prejudicial to the
authors, and evil men: but when you so say, and yet show no fault, much less
prove their actions faulty, many will think you prejudicial unto them, and
an evil man, so to attaint them in a public writing. The men are well known
to be better men then your self, and by their labor^ to have done more good
service to the Church, than your self hitherto has done.

Miles Moss.
The things which I have aimed at in this labor, are principalie two. The one
is, more shortness in the answers, for the capacity, and memory of the
simple: and the other is, more direct and evident proofs of Scripture to the
purpose. Questions and answers I have added none, more than I suppose them to
have been intended of the first founders, or so necessary, as they might not
be omitted.

Miles Christianus.
But what has your self done to the book, if one may ask you? Have you so
published the same, as at the first by the Authors, the first founders, diverse
great Divines in the University of Cambridge, it was published? Have you
restored the same to the first integrity? No, you say. Have you not? And yet
call you them Evil men, which have altered it, you having your self varied
also from the first founders.

But what is it you have done? You have aimed, you say, Te (...) (...) (...).
Newly corrected and abridged by Miles Moss, etc. yoursel^e does say even in
the face of ^he Book.
at two things, the one is more shortness in the answers, for the capacity and
memory of the simple, and the other is more direct and evident profs of
scripture to the purpose. And is this all? No, you say, For you have added
besides questions and answers. Uerie well, then you have both made some
answers shorter, which were long, that is, Abridged, and you have Added
questions and answers too, that is, bolstred it out with more then the own.
Have you thus done, by your own confession, and blame you other men naming
them Evil, and saying, they have been prejudicial, very prejudicial to the
Authors, and yet have done but that which you have done, and no more?

But you have reasons for your doing. For you say, that you abridged it for
the capacity and memory of the simple, and enlarged it but by such things as
you suppose were either intended of the first founders, or so necessary as
they might not be omitted. And may not they where they abridged it, say also,
they did it for the capacity and memory of the simple? and where they enlarged,
that they either supposed their additions were intended by the first founders,
or so necessary that they could not be omitted? Be these reasons good,
alleged for your self? and be they not as strong, alleged by, and for
them? And then what praise purchase you, but they deserve the same? And why are
they reproched as ill, doing but that which you did, and upon so good grounds
as you have done? Is this well done of you, and that ill done of them? Are they
il men, doing as you do, and you a good man doing even as they? Are they
prejudicial to the aucthors, and not your self? And let al men that have
judgment judge, whether that by your abridging and adding, you have bettered,
and not rather worsered this Catechism, of so many great Divines of
Cambridge, and whether it were not much better, both at the first, as the
Authors did it, and since, as other men did publish it, then now.

You say, you have aimed at more direct and evident proofs of Scripture to the
purpose. I doubt not of that: but how well you have hit the mark let others
say, I will not now unfold. One thing only I will tell you, and but the truth
(as he knows, who knows all things) opening your book (as our Savior did
the book of the Prophet Esaias Luke 4. 17.
, I found this question, What call thou the Catholic Church? This
answer, The Catholic Church the number of faithful people, which are, have
been, and shall be to the worlds end in all places, all which are known to
God, and cared for of men, These proofs Job 10. 16. 2. Tim. 2. 19. Matthew. 18.
14.

The first proof Job. 10. 16. is to show that the Catholic Church is the
number of faithful people, which are, have been, and shall be to the worlds
end in all places. I turned to that place in Job, and I found the words to be
these, But let it increase: hunt thou me like a Lion, return and show thy
self marvelous upon me. Here is no word to the purpose, for which it is
quoted. You made me to muse: but thinking it might be a fault of the Printer,
and that Job might be set for John, I turned unto the tenth of John the 16.
verse, where in deed our Savior Christ speaks of his Church, and of one
Church, and of the increase and perpetuity of the same. But by your leave that
place neither will prove that The Catholic Church is the number of faithful
people, which are, have been, and shall be to the worlds end in all places.
For though it be true that the Ecclesia Catholica quam credimus est caetus
vniuersus electorum Dei. Thesis Rainoldian^. and vere Christiana Thesis.
faithful people which are, have been, and shall be to the worlds end, are of
the Catholic Church, yet are not the faithful people the Catholic Church.
For then should many which neither had, have, or shall have Faith, be excluded
from the mystical body, the Catholic Church of Christ, and yet both our
Savior dyed, and shed his precious blood for them, and they were elected unto
life everlasting, before the foundations of the world, so well as they which by
hearing the word of God preached, hane attained faith (b). They are in an
error (...). ^0. 17.
which expounded this Artickle, The holy Catholic Church, of the visible
Church, as the Papists do, and they are not in the right way, which expounded
it only of the Faithful. For the holy Catholic Church, which we believe in
our Creed, is not the company of the Faithful only, but the whole company of
Gods elect and chosen, whether ever or never they do believe.

The second proof, (2. Tim. 2. 19.) is truly quoted. But the third and last
(Matthew. 18. 14.) alleged to prove that the Catholic Church, as you say, the
company of the faithful is cared for of men, is nothing so nor so. The words
of S. Matthew in that place be these, So is it not the vvil of your Father
which is in heaven, that one of these little ones, should perish, where our
Savior plainly shows that his provident care is exceeding great even over
little ones of this world, he says not that men have a care of his people, the
little ones of this world, or that they be cared for of man. But the contrary we
may see in the holy Scriptures. For the world hates them Ioh. 1^. 1^.
, because they are not of the world (...). 17. 1^.
, but chosen out of the world Ioh. 1^. 19.
.

Neither have you misapplyed only this text of Matthew, but over and that
perverted the good meaning too of the Authors. For where in the former
editions, it is thus, I believe that God knows them al, and has a most
tender care over them, which is very true, you set down in yours, Al which
are known to God, and cared for of man, the former of which is true, the
latter most false. And yet are you a good man, and they ill? you a benefactour,
and they prejudicial to this book? Fell it into ill company, when it came into
theirs, and was it happy by lighting into your hands? This one place makes me
to think you have not dealt soundly in other.

Miles Moss.
And in these I have not trusted my self alone (because every man abounds too
much with his own sense) but have consulted with diverse godly and learned
brethren, that two might be better then one, and a three-folde a^arde might not
easily be broken.

Miles Christianus.
As you can not trust your self in your doing (if we may believe you): so,
take you not the better heed, this and such other dealing of yours will make
others wary how they trust you, and others in such actions. This is not the
first time you have ouer-reached your brethren, and made them to give
approbation to your devises, of which both they and you may be justly grieved.

It is now almost usual for cunning fellows to circumuent their plain
meaning brethren, and make them doers of that, which themselves will not, or
dare many times be seen in, or not alone.

You have made your brethren accessarie unto those faults whereof I have
proved you guilty, by consenting unto your action. For not the doers of evil
only, but they also which approve the same, be culpable.

If you did amiss your self before, the consent of diverse (how learned and
godly so ever reputed) does not good your fact, but aggrauate your offense. And
therefore if you offended any way, as you have diversely, both they and you have
much more sinned, you in getting, they in giving their approbation unto your
doings,

Miles Moss.
Now this handful of water I have presumed to present unto your Lordship:
first, in regard of mine own especial duty. Secondly, because that the care
of the principles of religion, lies by right most weightely upon the shoulders
of the governors of the Church. Thirdly, that thus I and my brethren about
me, might as we could, witness our thankful minds to your Lordship, for the
freedom of our Ministry, and the peace in our places, which hitherto we have
enjoyed by your government.

Miles Christianus.
These words open me a gap into a wide field of large discourses, which I
purpose not to enter into at this time.

How you are bound unto your Lord and Master, it is better known unto your
self, then unto me: sure I am his Lordship is nothing bound unto you for this
Epistle, and dedication: neither have your brethren about you, nor your
brethren far of, cause to thank you, for these open thanks in a public
writing,

And if you had writ nothing but used the eloquence of Atticus altogether, it
had been better both for your self and the whole Church.

Miles Moss.
The Lord Almighty grant that your old age, may be found in the ways of
righteousness: and so may be unto you a Crown of glory: and vouchsafe you
the continuance of his Spirit, that as in the days of persecution, you
striued for the Gospel, almost unto blood: so in these days of peace, you may
hold out the faith, and a good conscience even unto the end. Bury S. Edmund
the 14. of July. Anno. 1590.

Miles Christianus.
Amen.


