THE GENERAL Session, CONTAINING AN APOLOGY of the most comfortable doctrine
concerning the end of this World, and second coming of CHRIST, Written by
THOMAS ROGERS.

The first part, Wherein for the comfort of the godly is proved not only that
God will, but also that he does judge this world.

2. Pet. 3. verses 3, 4. This first understand, that there shall come in the
last days, mockers, which vvil walk after their lusts, and say, where in
the promise of his coming? Allowed by authority.

AT LONDON, Printed by HENRY MIDDLETON for Andrew Maunsell.

ANNO. 1581.

To the right Honorable, Sir THOMAS BROMLEIE, Knight, Lord high Chancellor of
England etc. his most gracious Patron: Glory eternal and happiness by the
coming of our Savior CHRIST.
RIght Honorable, The misery of mankind in general.
experience does prove that miserable is the state of mankind in this life.
For we do both come into the world in pain; and live in cares; and die with
grief. Our bodies are subject to manifold infirmities; and perils: and our
minds to innumerable ungodly perturbations. Our whole life is very trouble
some; and how, or where, or when we shall depart out of this world, it is
uncertain.

And although this condition be alike to the just, and to the wicked; to the
good, The great misery of the godly in this world
and to the pure, and to the polluted Eccles. 9, 2.
: yet none do feel the smart hereof so extremely as the upright dealers in
the world, and such as unfeignedly be religious. For theie are for the most
part oppressed, when the wicked have favor; there impouerished, when the
wicked increase in wealth; theie imprisoned, when the wicked are at liberty;
and theie grieuouslie afflicted, when the ungodly do triumph. The troubles of
the godly dismaie them sometimes.
This good men observe manie-times, and it dismaieth them not a little. As it
did both King David, and also the Prophet Jeremiah, when the one said Psalm. 73,
2.
, My feet were almost gone, my steps had welnere slipped. For I fretted at the
foolish, 3.
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. 4.
For there are no bands in their death, but theie are lusty and strong. 5.
Theie are not in trouble as other me^, neither be theie plagued with other
men. Therefore pride is as a chain unto them, 6.
and cruelty covers them as a garment. Their eyes stand-out for fatnes; 7.
theie have more than their heart can wish. 8.
Theie are licentious, and speak wickedlie of their oppression: theie talk
presumptuouslie. Theie set their mouth against heaven, 9.
and their tongue walked through the earth, 12.
etc. Lo, these are the wicked, yet prosper theie alwaie, and increase in
riches. 13.
Certainly I have cleansed mine heart in vane; and washed mine hands in
innocence. 14.
For daily have I bine punished, and chastened every morning, etc. And the
other exclamed Iere. 12, 1.
, wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Why are al theie in wealth,
What the reprobate do gather by the troubles of the godly.
that rebelliouslie transgress? The reprobate also do mark this, and therbie
with corrupt judgments theie falselie imagine, first, that either there is no
God at al Psalm. 10, 4.
; or that he has forgotten his servants which put their trust in him Psalm.
10, 11.
; or that he does neither govern the world, nor see their ways Ezekiel 9. 9.
: and secondly that there is no life after this life Wisd. 2, 2.
, nor judgment to be feared Psalm. 94, 7.
. Therefore say theie Wisd. 2, 6.
, Come, and let us enioie the pleasures that are present; and let us
cherefullie use the creatures as in youth. 7.
Let us fill our selves with costly wine, and ointments; and let the flower of
life pass by us. 8.
Let us croune our selves with rose buds before theie be withered. 9.
Let us al be partakers of our wantonness, let us leave some token of pleasure
in every place: for that is our portion, and this is our lot. Let us oppress
the poor that is righteous; 10.
let us not spare the widow, nor reverence the white hairs of the aged that
have lived many years. 11.
Let our strength be the law of unrighteousness: for the thing that is feeble,
is reproved as unprofitable. 12.
Therefore let us defraud the righteous: for he is not for our profit, and he
is contrary to our doings: he checketh us for offending against the law of
God; and blames us as transgressors of discipline. 13.
He makes his brag to have the knowledge of God: and he calls himself the
son of the Lord. 14.
He is made to reprove our thoughts. 15.
It greeueth us to look upon him: for his life is not like other men's: his
ways are of an other facion. He counts us as bastardes, 16.
etc. 19.
Let us examine him with rebukes and torments, that we may know his
meekenes, and prove his patience. 20.
Let us condemn him unto a shameful death: for he shall be preserved, as he him
self says, etc. Thus speak the reprobat Epicures of this world. And so of
eroneous suppositions, namely that there is not, neither shall be a judgment,
theie do greedily giueouer themselves unto sin; and are wholly resolved
never to repent. Which Atheistes if ever theie did, I am persuaded theie swarm
in our age: as the present state of this world can witness. The blessed state
of the righteous.


Not withstanding, neither are the godly for all this to be out of heart; nor
the wicked ouer-vanelie to insult. For both the righteous shall flourish like a
palm tree Psalm 92, 12.
; and abide immovable like the mountanes about Jerusalem Psalm. 12^* 2.
: and the wicked shall soon be cut-downe like the grass Psalm. 37, 2.
, and wither as the green herb. Because God will arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered Psalm. 68, 1. 2.
; theie also which hate him, shall fly before him. The heavy judgments of God
upon the wicked.
As the smoke vanishes: so will he drive them away; and as the wax melts
before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of the Lord. For
many sorrows shall come to the wicked Psalm. 32, 10.
. He will break their arms Psalm. 37, 17.
; crush their bones with a scepter of iron Psalm 2, 9.
; and break them into pieces like a potters vessel. He will rain upon them
snares, fire, and brimstone Psalm. 11, 6.
; and bring them at length into hell Psalm. 9, 17.
, into everlasting torments Matthew 25, 41.
, where shall be weeping and gnashing Luke 16, 25.
of teeth Luke 13, 28.
. Even this shall be their portion Psalm. 11, 6.
. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall
wash his feetee in the blood of the wicked Psalm. 58, 10.
.

The righteous, I say shall see it, and fear, and shall laugh at the
destruction of the ungodly man, saying Psalm. 52, 6. 7.
, Behold the man which took not God for his strength, but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and put his strength in his malice.

The wicked theie also in themselves shall freate for grief of mind, and say
Wisd. 5, 3.
, This is he whom we had sometime in derision, 4.
and in a parable of reproach. We fools thought his life madness, and his end
without honor. 5.
How is he counted among the children of God; and his portion is among the
Saints, 8.
etc. What has pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of riches
brought us? 9.
Al those things are passed-awaie like a shadow, and as a post that passes
by, etc.

And so al men shall acknowledge, how there is a God which judges the earth
Psalm. 58, 11.
.

These things would the godly have continualie in remembrance, doubtless
neither could the prosperity of the wicked astonish, The fruit of meditating
upon the judgments of God.
nor their own trouble some condition overthrow the^, as it does many times:
but boldly both with Paul theie would say Romans 8, 35.
, who shall separate us from the love of Christ, etc; and with David protest
Psalm. 23, 4.
, that though theie should walk through the valleie of death, yet they will
fear none evil; yea; they will not fear though the earth be moved, and though
the mountanes fall into the mids of the sea Psalm. 46, ^2.
. Because God is with them, and has laide-vp unspeakable blessings for them
Psalm. 31, 19.
; does great things for them even before the sons of men; and in the end too
will advance them unto everlasting glory, honor, and peace Romans 2, 10.
. The wicked also in considering these things must needs be terrefied from
much wickedness. For the very devils when theie remember the judgments of the
Lord do tremble again Iam. 2, 19.
.

Wherefore especialie (for other causes I have elsewhere specified in this my
book) The occasion why this Book was written.
both for the comfort of the one sort, and for the terror of the other, I have
written this treatise following, wherein out of the word of God I have proved,
not only that God will (which thing many Atheistes do doubt, and many
utterly deny) but also that God presently does judge this world.

For which causes I have entitled the same, THE GENERAL SESSIONS, because there
is not a man, whom God does not; neither shall there be any, whom he will not
judge. At which judgment how he will deal with us, we are ignorant; what he
may do in his justice, we know full well.

And therefore, as that good King, of an Heathen Prince, Philip of Macedon in
his chief prosperity thought it the readiest way to deteine him both from
insulting proudly over his vanquished enemies the Athenians: and from
oppressing tyrannicalie his distressed subjects the Grecians, if he were told
every morning that he was a man; and as the noble men of Aethiopia had always
whenever there went abroad, a cross, and a basen of gold filled full with
earth born before them, that the one might put them in remembrance that earth
must be resolved into earth, and the other renew the memory of Christ his
passion; and as the Egyptians at al their solemn banquets had the image of
death laid before their faces, that the sight thereof might withdraw them
from defiling themselves with those vices which commonly do follow after
rioting, and bellie-cheere; and finalie as S. Jerome, whether he did eat, or
drink, or whatsoever he did, seemed to hear the terrible trompet sounding
unto judgment: so the readiest way to please God, and to avoid his heavy
indignation, is, in our prosperity while the evil days come not, every
morning with Philip to call into mind that we are men; when we are abroad with
the noble men of Aethiopia to think that we are but earth; in our feastinges
and triumphs, with the Egyptians to fore-think what we shall be; and with good
S. Jerome in whatsoever we are doing to remember that a judgment there must
be, yea and is near at hand, at which God will bring every work into
judgment with every secret thing whether it be good or evil Eccles. 12, 14.
. For theie which call into mind what theie have bine, have theie any grace,
will blush; what theie are, will be humble; what theie may be, will tremble.

And this treatise, Causes of this dedication.
Right Honorable, I think most meet to come from your Honors hands into the
world. First in respect of my self. For greatly I do know, and confess
that I have bine bound unto your Honor for many great words of encouragement
which it has pleased you to give me, but especialie for that favor which of
late I found at your Honors hands, and that when I least looked for the same:
the Lord requite you for it, and make me thankeful.

Secondly in respect of the highness of your calling. For being, as you are
appointed the chiefest Iusticer under God and her Majesty in this realm, me
thinks none either ought sooner to be a reader, or will more gladly be a
patron, of God his judgments than your Honor.

Last of al, in respest of their profit, who are inferior persons both in the
Church and commonweal. For sure I am, the more your Honor calls into mind,
which thing your wisdom cannot be ignorant of, the condition of the godly in
this life, the more you will being their special Patron by office administer
both comfort unto them, which theie have need of; and encouragement, being
many ways by the wicked, which make a pray of them, dismayed, while there is
none almost will help. Thus I surcesse; beseeching both your Honor in good part
to accept these my labors; and our Savior Christ, who is ordained of God a
judge of quick and of dead Act. 10, 40.
, everlastingly to bless you, and the virtuous Lady your wife, with your
children, and family. The 20. day of November Anno 1581.

At your Honors commandment, THO. ROGERS.

Faults escaped.
Page 8. in the margin read, Iauel Epit. p. 29. in the margin r. z Gal p. 31.
line 3. r. do theie. p. 31. l. 11. r. new heaven p. 73. in the margin r.
Smetonius. p 74. l. 17. read by authority. p. 88. in the margin r. g. Genesis 6.
3.

The contents.
1 THAT it is not only comfortable for the godly to hear; but also
commendable for every Christian reuerendlie to entreat of the second coming
of our Savior Christ. 2 Whether there shall be an end of this world; a
resurrection of the flesh, and a general judgment, or no. 3 Against such as
think how the world neither had beginning, nor shall have an end. 4 Against
them which allow the beginning, but deny the end of this world. 5 Against the
Manichies, and their adherenets, who say there shall be no general judgment,
nor resurrection of mankind. 6 Against H. N. or the Family of love, who
think that now the day of judgment is come. 7 Against the favorers of
Hymeneus, and Philetus, who said that the Resurrection is already past. 8
Against the Saturnians, Valentinians etc. who deny the resurrection of the
flesh. 9 That undoubtedly there shall be a general judgment of al flesh. 10
Whether God do judge this present world, or no. 11 How God does judge
mankind in this present world. 12 Whether all the wicked be judged in this
world; and why these are suffered, in the opinion of man, to flourish. 13
Causes why the godly are afflicted. 14 That the godly deservedly for their
sins are punished. 15 That none be perfectly righteous in this world. 16
Whether the saints in this world endure greater affliction than other men;
and why theie do so. 17 Where the bodies and souls of men do remain until
the day of judgment.
FINIS.
CHAP. 1.
That it is not only comfortable unto the godly to hear; but also
commendable for every Christian, reuerendlie to entreat of the second coming
of our Savior Christ.
SVCH is the nature of al men generalie, be they bad or good, that what theie
love, wanting it, theie long for. As the covetous for profit; the epicure for
pleasure; the bondsman for liberty; the banished for his native country. So
do Christians for the coming of their Christ: and that so much the more
earnestly as heavenly ioies are better than the comfort of this world; and
the felicity to come more excellent and surpassing than prosperity present,
between which there is no comparison.

Hence the faithful do cry, Come Lord Jesus Reave. 22, 20.
. And therefore, as theie long exceedingly for his return: so do theie a
thousand times more heartily rejoice, when theie hear but an inkeling that he
is at hand, than do worldlinges at the news of any profit toward them.

Which of late theie have notably declared, especialie in England, by the well
acceptance of a treatise, to this purpose entitled, Of the end of this
world, and second coming of Christ etc. A work both liked of the godly,
allowed of the learned, well bought-vp of al sorts, and often imprinted in a
small time. Notwithstanding, what through the security of Atheistes;
Adversaries to this doctrine.
the malice of Heretics; ye ignorance (shall I call it ennie rather, or both?) of
some it has been oppugned, and vndiscretelie, unorderly, and uncharitably
condemned. Wherefore, knowing how tha^kfully, The occasion why this discourse
was written.
and gladly the virtuous of this land have accepted that work; and seeing how
vnchristianlie others have condemned the same, I have thought it my duty,
having now some leisure, and being some instrument of bringing that discourse
into our English tongue, both for the comfort of ye one sort, and confutation
of ye other, to entreat once-againe of the second coming of Christ. And
surely it is not vane curiosity either for me to write, or for any christian
to think thereof; but mere security were it, either quite to forget or but
seldom to call ye same to mind. For is it co^me^dable to prognosticat ye
seasons of the weather for the safety of ye body; and it is not commendable to
search-out the time of our redemption; so far forth as the word of God will
permit, for our everlasting welfare? Are they rebuked which regarded not Luke
12, 56.
, and commended that searchfoorth 1. Pet. 1, 10, 11.
when, and what time the first coming of our savior should be; and shall theie
be blameles ye seek not earnestly for his second coming? Shall our savior so
graciously foreshew ye signs immediately before his coming Matt. 24, 3. 4.
etc.
, and shall we neglect them? Mark. 13. 4. 5. etc.
Shall he tell us, that when we see al those things do come, he is at the
doors Mat. 24, 33.
, and shall we think with mockers, that he will not come at al 2. Pet. 3. 3, 4.
or not so sone? Shall he, as our Lord and master, Matt. 25, 13.
command us to watch Matt. 24, 42, 43. etc.
, to take heed Mark 13, 23. 33.
, to pray Luke 21, 36.
, to looke-vp, and lift-vp our heads Luke 21, 28.
, when those tokens do but begin to come our redemption draws near, and shall
not we obeie him? O most wretched we, if we do not; but blessed, if we do!
For, blessed is that servant whom his master, when he comes, shall find so
doing Mat. 24, 46.


My mind is not to set an hour, The su^me of this treatise.
a day, a year, or any season of his coming, that were extreme impiety:
but my purpose is, through Gods assistance, to prove especialie that he will
come, how soon no man knows, no not the Angels of heaven Matt. 24, 36.
, and that to keep both my self, and others from security. For he which
thinks the end of al things to be at hand, as says a right learned man N.
He^mingius in cap. 4. epist. 1. Pet.
will fly sin for fear of punishment; continue in godliness in hope of the
promises; endure adversity through the cogitation of glory; and in
prosperity be meek, through thinking of the blessed immortality to come, of
which theie only shall be partakers, which retain faith and a good conscience
unto the end. For theie who finish their lives on this wise, shall come unto God
eue^ the end of their desires, who shall be seen without end, always loved, and
never loathed, and ever praised, but never misliked. And then at length shall be
fulfilled that canticle, Blessed are theie which dwell in thine house, o Lord,
for ever and ever, theie shall praise thee.

CHAP. 2.
Whether there shall be an end of this world; a resurrection of the flesh; and a
general judgment, or no.
THere is nothing so certain, but it has been denied; nor any thing so
necessary to be believed, but it has bin doubted-of; nor any thing so
profitable for Commonweals, but it has been spoken-against; nor any thing
so godly, but it has been oppugned.

What so certain as that there is a God? yet have some denied the same, as
Diagoras, Theodorus Cice. de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
, and others Epist. of Jude verse. 4.
.

What so necessary as that sinners should repent? Theodoret. lib. de principiis.
yet have the Montanistes Hierom. lib. 2. aduersus Iouin.
, and the Nouatians Dionys. Alex. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43.
defended that it is both needelesse, and bootelesse so to do. What more
profitable than government in a Commonweal? yet have the Arrians Theodoret.
lib. 2. cap. 31.
, and the Anabaptists of our time Melanct. in locis suis co^mu. Tit. de
Baptis. Infantium. Georg. Mayor, Tom. 3. Homi. suarum. fol. 129. b. 572.
inueighed against the same. And what more godly than to think the world shall
have an end; al flesh shall rise-againe, and appear before the iudgement-seat
of Jesus Christ? yet have there bine monsterous, and heretical opinions
hereabout.

For some have flatly, but most blasphemouslie giuen-out that the world
neither had beginning, nor shall have end: so did the Priestles, and Magicians
of Babylon Hector Boe^thius lib. 2, ca. 3.
, with certain Philosophers. Some, thought it had a beginning, that it shall
have none end, as do the mockers of whom Saint Peter prophesied 2. Pet. 3, 3.
, and we hear of in our time. Some have altogether denied ye general
judgment, as the Manichies, etc Eccles. hist. Cent. 3, cap. 11.
. Some have granted ye last judgment, but denied the resurrection of the
flesh, as the Saturnians Irenaeus li. 5.
, the Valentinians, the Marcians, the Cerdonites, and many more.

Which damnable and curssed opinions I would not have recited, but suffered
them to be buried, as be the Autors, were I not persuaded that in these days,
Satan by his ministers had sowed the like ful-thicke in the hearts of many
men; and therefore that it were very needeful, that theie were both
written-against in Books for the posterity to come, and inueighed-against
most zealouslie with tongue for a present profit.

Wherefore against al, and every of these opinions somewhat, according to the
measure of that grace which God shall give me.

CHAP. 3.
Against such as think how the world neither had beginning, nor shall have an
end.
Sundry arguments to defend their damnable opinion do theie bring, who think
the world has bine, and shall be everlasting.

First theie say with I. Argument.
Aristotle Arist. lib. de Coel. and Phy. li. 8
Of nothing nothing can be made. Therefore seeing the world cannot be made of
nothing, it must of necessity be eternal.

I answer, Certain it is of nothing no creature can make any thing: but God
who does whatsoever he will both in heaven and earth, of nothing can make
whatsoever he list.

O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, thou have made the heaven, and the earth
Isai. 37, 16.


Thou have made the heaven and the earth by thy great power, and there is
nothing hard unto thee Ierem. 32, 17.
.

Thou have afore-time laid the foundation of the earth Psalm. 102, 25.
, and the heavens are the work of thine hands, theie shall perish, but thou
shall endure; 26.
even theie al shall wax old as does a garment; as a vesture shall thou change
them, and theie shall be changed. But thou art the same, 27.
and thie years shall not fail.

Let all the earth fear the Lord Psalm. 33, 8.
let all that dwell in the world fear him. For he spoke, 9.
and it was done; he commanded, and it stood.

Of nothing he did make the world Wisd. 11, 14.
.

Therefore no good reason is it, but a mere fallacy, to say, because we
cannot make of nothing somewhat, 2. Argument.
therefore God cannot; or because man does not, therefore God did not.

Secondly, says Iauel, Iauel. epist. in lib. 1. Artist. de Coelo tract. 4. c.
5
according to the mind of Aristotle, The Mayor.
Al men think that heaven is Gods abiding place. The Minor.
But an eternal thing cannot have a corruptible place. For the place, and the
thing placed must have like proportion Arist. Phys. lib. 4.


Therefore heaven, which is supposed to be God his abiding place, Conclusion.
is eternal, as God is.

I answer, the Mayor is false. For all men think not that heaven is Gods
abiding place. For Solomon wisely 1. King. 8, 27. 2. Chron. 6, 18.
, Behold the heaven, and heavens of al heavens, are not able to contain thee.
And Bernard notably Bern. de triplici cohoerentia vinculorum serui.
, Whether then is the beloved gone from the beloved, and we will seek him?
Where is he? What said I, wretch that I am? But where is he not? He is higher
than heaven, deeper then hell, broader than the earth, huger than the sea. He is
no where, and yet is every where, because he is neither absent from any; nor
contained in any place.

But God says by the Prophet Isaiah Isaie. 66, 1.
, Heaven is my seat, and earth is my footestoole. I grant: so does the Spirit
of God in S. Peter say 1. Pet. 3, 12.
The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers; and the face of the Lord is upon them that do evil. Yet has
not God either eyes, ears, or face. But it is an usual phraze of the Scripture
to give unto God members, actions, and affections of man for our capacity, and
understanding, says Hemmingius Hemmingius in c. 3. epist. 1. Pet.
, by the figure Anthropopathie: and by a certain excellency he is said to be
in heaven, as proves Zanchius Zanch. de tribus Elohim p. 1. lib. 1. c. 4.
For the eyes of God signify his favor; his ears, his willingness to hear;
and his face, his displeasure, says Thomas Aquinas Tho Aquin. in cap. 3. Pet.
1.
. And though it cannot be douted that God is euerie-where: yet is he so in
heaven, as in respect thereof, he seems not to be in earth at al, as may
appear in Bernard Bern. in explic. Psalm. 90, sermon. 1.
.

Thirdly, and last of al (to omit the other vane reasons used of the
Philosophers) say theie: 3. Argument.
It is impossible that God who is infinite, The Mayor.
either could, or may be everlastingly idle.

But God both had bine idle, if the world had not continued from everlasting;
The Minor.
and should be idle, if it continue not evermore.

Therefore, theie conclude, The Conclusion.
the world has bine, and shall be everlasting.

I answer, the Minor contains a fallacy fetched from no cause, as if it were
a cause. For it follows not that God should be idle, though he made not the
world from everlasting. For his works are eternal in himself, though none of
them appear outwardly.

Now, if any be not yet satisfied, but will needs know, what God was about
before the world was made, I answer, yet not I, but Augustine Augustine.
, He was preparing of hell for all such as curiously enquire there-about. If yet
not satisfied, he will further demand, what he will do, when the world has an
end, not Augustine but I make answer, he will not cease from tormenting thee,
and such like in hell, and also rejoice with his saints in perpetual bliss.

CHAP. 4.
Against them which allow the beginning, but deny the end of this world.
SAint Peter through the spirit of God did foretell, that in the last days
mockers should come, who will deride, and scoff at the doctrine of the worlds
consummation. Whose words, because they are continualie to be fixed in mind, I
will recite as I find them placed in the sacred Bible.

This first understand, says S. Peter 2. Pet. 3. 3.
, that there shall come in the last days mockers, which shall walk after their
lusts, and say, where is the promise of his coming? 4.
For since the fathers died, al things continue alike from the beginning of
the creation. 5.
For this theie willingly know not, that the heavens were of old, and the
earth that was of the water, and by the water, by the word of God. 6.
Wherefore the world that then was, perished, 7.
and ouerflowed with water. But the heavens, and earth which are now, are kept
by the same word in store, and reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment, and of the destruction of ungodly men.

In which words among other notable points, these are chiefelie to be
considered for this place. First, the speakers, who they are; secondly, the
arguments which they do use; thirdly, the answer of the Apostle; last of al,
the manner of the worlds destruction.

The enemies of this doctrine are described here to be mockers, such as deride
al religion; and walk after their lusts, not according to Gods word. Therefore
none will impugn this comfortable doctrine, but such as are mere Epicures for
their leude conversation, and Atheists for their devilish opinions.

One argument which they do use, is this: 1. Argument.
Since the fathers died, al thigns continue alike from the beginning of the
creation. Therefore they shall continue after us, and after our posterity too
at one stay, as they have done, neither is there any judgment to be feared,
nor resurrection to be hoped for.

Unto this ungodly assertion the Apostle answers by an argument taken from
ye undoubted history of the flood. S. Peter's answer unto Atheistes.
which history, he says, they against their conscience deny, who be of
opinion that the world shall have none end. For he denies that ever the world
was drowned with water, who denies that the world shall be destroyed: yea, he
thinks that the Raine-bowe, which is the sign of the covenant between God
and us Genesis 9, 13.
, is but a toie to mock men with all. For we are to think, and learn
undoubtedly by that great punishment, First, that the world and al therein,
was made to serve for the use of the godly and virtuous, not of the wicked;
and that the saints of God everlastingly shall enioie the same, the reprobate
being cast into utter condemnation.

Secondly we must think, that God assuredly will punish wickedness, although
he have promised, and the Raine-bowe does witness, that he will not ouerwhelme
the world again with an universal flood, but consume it with fire. For which
cause he has set diverse colors in the Rainbow Colors of the Rainbow, and
what they signify.
as blew principalie, and red: whereof the one shows how it has been
drowned, the other how it shall be consumed with fire.

At these things, says Peter, do these Atheists and Epicures even contrary
to their very conscience, deny. And therefore there needs none other
confutation, but only to lay before them either the history of Noah's flood,
or the Rainebowe in the clouds. For beholding either of them, they cannot
choose but confess that the world must have an end.

Another of their arguments, 2. Argument.
is this: Had God minded to bring the world unto an end, he would have done so
before this. But seeing it has continued these 5500. years, and upward:
likely it is that evermore it shall endure.

Thus do they miserably deceive themselves, Answer.
says Peter in effect, not considering that God being eternal, is not encluded
within the compass of any time. For one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years 2. Pet. 3, 8.
and a thousand years, as one day. Therefore it follows not, because he
differreth the destruction of the world, that he will not make an end thereof.
But he is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would al men
to come unto repentance. Why the world has continued to this day.
The cause then why it is not yet utterly overthrown, is his great, and
infinite mercy, for our everlasting welfare. For the patience,
long-sufferance, and bountifulnes of God, leads unto repentance. Romans 2, 4.
So did he spare the old world an hundred and twenty years before he drowned
it Genesis 6, 3.
; and Jerusalem 40. years after Christ his death before he destroyed the same
Ecclesi. hist. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 14. fol. 664.
It is therefore a special cause why we should seek to please so gracious,
and merciful a God, no cause to make us secure.

The manner of the worlds destruction The manner of the worlds destruction.
at the day of judgment, is signified by a comparison. For as the world in
time passed for the wickedness of men was after a sort destroyed with water:
so it shall burn, and be consumed with fire. Why the world must be consumed
with fire.
And that, both for a sign of the eternal pains, which ye ungodly shall
endure; and also for the purging, and repairing of the world. For as filthily
diseased persons infect the places where they are: so have the wicked polluted
this world with their manifold sins. Therefore it must be purged with fire,
that it may be a meet, fit, and pleasant theater, as it were, both for
Angels, and the chosen servants of God with Christ for evermore.

CHAP. 5.
Against the Manichies, and their adherents, who say there shall be no general
judgment, nor resurrection of mankind.
THeie who deny the general judgment to come, are diverse, and of diverse
opinions. For some do hold that it shall not be at al; some, that it is now;
and some, that it is already past. The first sort are Manichies; the second
H. N. or the Family of Love; the last the favorers of Hymeneus and Philetus
2. Tim. 2, 17. 18.
as the Family of Love. Al wicked, heretical, and abominable. For proof
whereof they al do bring, not human reason altogether, as they did whom
already we have confuted; but they abuse ye divine Scripture, as shall appear.
Of every of these therefore as they stand.

The Manichies, 1. Objection.
and their adherents, to prove that there shall be no general judgment, do
bring-out first a place out of the third of John, where it is thus written:
John. 3, 17.
God sent not his son into the world, that he should condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved. If therefore, say they, he
came not to condemn the world, it shall not be judged.

Against which their allegation I might bring a contrary place out of the same
Gospel, where our Savior says, John. 9 39.
I am come unto judgment into this world, and so let one place answer unto
the other. But I answer, there is a two-folde coming of our Savior Christ, A
twofold coming of Christ.
a first, and a second; the first is past, the second is to come.

The principal cause of his first coming Why Christ came in the flesh.
was not to condemn, but to be condemned; the principal cause of his second
shall be to execute justice, Why Christ will come.
justice with severity upon the reprobate, justice with mercy upon his elect,
yet justice upon both, upon the one sort for embracing his Gospel by a lively
faith unto their salvation, upon the other for contemning the same unto their
utter condemnation. Therefore according to his diverse commings he bears the
persons of diverse men, in his first coming of a priest, whose part is both to
teach, and to offer sacrifice: in his second of a judge, whose duty we have
shown.

Secondly, 2. Objection.
theie cite this place out of the same Chapter of John John 3, 18.
, He that believes in him ( which is Christ) shall not be condemned: but he
that believes not, is condemned already; because he believes not in the name
of the only begotten son of God. They say therefore August. de agone
Christ. cap. 27.
, If he who believes, shall not come into judgment, and he who believes not,
is condemned already; where are they whom he shall judge at the day of
judgment? In effect, if none are to be judged, there shall be no judgment.

I answer; first touching the righteous who believe, that, though they shall
not be condemned, yet that they shall be judged. A twofold judgment of Christ.
For Christ will reward euerie-man according unto his works Romans 2. 6.
. There is then a judgment of salvation, and a judgment of condemnation. The
righteous shall be judged, yet not condemned, but quited by proclamation: the
wicked shall be judged, and condemned both by God, and the country, that is by
their own conscience, and all the Angels in heaven.

Secondly, against the wicked I say with our Savior, because they believe
not, they are condemned. But does it follow thereof that they shall not be
judged? I believe not. For it is a phrase used much in ye holy Scripture, to
take the time present for the time to come August. de agone Christiano. Cap. 27.
. As, Theophylactus in cap. 23. Lucae.
cursed be he Deuteronomy. 27, 26.
, or more plainly, cursed is every man Gal. 3, 10.
that continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the Law
to do them. It is not, Cursed shall be every man, but, Cursed is every man etc.
For God has signified what shall become of unbelievers, and wicked men; only
there lacks but pronouncing of sentence at his general Sessions. So says
Saint Augustine August. de agone Christian^ cap. 27.
, He that believes not, is now judged, that is, condemned by the foreknowledge
of God, who knows what hangs over the heads of unbelievers. And very
notably in another place he says August. in 3. cap. Joan.
: Judgment has not yet appeared, and yet judgment is come. For the Lord
knows who are his: he knows who are to be crowned, and who to be burned:
He knows his wheat, and he knows his chafe: He knows his good corn,
and he knows his tares. He who believes not, is now condemned.

By which their objection, The state of the wicked even in this world.
occasion is given for our profit and comfort to consider these three things.
First, the wretched state of the wicked, theie are condemned, that is, in the
eyes of the Almighty theie go even with their hands bound; their feet
fettred; and their necks be in cords, only theie tarry but for these words,
Hangman, dispatch them, or, Tormentors, spare them not; or, as our Savior
says, Math. 25. 41
Depart fro me you curssed into everlasting fire etc. Secondly, the cause of
their misery, Unbelief. It is in themselves, not in God that they are
condemned. For, God would have al men saved, and come unto the knowledge of the
truth, 1. Tim. 2, 4.
He that believes not, is condemned, as in an other place, John 3, 36.
He that believes not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon
him. Thirdelie, the way to avoid this condemnation, even To believe. Last of
al, among other vane arguments theie allege 3. Objection.
these words of our Savior John 12, 47.
, If any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not
to judge the world, but to save the world. Wherebie they will conclude how
there shall be no general judgment.

Unto which place I say, that as was their first, so must this also be
understood of his first coming, when he judged not. For at that time he
brought, and preached not the Law, but the Gospel, wherebie he declared how,
and which way they might escape the bitter, and biting curse of God his
heavy indignation, and be saved, even if they received the reco^ciliation
promised, which was himself, by faith.

In his second coming he will judge the world. For so is it plainly
setdowne: Romans 14, 10.
We shall al appear before the judgment seat of Christ. And yet more plainly,
if plainer it may be, We must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according
to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. In which places the words of
the Apostle are most diligently to be considerd, one says, we shall, the
other, we must, both of them import a necessity of a judgment to come, and
that of al men: money shall not save the rich man; nor might the honorable; nor
learning, the student; nor years, the aged; nor weakness, the sick; nor any
thing, any man, but Al must appear, and that before the Judgment seat of
Christ, where he will show himself to his foes terrible, but amiable to his
friends.

CHAP. 6.
Against H. N. or the Family of Love, who think that now the day of
judgment is come.
AMong all the sects which have been since the Apostles time, I am persuaded
there is not one which has been either more foolishlie fantastical, or more
miserably caried-away from ye truth unto fables, and fantasies of man's gross
inue^tion, than (I only except the most blasphemous company of Papists) that
new disordered Family of Love, as theie call it. And among al their errors,
displaied by one, battered by another, and ouerthrown by a their de, I verily
do think there is not one which for impiety is more abominable, than that
which theie have concerning the day of judgment.

When I name the Family of Love, Who are the Family of Love.
I understand so many as know and defend the errors of H. N, not those who
know them not, much less defend them. For every one which leans unto the
sect, is not privy to their errors In the displaieng of the Family of Love,
leaf H. 4. Art. 6 6.
. For the il-luminate Elders know right well, that many which favor them for
the open show of godliness that they see in them, would utterly abhor them, if
they knew the damnable heresies 2. Pet. 2, 1.
Which privily they bringin. Therefore like subtle fellows Ephesians. 4, 14.
they disclose not themselves but only unto such, as be either of no
religion at al, and so ready like wax to receive the print of al opinions; or
sworn enemies, against the Gospel of Christ; as for those, who zealouslie do
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and abhor al wicked opinions contrary to
the word of God, they make such not acquainted with their errors, but feed
them with fair words, as they can well enough, either to make them in time
even to deny the Lord which has bought them 2. Pet. 2. 1.
, and so bring upon them selves swift damnation; or to be some countenance unto
their curssed sect. For who never seeing their books, nor hearing of their
errors, would think that to be a Family of ungodliness, and heresies, which
so discrete men, sober women, so ancient fathers, so grave and so godly
matrons, do favor? Oh the subtlety of Satan! Oh the deceit and craft of men!
O dangerous days! O time of trial!

Notwithstanding, as the venomous Adder lurketh many times under the greenest
grass; and as every thing which glittereth is not gold: so under their fair
show of a virtuous life, the elders do hide venomous opinions; and though
theie have the show of Godliness: yet they deny the power thereof 2. Tim. 3. 5.
. Even tares they be, like wheat Matt. 13, 24.
; false Prophets under sheep clothing 2. Cor. 11, 14.
; seducers, yet like the ministers of righteousness 2. Cor. 11, 15.
; and as Cyril says Cyril. Catech. 4. de december dogmat.
, such as bite lik wolves though they would feign seem eue^ as simple E. R. one
of the Family in his Epist. sent unto M. John Rogers, and is to be found among
the Epist. annexed unto the displaieng of the Family. leaf L. 6.
as sheep, and so loving as lambs. As their opinions extant to be seen, and
judged of al men do sufficiently declare; and shall appear even by their errors
which theie have concerning the day of judgment, had they no more but them.

And what are theie? I said in the title of this Chapter, and also in an other
place Before, Chap. 5. pagi. 16.
, how theie hold not only that the day of judgment is now; but also that
is already past, as in the chapter following shall be proved. For confirmation
of their former opinion, I will not frame an argument, as I might well, and one
does wittily, by the very words of H.N. after this sort, Whatsoever the
vngodded, or vnilluminated Men out of the imagination, or Riches of their own
Knowledge, and of their Learnednesse of the Scriptures bring-foorth, institute,
preach, and teach, is assuredly al false, and lies, seducing, and deceit full
H. N. in his 1. Exhort. cap. 16 sen. 17. page 43. b.
But the vngodded, or vnilluminated men (which are all the godly learned that
abhor the heresies of H. N.) preach and teach that there shall be a general
judgment of al mankind, and a resurrection of the flesh.

Therefore it is false, lies, seducing, and deceitful to preach, and teach so.

If I should thus reason, perhaps theie would say I press them too sore, and
as it were violently wrest a confirmation from their books. Their own words
therefore for me, shall confirm what I say.

That theie hold that the day of judgment is now, he that waieth with
judgment these few places out of their own works, will easily confess. I
will recite but three of them, and that from sundry of their works, omitting a
great many both in the first Exhortation H.N. in his first Exhort. cap. 6.
sent. 1, 2. 3. 5. cap. 7. sent. 42.
; in the Instruction of the upright faith H.N in his Instruct. praef. Set. 1.
3, 5. Art. 8 sent. 35. Arti. 11. sent. 42. Exhort. after to those Art. sent. 1.
; in the Prophecy of the Spirit H.N. in Prophecy of the spirit of love, cap.
14. Sent. 7. cap. 16. Sent. 6, 7, 8. Cha 19 sent. 14.
in ye Proverbs H.N. in his Proverbs Chap. 1. sent. 17. 18.
of H.N; and also in Elidad his exhortation Elidad a fellow Elder with H.N. in
his Exhort. sent. 33, 34 35.
. Wherebie it may be gathered that it is not a escape, but a doctrine
advisedly taught of H.N. and his scholars.

The first is this H. N. in his Euang. Chap. 2. sent. 1.
, Behold in this present day the Isai 3. b. Mat. 24, d Mat. 25, d
glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the many thousands of his
Saints, be comes manifested: which has set himself Now upon the seat of
Isai. 16, b.
his majesty for to judge in this same day which the Lord has ordained, or
appointed: the whole Acts 17, d.
world with equity, and with faithfulness Zacha. 8. ^.
and truth according to his righteousness.

The words are plain enough, that Christ in this present day is come; and
has Now set himself upon the seat of his Majesty, for to judge in this same
day the whole world. Yea, he is so come that he may even Now, not he only,
but thousands of his Angels also sensibly be seen and perceived. Therefore
does he say, Behold, in this present day the glorious coming of our
Savior. Which some have seen, as that dreamer Vitel for an ensample, believe
him that list.

For so himself does say Christopher Vitel in his Libel against the Book
entitled, The displaieng of an horrible sect of gross, wicked Heretics,
naming themselves the Family of Love.
: Moreover there was made manifest unto me, through the same service of Love,
and the Lords minister H.N, the coming of Christ with his Saints, and his
righteous judgment.

The second place is this H.N. in his documental sentences chap. 15. sent, 4.
: This is the day which God Acts. 17, e.
has appointed for to judge in the same the compass of the earth with
righteousness through his word, in whom he has concluded his judgment.

The third shall be this H.N. in his preface before the instruct. of the upright
Faith, sent. 2.
: For as much then, as that now in this same newest day Matt. 24, 25. d Luke
17, c. 21.
the coming of Jesus Christ as a Lord in his majesty from the right hand of
God his Father appears Act. 1, b. 2. 2.
, and becomes manifested unto us, These. 1. b.
with full clearing of his heavenly illumination, according to the Scripture.

In all which places he either says Christ comes in this present day; or,
Now he is set in judgment to judge in this same day; or, this is the day
which God has appointed for to judge in the same the compass of the earth; What
the Family of Love does mean by the judgment, in this present day, or now
executed.
or finalie, Now in this same newest day the coming of Jesus Christ, as a
Lord in his majesty, etc. appears; al are in the time present. It will be good
therefore to examine what he means by this present day; by Now, by this
day; by this newest day. For therbie the head of this viper will notably
peepe-out to the destruction of it self.

For interpretation whereof, I will not allege the words of any adversary of
theirs, but even their own judgment; yea the judgment of the whole Family,
which is this In the answer of the Family of love unto the notes of the Bishop
of Rochecter, placed before the confut. of M. Wilkinson, leaf A, 4. line 34.
He ( meaning H. N.) affirms this present time of the light of love, to be
the day of the clear and righteous judgment of God: wherein God will restore
al things to their right (to wit) bring or set the lie in his lieng being to
be condemned in the hellish cave, and the truth likewise in his right form or
degree, to wit, to prevail, flourishe, or bear swaie over the unrighteousness
for evermore, wherebie that the will of God might be accomplished in earth as in
heaven.

In which words note with me, I beseech you, first, what theie think the day
of judgment to be; secondly, at the day of judgment what things be renewed;
and thirdelie, the end of his judgment.

For the first, it is manifest that the day of judgment among them is naught
else, 1. Day of judgment what in the opinion of the Family of Love
but this time wherein the Light of Love, that is, their obscure and erroneous
opinions are published. For so theie do expresselie say: He affirms this
present time of the light of love to be the day of the clear, and righteous
judgment of God. By which I gather, either that their doctrine is but newly
vp-start, and so before this time that God had no Church; or if theie grant,
that it has from time to time, and from hand to hand even from the beginning
been delivered, that the day of judgment was always, which is impiety to
be thought, and heresy to be spoke. Let them take which part theie will, as
one of them theie must, they shall see how theie run into many, and absurd
opinions.

If their doctrine has been from the beginning, then has the judgment bin
from the beginning. For when their doctrine peeped-foorth, the judgment
appeared. But that the judgment has bin alwaie, I think theie will not say.

Therefore their doctrine is but new. And if it be but new, then is not the
same, which the old Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles preached, and
believed; and wherebie theie were saved. And being not the same, it must of
necessity lead unto damnation. And the teachers thereof are to be held
accurssed, according unto the commandment of the Apostle Gal. 1, 8.
.

If theie say the judgment of Christ has been from the beginning, how is it
that theie say, Behold in this present day the glorious coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with the many thousands of his Angels becomes manifested, and
not, The glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. has bin manifested
from the beginning? And yet were it shameful and vile heresy to say so. For
what godly man ever was of that opinion? Or how by Scripture can there prove
the same? Into which error theie must needs fall, if theie hold their doctrine
has been always; and the judgment to appear, that is, the glorious coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with many thousands of his Angels to appear to
judge the world, when the light of the Love brake-out.

But whether theie think that their doctrine has been always, which theie
can never prove; or whether theie think that of late it sprang-vp, which all the world does know; theie utterly deny a judgment to come, and say that
now it is: which is a very detestable opinion.

Secondly, 2. What shall be renewed.
for the things to be renewed, mark their very words: They say, In this
clear and righteous judgment God will restore al things to their right. That
is, the head, and it seems goodly, but in the tail which follows, great
poison does lurk. For do theie say, That we shall al be changed, or, that
this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality, as
Saint Paul does 1. Cor. 15, 51. 53.
? or that the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that
are therein shall be burnt-vp, as S. Peter does 2. Pet. 3, 10.
? or finalie, that al things shall be so renewed, that there shall be a new
heaven, and a new earth, as Saint John does Revel. 21, 1.
? No. Yet do theie say, God will restore al things to their right.

What do theie mean then therebie? To wit, God will bring or set the lie in
his lieng being, to be condemned in the hellish cave, and the truth likewise
in his right form or degree. Then to bring or set the lie in his lieng being,
to be condemned, etc. is to restore al things. A goodly reason no doubt.
That which the Scripture speaks of, theie never mention; and that which the
Scripture is against, theie avouch. The Scripture says, al things shall be (...)
and it names what, as before I said, 52.
namely the bodies of al men, 53.
be they alive or dead 1. Cor. 15, 51.
; the elements 2. Pet. 3, 10.
; heaven and earth Revel. 21, 1.
: but that the lie in his lieng being should be restored, 2. Pet. 3, 13.
I find no mention neither in the word of God, nor in the writings of godly
men. And therefore in my judgment it is a great error to say so.

And the rather I think it, because I never find that a restoring shall be made
of things either absolutely good, or absolutely evil: but of things
indifferent. For neither can virtue be turned into vice, nor vice into virtue;
truth cannot become falsehoode, nor falsehoode become truth. No, theie cannot
degenerate in any sort from their very natures. And therefore a restitution
cannot be made of them, as though theie had changed either into others nature.
But man for that being left in his own hands to choose either good or evil, he
left that good was and followed the contrary, he must be restored unto his
first integrity: and the creatures which have served to the lust of man, theie
shall be renewed.

Thirdly, and last of al, the end of the judgment which theie feign, 3. End
of the judgment.
is, That the will of God may be accomplished in earth as in heaven. The
grossenes of the former mer points may palpablie be perceived, and yet theie
will seem more blasphemouslie wicked, when the impiety of this last clause is
discovered.

These things come to pass, say the Family, That the will of God may be
accomplished in earth, as in heaven. Wherebie, as I now sit, me thinks theie
imagine very baselie, and grossly of the event of this judgment. Saint Paul
says 1. Cor. 15, 28.
, When al things shall be subdued unto him, (meaning Christ) the^ shall the son
also himself be subject unto him, that did subdue al things under him, that
God may be al in all. That God may be al in all is the event of this judgment,
says Paul: that the will of God may be accomplished in earth as in heaven,
say the Family. Thus are the Scriptures, and the Family of Love clean
contrary, not in this point only, but in the other points beside. For the
Scripture says, That in a moment in the twinkling of an eye 1. Cor. 15, 52.
, judgment shall be: the Family make it either everlasting, or of long
continuance, and say that Now it is. The scripture testifies yt al me^, and
other creatures shall be restored: the Family restrain it unto the Lie in his
lieing being, and to the truth; of which there is no mention in the Scripture.
The scripture makes nothing capable of everlasting felicity, but the obedient
servants and sons of God: the Family make virtue capable both of the same,
and of damnation too; as though virtue could be contrary unto virtue, that is,
Truth unto Righteousness, or Righteousness unto Truth. Finalie the
Scripture proves the end of the judgment to be, that God may be al in all:
the Family will have it, that the will of God may be accomplished in Earth, as
in heaven, that is, that theie may lead a life answerable unto the form
which H.N. has prescribed in this present world.

For proof of which my words I could cite many places both out of the
Prophecy of the spirit of Love H.N in his prophecy of the spirit of Love
Chap. 7, sent. 19. Chap, 19, sent. 12, 14.
, and out of the Proverbs of H. N. H. N in his Proverbs Chap. 1. sent. 16, 17,
18. Chap. 4 sent. 9. 10. etc.
, and also out of the spiritual land of peace H.N spiritual. terr. pacis cap.
44, sent. 9, 10, 11, 12. etc.
, but for all hark what in his Euangelie he does say H. N. in his Euangelie
Chap 35, sent. 8.
. Behold now in This present day is the Scripture fulfilled Scripture in
this day of Love fulfilled.
and according to the testimony of the Scripture, the raising up, and the
resurrection of the Lords dead comes also to pass Resurrection is come.
Presently in this same day through the appearing of the coming of Christ in
his majesty Christ in his majesty appears.
. Which resurrection of the dead, seeing that the same Is come unto us
Resurrection come unto the Elders of love.
from Gods grace, we do likewise this present day, to an Euangelie or ioieful
message of the kingdom of God and Christ, publish in all the world, under the
obedience of the Love, In which resurrection of the dead, GOD shows unto us
None but the il-luminate Elders know the fulfilling of the Scriptures.
that the time is Now fulfilled, that His dead, or the dead, which are fallen a
sleep in the Lord They only do rise-vp which are fallen a sleep in the
Lord.
rise up in This day of his judgment Dead do arise in this day of judgment.
, and appear Dead appear unto H.N. and to the Elders of the family of love,
and that in glory.
unto us in godly glory, which shall from henceforth live in us The dead shall
live in the Elders of the family.
, everlastingly The dead shall live in the Elders everlastingly.
with Christ Dead shall live in the Elders everlastingly with Christ.
, and reign The dead shall reign upon earth; or in this world enioie absolute
felicity.
upon earth.

Were it my mind to stand upon this place of H. N. I could easily prove more
curssed errors in the same than it contains lines: but I hasten unto other
matters, I allege it in this place only to show, that he teaches happiness
to be naught else, but a pretended righteousness in this present world, and
that such as be risen-againe from the dead, and enioie felicity, do live and
reign upon earth.

Then by their own words, if the judgment be come; if the dead be raned; if
happiness be attained, they shall never be partakers of the fruits of the
second resurrection, nor of those things which eye has not seen, neither
ear has heard, nor heart conceived prepared for such as love God 1. Cor. 2, 9.
. For they are happy already in their own opinions, in mine theie are of al
men the most miserable; and that partly because they are altogether destitute
both of faith, without which it is impossible to please God Heb. 11, 6
, and also of Hope, without which they cannot be saved Romans 8, 24.
. For Faith is the ground of things that are hoped for, and the evidence of
things that are not seen Heb. 11, 1.
. Which things being once seen and attained, Faith cesseth, and hope
vanisheth-awaie. For how can a man hope for that which he sees Romans 8, 24. 25.
? But if we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it.

They therefore being come unto the top of blessedness, have banished-awaie al
Faith, Hope, and fear of God. Marvel then I will no more why they call
themselves the family of Love; neither why they so highly commend Love,
saying of those three virtues, Faith, Hope, and Love, the chiefest is Love 1.
Cor. 13, 12.
; neither why they will needs be caled, not the householde of Faith Gal. 6, 10.
, but the Family of Love, for I have them now. They are come, forsooth, unto
the third form, and become capitanes in the school of Christ, they are past
Faith, and Hope yea and grace too.
, and are come unto Love, which is the chiefest, wherebie they are like Angels,
what say I like Angels? Theie are Godded with God H.N. in his first Exhort.
ca. 16. sent. 16. but more truly they are Diueled with the devil, as their
own phrase is, though in another sense. Christopher Vitel in his Libel, leaf
D. 3, b. line 21.
, or incorporated with God in all Love; and are consubstantiated or conformablie
united as one man of God in God H.N. in the prophecy of the spirit of Love.
.

Especialie I account them of al men the most miserable, Chap. 7, sent. 19.
for that theie take dross for gold, misery for happiness; this life for a
blessed life; earth for heaven; yea theie dream or doat rather that theie see
God, not through a glass darkly 1. Cor. 13, 12.
, but face to face; and know him not in part, but as theie are known; and
are in such a state wherein theie laugh always, and never weep; live always,
and never die; always rejoice, and never be sad; always merry, and never
sorrowful, in pleasure alwaie, and never in pain. For that is ye state of an
happy life Revel. 21, 4.
. And yet who sees not that they live wretchedly as sinners; and die like men,
to speak no worser of the ends which commonly they have.

Now, by what authority of scripture does H. N. prove that the judgment is
now (for that would be considered?) His principal places be taken out of the
24. and 25. of Matthewe; the first and the 17. of the Acts; the 17. and the
21. of Luke; the 2. Thessal. 1; and the Epistle of Saint Jude. In all which
places mention is made of the utter destruction of the world, and of the
second coming of our Savior unto the general judgment: and prove as well
that the day of judgment is come as that text, where it is said: Mal. 3, a.
4, a.
Behold I send mine Angel or messenger, Math. 11, 17.
which shall prepare the way, Mark 1.
or make plain the path before Me, Luke 7.
set before most of their Books, does prove that H. N. is the messenger of
Christ. Thus much against the Family of Love, and this one opinion of theirs,
as wicked, as it is strange, and unheard of until these late years.

CHAP. 7.
Against the favorers of Hymeneus, and Philetus, who said that the
resurrection is alredie past.
AS had S. Paul in his time Hymeneus and Philetus: so have we in our time such
as favor Hymeneus and Philetus, namely the Family of Love, who deny the
judgment to come, and say the resurrection is past. Yet so I would not write
of them, did not both Christopher Vitel, and also H. N. himself avouch the
same.

For says Vitel, C. Vitel in his Libel leaf F. 1.
The Lord has accomplished according to his promises through the spirit of
Christ, line 3.
in him ( namely H.N.) all that he has spoken through the mouth of his servants
the Prophets. And, in this day are al Prophecies fulfilled, says H.N.
himself. H.N in his Euang. Chap. 36. sent. 13.
.

In which two places, although express mention be not made either of the
judgment, or coming of Christ: yet in that they say, Al Prophecies are
fulfilled, and that the Lord has accomplished all that he has spoken through
the mouth of his servants the Prophets, they do comprehend the judgment, and
coming of Christ, so well as any thing else. 20.
For the Prophets have foretold thereof. 21.
As the Prophet Isaiah Isai. 26, 19.
; the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 37, 4.
, the Prophet Daniel Dan. 2, 44.
Dan. 7, 13.
, and others. 5.
If therefore whatsoever the Lord has spoken by his servants the Prophets, 6.
be fulfilled; and the Lord has fore-tolde by his servants ye Prophets of a
general resurrection, 14.
judgment and second coming of Christ: Dan. 12, 2.
Then is the resurrection, 3.
judgment, and second coming of Christ, come and past already, even by the
very words of the arch-pillers of the Family.

Yet would I not think that so wretchedlie theie do err, had I not read, that
one of the Family gaue-out that Christ was already come. For one of the
Family, being asked before many witnesses, touching Christ his coming unto
judgment, did answer plainly that he was already come Answer unto the
Libel of C. Vitel, leaf l. 17, line 12.
.

Neither yet should I so conceive of the^, did I not find, that not only
H.N. himself was H.N. in his Euang. Chap. 1. H.N. in his 2. Epist. Chap. 2.
sent. 1.
, but also the Lords dead are already raised-againe H. N. in his Euang. Chap.
35. sem. 8.
.

Which opinion theie would never stand-in, H. N. in his preface before his
instruction of the upright Faith sent. 1.
or defend, if theie did think any other resurrection to be, than only a
rising from sin; a casting-of of the old man; and a putting-on of the new.

But as Hymeneus and Philetus were deceived, for yt theie divided not the word
of God aright 2. Tim. 2, 15.
: so the Family of Love do so perilouslie err, because theie under stand not
the word of God aright. For did theie so, theie would confess, and believe
not a single, but a double; not a spiritual only, but a corporal resurrection
also: whereof the one which is spiritual, must go before the other, that is
corporal. Wherefore to avoid the error of the above mentioned, Twofolde
resurrection.
we are to bear in mind yt there is a twofold resurrection, of the dead; one
spiritual, of the mind; the other corporal of the body.

When I say there is a spiritual resurrection: Spiritual resurrection what.
I mean, not that the Soul or Spirit can die, and be raised vp-againe. For
the soul is immortal. But the spiritual resurrection is, when a man who was
dead in sin, through the preaching of the Gospel, is reclamed from the death
of ungodliness, unto life, that is unto faith, and knowledge of Christ, wherebie
he is made a new creature. According as Irenaeus does say Irenaeus lib. 5.
aduersus haereses Vlentini. etc.
, Agnitio Dei renouat hominem, that is, the knowledge of God makes a new-man.

For, A double death, and a double resurrection.
as there is a double death, to wit a spiritual and a corporal: so is there a
double resurrection. He is spiritualie dead, though he seem healthful in
body, who is a blasphemer, Spiritual death what.
a traitor, an adulterer, an vserer, a murderer etc. For he is as a dead man
in the sight of God. Even as we count him, who either has done some horrible
fact worthy death against the laws of man, or else is condemned to die, but
for a dead man: because he stands at ye mercy of the magistrate either to be
saved, or cast-awaie, as our phrase is.

He therefore who by the preaching of the Gospel is sorry for his sins, Who
spiritualie risen.
and believes that through the blood of Christ al his offenses are washed,
and wypt-awaie; and through the virtue of his faith, does so fight against his
wicked affections, that he is become a new man, that is, of a blasphemer, a
continual praiser of God; of rebellions, obedient; of incontinent, pure and
chaste; of an vserer, a free lender, yea a liberal giver; of a murderer, a
careful preserver of me^, etc. this man, I say, through the power of the holy
Ghost is raised from the death of sin, Spiritual resurrection before the
corporal.
and risen with Christ.

Which spiritual resurrection, as euennowe I said, must goe-before the
corporal resurrection. For unless we arise spiritualie by Faith unto newnes of
life, let us not look to rise-againe corporalie unto eternal life. For our
Savior does does say John. 5. 29.
, Theie shall come-foorth that have done good unto the resurrection of life: but
theie that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation.

So then, None arise corporalie unto salvation, who have not risen spiritualie
from sin.
if any man desire to live eternaly in the sight of God, and to be a partaker
of the felicity to come, let him first arise from sin; believe that his
offenses are pardoned through the death of Christ; and spend the time he has
in this world, godly, righteouslie, and soberlie Tit. 2, 12.
, and assuredly he shall be raised at the second resurrection unto eternal life
Reave. 20, 6.
.

The corporal death is when as the soul does forsake the body; Corporal death
what.
and the body returns unto duste, where out it was taken. Which body we
Christians do believe As appears by the Creed, Apostolical, Nicene,
Athanasian.
, shall rise-againe at the day of judgment. But the favorers of Hymeneus and
Philetus will not be so persuaded to think. And therefore, because theie
understand not the Scriptures aright, theie hold that there is only a
spiritual resurrection. But the Scripture does so well speak of a corporal, as
of a spiritual.

For, as it is written Coloss. 2, 13.
, ye which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, has
he quickened-together with him; which is the spiritual: so is it wtitten 1.
Cor. 15. 52. 53.
, The dead shall be raised-vp incoruptible, and we shall be changed. For this
corruptible, must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality, which is the corporal resurrection. And as it is written Coloss.
3, 1.
, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, which is ye
spiritual: So is it wtitten, Job. 19, 25.
I am sure that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth. 26.
And though after my skin worms destroy this body: yet shall I see God in my
flesh. 27.
Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
though my reins be consumed within me; which are the corporal. Which
difference theie mark not; and therefore they goe-astraie, and have made
shipwreck as concerning faith 1. Tim. 1, 19.
.

CHAP. 8.
Against the Saturnians, Valentinians, and such like, who deny the
resurrection of the flesh.
AN hard thing it is to make flesh and blood believe, that there shall be a
resurrection of the flesh. Therefore have theie who defended the affirmative
part, had many adversaries. Much contradiction, says Cyril Cyril catech. 18.
, yet but one truth. Grecians deny it; Samaritanes believe it not; Heretics
say it shall not be, And al of them to prove their vane opinions do bring
either reason, as theie think, or scripture.

Their reasons are these. Man dies, rotteth, and is eate^-vp of worms; which
worms also do perish: Seeing therefore the body so putrifieth, and perishes,
how can it rise-again? Many are drowned, and devoured of fishes, which fishes
afterward perchance be taken, and eaten-vp. How then shall the whole body
arise? These and many more idle imaginations, which of purpose I ouer-passe,
theie bring-foorth to prove the impossibility of the bodies resurrection. Unto
which. S. Cyril as in other places christianlie Cyril catech 4, and 14.
; so most diuinelie, in his 18. Catecheis does answer to this effect:

Thou which we beleeuest not those things which are written concerning the
resurrection, being carnalie minded, look-vpon earthly, and material things,
and thou shall see most notable examples of the resurrection. Behold the seed
which is sown, how does it spring-afresh, and flourish if it putrify! if it
putrify not, it would never spring. Which seed is created for us, and our
use, not for it self. Shall therefore that which is made for man, being even
dead spring-afresh; and shall not man himself rise-againe when he is dead?

Look somewhat higher upon the trees, consider them as theie are in the winter
season, and consider them as theie are in Summer. In the winter theie are dead
without both leaves and fruit: in the Summer most goodly to behold either
with green leaves, or goodly fruit, or with both. For God who knows thine
hardness of heart, every year sets a resurrection before thine eyes, that
by things without soul, thou might beleuee the resurrection of reasonable
me^ which have souls.

Look higher yet upon heaven, and thou shall find a most evident proof of
the resurrection. The Moon sometime is in the waine, and sometime at the full:
sometime it is bright as day, and sometime red as blood. Which thing God does,
says Cyril, that thou man consisting of blood, should not doubt of the
resurrection of the dead; and that thou should believe that of thie self,
which thou see happen to the Moon in heaven. With many other both strong
and Christian arguments does Cyril in that fore-saide place overthrow the
foolish opinion of fleshly minded men, the which, either because I study to
be brief, or for that I know these by me now alleged be sufficient to
prevail with a man any whit reasonable, I omit: confuting their error, and
concluding this point with an excellent place of Irenaeus, which is this
Irenaeus aduersus haereses Valentini etc. lib. 5.
.

Theie therefore deny the power of God, and see not the truth, who look upon
the weakness of the flesh, and consider not his power who raised it from the
dead. For if he do not quicken that which is mortal, neither make that
incorrupt which is corruptible, God is not almighty. But inasmuch as in all
these things he is mighty, we should thinkvpon, and call into mind our
beginning. For God took duste of the ground, and made man. And undoubtedly
more hard, and incredible is it to make man, yea and a living and reasonable
man too of bones, and sinews, and veins, and form which never was before;
then to raise-againe that which sometime was being dissolved into earth, for
those reasons above mentioned; yea, though it return unto that, whereof at the
first he made him to be who was not, when he thought good: much more will he
now, and that willingly restore the^ when sometime were into that life which he
gives. Hitherto Irenaeus. The principal place of scripture whereby theie would
prove that the body shall not rise-againe, is this 1. Cor. 15, 50.
: Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Which place makes no
whit to their purpose. For ye Apostle in that whole chapter wherout that text
was taken, as no where else so forcibly, proves the resurrection of the
flesh. What therefore does the Apostle mean by these words, Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God? Is it that so many as are not regenerated
by the holy Ghost, shall never be partakers of heavenly consolation? or
equivalent with that of our Savior Ioh. 3, 36.
, He that believes not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon
him? yes undoubtedly. Of which judgment Irenaeus is, as appears in these
his words Irenaeus aduersus haereses Valent. lib. 5.
: The Apostle adhorting us unto the participation of the spirit, according to
the reasons above mentioned, did say: Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God. As if he should say: Be not deceived, for unless the word of
God abide, and the Spirit of the Father be in you, vanelie, as it falls out,
ye have spent the time, and so being blood and flesh, ye cannot inherit the
kingdom of God. This to the end we should not refuse the ingraffing of the
spirit by following and favoring the flesh. And thou being, says he Romans 11,
17.
a wild olive, wast graffed into the good olive, and made partaker of the
fatness of the Olive. As therefore a wild Olive, if, being ingraffed it
continue as first it was, is cut-waie; but if it keep the ingraffing, and
change into the nature of a good olive, it bears fruit as though it were
planted in the paradise of a king: so me^, if through faith they profit in
godliness, and take the spirit of God, and prosper in bringing-out fruit of the
same, they shall be spiritual, and as it were planted in Gods paradise. But if
theie refuse the spirit, and abide as theie were at first, liking better of the
flesh, than of the spirit; the^ rightly it is said of such, Diverse
significatio^s of the word flesh.
Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Again, ye more fully
to answer them, I say the word Flesh, has not always one signification in
the holy scripture. Frr sometime it is properly taken, as the nature thereof
does import, for a mass and substance of flesh, as where Paul faith 1. Cor.
15, 39.
, Al flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of me^, and another of
beasts and another of fishes, and another of birds. Sometime improperly, both
by the figure Synecdoche it is taken, sometime for man only, a where it is
said Genesis 6, 12.
, Al flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, meaning al men; sometime for
every living creature, as in this sentence Genesis 6, 13.
, An end of al flesh is come before me: and also by the figure Metonymie it
signifies, first ye state and condition of this life, as in these words of
Paul Gal, 2, 20.
, In that I now live in the flesh; I live by the faith in the son of God;
secondly, ye outward show or appeerance of things, that Christ meant when he
said John. 8, 15.
ye judge after the flesh; thirdly, and last of al, it signifies the
corruption of our nature, or what soever is in a man not regenerate; this meant
both our Savior in saying John. 3, 6.
, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and Paul too Romans 8, 13.
, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die.

Therefore Paul in saying, Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God,
means that fleshly minded men, such as delight in the works of the flesh
Gal. 5, 19. 20. etc.
, as adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, etc. shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Now had he meant the
earthie or fleshie substance of man, as these heretics do dream, he should
therebie have spoken* against that which he had not only so courageously
maintained both at Athens in the street of Mars Act. 17, 22. 23. etc. 31. 32.
; and at Jerusalem in the counsel of the Jews Act. 23, 6.
; and at Cesarea, before Felix the governor Act. 24, 14. 15. 16.
: but also so learnedlie by arguments taken from the resurrection of Christ 1.
Cor. 15, 12. 13. etc.
; from the end of our Baptism 1. Cor. 15, 23.
; from absurdities which arise by the denial thereof 1. Cor. 15, 13. 14. 32.
; from similitudes of things created 1. Cor. 15, 36. 37. etc.
; from comparisons 1. Cor. 15, 48. 49.
, and from sundry other special places, proved and confirmed. But leave we
these heretics.

CHAP. 9.
That undoubtedly there shall be a general judgment of al flesh.
THus I have both showed their opinions, who either doubt-of, or deny the
general judgment; and also confuted the arguments which theie allege. I will
now therefore proceed to prove the certainty of the judgment to come.

And although in M. Scheltco a Ieu^ren his book, this matter has notably
been handled* yet, because I do know the godly cannot choose but receive great
comfort and profit by hearing of them, I will unto his arguments add sundry
others of no small importance to confirm our faith in this point.

First therefore (to omit ye testimonies of men; 1. Proof from the testimony
of the Prophets
be theie Fathers, as theie use to call them, or late writers) ye Prophets have
at large, and in many places fore-tolde the same. As the Prophet Isaiah Isai.
26. 19.
, Thie dead men shall live; even with my body shall theie rise. Awake and sing,
ye that dwell in dust: for thie dew is at the deawe of herbs, and the earth
shall cast-out the dead. 20.
Come, my people, enter thou into the chambers, and shut thie doors after
thee; hide thie self for a very litlewhile, until the indignation pass over.
21.
For lo, the Lord comes out of his place to visit the iniquity of the
inhabitants of the earth upon them: and the earth shall disclose her blood, and
shall no more hide her slain. Also in ye prophecy of Hosea it is thus written
Hos. 13, 14.
: I will redeem them from the power of the grave: I will deliver them from
death: O death, I will be thie death; O grave, I will be thie destruction;
repentance is hid fro mine eyes. And again for all by the Prophet Daniel it
is said Dan. 12. 1.
: And at that time shall Michael stande-vp, the great Prince, which stands for
the children of thie people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there began to be a nation unto that same time: and at that time thie
people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book. 2.
And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shalawake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. 3.
And theie that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and
theie that turn many unto righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. I
omit the places in Job, in Ezekiel, in the 4. of Esdras, and many mo. I say
nothing also of the whole Book of wisdom, especialie of the 3. and 5.
chapters of the same, the which what are theie but even a very Sermon
concerning the last judgment of God; of the rewards of the godly and pains
of the reprobate?

Secondly, 2. From the testimony of Christ.
our Savior Christ, who is truth it self John. 14, 6.
, does auowe the same. For in one place thus he says Matthew. 12, 36
, I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, theie shall
give a count thereof at the last day: in another Matthew. 24, 30.
, Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven; and then shall all the kinreds of the earth mourn, and theie shall see the Son of man come in
the clouds of heaven with power, 31.
and great glory. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trompet,
and theie shall gather-together his elect, from the four winds, and from the
one end of the heaven unto the other.

Thirdly, 3. From the testimony of Angels.
the Angels of heaven do testify ye same, when theie said Act. 1. 11.
, Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing into heaven? This Jesus who is
taken-vp from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen him go into
heaven.

Fourthlie, 4. From the commandment of Christ.
Christ has not only testified this matter himself, but besides enioined
the Apostles to preach the same in ye ears of al men. For so Peter says Act.
10, 39.
: We are witnesses of al things which he did both in the land of the Jews,
and in Jerusalem, whom theie slew hanging him on a tree. 40.
Him God raised-vp the third day, and caused that he was showed openly: 41.
Not to all the people, but unto the witnesses chosen before of God, even to us
which did eat and drink with him, 42.
after he rose from the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people,
and to testify, that it is he that is ordained of God a judge of quick and
dead.

Fiftlie, the testimonies of the Apostles do confirm this point. 5. From the
testimony of the Apostles.
For Paul, besides that he stood hereineuen to the teeth of his adversaries,
as in the end of the Chapier immediately going-before, I have declared, he
proves the same, though most effectualie in ye 15. chap. of his first epistle
unto ye Corinthians: Romans 2, 3. 4. 5. etc.
yet very forcibly in diverse other places. Romans 14, 10.
As in the 2. and 14. Chapters unto the Romans; 2. Cor. 5, 10.
and in the 5. Chapter of his latter epist. unto the Corinthians. Peter also he
says: The end of al things is at hand 1. Pet. 4, 7.
; and that the wicked shall give accountes to him that is ready to judge quick
and dead. Again, Their judgment is not far-of, says he 2. Pet. 2, 3.
, and their damnation sleeps not, etc. Furthermore the last Chapter of his 2.
epistle is wholly in a manner to prove this article of christianity. Now
seeing the Prophets, Christ himself, his Angels, and Apostles, who have not
lied nor deluded men at any time before with vane prophecies, have foretold of
a judge meant to come, the godly doubtless will build their faith upon their
words, especialie because theie al have spoken thereof, moved thereunto by the
spirit of God, who cannot lie. Which testimonies may bring much good unto al
mankind. For first the godly herebie in all their troubles may receive great
and unspeakable comfort, considering that their afflictions shall not alwaie
endure, but that one day, when the Lord thinks good, theie shall be adorned
with everlasting glory, and life, according to his promises. This made S. Paul
to break into these words Romans 8, 18.
: I account that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy the
glory, which shall be showed unto us. Secondly, the wicked hearing these
prophecies of the Lord touching the last judgment, may be terrified from
displeasing so gracious a God, who of his mercy has revealed what shall betide
the wicked and vngonlie, that theie may with hearty sobs and sorrow repent.

Last of al, both good and bad may herebie as in a glass behold how the
world neither is governed by chance, nor shall endure everlastingly: but that,
as the old world, the sins of men being come unto ripenes, was drowned with
water: so the whole world, when iniquity has gotten the upper hand, shall
perish and be consumed with fire, Theie also, both good and bad I mean, ought
herebie to learn so to set themselves in order by repentance, that when theie
shall be summoned to appear at that general Assise, theie may boldly stand in
the presence of his glorious Majesty.

But beside these testimonies which I have aleaged, 6. From the justice of God.
there be sundry other great arguments of the worlds consummation. For, the
present condition of men in this life is a manifest proof that this world
cannot alwaie endure. For who are in more prosperity then the wicked; and who
more afflicted the^ the godly in this life? Therefore of necessity there must
be a judgment, where at both the ungodly are to be condemned for their
wickedness, and the virtuous to receive rewards for their well-doing. For every
good master to his power, will prefer his good servants; and every upright
judge, will quite the innocent, and punish malefactors. Is this uprightness
among mortal men, says Cyril Cyril. Catech. 18.
, and shall not God the immortal king reward every man according to his works?
He which otherwise thinks, is in a wrong opinion. For, as it is in a
certain Psalm Psalm. 5, 4.
, God is not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him. 5.
The foolish shall not stand in his sight: for he hates al them that work
iniquity. 6.
He shall destroy them that speak lies. The Lord will abhor the bloody man,
and deceitful. Wherefore seeing, though now and then some; yet all the wicked are
not destroyed; there must be a judgment, at which all the ungodly shall perish
from the face of the earth, and be damned. For the Lord neither can, because he
is just; neither will, for that he is holy, suffer his servants, and holy ones
alwaie to be afflicted, alwaie to be oppressed, to be kept in thraldom and
bondage of the reprobate alwaie.

Let the wicked then consider that a day will come when tribulation and anguish
shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil Romans 2, 9.
. And though either through policy, or friendship theie escape the displeasure
of man: yet that they cannot avoid the wrath of God. For idolaters,
blasphemers, and al wicked persons God will judge, though man do not: because he
is righteous.

Further let them note, that though they suffer, and that deservedly in this
world: yet if theie die impenitent, the end of their life, is but the
beginning of an everlasting death. For God is righteous, and will punish most
severely, unless his wrath be turned-awaie by the tears of Christian repentance.

Moreover man punishes outward offenses: but god outward and inward too. Man
executes correction for one, or a few: but God for all sins, which either the
heart Math. 5, 21. 22. etc.
, mouth Math. 12, 36.
, or any member of the body has committed 2. Cor. 5, 10.
, and that because he is righteous.

Again, the end why this world was created, 7. From the end of the worlds
creation.
is an undoubted argument, that a judgment one day must come. For it was
created only to serve for ye use of the saints and sons of God, not of
Atheists, and Epicures. A judgment therefore is to come, whereby the wicked
must be cast-into everlasting torments, that the godly, and none beside, may
enioie the creatures of almighty God. Hitherto makes that of the Apostle Romans
8, 19
. For the fervent desire of the creature waits when the sons of God shall be
reueiled, 20.
because the creature is subject to vanity, not of it own will, but by reason
of him, which has subdued it under Hope. Because the creature also shall be
delivered 21.
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. 22.
For we know that every creature groaneth with us also, and traueleth in
pain together unto this present. This Peter means when he says 2. Pet. 3.
12.
, by the coming of the day of God, the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and the elements shall melt with heat. 13.
But we look for new heavens, and a new earth, according to his promise,
wherein dwells righteousness.

Again, 8. From the base estate of the god lie in this world.
the base estate of the saints in this world does prove the same. For they are
now humbled: therefore they shall be exalted. for before glory goes humility. So
then, We are with Christ to suffer Romans 8, 17.
, that with Christ we may be glorified. And the life of the saints is hid with
Christ in god Colos. 3, 3.
. There remains then a manifestation, and a glorification of the godly. When
Christ which is our life shall appear Colos. 3, 4.
, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Now, says John 1. John 3, 2.
, are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we shall be: and
we know that when he (which is Christ) shall appear, we shall be like him. For
we shall se him, as he is. In this world, we are saved by Hope Romans 8, 24.
. Therefore the time must come when our Hope shall cesse, and we shall be saved in
deed, and by the sentence of a righteous judge be pronounced the very sons
of God, and heirs with Christ of that kingdom which has been prepared for
the elect even from ye foundation of the world Math. 25, 34.
: where we shall see god face to face 1. Cor. 13, 12.
; and know not in part, but as we are known.

Moreover the very conscience of men is an evident argument of a judgment to
come. 9 From the testimony of man's conscience.
By this murderers, whoremongers, and wicked livers be pricked, and tormented.
This made Cicero to say Cicero Epist. ad Aitici^ li. 11.
: There can no evils be imagined, but I am troubled therewith, notwithstanding
in respect of the grief of sin, which is greatest and eternal, theie are al
easy to brone. Therefore undoubtedly those torments of mind are tokens that
God is the auenger of wickedness, and that a severe judgment shall be pronounced
against all the wicked.

Furthermore, wars, famine, pestilence, affliction, 10 From temporal
punishments.
al temporal and corporal punishments in commonweals; what are theie but
arguments of everlasting torments to come for sin and wickedness after the
general judgment? Finalie, 11. From the curse appointed to the wicked for
breaking the laws of God.
we are to believe yt the laws of God were not given out in vane; but that
God, as he requires an exact performance of them: so if he find not ye same,
he will severely punish ye transgressors, according as it is written Deuteronomy. 27,
26.
, Curssed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law, Gal. 3, 10.
to do them. Wherbie it may be gathered the^ an universal judgment must come,
wherein this curse shall be executed upon ye wicked, and the righteous received
into ye fellowship of ye saints. And as that Moral Law of Moses was not
giuen-out in vane: so neither has God written the same in the mind of every
man in vane. For so many as have sinned without the Law, (says Paul) Romans 2,
12.
, shall perish also without the Law: and so maine as have sinned in the Law,
shall be judged by the Law (For when the Gertiles which have not the Law, 14
do by nature the things contained in the Law, theie having not the Law, are
a Law unto themselves, 15.
which show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing) At
that day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, 16.
according to my Gospel. In which words of Paul it is evident, that as the
wicked shall perish for breaking of the Law of God, whether it be the written
Law, or of Nature: so is the time expressed when destruction shall come upon
the wicked, namely when God shall judge the secrets of me^ by Jesus Christ.
There shall be therefore a general judgment.

CHAP. 10.
Whether God do judge this present world, or no.
But one perhaps will say, yea, I thank God, I utterly detest al such as
either doubt-of, or any way deny the general judgment to come; I believe it
shall come, and I pray God it may come this week before the next. For
doubtless we had need of a judgment, we have lacked justice a great while:
too to long has god neglected his servants, too to long has he winked at the
ungodly, and suffered his faithful children either with poverty, or with
infamy, or with slavery, or with per secutio^, or with one cross or other to
be afflicted: where-as the wicked, theie do continue for riches, welthie; for
health, lusty; for authority, of countenance; every way at their hearts
ease, flourishing, iocunde, and happy.

This I know many do think; and some, comparing the state of the godly in
this world, and of the wiked together, will not let to say so much: not
considering that by such words they utter out as dangerous, and damnable
opinions, as any of them are which they do detest. Wherefore, albeit when I
took this discourse in hand, I thought not to handle this question: yet,
because I see both how it springs of ye premises, and is also very needful to
be discussed in these wicked days, and the handling thereof beside will much
confirm the minds of the weak, and advance the glory of almighty God, I
will allege such proofs for the affirmative part, as no cause, I hope, shall be
left of doubting, whether GOD has care of this servants, or do judge mankind
in this world.

Thou therefore who say, God has no care of the godly in this world,
Diverse reasons, and arguments, proving that God judges mankind.
answer I pray thee, is he their father? If thou say, No; thine words
shall condemn thee. For thou say in thy daielie prayer, O our Father. If
thou say, Yea; then has he a fatherly affection toward his children. For
can a woman forget her child Isai. 49, 15.
, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? Though theie should
forget: yet will not God forget his children. God then does not forget, naie he
cannot but have a care of the godly, because they are his children. If
therefore without great folly it cannot be said, that earthly fathers will
neglect their children; without extreme folishnesse thou can not say, God
neglects the godly: because he is their father.

Again, is he their Lord? If thou say, No, why do thou serve him? why
do thou fear him? why do thou dread his displeasure? if thou say,
yea; then does he govern; and if he govern, he does judge. For where a
government is, there is also administration of justice. If therefore without
great absurdity, it cannot be denied yt he is a Lord; without foul
absurdities thou can not deny that he judges: because he is a Lord.

If thou say, he is a Lord but in little, he does not the office of a Lord,
he executes no justice: in saying so, thou bewraiest thy madness. For what
realm; naie, what town; naie, what house; naie what one man can prosper
without a governor? For an house without an inhabiter comes quickly to
decare; a ship without a master, goes to warcke; and a body without a soul
cannot live, and do well. So Lactantius Lactant. de falsa Sap. ca. 10.
. Then if small things, in the judgment of the wise, must needs be governed;
the whole world is governed: and if governed, then judged. For he that is a
governor, is a judge. If therefore without mere madness it cannot be said
that small things can continue without governors: it is extreme madness to
say, God judges not the world: because he is governor of the same.

He governs the world, thou will say, but he judges not among men; for the
innocent are oppressed of the wicked. But listen, can God, think thou, judge
the whole world, and yet not judge a part? Or will he govern things
senseless, and liuelesse, and neglect reasonable men?

Again, if he be a judge, and yet do no justice, what do thou make him,
but a rechles, and careless person, one that fetteth al at six and seven, not
caring which end goeth-forward? which thing thou can not conceive in thy
mind, much less report, without great impudency; and assure thy self God will
not hold thee giltlesse for thinking so of him, who is only wise 1. Tim. 1,
17.
.

Last of al, I advise thee, O man, take heed what thou say. for, if thou
grant, as thou can not deny, that God judges al men, and yet say the
innocent are punished, or oppressed without just cause why, and the wicked
cherished; then is he not a righteous judge; and if not righteous, then a
tyran; which is blasphemy be it either thought or spoken. Wherefore lay thine
hand upon thy mouth.

These are good reasons, thou confessest. If they be, they will persuade thee,
be thou a reasonable man. Happily, thou look for scripture. Would thou
have it proved that God does judge? God is the judge of the whole world Genesis
18, 25.
. He sits in his throne and judges right Psalm. 9, 4.
. That God has care of ye godly? Behold the eye of the Lord is upon the^ that
fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercy Psalm. 33, 18.
. That he has consideration too of ye wicked? The face of the lord is against
the^ that do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth Psalm. 34, 16.
. That he beholds ye ways of al men? The Lord looks down from heaven, and
beholds all the children of men Psalm. 33, 14. 15.
. From the habitation of his dwelling, he beholds al the^ that dwell in the
earth, even, the evil and the good, and that in every place Prou. 15, 3
.

Thou see therefore first, that God does now judge, that thou may think
al justice is not reserved until ye time to come. Secondly that God has an
eye upon the godly, that thou may note how he is charie over them.
Thirdly, how his face is against them that do evil, that thou may
understand, how his wrath is kindled a against the wicked. Last of al, how he
beholds al men, that thou may know, how he neglects no man: and not
giueout, that he winketh at the wicked. For he beholds, the good for their
welfare, and the evil to their destruction. With who^ look thou to have a
part, who deniest that God beholds the ways of me^. And not only know thou
that God does cleerelie behold thee, but acknowledge also that he will assuredly
co^de^ne thee. For seeing the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
cut off their remembrance from the earth: of the government of of God it must
ensue, that thou who through infidelity deniest the countenance of God, must
through destruction understand the wrath of the beholder, said Saluianus
Saluianus de gubernat. Dei. lib. 2.
, and so do I.

But the more to prevail, unto these reasons, and testimonies of scripture, I
will annexe most evident examples of the judgments of God. For, if we into
the holy Bible, Examples of God his judgments in foretime.
we shall find the same to be even a glass as it were of God his judgments
from time to time. For our first Parents Adam and Euah were expelled out of
Paradise Genesis 3, 23.
, through the justice of God. The murder which Kain committed, was revenged
Gen 4. 10. 11.
through the justice of God. The whole world was drowned Genesis 7, 21.
; Babel overthrown Genesis 11, 6.
; Sodom and Gomorh burned Genesis 19, 23. 24,
; Pharao and al his host brought unto destruction Exodus 14, 23.
, through the justice of God. 27. 28.
Again, that Noah and his household were preserved Genesis 7, 23.
; Lot with his wife and daughters saved Genesis 19. 16.
; Moses and the Israelites, delivered Exodus 14, 21. 22.
, it was through the same justice of God. Wisd. 10, 15. 16.
Again, that David in the the deflouring of his wife; rauishement of his
daughter; rebellion of his sons; banishement from his kingdom; defection of
his subjects; and in the odious death of his son Absalom was punished; what
was it but the righteous judgment of God, for his sins committed against the
commandments of the Lord?

In all these examples, says Saluianus Saluianus de gubernas. Dei. lib 1.
, what is there not? would you see a ruler? Lo, he both reformeth that which is
presently a^isse and disposes things to come. Would you see a severe judge?
Lo, he punishes malefactors. Would you see a just, yet a merciful judge? Lo, he
spares the innocent. Would you see yet a judge in all things? Lo, here is
judgment. For he reproves as a judge, and governs as a judge. A judge
pronou^ceth sentence, a judge condemns the guilty, and a judge rewards the
innocent. Again says he Saluianus de gubernat. Dei lib. 2.
, And althese things, Why? Why? but that we should understand that as God
has judged and punished; so he will evermore. And therefore we read how even
holy men were corrected before time by the judgment of God, that we should
know how God will judge us in this present world. Because God, as he lives
alwaie, so he judges alwaie; as his omnipotency lasts ever, so his
righteousness edndureth; and as he is eternal, so is his justice from age unto
age.

CHAP. 11.
How God does judge mankind in this present world.
NOw God judges mankind in this present world three manner of ways; sometime
by men, by himself sometime, and sometime both by himself, and by man too.

By man diversely, as by eeclesiastical peesons; and by the civil magistrate:
by the word and power of the one; and by the sword of the other. Therefore
the word of the preachers is said to be the savor of death unto death to some
2. Cor. 2. 16.
, and the savor of life unto life to others; and that which officers of the
Church do bind on earth, is said to be bound in heaven, and that which they
loose on earth, is loosed in heaven Luke 18, 18.
: and Magistrates for that cause are caled the ordinance of God Romans 13. 1, 2.
, and said to execute the judgments not of man, but of the Lord 2. Cor. 19,
6.
, and are named the ministers of God Rom 13, 4. 6.
, yea, Gods Psalm. 82. 1. 2.
too, not simply, but for that theie sit in the room of God here upon earth.

So that, when either the vengeance of God against obstinate sinners; or a
gracious pardon unto the penitent, is pronounced: or thieves be hanged, witches
burned, traitors quartered, malefactors punished; when the innocent are
desended, right maintained, and justice duly executed according to the laws
of God, it is the judgment of the Lord.

I say, when justice is executed according to the laws of God. For all the
judgments of men, in authority, though according to laws, are not the
judgments of God. Because, many times both ecclesiastical persons, and that
by law, condemn those whom God does pardon; and absolve those whom God does
condemn: and temporal governors also allow that by their laws, which God
abhors. So both theeuerie in Lacedemonia Ex Heraclid. de politiis.
; public whoredom in Assyria Osorius de gl^ria lib. 1.
; incest in Persia Boemius de moribus, and legibus gentium, lib. 2.
, was: and common stews Cor. Agrippa de Vanit. Scien. cap. 64.
, yea and Sodomitrie sometime of year at Rome Tho Swetonius co^tra Hamiltonium
Apostatam. p. 102.
, and gross idolatry in all places where the Pope has supreme power is
maintained. And therefore magistrates judging according to such laws, are not
the ministers of God, but of Satan; and execute the judgments of the devil,
not of the Lord.

When therefore be magistrates the ministers of God? or when do theie execute
his judgments? Surely when they judge according to Gods laws. Which laws of
his be either imprinted in the minds of al and every man, and are for that
cause termed the laws of nature; or else written in the word of God, which is
the scripture, and are called the Decalog or Ten-commandements. Whatsoever is
by the authority enacted contrary to these laws, it is the law of Satan; and
what is either grounded upon them, or done by them, God allows the same.

And such good magistrates, and their laws the Lord so favors, that he
commands them to be obeyed, as his own ordenance Romans 13, 1. 2. etc.
, and that theie may be duly put in execution, he reueileth heinous
malefactors oftentimes; and those whom men by no policy can either get, or
know, he by his omnipotency in his justice does descrie. Thus come thieves
and murderers commonly, and traitors daily into the magistrates hand. And
why? No doubt, because the Lord would have it known, that he is a righteous,
and a most just auenger of enormous crimes, and y^ albeit by his almighty
power, he can: yet through his wisdom he will have the civil magistrate to
punish such, and that partly that others may be terrified by their punishment
from following their example: but especialie that notorious offenders may have
notorious and deserved correction.

Again, he judges by the civil Magistrates, when through strength of arms,
and force of war, the innocent are defended against al enemies whatsoever, be
theie domestical or foreign usurpers of another kingdom, or Tyrants in
their own. And theie who take such wars in hand, are said to fight the
Lords battle, as both Joshua Eccles. 46, 1. 2. etc.
, David 2. Sam. 17, 24 2. Sam. 18, 1. 2. etc.
, Machabeus 2. Macc. 15, 7 8. etc.
did, and praised be God our renoumed Queen does, both in defending her loial
subjects against al enemies; and in protecting the oppressed against usurpers.

By himself the Lord also does judge and that diversely. And though in all his
works he be marvelous: yet most wonderful is he in those his judgments. For
he judges secretelie, and he judges openly; he judges particularly some,
and he judges vniuersalie, al me^ by himself.

By his secret judgment he stirrethvp the hearts of man against man
manietimes, Secret judgments of God.
and again makes some to be extraordinarily favored. This do the godly
note. And therefore when either theie do find for love, enimitie; for good
will, hatred; for benefits, ingratitude, or get y^ friendship which theie never
looked for: the one theie impute unto the righteous judgment of God for their
neglecting his love, and requiting his friendship with unkindness, and his
manifold good turns with unthankfulness; and for the other theie cry with the
Psalmist Psalm. 75, 6.
, To come unto preferment is neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from
the South, but God is the judge, 7.
he makes, low, and he makes hie. By this judgment the Lord both takes
away good magistrates sometimes; turns the hearts of Princes; and changes
the state of Commonweals. For a true sentence is that of Cominaeus Phil.
Cominaeus Commens. suor. lib. 6.
; God suffers no wickedness to go unpunished, although sometime it be long
ere he take vengeance. For so often as we see any notable alteration in
mighty Princes, we ought certainly to persuade our selves that it proceeds
from the justice of God. And by this judgment he succoureth, yea and
preserves his Church miraculouslie from destruction; and also punishes the
enemies of the same from time to time.

Secretelie also the Lord does judge, when he touches the mind of man with
the feeling of sin and wickedness. And this judgment of God, if the holy
spirit be not assistant, is vnportable. For herebie diverse have desperately
finished their lines; as Kain, Judas, and in our age Franciscus Spira. By this
judgment diverse which seem in many outward and worldly respects, as either
for authority, or for their nobility, or for their places, or for their
learning, or for their profession, or for their wealth, happy; yet are theie
by the testimony of their gnawing conscience, which accuses them continualie
of heinous and manifold crimes, in a curssed state, and condition.

Last of al, when the wilful despisers of God his mercies preached by the
Gospel, and the malicious resisters, or peruertors of his word be deliuered-vp
into reprobate minds, wherebie there take darkness, for light, sower, for
sweet; for truth, falsehoode, wickedness, for holiness, superstition, for true
religion, man's fantastical imaginations, for the very service of God: and
follow, without remorse of conscience, or sense of wickedness, sin, and that
with greediness, what is it but the secret, yet righteous judgments of the
Lord Romans 1, 21. 22. 23. etc.
?

Secondarilie, without the ministry of man God judges by himself openly to
the sight of the world by diverse means, Open judgments of God.
as by the fire sometime, by water sometime, by the earth sometime, etc. By
which, and such like the Lord in his justice does punish us in these days
many times. So have we bine by great fires, great inundations, great
earthquakes, great plagues, corrected: yet very mercifulie. For we are
neither consumed of fire, as Sodom was Genesis 19, 23. 24.
, nor drowned of water, as the old world was Genesis 11, 6.
, nor swallowed-vp of the earth, as Korah, Dathan, and Abiram were Numb. 16,
31. 32.
: and that, not because we are more innocent now in the sight of God, Psalm.
106, 17.
than theie were, nor God is, either less righteous, that he will not, or of
less power, that he cannot punish so severely as ever he did: for both we are
by so much more wicked thantheie were, as we contemn greater benefits than
ever theie enioied, and God also is as righteous for justice, and for his power
as mighty, as ever he was. For he is the Lord and changes not Mal. 3, 6.
But of his infinite mercy he brings us not unto utter confusion, but
punishes us by little and little, because we should amend.

Thirdly, by himself God openly Examples of God his judgments upon
particular men.
punishes particular men, and that notoriously, that others may beware. Thus
has he punished long-ago both Herod Antipa, for his cruelty, and Herod
Agrippa for his pride, and Cerinthus, and Arius curssed heretics, for their
blasphemies, and the enemies of Narcissus for their perjury, and Hatto of
Maguntia, for insatiable covetousness, and cruelty, and Dalburgius of Worms in
Germany, for his lewd and unchaste conversation, and to omit a number mo,
Friar Bacon for his familiarity with Satan. For one of those Herodes he
threw from hie authority down to extreme beggerie Eccles. hist. cent. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 30.
, the other was eaten-vp of vermin Act. 12, 23.
, Cyrinthus was bruzed into pieces with the fall of an house Paulus ab Eitzen
Eth. doct. li 2. ca. 19.
, the bowels of Arius gushed-out, and so horribly ended his days Paulus ab
Eitzen, ibidem.
, one of Narcissus his enemies with fire, another with an odious sickness, and
ye third having lost his eyes with weping perished miserably Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 9.
; Hatto was pursued, yea at ye length devoured of Myce and Rats Eccles. hist.
Cent. 10. ca. 10. p. 590.
; Dalburgius going to naughty company in the night, fell into a cellar, and so
took his death Georg. Mayor Tom. 2. Homil. fol. 746.
; and Friar Bacon pined-awaie with hunger, having both a greedy desire to
eat, and plenty of meat to feedevpon Francis Coxe in his brief treatise
concerning the detestable wickedness of Magical sciences.
.

And of very late years, what notable, and how many examples of God his
judgments against wickedness have we seen? What a death came Anne Auerie (a
notable example of avarice) for her wilful perjury unto? How died widow
Barnes, because she would have defrauded her own children of their portions of
goods due unto them by Law? How desperately did father Lea finish his life,
for bearing false witness to a matter? How died one Thomas Hill at Feuersam in
Kent for murdering his own Mother? Did not the very excrements of Anne
Auerie come-out of her mouth? Was she not stricken with such a sickness, and
that sodenlie, that neither her feet could move, nor her mouth speak, nor
any member of hers in a manner do the duty it should? Died she not odiouslie
in a stinking stable for her abominable covetousness and perjury? Fell not
widow Barns out of an hie window, and so brake her neck? Did not Father Lea
dispatch himself with a rustie knife, and that two years after he had
forsworn himself? And did not five small points stra^gle, in strange manner,
Tho. Hill? Read the little treatise entitled, A view of examples; The Book was
printed at Morges this year 1581. par Iean le Preux.
and if thou have the French tongue, read also the Book entitled, Des grands
and redoutables iugemens and punitions de dieu aduenus au monde, etc. and there
thou shall see that punishments have bine executed upon some one or other, for
the violating of every commandment of the Lord. The which, and such like
examples God he sends day by day, that men should know and consider, how
that may happen unto every forsworn, blasphemous, and wicked person, which
happens to any. Finalie, God as he judges particularly some for some
special sins: so he judges vniuersalie al men, when he takes them out of
this world by death. For the wages of sin is death Romans 6, 23.
. Of which since every man is guilty, no man escapes the punishment of sin,
which is death. For, it is the condition of al times Eccles. 14, 17.
, Thou shall die the death: And it is appointed unto men, that theie shall once
die Heb. 9, 27.
, For so much as al men have sinned Romans 5, 12.
.

But the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has freed us
Romans 8. 2.
from the law of sin and of death; why therefore do we die, and are not
forthwith clothed with immortality? I answer with Bernard Bern. sermon. ad
milites, Cap. 11.
, It is that the truth of God may be fulfilled. For seeing God loves mercy
and truth, man is to die, because he prophesied that he should, and yet shall
rise-againe, least God seem to forget his mercy. So therefore death although
it bear not dominion alwaie: yet notwithstanding it abides for the truth of
Gods sake, or for a time in us: even as sin although it now reigns not in
our mortal bodies: yet are we not without the same.

The third manner of God his judgments is both by himself, and by man too. As
when he not only suffers ye Magistrate to punish the bodies, but also
himself tormenteth ye minds of malefactors by himself. Examples of which his
justice I will recite two: one shall be of a murderer executed at Vienna, named
Paul; the other of Muntzer the traitor put to death in Germany. Paul the
murderer.
For Paul, having not only robbed his own master of that money which with
great pains and toil he had gathered for the relief of him and his in
necessity: but also murdered, to make his way sure, first his fellow
workman, then a maid servant, then his master, next his mistres, and last of
al a poor young infant a maiden child, and being miraculouslie by God
himself apprehended at Ratisbone a city distant from Vienna 50 Germane miles,
delivered into the hands of the magistrate, by them conveyed to the place where
that horrible fact was perpetrated, and there, according to the laws of that
country, adjudged unto a most bitter death, amid his pains, which were most
grievous to flesh and blood, he openly confessed yt al his bodily torments
did not so much afflict his flesh, as the last words of the poor infant and
innocent, whom among the rest he had murdered, did torment his mind. For
when he came with bloody hands to kill her, ye sweet babe entreated him
earnestly to save her, promising ye best things which she had for a
recompense of his mercy, in these words: O Paul, good Paul, do not thou kill
me, and thou shall have al my poppets whenever thou will. Those words from
the time he had murdered her, were as corosies at his heart; and at his death
as the pains of hell to his soul: so testifies a good, and a godly wtiter D.
G. Mayor Tom. 6. Hom. fol. 509. b.
.

Muntzer also, Muntzer the Traitor; Father of the Anabapstes.
being ready to be put unto death for raising the poor Countrie-men in
Germany against their liege Lords, and governors, was so vexed in mind,
that such as stood by him, when he was to be executed, might sensibly hear
his heart to pant, shake, and beate-againe. so did God for his part show his
judgment upon him for his wickedness; as witnesses D. George Mayor D. G. Mayor
Tom. 7. fol. 612, b.
.

CHAP. 12.
Whether all the wicked are punished in this world; and why theie are suffered
in the opinion of man to flourish.
IF God then so favor justice, some will say, he should judge and punish all the wicked in this world.

He should in deed, No wicked man but has his punishment.
and he does. For there is not a wicked man upon the earth, whom God in his
justice one way or oother; either by his Magistrates, or by himself; either
by his secret, or by his open judgments; either by an accusing conscience, or
by casting him of into a reprobate mind; either by sickness, or by poverty;
by adversity, or by prosperity, does not punish. But it may be objected, to
have a guilty conscience, is an heavy cross; and to be utterly forsaken of
the Lord, and possessed of Satan, is of all the sorest plague, which can
fal-vpon man in this world; adversity also is a grievous punishment, but that
prosperity can be a cross, that is a Paradoxe in the opinion of the world. I
grant it is so. For so theie have always thought. Therefore the Romans with
Cicero; the enemies of Job, and the adversaries of Paul in their own eyes
were; and the Turks as theie think themselves are happy. And why? The Romans
had all the world as it were in subjection, Job his enemies lived at their
hearts ease, Paul his adversaries were not touched with adversity, as theie
thought, ye Turks do flourish. Whereas contrariwise ye Jews with Cicero, Job
even of his friends, Paul of the barbarous people, Christians of the Turks,
are judged accurssed.

But why? The nation of the Jews are vanquished, are carried from their
native country; are detained in captivity, said Cicero Cicero Orat. pro L.
Flacco.
. Job was in misery; And who ever perished being an innocent? or when were the
godly destroyed? said the fained friends of Job Job. 4, 7.
. Paul had a viper upon his hand; Therefore he is a murderer, and though he
have escaped the sea, yet vengance will not suffer him to live, said barbarous
people Acts 28, 4.
. Christians are but few for number, and for power nothing so mighty as they
have been; theie endure much affliction and trobles in respect of others;
therefore they are not the sons of God, says Mahomet Azoara 12.
.

These are the rash, and sinister opinions of the world. When god sends
prosperity he loves; but when adversity does come, he hates. But the
godly are of an other mind. For albeit when such as fear God enioie
prosperity, they think it an argument of his favor: yet when the wicked have
the same, in their judgment, it is a token of his displeasure. Therefore
Augustine in a certain place does say, The men of this world are unhappily
happy, that is, in their wealth theie are poor; in their health, sick; and
in their felicity, they are accurssed. For when the Lord seems not to be
angry at al with the wicked, he is most displeased. So Bernard Bern. super
Cantic sermon. 41
, when God is not angry, as me^ think, he is most angry. And this may
appear to be true both in the Romans, in respect of the Jews; in Job his
friends, as they were called, in respect of Job; in the barbarous people in
respect of Paul; and in the Turks at this day in respect of Christians. For
who were out of God his favor more than the Romans; than Jobs friends; than
Paul his adversaries: and who more miserable in deed than the Turks,
notwithstanding their prosperity? And such is the state of the wicked at al
times.

Then why does the Lord suffer the wicked in the sight of men to flourish?
Why the wicked do flourish.
and why does he not in justice confound them speedily, and utterly?

Sundry reasons may be given hereof. For either of his wisdom he thinks it
no due time as yet to punish them; or of his mercy he spares them, because
they should repent; or in his justice he has quite forsaken them. In his
wisdom he spared Sodom, until the sins thereof were exceeding ripe, and
cried-up to heaven for vengeance Genesis 18, 21.
: in his mercy he spared ye old world an hundred and twenty years, that theie
might amend g: in his justice oftentimes he spares the wicked in this present
world, because he has given them over into reprobate minds, and reserved the^
for euer-during torments in the life to come. So do good Physicions suffer
such to have their wills without gaine-saying them, who are past recovery.
But, as they who are so desperately sick in body, are nigh unto death: so
they whom God for saketh, and leaves to their own hists, are nigh unto
damnation. And as calves the fatter they be, the nigher they are to be killed;
and as trees the bigger there are, and the more unfruitful, the nighter to be
hewen-downe: so the prosperity of the ungodly, is an undoubted argument of
their destruction at hand. Which punishment of their shall the^ by so much be
the more grievous and intolerable, by how much the time was great before the
Lord executed his judgment. Phatao is a notable example hereof. For he was
long spared, but at the length overwhelmed in the red sea Exodus 14, 21. 22.
. So is Balthazar, Psalm. 78, 13.
who in the mids of Wisd. 15, 19.
his iolitie came to destruction Dan. 5, 29. 30.
. But they which are best known, and most of al to be noted, are Sodom and the
old world, the one whereof was utterly consumed with fire Genesis 19, 24. 25.
, the other drowned with water Genesis 7, 17. 18. etc.
: both special examples of the sudden, and utter damnation of the ungodly.

CAP. 13.
Causes why the godly do endure such misery, and troubles in this world.
FVrthermore, it may be demanded,

Why such as fear God of al others most zelouslie, and favor religion best,
suffer such misery, and affliction in this present world, as they do?

I answer: one cause is in themselves, through their zeal of godliness,
they choose it: another in Satan their enemy, through his malice against them,
he seeks it: a third in God, who partly of his wisdom, and of his justice
partly, does send it.

For, to speak seueralie of these causes somewhat, doubtless the godly endure
affliction oftentimes, when would they but asse^t unto sin, or consent unto the
wicked, they migh flourish in all outward happiness, and worldly, as they call it,
felicity. But, for that they have the fear of God always before their eyes,
and thinke-upon the valor-both of religion, and virtue, they choose rather to be
afflicted for righteousness sake, then either for wickedness to be advanced, or
that the glory of their profession should be blemished. Herebie many endure
displeasure, which might have favor; many suffer poverty, which might be
rich; many be obscure, which might be of countenance; and many are in great
adversity, that might do well in the world. So Michaiah for speaking the
truth faithfully without flattery 2. King. 12, 26 27.
; Daniel for serving the true God zelously with out hypocrisy Dan. 6, 16. 17.
etc.
; old Eleazer for observing the holy Laws of his God religiously 2 Macc. 6,
28.
; Joseph for his loialtie to his master ward Gen 39. 12. 20.
, and such like both were punished, and are daily afflicted.

Of which their invincible courages manifold commodities do arise. For, first
in so doing albeit they lack outward comfort of the world: yet they have the
inward joy of a good conseience, which, as Solomon says Prou. 15, 15.
, is a continual feast.

Secondly, they give testimony unto the world, how they favor Christianity
and religion; not of hypocrisy, or in worldly respects, but of pure zeal:
and that theie regard those words of our Savior Mat. 10, 32.
, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father, which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, 33.
him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven: 37.
Again, He that loves father and mother more than me, is not worthy of me.
38.
And he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And
he that takes not his cross, and follows me, is not worthy of me. He that
will save his life shall lose it; 39.
and he that loses it for my sake, shall save it.

Thirdly manie-times therebie theie win such as are without, and make them
to glorify God, and to forsake either their naughty life, if theie have been
sinners; or their idols and errors, if theie have been superstitious.

And last of al theie both encourage the weak, and confirm the strong in good
motions, by their examples.

Again, considering how it is impossible to please God, and in the world to
flourish too; and that such things as delight the body, are extreme enemies to
the soul, theie voluntarily abandon al occasions that may with-drawe them
from God, or quench the zeal of virtue within the^. Whereof it is that theie
do, yea it cannot be but theie must suffer many troubles, as Lactantius
notes Lactant. de diuino praemio. cap. 5.
. For, it is very hard to be holy in this world, and happy too. Therefore
theie do choose and willingly for wealth, poverty; for pleasure, pain; for a
flourishing state, affliction: and though theie do neither with Democritus,
pluck-out their eyes Cicero lib. de finibus.
; nor with Spurina, deface their faces Valor. Mar. lib. 4, Cap. 5.
, nor with the Monches live by themselves; nor with the superstitious Jesuits
whip their own corpses: yet with Saint Paul 1 Cor. 9, 27.
, theie beat down their bodies, that their flesh prevail not over the
spirit.

Furthermore, insomuch as the devil is for power mighty, in that he is a
Prince John. 14, 30. John. 16, 11.
; and his hatred is deadly, because there is enimitie between his seed and
the godly Genesis 3, 15.
; and his cruelty insatiable, being a dracon Revel 20, 2.
; and his subtleties manifold, because he is a serpent Ruel. 12, 9. Revel. 20,
2,
: marvel it is not, though the saints of God in this world, wherein theie are
but strangers Heb. 11, 13. 14. Heb. 13, 14.
, enioie neither such ease, nor such honor, nor such prosperity, as the wicked
do.

Notwithstanding whatsoever the devil does against them, Power of Satan what.
it is because God does either send him, or suffer him. And therefore although
his hatred, be mortal; his cruelty, extreme; and his subtleties, past
finding-out: yet can he do nothing to hurt the godly, without God permit. So
that his will is naught, but his power is good. For his wicked will is of
himself: but he has no power, but from God. Which power notwithstanding the
Lord always does moderate, that of his malice he cannot afflict, more than
the will of God is, he should. This makes the godly neither to fear the
power, nor to set a rushe by Satan for all his malice. Because he can do
nothing but by sufferance.

God also himself does bring the godly into troubles, and that as before I
said, partly of his wisdom, and partly of his justice. In his wisdom he
does correct them for diverse ends. First to try whether theie are such indeed
as theie would seem to be. For many do both think themselves, and are
thought also, to be valiant Christians, who in the time of tentation are but
very cowardes. And therefore, as when war is hot, men are proved, whether
theie have hearts or no: So affliction shows who is the faithful Christian.
For God proves them, and finds them meet for himself Wisd. 3, 5.
. He tries the^ as gold in the furnace, 6.
and receives them as a perfect fruit offering. He hides himself
oftentimes, and turneth-awaie his face, but not in wrath: It is to try, not to
destroy them Bern. sermon. in (...) Mari^.
. Yet tries he not Christians the better to know them himself. For he both
knew them before theie were fashioned in the womb Psalm. 139, 15. 16.
; and continnalie beholds the secrets of man's heart 1. Sam. 16, 7. Psalm. 7,
9. Act. 15, 8.
. But that both theie them selves, and others also should see what theie are.

Secondly, to bring them into his fear. Because in prosperity even the
righteous oftentimes forget the Lord: but in adversity theie remember him. For
as the stars do shine in the night, but in the day time are not seen: so the
virtues of men which in prosperity appear not, in adversity are most
glorious to behold. And then theie see both the frailty of their own nature,
and theie acknowledge it; and the unspeakable mercy of God, and theie commend
it; and the general misery of mankind, and theie bewail the same. This made
the Prophet to say Psalm. 77, 2. 3.
, In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran, and ceased not
in the night: my soul refused comfort. I did think upon God, and was
troubled: I prayed, and my spirit was full of anguish. Again Isa. 26. 16.
, Lord, in trouble they have visited thee: theie powred-out a prayer when thie
chastening was upon them. And again Psalm. 119, 67.
, Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I keep thie word. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thie
statutes.

Thirdly, y^ they may be like unto Christ; and that partly because he is
their eldest brother. Now no reason is it, that the younger brethren should
have greater pre-eminence then the eldest, so long as he is good. But Christ
their eldest and good brother suffered, and so entered into his glory Luke.
24, 26.
, wherefore the younger, and wicked of necessity must look for troubles. For
otherwise theie are neither the sons of God, nor the heirs annexed with
Christ Romans 8. 17.
. Partly for that he is their master. But he was persecutde, and hated John.
15, 20.
. Therefore they are to look for persecution and hearted. For the servant is not
greater than his master: 19.
but a great praise is it for servants rightly to follow the steps of
their Lords. It suffices the disciple to be as his master; and for the
servant to be as his Lord. And partly, because theie are commanded to follow
his steps. For so says Peter 1. Pet. 2, 21.
, Here unto ye are caled. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
ensample that we should follow his steps. And Paul 2. Tim. 2, 11 12.
, If we be dead with him, we also shall live with him. If we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him. As who should say, If we die not, as he did, we
shall not live with him; and if we suffer not after his ensample temporal
affliction, we shall not reign with him in eternal felicity.

Fourthlie, that both themselves should be assured, and others know how theie
are not of the world. For God has chosen them out of the world. And therefore
theie are hated John. 15, 19.
. For which cause the doctrine of the Gospel is caled the word of the cross;
and the proverb is, Crux comes Euangelii, The cross accompanies the Gospel,
because the world does persecute the professors of the same: not for any evil
which theie do, but for that theie reprove ye works of darkness which thing the
world cannot abide. And therefore theie persecuted the Prophets, Apostles, and
Saints of GOD from time to time. Then seeing theie protest the same truth,
let them prepare themselves unto the like patience, For we must through many
afflictions enter into the kingdom of God Act. 14, 22
. And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution 2. Tim.
3, 12.
.

Fiftlie, to put them in mind what they are; and whither theie tend. For in
this world theie are pilgrims, and strangers Heb. 11, 13. 14.
; their country is heaven Heb. 133, 14.
. Which country theie would little couet-after, enioied theie prosperity
according unto their hearts desire. O death, says Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 41, 1.
, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions; unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things; yea unto him that is able to receive meat* O death,
2.
how acceptable is thie remembrance unto the needeful, and unto him whose
strength fails, and that is now in the last age, and is vexed with all
things, and to him that dispaireth, and has lost patience! Therefore y^ Lord
knowing this, does in his wisdom cross, and afflict his servants on al
sides, that theie may be out of love both with the world, and with the things
in the world 1. John. 2, 15.
, and desire as Paul did to be loosed, and to be with Christ Phil. 1. 23.
.

Sixtelie, that it may appear how the godly do favor Christianity and
religion not for temporal profit, or preferment; not for glory and praise of
men, or in any worldelie respect, but principalie of mere zeal and duty to
Godward.

Seuenthlie, that their deliverance, which in the judgment of man could never
come to pass, may assure the consciences of them, and others too, of God his
continual providence, and presence with his servants. So doubtless the
miraculous deliverance both of Joseph out of his troubles; of the Israelites,
out of Egypt; of David, out of the hands of Saul; of the three young men, out
of the consuming fire; and of the godly from time to time, out of the cruel
paws of ravening wolves, tyrants and oppressors, does not a little strengthen
the minds of all the godly in their miseries; and confirm their faith
touching the continual presence of God with his servants at al seaso^s.

Eightlie, to show that intolerable shall be the pains of the reprobate. For, if
God so afflict his Children; how will he torment his enemies! If he spare not
the righteous! how will he punish the reprobate. If judgment begin at the
godly; what shall the end be of them which obeie not the Gospel 1. Pet. 4, 17.
! If the righteous scarslie be saved; where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear! If he do so to the green wood; 18.
what shall be done to the dry Luke. 23, 31.
! And if he plague them which cal-vpon his Name, how will he afflict such as
fear him not Ier. 25, 29.
!

Last of al, that the righteous may atteine the rewards which are promised to
the miserable of this world; according both unto these words of Christ Math.
5, 10.
, Blessed are theie which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, and these
also of Paul 2. Cor. 4, 17.
, Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.

CHAP. 14.
That God in his justice does punish his servants for their sins.
IN his justice God also does punish eue^ his saints for their offenses.
Because theie are guilty not only of original, but of actual also; not only
of secret, but of known sins beside. Of original, because Theie are borne in
iniquity, conceived in sin Psalm. 51, 5.
; and their hearts, are evil even from their youth Genesis 8, 21. Genesis 6, 5.
: of actual, For who can say, Mine heart is clean Pro. 20, 9.
, I am clean from sin? There is no man that sins not 1. King. 8, 46. 2.
Chro. 6, 36. Eccl. 7, 22.
: of secret, for, If thou o Lord, streightlie markest iniquities, o Lord, who
shall stand Psalm. 130, 3.
? If I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me; If I would
be perfect, he shall judge me wicked Job. 9, 20.
; yea my clothes shall judge me filthy: 31.
and of known, for, I know mine iniquities Psalm. 51, 3.
, and my sin is ever before me; Again, In many things we sin al Iam. 3, 2
. Seeing then so many ways the godly are guilty of sin, what marvel
though God as a righteous judge, does severely in his justice pinish them for
the same!

In this their affliction the godly have Cogitations of the godly in their
troubles
continual consideration both of themselves and their misery; and of God and
his mercy. In themselves theie compare their sins, and their misery
together; and by the greatness of their affliction theie gather, what an ouglie,
filthy, and abominable monster sin is. Theie consider that by their sins
theie have offended not man but God, who is soueraignelie, and infinitely
righteous: and that impossible it were for them to be saved, except some
extraordinary pardon did come. At the remembrance where of theie do even
tremble and quake-againe.

As David did when he said i; 1. Psalm. 38, 2. 3. 4,
Thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon me. There is
nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there rest in my
boanes because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gon-ouer mine head, 5.
and as a weighty burden theie are too heavy for me. My wounds putrify and
corrupt 6.
because of my foolishnes. I am bowed and crooked very sore: I go mourning all the 7. 8.
day. For my reins are full of burning; and there is nothing sound in my
flesh. I am weakened 9.
and sore broken, I do roar for the very grief of mine heart. And
afterward, 10.
Mine heart pants, my strength fails, and the light of mine eyes, even
theie are not mine own.

By which words the affections, and sorrows of those men who truly do repent
and weigh their wickedness in equal balance, are described. For theie conceive
of their sins, not as the hypocrites do, according to their own opinions, and
fleshly imaginations; but theie place before their eyes, first the majesty of
his person whom theie have offended, namely God: then the filthiness and
abomination of sin in it self: and last of all the punishment which theie
deserve for sinning by the sentence of the Law: and according to the majesty
of God which is most sacred; to the nature of sin, which is most abominable;
and to the torments y^ theie deserved, which are endless, and intolerable,
theie do think of their offenses.

In God theie note justice and mercy. The great mercy of God in punishing
sinful man.
For of his righteous iudgemement it is that theie are punished, and of his
mercy, y^ theie perish not utterly. And although theie are scourged sometimes
gently, and sometime sharply: yet always favorably. For when he is angry
he shows mercy Tob. 13, 2.
, and in the time of trouble forgiueth the sins of them which call upon him.
Therefore, 18.
blessed are theie whom God corrects Job. 5, 17.
. For though he wounds them, 19.
yet he heals them: though he smites them, yet he makes whole again:
though he se^deth troubles, yet at length he delivers: though he does
afflict 2. Cor. 4, 8. 9.
, yet he forsakes not; and though he casts down, yet he raiseth-vp again.
For he tempereth his justice with mercy unto the preservation of his servants.

But how come theie by such mercy? Even through the obedience of Jesus
Christ. For he was wounded for our offenses Isa. 53, 5.
; and made a curse for us Gal. 3, 13.
, so that by his stripes we are healed Isa. 53, 5.
, and delivered though not from worldelie punishment, yet from the guilt of
sin; wherbie we appear boldly before God, being justified through his
obedience, and and made clean by his blood.

These things when the godly do thinke-vpon, as seldom theie are quite out
of their minds, theie do magnify the goodness of God exceedingly, partly for
punishing them, which is an argument to their consciences, not only y^ theie
are his children (for theie who are without correction, are bastards, and not
sons Heb, 12, 8.
) but also that he loves them entirely (because, 10.
who^ the Lord loves he chasteneth Heb. 12, 6.
, and corrects them for their profit, 11.
that theie may be partakers of his holiness, and bring-forth the quiet fruit
of righteousness: Partly for punishing the^ in this world, and not in the
world to come; with lenity, not in his fury; as his children, not as
servants; and as elect, not as cast-awaies.

But especialie theie praise him for their reconcilement unto God ye Father
Col. 1, 21.
by the precious blood of the immaculate lamb Jesus Christ 1. Pet. 1, 19.
: wherebie theie bebeleeue that none afflictions can hurt them. And therefore
theie rejoice Romans 5. 3.
, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience, experience,
and experience, hope; 4.
and hope makes not ashamed, but boldly to endure al manner troubles; 5.
and earnestly to desire not only a quite deliverance from sin, but also
that quiet state, where shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crieng,
neither pain Revel. 21, 4.
.

CHAP. 15.
Against a vane opinion that the Saints, yea in this world, have no sin.
NOtwithstanding this being so apparent, that it cannot be doubted of; and so
true, that the Scripture does confirm what so ever has bine written: yet some
fantastical heads will not let to say, yea and to publish also, that the
Saints are without al manner sin, or do not sin at al.

Whose words if theie be true, then does God against al justice in punishing
them so severely, and that without ceassing, who deserve not the same, being
pure from al contagion of wickedness. For this necessarily must be inferred
upon their words, although happily theie do not mark so much. To prove their
opinion theie bring diverse, as theie think, substantial arguments; of which I
will recite, though not al, yet the strongest, that such as either be assaulted
by their Sophismes; or shall hear their arguments, may the more easily both
dissolve, and abhor them.

Theie say therefore by an argument a diuisione:

The Saints are without both original and actual sins: The Antecede^t.


Ergo theie have no sin. The Consequen^


For confirmation of their false antecedent, theie first labor to prove that
theie are without original sin, and that by this argument.

That sin which is forgiven, remains not. The Mayor.
But Baptism is a seal to assure the consciences of the faithful, The Minor.
that original sin is forgiven:

Therefore it remaneth not. The Conclusion.
And if it does not remane, then are the Saints without original sin.

The Mayor is untrue. For original, Answer.
yea al sins are forgiven through the obedience of Christ. For he being just,
did suffer for the unjust Romans 5, 6. 7. etc. 1. Pet. 3. 18.
; and has taken-awaie the sins of the world John 1, 29.
; so y^ by his stripes theie are healed Isai. 53. 5.
, and sanctified by his blood 1. Cor. 6, 11. Ephesians. 2, 13.
. Yet remains, though there reigns not, much wickedness yea in the godly,
as both concupiscence of the heart, and other sins. Which sins (although
theie remane in them) are not to their hurt, because theie believe in him that
justifies the ungodly Romans 4, 5.
. For, their faith is counted for righteousness; and theie are in God his
sight, pure, holy, and faultlesse. Whereof it is that Theie are pronounced
Blessed, not which are without sins, but whose iniquities are forgiven Romans
4, 7.
; not theie which are pure from al wickedness, but whose sins are covered.

Secondly, to prove that theie are without actual sin, thus theie reason:

Where there is no condemnation, The Mayor.
there is no sin.

The Minor.
To the Saints there is no condemnation Romans 8, 1.
: Therefore in the saints there is no sin. The conclusion. The answer.
I answer unto the Mayor, where there is no condemnation, there is no sin
unto death. For the sins of them which are in Christ Jesus are venial, or
pardoned, or blotted-out even as though they had never been committed.
Notwithstanding they are suffered to be in the godly, yea and to assail them
sore, that they may continually bear in mind how much they are bound unto
God, and still seek to please him whose help they stand always in need of.
For the flesh lusts against the spirit Gal. 5, 17.
, and, as the proverb is, he is liuelesse that is faultlesse. And yet, who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen Romans 8, 33. 34.
? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? so that, there is no
condemnation to the faithful, not because they are clear from al contagion of
wickedness; but for that their sins are not imputed unto them.

For man's righteousness, is Gods mercy Bern. super Cantic. ser. 23.
. Again say they: Whosoever is borne of God, sins not 1. John 3, 9. 1.
John. 5, 18.
.

But the saints are borne of God:

Therefore the saints do not sin.

For the better answering this argument, The Answer.
it is to be considered, that ye saints have a double generation, one a carnal
of their earthly parents, ye other a spiritual, of God: according to the
diversity whereof theie are carried diversely, partly with human, and partly
with divine cogitations. By the carnal generation, their flesh lusts against
the spirit Gal. 5, 17.
; by the spiritual, the spirit lusts against the flesh: by the carnal, they
sin in many things Iam 3, 2.
; by the spiritual, theie show their faith by their works Iam. 2, 21. 22. etc.
: by the carnal, 10.
theie are sinners 1. John 1, 8.
; and by y^ spiritual, they abide in God, and avoid sin, 9.
because theie are the sons of God 1. John 3, 2.
.

Therefore, says Augustine Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 2. de peccat. merit. etc. ca. 8.
, consume that wherebie we are the sons of the flesh, and of the world, and
that will come unto perfection, wherebie we are the sons of God, and redeemed
in the spirit. This made the same John to say, Dearly beloved, now are we
the sons of god, but yet it does not appear what we shall be. What means
this, We are, and we shall be, but only that we are in hope, but shall be
indeed? For afterward he says, we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him; for we shall see him, as he is. Therefore we both now have
begun to be like him in this world because we enioie the first fruits of the
spirit; and are yet unlike him, through the remnants of the old man. Then, so
f^^forth as we are like him, so farforth we are through the regeneration of the
spirit, the sons of God: but by how much we are unlike him, by so much we
are the sons of the flesh, and of the world. In respect of the one, we
cannot sin: but in respect of the other, if we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves. and so Augustine.

Bernard answers unto the mayor on this wise Bern* in septu^ ges. Sermon. 1.
, Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, that is, says he, rests not in
sin; or sins not, that is, it is so much, as if he did not sin. Because
sin is not imputed unto him.

Wherefore to conclude mine answer unto this argument, I say with Augustine
Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 2. contra Epist. Parmen. cap. 7.
, So long as through patience we hope for the redemption of our bodies, let us
never have the faces to say we have no sin; least that arrogancy of mind,
be a most heinous offense.

Moreover they reason thus, It is the commandment of God, The Mayor.
Do this, that is, fulfill the commandments, and thou shall live Luke 10, 28.
Leuit 18, 5.
.

The saints do live, that is, in the eyes of God they are blessed. The Minor.


Ergo they fulfill the commandementes of God. The conclusion.


Hereunto I answer, first the argument is false. For it is no good reason,
They should, therefore theie do keep the commandments; or, they are
commanded to fulfill, therefore they do fulfill the laws of God.

Secondly, the commandments are fulfilled two manner of ways; by Christ,
and by our selves. By our selves we could never keep them; and therefore
Christ has fulfilled the^ on our behalf. For ( that that was impossible to
the law, says Paul Romans 8, 3.
, in as much as it was weak, because of the flesh) God sending his own son in
the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that
the righteousness might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.

Last of al unto the minor, I say, The saints do live, but not through any
righteousness which they have done, or for their keeping the Law, it is by
their faith in the blood of Christ, for so says Paul Romans 1, 17. Gal. 3, 11.
.

Furthermore, The Antecedent
they object, The saints be righteous:

Ergo they do not sin. The consequent.


If this argument be meant of the saints in heaven, it is true: but if
otherwise, I deny the same. For the saints in this world be righteous, and yet
sinners, Righteous, because God accepts them for righteous; and righteous,
not absolutely, but in respect of other men. So was Noah righteous, but in his
generation Genesis 6, 9.
, and ye Publicane righteous, but rather than the Pharisie Luke 18, 14.
, and the spouse of Christ fairest, but among women Sal. song 1, 7
. And so the saints in this world before others, rather than the wicked, among
men, be righteous: but simply without al comparison righteous, or without
sin they are not. For in that respect God only is holy Revel. 15, 4.
; and there is none good but one, even God Math. 19, 17.
. For no man lives, that sins not Eccles. 7, 22.
.

Who then is righteous? Even he, as I said, whom it pleases God to accept for
righteous. Who most righteous? He that has the greatest faith, and does least
offend. Finally to omit the rest of their arguments, thus they argue:

If the godly do not observe the commandments of God, The Mayor.
no man can fulfill them.

But the commandments of God may be fulfilled, The Minor.
because God prescribes nothing to be done of man, which is impossible to be
performed; or in vane.

Therefore the godly do observe them. The conclusion.


How this argument hangs together, Answer.
I will not spend time to discuss: only unto the minor I say, that the laws
of god are to be fulfilled. For both ye Saints hereafter being unloaded from
the burden of sinful flesh, shall; and Christ in the flesh has kept them, not
transgressing the lest precept, nor any jot of them. Notwithstanding that
which he was able to do, man cannot do in this world: and yet are the laws of
God prescribed to man, not in vane. Because manifold commodities do spring
thereof.

For, first by the Law we gather how there is God. 1.
Because it is impossible, that those most true and certain notices touching
the difference of honest and dishonest things, expressed in the law, should
either be known, or continue without the providence of some God.

Again by the Law we may learn the disposition of God; 2.
as that he is al righteous, al holy, merciful, true etc. For, seeing the
seeds and sparcles of those virtues are in the minds of man; and that it is
impossible that the cause can be worser then the effect, it must needs be,
that the virtues commended to men in the Law of God, and glitter somewhat in
our nature, be most gloriously, and singularly in God himself. Neither may it
be doubted, but God by his Law does show himself what he is: even as the
civil laws of a country declare the inclination of those men which made them.

Again, 3.
by the Law of God we may, as in a glass, behold to what end man at the
first was created, or in what a state of perfection our first parents Adam and
Euah were. For with such virtues were they adorned, yea, and with such, after
the state of this life, shall the saints of God be endued withal, as the law
exacteth: That is, both they did, and we shall, both know God perfectly, and
serve him zelouslie, and love him and one another faithfully, hartelie, and
blessedly.

Again, by the law we may see how filthilie we are polluted, and defiled
with sin. Wherefore he that would know ye manifold spots, wrinckles, and
corruption of man's nature, let him go unto the looking glass of God his law,
and he shall easily perceive in the mind, a dark ignorance of God; in the will,
a declining from and loathing of true religion; in the heart vicious
affections; and in all the members, an horrible deformity.

Again, 5.
by the Law we may know what an ouglie, filthy, and abominable thing, sin
is. For says Paul Romans 7, 7.
. I knew not sin, but by the Law. For I had not known lust, except the
law had said, Thou shall not lust.

Again, 6.
by the Law we are brought unto Christ. For the Law, as notes Paul Gal. 3,
24.
, was our petty schoolmaster unto Christ, 25.
that we might be made righteous by Faith. 26.
But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a scoolemaster. For ye
are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

The office of a pettie-schoolemaster, or of an Usher, as we call him, is to
teach; to reform manners; to correct; and to bring unto an head-master. Al
which the Law does. For first it teaches what God is, and of what
disposition; and what we ought both to do, and to leave undone. Secondly, it
is a rule for the directing of our life. Thirdly, it corrects, when it
denounces ye wrath of god against the unpenitent, and condemns. And last of
al, having laid-open the abomination of sin, and the anger of God, it
brings us unto Christ ye headmaster, that of him we may learn how to
pacify the wrath of his almighty father.

To conclude (for who is able to recite all the benefits which it brings!) 7.
by the Law of God, both every private man may learn how to lead a godly
life; and every public person how to govern aright; and every state,
condition, and calling of men, how to please God. For the cause of al
enormities both public and private, is the neglect or forgetting of the holy
commandments of the Lord.

CAP. 16.
Whether the saints in this world endure greater affliction, than other men;
and why they do so.
THus, I trust it is evident that the saints deserve their troubles, because
theie are sinners.

But some will yet again object and say, they deserve not greater troubles in
this word, because they are not so egregious offenders, as others be.

Of which their objection it must follow, that if they have more misery, and
yet deserve greater mercy; that God is both partial in judging, and not al
holy for favoring the wicked. But this is an intolerable reproach against the
majesty of god. For it is none hard matter to prove, that neither the wicked
have more favor; nor the godly deserve less troubles, than they do suffer.

For, touching the first point, who are more afflicted, I pray you, theie
whose souls do triumph with joy, though their bodies do smart; or they
rather whose bodies be at ease, and their minds tormented? they whom God does
scourge of love Heb. 12, 6.
, or they whom he spares of hatred? they which in few things Wisd. 3, 6.
, or they which many ways Wisd. 12, 22.
, are punished? they which favorably are forsaken for a little while in this
world Isai 54, 7. 8.
; or they which both now in this life severely are, 8.
and in the time to come shall everlastingly be tormented Math. 25, 41.
?

Again, what troubles suffer the godly, but the wicked are made to feel ye
same? Is it poverty? The wicked are poor. Is it sickness? The wicked be
diseased. Is it imprisonment? The wicked have not their liberty. Is it
unnatural deaths? The wicked come unto them.

But not so many wicked men are poor, as godly. Who shall be judge? shall
magistrates? They will say; for one godly man that is poor, they are troubled
with twenty wicked; some through unthriftiness, some through idleness, some
through falsehoode. Which vices no godly man but does detest. And therefore in
reason there must be more of the wicked, tha^ of ye godly in a poor estate.

But not so many wicked are sick as godly. Who shall be judge? shall the
learned Physicions? They will say, for one godly person that is sick, they
are troubled with twenty wicked; some through drunkenness, some through
gluttony, some through incontinencie. Which vices no godly man but from his
heart does abhor. And therefore more of the wicked than of the godly diseased.

But not so many wicked are imprisoned. Who shall be judge? shall the judges of
realms? They will answer; for one godly man they send twenty wicked unto
the iayle, some for polling, some for roaging, some for quarreling, some for
perjury, which vices the godly will not defile themselves withal. And
therefore more wicked, then godly imprisoned.

But not so many wicked come to unnatural ends, as godly. Who shall be judge?
Shall common experience? That must needs declare, that for one godly person an
hundred come unto evil ends, some for theft, some for murder, some for
treason, some through desperation. With which vices the godly will not be
stained for all the goods in the world. And therefore mo of the wicked than of
the godly do come unto unnatural ends.

On the otherside, what prosperity has God promised, for this life, but the
godly enjoy ye same so well as the wicked? For riches, they are welthie, for
health, lusty; for power, mighty; learned for knowledge wise for experience,
honorable for calling; for fame renowned, so well as they. Yea, but all the godly
are not such. Neither be all the wicked: But more wicked yet than godly be such.
How can thou tell that? the scripture says Eccles. 9, 1.
by outward things no man knows either love or hatred, 2.
al things come alike to al: and the same condition is to the just and to the
wicked; to the good and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner,
he that swears, as he that fears an oath. But do the wicked more flourish?
Let them assure themselves they have their reward. And have ye godly less
prosperity? They are to revive their spirits through consideration that a time
will come, when they shall fully be comforted, and the ungodly tormented Luke
16, 25.
.

Again, be it that they find less favor, and more troubles in the world, not
for manifest wickedness, but through the malice of Satan and his members, than
the wicked do: yet are theie punished, as unjustly of man, so justly of the
Lord: and that, both because he exacteth a greter righteousness of them than of
other men, which he finds not, and also looks for more thankfulness for his
extraordinary benifites co^ferred upon them, and they yield it not.

CHAP. 17.
Where the bodies and souls of men are until the day of judgment.
SEeing now a general judgment shall ensue; what becomes of bodies and
souls until ye day of judgment? will some say. Touching the bodies theie are
dead, without any, either sense or feeling at al until the last day, and abide
in their places 2. Esd. 2. 16.
, if theie were never buried, and in the graves, if theie were committed to the
earth. But the hour shall come in which all that are in the graves shall hear
(Christ) his voice Ioh. 5, 28.
. And theie shall come forth etc. 29.
and such also as have been either devoured of beasts, or consumed of fire,
or drowned of waters, or any way dead since the beginning of the world, theie
altogether in a moment in the twincling of an eye shall arise Aug. tom. 9, lib.
de vanit. seculi. cap. 3.
.

But why reasteth the body, and goes not presently with the soul either
unto joy or pain? It is because neither the sins of al ye wicked, are yet
perfectly ripe; nor the number of the faithful fulfilled. For neither the
wicked which have died since the beginning of the world shall prevent those
which are to come unto them in extreme torments: nor any of the godly enioie
perfect happiness until ye whole number of ye faithful com together.

Why shall the body arise at al? The reason is easily given. That whole man
may be rewarded according to his deserts: ye is, that as neither the soul
without the body did any thing; nor the body without the soul while it was
alive: so both body and soul together may receive either the reward of well
doing, or the punishment of sin. For, we blaspheme with the mouth; we pray
with the mouth; we praise God with the mouth. We are wanton with the body; and
we are chaste with the body. We pil and poll with the hand: and we give alms
with the hand. etc. Seeing then, says Cyril Cyril Catech. 18.
, the body is a doer in all things, it shall reap the fruit of his labor in
the time to come.

But some will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body come theie
forth 1 Cor. 15, 35
? O fool, 36.
that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it die. 37.
And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare
corn, as it falls, of wheat, or of some other. 38.
But God gives it a body at his pleasure, even to every seed his own
body. etc. 42.
So also is the resurrection of the dead. The body is sown in corruption, and
is raised in incorruption; 44.
It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory, it is sown in weakness, and
is raised in power; It is sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual
body. Wherbie it is evident how the same body in substance which we have,
but not in quality shall arise. For the quality shall be changed of the same.
Hereunto Cyril bears witness when he says Cyril Catech. 18.
; This body shall arise, but not subject to infirmities, yet this same very
body, being transformed into an incorruptible body. Even as iron burned in the
fire, becomes fire. But more than so as the Lord rising knows best. This
body than shall arise: but not remain as it is, but be eternal. It shall not
stand in need either of meat to live withal, or ladders to climb by: for it
shall become spiritual. A certain glorious thing ( it shall be), such as
sufficiently for theworthines of the same cannot be expressed. The righteous
shall shine as the sun, as the moon and as the brightness of the firmament.
And God foreseeing this incredulity of man, has given to small worms bright
bodies in the summer that therebie theie may shine, to make men by apparent
things to believe that which through hope we lookefor. For he that canperforme
a part, can also accomplish the whole; and he that has made a worm to shine
with cleerenesse, can much more make the just to be glorious. So then we shall
be raised having eternal, and al like bodies: but he that is righteous shall
receive a celestial body, that he may accompany the Angels; and he that is
wicked shall take an eternal body, by which he may suffer the punishment of
sins, and burn in fire, and yet never be consumed; so Cyril.

This being spoken of the place of the body, and resurrection of the same, I
will now show what I think concerning the places where the souls are, had I
recited the sundry opinions of diverse men touching this matter. For great
variety of judgments have been here-about. The Pharisees have one opinion,
the Dormitans an other, the Papists another, the fathers another; and the
purest writers of our time, another.

For the Pharisees they thought that the souls of the good had no certain
abiding place, Opinion of the Pharisees.
but passed from one body unto another until the day of the general
resurrection. Boe^mius de moribus Genti^m lib. 1. or in 2. part of the Fardle
of faci^ns, Cap. 4,


The Dormitans they thought the souls have a certain place, where it is
either in heaven or hell theie show not, Opinion of the Dormitans.
where theie sleep until ye day of judgment M. Ca^^^ne in his treatise of the
immortality of the souls. and I Cha^^on in his se^^^^ of the 2. coming of
Christ.
. The Papists say before the death of Christ there were four places for ye
souls, to wit, Hell Lymbus puerorum, Purgatory, and Lymbus Patrum. Hell, as
says Iauel Iauel Philos. Chri. p. 8. Tract. 4. de felicit. Christ. cap. 3.
, is the lowest place, and there such as are damned for actual and mortal sins,
are in torments. Next above that is Lymbus puerorum, Opinion of the Papists.
which is a place for infants, that died either uncircumcised before the
coming of Christ, or unbaptized after his resurrection. Next above that is
Purgatory, a place where such are to be purged as have not sufficiently
repented in this life. Next above that Lymbus patrum, where the souls of such
as died godli abode in peace, etc. Which Lymbus Patrum, as testifies Dionysius
Carthusianus Dionys. Carthus. Col. de iud. Animarum Art. 15.
out of Bonauenture, was also called Abraham's bosom, and Hell. It was called
Hell both because it was inferior, and also for that after a sort it was a place
of misery. It was called Lymbus, because the punishment of lacking was there.
And it was called Abraham's bosom, for that there was an expectation of glory.
And of this opinion is Petrus de Tharantasia, Richardus de media Villa, and
Thomas de Herfordia. So Dionysius Carthus. Which four places, says Iauel
Iauellus in the foresaid place
, do continue yet, and have their situation, albeit the fourth which is the
hiest is quite empty ( hell is so full by like thorough Papistical delusions).
And with this fellow agree those unholy fathers of the late general Council
holden at Trent in all points Catech. Trident. upon this art. of the creed,
Descendit ad inferos.
, saving that theie make no mention of Lymbus puerorum at al; espieng perhaps
that already theie have set more places beside, than theie can by any good
reason, or Scripture defend.

Furthermore, Opinion of the Fathers.
the fathers theie have had their opinions. As Irenaeus, who seems to think,
as in the end of his 5. Book appears Irenaeus aduersus haereses Valent.
etc. li. 5.
, that the souls so soon as theie leave their bodies go not presently
either vnot joy, or pain; but are kept in a secret place against the day of
judgment: agreeing therein very much with the Dormitans above mentioned. In
this error also was Pope John 20. But one of these, which was Irenaeus, seems
not to be throghly resolved in this point. For in another place of the foresaid
Book, he has these words Irenaeus lib. 5. not far from the beginning.
: Wherefore the Priests, who are the disciples of the Apostles, theie say that
such, as are translated, are translated thither (For Paradise is prepared for
the just, and spiritual men, whereinto when Paul was carried, he heard words
that cannot be uttered, as touching us at this present) where they which are
translated do abide even until the consummation beholding incorruption. And the
other, The recantation of Pope Ioh. the 20.
to wit, Pope John the 20. of that name, was enforced by K. Philip of France,
surnamed the Fair, at the suit of the divines of Paris, to recant his error in
a solemn and public audience, as witnesses Gerson Johan. Gerson sermon. de
Paschate.
. Other fathers, as Chrysostom and Augustine, according to the diversity of
times, have conceived diversely of this matter. For touching the souls of good
men (for I say nothing of the souls of the wicked, because generalie al men,
the Dormitans, and Atheistes only excepted, do hold that theie are in hell)
in respect of the time from the creation until the death of Christ, theie think
theie were in one place, namely in the lower parts Chrysostom. hom. 4. ad Marcum.
Aug. quaest, vet. and noui Testamenti quaest. 121
: and in respect of the time from his death until his second coming in glory,
theie judge theie are in another, even in heaven August in Joan. Tract. 40.
. One opinion whereof is of al good men to be abhorred; the other no Christian
but will defend. For touching the former, did theie al, I mean the Patriarchs,
and Prophets, our forefathers, eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the
same spiritual drink, which we do? were theie saved by the same hope;
justified by the same Christ; redeemed with the same blood; sanctified by the
same spirit, yt we are; yea, were theie as doubtless theie were, as good, as
zealous, as holy, as righteous in all respects as we, and yet shall we think,
that God would be less favorable to them than to us; and receive us forthwith
into his everlasting kingdom, and let them remane either thousands, or many
years, or any time at al, either in dead bodies miserably, as the Pharisees
thought; or in a dead sleep vnsensiblie, as the Dormita^s taught, or in Lymbo
vncomfortablie, or piteously in P^^^torie, as ye Papists would persuade, or i^
an out-corner not happily, as some, or in ye lower parts wretchedlie, as other
fathers gave out? No, rather think we, that as now the faithful do: so then ye
godly did presently, and directly, and without any stopping, and staieng
ascend unto their masters joy. And their other opinion is to be believed and
defended, Judgment of the (...) writers
as yt which all the godly and best learned of this age have embraced, as
consonant and agreeing to the holy Scripture: of which I will aleage the
testimonies of one or two. For says M. Bullinger D. Henry Bullinger in his
32. Sermon upon the Apoc. p. 90.
: Where be the souls of the^ that are slain for the word of God showed unto
us? under the altar. The altar is afterward in the 8. chap. set in heaven,
before the throne of God. Therefore the souls of al saints are in heaven before
the throne of God, which was also signified before in the type of the 24.
elders. The Lord has said also, where I am, there shall my servant be likewise.
But the Lord is in heaven: therefore the souls of the faithful, whose bodies
have bine slain, or buried without slaughter, be no where else but in heaven.
And afterward within three or four sentences he says: For like as the bosom
of Abraham is called the receptacle, and haven of salvation, into the which the
souls of them be received which had the faith of Abraham: so do we understand
the altar to be a place of blessedness in heaven, wherein they rest, which with
true faith have acknowledged Christ the altar, propitiation, sanctification,
and satisfaction etc. Under this altar was gathered the faithful martyr Abel:
under this altar are gathered as many as have died since that time for
religions sake: and under this altar shall al be gathered hereafter, as many as
enter into glory with Christ through sundry tribulations in bearing of the
cross. Hitherto Bullinger. And D. Chytraeus D. Chytraeus in 6. cap. Apoc.
: This is the rest of the holy souls, which are dissolved from the ba^d of
their bodies. It is not an idle rest, or a certain dead sleep, as many do fain
the souls of the dead together with their bodies to sleep until the last
judgment: but it is a tranquillity a joy, and a peace of that conscience
which has finished the labors of the warfar which it sustained in this world
with the Devil, the flesh, and the world, and now enioieth the company of the
celestial Church, and rests, yea and reioiceth sweetly in the Lord praising
his goodness with hie commendations. That treatise also touching the
immortality of the soul written by the reverend father M. John Calvin, is
altogether to the confirmation of this matter.

These late writers agree with the ancient Doctors; The testimonies of the
Scripture
and both with the holy Scriptures. For the souls of the righteous are in the
hands of God, and in peace, says the wise man Wisd. 3, 1.
* theie rest from their labors, says a voice from heaven Revel. 14, 13.
. Which hand of God, and rest in other places also is called Abraham's bosom
Luke 16.
, and Paradise Luke 23.
. Therefore the fowls of the righteous until the day of the last and general
judgment, are in Abraham's bosom, even in Paradise, where theie have from the
beginning; and shall unto the end of the world enioie, though not perfect, yet
unspeakable happiness. There every of the saints has his several robe, but
shall not be clothed with double robes until we put the^ on too for company,
says Ber. Bern. in festiuit. omniu^ sanc. sermon. 3.
. The 1. robe is the felicity and rest of the souls: but the 2. shall be the
immortality, and glory of the bodies.

FINIS.

