AN ANSWER TO MR. FISHER THE IESVITE, HIS FIVE PROPOSITIONS CONCERNING LVTHER.

By Mr. ROGERS, that wor^^^ Oxford Divine.

With some passages also of the said Mr. Rogers with the said Mr. Fisher.

Hereunto is annexed Mr. VV. C. his Dialogue of the said Argument, wherein is
disco^^^^d FISHERS FOLLY.

Printed M.DC.XXIII.

MR. FISHER THE IESVITE, HIS FIVE PROPOSITIONS CONCERNING 1. Luther. 2.
Doctrine. 3. Names.

1. THere is one, and but one true infallible faith, Ephesians. 4. Heb. 11.
without which none can please God: nor consequently attain eternal salvation.

2. Romans 10. Ephesians. 4.
This infallible faith cannot be had (according to the ordinary course of Gods
providence) but by hearing Preachers and Pastors of the true visible Church,
who only are lawfully sent and authorized to teach the true word of God.

3. As therefore this one infallible faith has been, Ose. 2. Isa. 56. Mat.
18. Ephesians. 4.
and must be in all ages: so there must be in all ages Preachers and Pastors of
the true visible Church, of whom all sorts of people have in times past (as
appears by histories) learned, and must in all future times learn the said
infallible faith.

4. Hence it follows, that if Protestants be the true visible Church of God,
then all sorts of men who in every age have had the aforesaid infallible faith,
have learned it by hearing Protestant Preachers, whose names may be found: who
in every former age did teach and convert people of several Nations unto the
faith of Christ.

5. Hence further it follows, that if there cannot (as there cannot) be found
in History the names of Protestant Preachers, who in all ages did teach all
sorts of faithful people, and who conuertd several Nations unto the Christian
faith; hence it follows I say, that the Protestants are not the true visible
Church of Christ, neither are their Preachers lawfully sent or sufficiently
authorized to teach, nor the people securely warranted to learn of them that
one infallible faith, without which none can please God, nor if they so live
and die can be saved.

1. Names. 2. Doctrine.



If any Protestant will answer the premises, let him set down the Names of
Protestant Preachers in all ages, who taught the people Protestant Doctrine in
every several age: or else confess that there were no such before Luther: or
at least not in all ages to be found in History.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, There came to my hands by the good providence of God this
small Treatise, touching a conference betwixt one Mr. Rogers an Oxford Divine,
and one Mr. Fisher a Jesuit: as it should seem it was sent enclosed to a
Gentleman of good worth and worship one this side the Seas, having read it
over, and perceiving it to be of very necessary use for my Countrymen of
England, (whose good I desire from my heart) I have adventured to publish it to
the view of the world: the rather, because therein is notably laid open and
convinced, the weak grounds of the five propositions of Mr. Fisher the
Jesuit, who is as I hear, so much admired of English papists; the which
Fisher, Sweet, Brierly, Clerk, with others of that company, do study and
strive with all might and maine by divulging their written papers, as also
their Printed Books full of lies and untruths: nay I say, Books full of
blasphemy against the great God of heaven, as namely that Book Entitled. The
uncasing of Heresy, written by O. A: and all to make proselites of their own
faction, to ruin that flourishing Church and Commonwealth. I beseech the
great God of heaven, to raise up daily worthy Divines more and more to defend
his own cause, against the Kingdom of Antichrist, and wicked instruments,
being very dangerous persons both against Church and Common wealth. Read it
with the (...) joined, and so by Gods blessing thou shall reap (...) fit by
it, and g^ue all glory to God above, who in (...) will ^e^^esse things that are
amiss.

THE ANSWER TO THE MASS PRIESTS DEMANDS, CONCERNING 1. Doctrine. and 2. Names.
Rogers.
THe three first positions I admit.

1. that there is one faith.

2. That the ordinary propagation of this faith is by Pastors lawfully called.

3. That there have been, and must be in all agee such Pastors so called.

4. I would gladly know what they mean by those words, [If the Protestants be
the true visible Church] whether so, as if we alone (who are commonly called
Protestants) were of the Church, and no others? we leave such enclosing of
commons to the Romanists, we challenge it not.

We are a true Church, not the true Church; we are a part, not the whole: we
include our selves, we exclude not others: whether Grecians, Armenians,
Aethiopians, Spaniards, or Italians, etc: yet so they deny no fundamental part
of the faith, either directly, or by consequent.

5. In the first, I desire to know whether they require we should show the
Names of Protestants in Histories, or their faith; this we will show, that we
need not: for the name of Protestants is but arbitrarie and accidental from a
protestation made in Germany; and from the like accidents we may call the
Romanists Protestants, for many protestations made in the Council of Trent,
Registered in their public Acts.

But if it be really meant thus; let the Protestants show that their now faith
was taught by lawful Pastors in all ages: I do (with Gods help) undertake
it, and require the same from the Authors of these propositions and demands.

This will I prove by three Argument.

1. A Causis. 2. A Signis. 3. Ab Exemplis.
Which is the only satisfaction here demanded: but I must desire the authors
not to affect obscurity, or to alter their words, which may alter their
meaning, as in the five propositions they have with the multitude of needless
words obscured the matter: the fourth being briefly and plainly this.

4. If the Protestants be a true Church, their faith has been taught in all
ages by lawful Pastors. This I grant also.

The sum of the fifth is briefly this.

5. If the Names of Protestant Pastors in all ages cannot be showed, then the
Protestants are not a true Church.

This I deny to be of undoubted consequence, for the Argument negatiuely from
authority is of no force.

In your Demands, you require the Names of such as taught the Protestants
Doctrines in all ages: whereas all your propositions before were of faith, as if
all Doctrines were points of faith.

Now Sit my Arguments.
1. The faith contained in Scriptures has been taught in all ages.

But the faith of the Protestants is contained in Scriptures: Ergo,

The faith of the Protestants has been taught in all ages.

2. That faith which has the testimony of antiquity, universality, and
consent, was taught in all ages by lawful Pastors.

The faith of the Protestants has these testimonies: Ergo,

The faith of the Protestants was taught in all ages.

3. That faith which has been taught by Authors visible in all ages, is the
true faith.

But the Protestant faith has been so maintained by such Authors: Ergo,

The Protestant faith has been maintained in all ages.




The Names of such as professed the faith of the Protestants in all ages, since
the incarnation of Christ.
In every centure of years, which is called saculum, an age: I will name some
writers whose works are extant.

Ab anno 1. ad 100.
In the first centure Christ himself, and his Apostles, and Evangelists.

Ab 100 ad 100.
In the second age Saint John the Evangelist, who died either Anno 100, or 101:
to him we add Ignatius, and Polycarpus, who though they lived in part of the
first age, and part of the second age, they are always reckoned Fathers of
that age in which they dyed: to these I add Justin Martyr, Iraenaeus.

Ab ^^^. ad 3^0
Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Cyprian, Lac^antius.

Ab 300. ad 400
Athanasius, Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, Ambrosius, Gregorius Mystenus,
Hieronymus, Ruffinus, Chrysostomus.

Ab 400. ad 500.
Augustinus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Theodoretus, Vincentius ^^riuensis,
Socrate^, Zozomen, Chrysologus.

Ab 500. ad 600
Bulgentius, ^u^grius, Gregorius primus.

Ab 70^. ad ^00
Beda, Damascenus, Alcu^nus.

Thus having gone half the way, I conclude with this Argument.
The Protestants says is plainly expressed in the Canonical Scripture, and
comprised in the Apostles Creed.

All these Fathers did profess that faith which is contained in the holy
Canonical Scripture, and comprised in the Apostles Creed: Ergo,

All these did profess the Protestants faith.

As I admonished Mr. Fisher to distinguish between Affirmation and Negation,
so I do these men: and that faith is Affirmation, not Negation, for no man
believes which he denies. Secondly in point of faith I like Mr. Fe. rule.
They that are in the affirmative, must prove now all that we affirm: they
affirm, as one God, three Persons, etc; all the Creed; so that we need not
prove what our adversaries do confess.

But in those points in variance between us, they are to prove; because they
are affirmative, we negative: as unwritten Traditions, Latin Service,
invocation of Saints, etc.

The Protestants faith being that which is contained in the Scriptures,
received for undoubtedly Canonical in the first 400. years, which is
summarily comprised in the Apostles Creed, is received by all the Orthodox
Fathers.

But those Fathers above named be all Orthodox:

Ergo,

The Mayor is manifest: the Minor I will prove out of their own Authors,
concerning all saving Tertullian, in whom I must distinguish the times: for
first he was Orthodox, though after an Heretic.

Having gone thus far at this time, I undertake for the rest: and do require
the like from the Romanists, viz.

That they will show me the Names of such as taught the now says of the Church
of Rome in all ages, and let them set me down the Names, as I have done.

And for instances in points of Roman faith in all ages, I require these men
to show me the Names of those who in the 1. 2. 3. centure of years did preach
or profess unwritten traditions to be the rule of faith: 2, that the vulgar
translation is authentical: 3, that there are 7 Sacraments properly so called,
and no more: 4, that the Books of the Machabes are Canonical: 5,
transubstantiation: 6, Invocation of Saints: 7, worshipping of Images, etc.

This rule is proposed by them, which though it be no necessary consequence of
faith, yet it binds them that propose it to make good in particular: out of
their own position thus I argue.

That is the true Church whose faith has had visible professors in all ages.

The Romish faith had not visible professors in all ages: Ergo,

The Roman Church is not a true Church.

An other Argument.
The true faith has the testimonies of Vniuesalitie, Antiquity, and Consent.

But the Romish faith (as far as they differ from the Protestant faith, which
they do in all the points above alleged) has not testimonies of 1.
Universality. 2. Antiquity. 3. And Consent.


Ergo,

The Romish faith is not a true faith.

Let the Romanists answer these two Arguments in those particular points above
written, and I will be of their Church.

An Admonition to the Reader.
I Do not so mean that those Fathers by me named have expressly set down
every point of our faith in their several writings, neither can the Church of
Rome do it for theirs.

But being Orthodox right believing Fathers, they did consequently maintain
the Scriptures, and Apostles Creed.

Some passages had between Master Rogers, and Master Fisher the Jesuit, as
follows.
Fisher. It being granted that there must be a visible Church in all ages, of
which all sorts must learn faith necessary to salvation.


Rogers. The perpetual visibilitie of the Church I acknowledge; But I pray you
set me down what a visible Church is, and what you mean by those words which
you put of another letter, who you mean by all sorts? whether the Children who
die before they come to years of discretion do learn this faith: or dying
before they come to learn it, be not after Baptism parts of the visible
Church.

Secondly, What you mean by learn? whether an actual explicit knowledge, or
an habitual only implicit knowledge?

Thirdly, What points of faith you hold necessary to salvation?

The question propounded by M. Fisher at the entreaty of a Gentleman who
desired satisfaction, was:


Fisher. Whether the Protestant Church was visible in all ages, especially in
the ages before Luther: and whether the names of the professors thereof may be
showed in all ages out of good Authors?


Rogers. A Church professing the same faith which the Protestants now does, was
visible in all ages: and I do undertake to prove it out of good Authors.


Fisher. Mr. Fisher undertook to defend the negative part, so as it did belong
to his adversaries to prove the affirmative.

M. Fisher explicated the meaning of his question to be, First, That his
adversaries should set down Names of men in all ages which they thought to be
Protestants.

Secondly, That they should show out of good Authors proof that they were
Protestants.

Thirdly, That they should defend them to hold nothing contrary to the Doctrine
of the Protestants, contained in the 39 Articles, unto which all English
Ministers are sworn.


Rogers. To the Second, First I will show the Names of such as maintained our
now faith in all ages, and bring good proof.

To the Third, First, It is no prejudice to our faith if the same Authors do
differ from us in other opini^ns not concerning faith, as long as they maintain
our faith.

Secondly, The Church of Rome cannot produce Fathers in all ages, who do not
contradict the Council of Trent in some Doctrines established in the said
Council.


Fisher. Mr. Fisher offered me a like proportion, to name, and prove, and
defend professors of Roman religion, holding nothing contrary to the Doctrine
defined in the Council of Trent.


Rogers. You must express whether you have all things defined in that Council
to be matters of faith: if you do, you can never perform what you have
promised,

I desired you therefore M. Fisher to express without ambiguitie the terms of
this question: whether the Protestant Church was visible in all ages?

What you mean by Church? what by Protestants? what by visible?

I will deliver my opinion in defining a Protestant Church.

The Protestant Church, is a society of men professing the faith expressed in
the Canonical Scriptures, acknowledged to be such in the Primitive Church,
comprised in the Apostles Creed, explained in the other two Creedes of Nice,
and Athanasius, Ministering the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper by
men of lawful Ordination and calling.

Such a society as this was in all ages: Ergo.

The Protestant Church was in all ages.

I desire you also to distinguish between matters of Discipline, and Doctrine.


Secondly, to distinguish between. 1. Doctrine Accessorie. And 2. Doctrine
Fundamental.


Matter of faith consists not in Discipline, but Doctrine: and that Doctrine
not accessorie, but fundamental.

By this distinction I mean the same which Aquinas does by Res fidei, 1. Per
Se. 2. Per Accidens.


I distinguish between. 1. Affirmation. And 2. Negation.


In those Articles of our English Church, our negation is partly a traversing,
partly a condemning of your novelties and additions: and therefore no part of
our faith; for no man would deny his own faith; In all these I defend the
Negative, and so it does belong to you to prove the affirmative.

Which when you shall do by testimony of writers in all ages, I will yield to
you.

For you proving the affirmative, the negative will fall of it self. As for
example, the first instance of negation in our Articles, is no part of the sixth
Article concerning those Books of Esdras, Tobie, Judith, etc: which we receive
not for Canonical, you do: the proof is on your side.

What I require of you, I will perform on our side: whatsoever is affirmative
in our Articles, I will maintain to be affirmed and taught in all ages, as the
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Articles, the affirmative part of the 6. 7. 8, and so in the
rest, or I will yield unto you: give me instance with affirmation of our
Articles you deny, and I will prove it in all ages: and I desire you to set
down withal, which of our affirmative Articles you receive: and whether we
agree in the Articles of the Creed, or not.

I will do the like by you, and give you an instance in your affirmatiues: show
me who in every age did receive the Books of Esdras, Machabies, Tobit, Iudeth,
etc. for Canonical, in the 1. 2. 3. 4 centure of years; this is one of the
first points of your Tridentiue faith.

I desire you also M. Fisher, for the avoiding of confusion to deliver your
opinion, whether all the affirmative Doctrines of the Council of Trent are
matters of faith Per se, fundamental and necessary to be held for salvation
Fide explicata: I speak de adubtis quibus facultas datur discendi.

And I do confess that none of your side, or ours, have given me ^ull
satisfaction in this point, which are Res fidei per se. I therefore propose
this M. Fisher as desirous to learn, and to lay a foundation for further
proceeding in this point of the visible Church.

Neither will I be sparing to deliver my opinion with submission to better men,
and better leisure of my own, (having bin these 6 months far from my Books,
and farther from leisure or repose to study.)

I do not think that all the affirmative Doctrines contained in our Articles,
are Res fidei per se, fundamental, necessary to salvation.

I therefore distinguish between Dogmata. 1. Scholae, these denied, work a
private dissension. 2. Ecclesiae, these work an external seperatio^ from the
Church. 3. Fidei, These denied, work an eternal damnation.


By Ecclesiae, I mean not the essential Church, but representative, whether
general, national, or provincial.

That it is only an error in the latter, which is damnable, not in the first
and second, unless it be with obstinacy.

I will give you instance as well as I can, being without my Books.

Consubstantiation was a School tenent Anno 1100, not a Church tenent.

Transubstantiation was a Church tenent after the year 1200. 1. Ecclesiae
Romanae, but the real presence, understanding thereby not a bodily presence,
but a true relation, a Sacramental obligation, and spiritual exhibition of
his body, is Res fidei, a point of faith.

Or thus, Transubstantiation was a School tenent Anno 1100, a Church tenent
Anno 1215, defined by Innocentius 3, in council. Latera: but no point of faith,
because the body of religion or points of faith are without addition: As
Lyrinensis: inuitetur animarum religio rationem corporum quae and
quotparuilorum membra tot virorum. And as Aquinas says,

The Articles of faith do grow quoad Explicationem. Non Quod ad substantiam.


That which was no point of faith for the first 1200 years, could be none
afterward, vt supra Vincentius Lerinensis, and Aquinas.

But transubstantiation was no point of faith before the year 1200: Scotus.
Ergo, transubstantiation is no point of faith.

If I do not cite the words of Scotus aright, impute it to my want of books,
for I have none at this time, yet I would lay the foundation of a friendly
conference without tricks, ambiguitie, or bitterness.

I desire you also to observe in the citing of the Fathers, to allege nothing
for your opinion but what that Father has held, written, and taught, aperte,
frequenter, perseueranter, or at least that his words be plain, and his
opinion such as that he has not after recanted, or crossed in his later works.

I think it reasonable also, that if I will justify the faith which is
publicly professed and recessitated by our Church, that I produce not only
some particular men delivering their opinions, but also proofs of some Church
or visible society, who publicly professed the same faith in all ages.

The like I expect from you.

So the first thing is, to express what is your faith, what is ours.

Next, what Society in all ages professed, and publicly recessitated with your
Church or ours, do publicly teach and recessitate: I mean affirmatively not
negatiuely, for no man does teach or recessitate what he does deny.

This I have briefly done in the definition of a Protestant Church.

I pray you give me a definition of the Roman Church.

Whereas you say that all our Ministers are sworn to the 39 Articles, you are
deceived, it is not so.


FINIS.
A DIALOGVE CONCERNING THIS QVESTION, Where was your Church before Luther and
Calvin.

Giving good directions how to discover FISHERS folly.

By VV. C.

Printed M.DC.XXIII.

Mr. W. C. his Dialogue concerning this question, Where was your Church before
Luther?
A Dialogue between E and D.
E. ANswer this question, Where was your Church before Luther?


D. Even where our doctrine was, sometime in one country, sometime in another,
as it pleased God in his wise dispensation, who caries the light of his
Gospel, as he does the Sun through the world, to illuminate nations at
several times therewith, according to his will.


E. That is a fair general; but will you tell us, who were these? what
country people? what Doctors? who taught as ye teach?


D. Look the Churches of Asia, Afric and of Europe, consider them as they
were before the mystery of iniquity ca^e to the height, and you shall see that
they all had the same doctrine and form of a Church that we have in all
substantial points pertaining to Religion.


E. But you are not able to name one before Luther, teaching in all things as
he did.


D. This is a piece of Sophistry, whereby your deceivers blind the ignorant.


E How so? should not the teachers of the truth agree in all things, in one
harmony?


D. I grant they should, and thanks be to God they do also in all substantial
things which are the Articles of our faith. The Buckler of Fa^^^, published in
French by M. Peter du Moulin, translated into English, and twice printed, Anno
1624 is a most excellent book for these present times, concerning Luther, etc.
let Luther answer it at his best le^sure, or Sweet, or Anthony (...), of any
Jesuit or Mass Priest whosoever.
But is this a good reason, because some Doctors in some opinions differ,
whereof men may be ignorant and saved nevertheless, that therefore these
Doctors teach no truth, and their Churches are no true Churches?


E. That seems to be hard indeed.


D. You have reason for you so to think. For in one age Victor with the Church
in the West was in a different opinion from Policrates and the Churches of the
East; and Jerome had his own discordance with Augustine; and the first ^athers
of the primitive Church were Chiliasts: shall it thereupon follow, that because
in this point they taught not in all things as we do, that therefore they
were not a Church?


E. It is no reason.


D. Cyprian in the point of rebaptizing taught not as Cornelius: what of that?
will it follow that he was not a faithful Pastor, or the Church of Carthage
was not a true Church?


E. It follows not indeed.


D. Why then do you urge me to give you one before Luther or Calvin, who in
all points taught as we teach? The Doctors of the Church both ancient and
recent, are men subject to infirmities; for no man upon earth has his
understanding perfect, whereof it comes to pass, that in some things one of
them differs from another: but as to the Articles of the faith and substance of
Christian religion whereby comes salvation, sure it is Tertullian and Cyprian,
Ambrose, Augustine, Luther and Calvin, have all delivered one doctrine and did
teach the way of God truly.


E. Then you think the Fathers of the Primitive Church were of your Religion.


D. I think so indeed, and hope to die in the same faith wherein they lived
and died.


E. It would be thought strange to hear that in Italy, that the Doctors of the
Primitive Church were of the Protestants Religion.


D. No marvel though it be strange there where truth is a stranger: but this
answer was given you and them both, by a worthy Doctor of our Church, The light
of Cambridge, M. Doctor Whitakers, in Camplanum.
M. Doctor Whitakers, and yet we stand to it: Patros in maximis sunt nostri, in
multis narij, in minimis vestri: Such Fathers (says Doctor Whitakers) as have
written before us and you both, in greatest things are ours, in many things are
doubtful, in smallest things they are yours.


E. Well, I will remember that, God willing: but in the days of Papistrie,
wherewith you say the world was blinded, where was your Church?


D. Answer me but another question, and it shall resolve you.


E. What is that?


D. Your Doctors say, that when Antichrist shall come, the Church shall fly to
the Desert, that is, as themselves expound it. The Rhemists upon Revel. 11.
The Church shall be without public state of regiment, and open free exercise
of holy functions; neither shall it be unknown to the faithful which follow
it, as this day may be seen the like by the Church of Roman Catholics in
many parts of England.


E. What does that help you?


D. Very much. That which they themselves say will be done, we say is done:
Antichrist has already chased the Church to the wilderness, and so oppressed
it, that for a time it had no public state of regiment, nor open free exercise
of holy functions, yet was it not unknown to the faithful that followed it,
nor to the enemies that persecu^ed it, as this day may be seen by the Church
of Christian Catholics in many parts of France.


E. Will ye make that clear, and I think you have won much.


D. What greater clearness can you crave? If this answer be good to clear
the Popes Church when they say it will be obscured by Antichrist, and yet be,
is it not as good to justify our Church, when we say, it has been obscured by
Antichrist, and yet was?


E. The answer is good enough; only if you can, I would have you qualify it
more particularly.


D. There is not one age since the days of Christ unto this day, wherein I
cannot point forth men preaching and professing as we do: but because your
doubt is specially of the time of Papistrie, I will let you see it is a
needless question for the Popes Church to demand of us, where our Church then
was? for they found us always in their teeth before ever Luther or Calvin were
borne.


E. Make that good.


D. See Reinerus upon the Apoc.
Reinerus a popish Inquisitor, who lived more then three hundred years ago,
speaking of the poor men of Lions, and calling them in contempt Valdenses,
Leonistae, says, they were more pernicious to the Church of Rome then all
other sects, 3. Reasons why the Walden^es much vexed the Romans Church.
for three causes. First, because it has been of longer continuance: for some
say, this sect has endured since the Apostles times. The second cause is,
because it is more general: for there is almost no Land in the which this Sect
does not creep. The third cause, for that all other Sects do bring an horror
with the heinousness of their blasphemies against God, but this Sect of
Leonists has a great show of godliness, because they live justly before men,
and believe all things well concerning God, and all the Articles which are
contained in the Creed, only they blaspheme and hate the Church of Rome.

Now there is the testimony of an enemy making answer for us, which may serve
to stop the mouths of all our enemies from demanding of us any more, Where was
your Church before Luther?


E. 1. but he calls them a Sect, and says, they blasphemed the Church.


D. So the Priests of the Jews called the Church of Christians a Sect of
Nazarites, Acts 24.5. what is that to the matter? yet he grants they are such a
Sect, as first had been from the beginning; secondly, had been in all
countries; and thirdly was honest in life and sound in faith, save only that
they held the Church of Rome to be the Whore of Babel. And that yet this
prejudice which you have conceived of our Church may be further removed out of
your mind, I pray you consider this: think you not that with good reason we may
affirm, that we are in communion with them who have taught the same doctrine
that we teach? If our doctrine was in former ages, you will not deny that our
Church was then also.


E. That cannot be denied.


D. Well then, if you please, name me any controversy of religion, The Ancient
Fathers.
concerning any article of faith between us and the Papists this day, and you
shall see that the ancient Fathers take our part in it.


E. That is strange; for they repose their chiefest strength and trust in the
ancient Fathers.


D. Brag what they will, it is true, I say, they may well boast in the dross
of Fathers, and deck their errors with it, but we shall bring you their finest
gold. Name you the controversy, and you shall try that which I say to be a
truth.


E. There are so many controversies among you, that I know not which of them to
name first.


D. Then will it please you to take a view of those which I have gathered for
my own private use.


E. With a very good will: let me see what they are.


D. They are noted and set down in four special books of the Protestants, and
I have observed and collected them for my own comfort and confirmation in the
faith: for as first of all I learned the way of salvation in the Scriptures, so
finding that the Doctors of the primitive Church (produced in these four
special books: 1. Doctor White his Way to the true Church: 2. Illyricus his
Catalogus testim. veritatis, augmented twice by Goularitus: 3. Doctor Reinolds
his five conclusions or Theses the fifth, quinta Conclus. quinta These. in
English, but more large in Latin: 4. Polanus his Symphonia Catholica; special
books, writ by four Protestant Preachers) expounded the Scriptures
conformable to the doctrine of our teachers, I was greatly therein confirmed:
for these are the two great props of our faith, which ^inentius gives us
against all heresies, Cap. 2.


E. You have reason for you: for if your doctrine be so warranted, Two maine
props and proofs of religion.
both by divine authority of God in his word, and humane testimony of the best
Doctors of the ancient Church, they are to be judged most unworthy that make
contradiction to you.


D. These points are so fully performed (as I have said) in three special books
by three worthy Protestant Divines, and so methodically set down, that I
think my showing to you of these three books, and your reading of them will
most fully content and satisfy you; I say again, by Gods help* they will give
you most full satisfaction, as also to all others who with indifferency will
vouchsafe to read them.


F. I pray you who be those three Divines who have writ those three books, and
which be the books.


D. Doctor White is the first, and the book is, his Way to the true Church.


E. Which is the second?


D. Fla^cus Illyricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, augmented twice by Simon
Goulartius, set out by him the second time in one volume in a large Folio.


E. Which is the third?


D. Doctor Reinolds his six Conclusions in English, placed at the end of his
Conference with Heart: but it is his fifth Conclusion which I mean for this
purpose, quinta Conclus. or his six Theses in Latin. of his last augmented
Edition, and thereof I mean his fifth These. quinta These. more full then the
English.


E. And what have these four Divines performed in those four books, to give
comfort, content and satisfaction on this very point we have now in hand, viz.
Where your Church, doctrine, teachers were before Luther? for I assure you,
this is the maine matter, which troubles many at this present: for Campian was
not so busy in Queen Elizabeth's days with his Audito nomine Ecclesiae, hostis
expalluit; but Fisher, Sweet, Clarke and other Jesuits are as busy now in
King James his days, even at this present, with their Where was your Church
before Luther? Where your Preachers? where your professors? where your
doctrine? let us hear their names; Names, names, names, names, cries the
Fisher catched in his own Net.


D. What have they performed? enough at the full (in the mercy of God) to
satisfy you and all other indifferent Readers, that without prejudice look
into those their labors.


E. How might I come by those books? may I meet with them in Paul's Churchyard
for I would very gladly buy them.


D. You may most easily: but stay, let me a little call back that word, for
they are so fast bought up, that I doubt they are almost out of print, for (and
that worthily) they are exceedingly in request.


E. So much the more the Printers are too blame, that they give not a second
impression to them.


D. A second impression, say you; why Doctor Whites Way to the true Church has
been printed four several times, now within a few years, and
notwithstanding are almost all sold up, but I hear a fifth impression is now
in hand. Polanus his Symphonia, Illyricus and Doctor Reinolds, their books
(before named) have been diverse times imprinted also; so that you need not
blame the Printers, who are careful to make new impressions, and new supplies
of books so worthy, and so much in request, and so greatly sought after.


E. This should argue, that their books (by Gods blessing) are very powerful,
and win many to the truth, they vent so exceedingly fast.


D. O yes, God be thanked, preaching and writing succeed happily with a blessed
success: doubt you not but at this day for one Papist, England does enjoy xx.
xl. yea rather an hundred Protestants. Masses and stage plays grow odious.


E. You make me long for these four books, I would gladly be in hand with
them.


D. Why Sir, seeing your longing is so great, I have them at hand for you, use
them so long as you please: now I fetch them out of my Study.


E. Are these they, Sir, I pray you.


D. Yes indeed, these are the very books.


E. Now I pray you Sir, before that we open them, tell me in brief what they
say and perform in these matters.


D. That, good Sir, I will most willingly perform.


E. And I most willingly listen and give attentive care unto you.


D. God direct with his holy Spirit, and give a blessing in his Son Christ
Jesus. These four books following do fully furnish any Scholar to make
answer to all Jesuits, Mass Priests, Fisher, Clarke, Sweet, etc. to that
question, Where was your Religion before the days of Luther?

1. Doctor White (to begin first with him) in his book entitled The Way to the
true Church, Digression 52. shows, that the present Religion of the Roman
Church was observed and resisted in all ages as it came in and increased;
naming withal the persons that made resistance, and the points wherein, and
the time when, from fifty years to fifty, throughout all ages since Christ,
compendiously observed out of history, for the satisfying of their error, that
so much conceit the antiquity of Papistrie, and think it was never controlled
till Luthers time. And Digression 48 Sect. 50. the said Doctor White sets
down a brief and direct answer to the Papists, when they say, we cannot
assign a visible company professing the same faith in every point that we do,
ever since Christ till now, without interruption.

2. Flacius Illyricus (the second I named) in his book entitled Catalogus
testim veritatis, A Catalogue of the witnesses of the truth, augmented twice by
Simon Goulartius, and by him the second time set out in one volume, in a large
Folio, shows, that the present rel gion of the Roman Church wa^ observed and
resisted in all ages as it came in and increased; naming withal the persons
that made the resistance, and the points wherein, and the time when, from an
hundred years to an hundred, throughout all ages since Christ, compendiously
observed out of history, for the satisfying of their error, that so much
conceit the antiquity of Papistrie, and think it was never controlled till
Luthers time.

3. The third is Doctor Reinolds (that light of Oxford) in his fifth Conclusion,
quinta Conclus. in English, joined to the end of his Conference with Heart; but
far more ^^lly in his fifth Latin Thesis, quinta These. of the last augmented
Edition, shows that the present Church of Rome is neither the holy Catholic
Church, nor a sound member of the Catholic Church; that the present Religion
of the Roman Church was observed and resisted in all ages; brings in
abundantly proofs and testimonies out of the ancient Fathers, Councels and
records, good Authors, Schoolmen, the Papists own writings, etc. in all the
controuerted points betwixt the Protestants and Papists.

4. The fourth is Amandus Polanus his Symphonia Catholica, though named the
last, yet as admirable as the rest, yea in one thing more admirable, viz. in
bringing in the ancient Fathers in all the controuerted points betwixt
Protestants and Papists in all ages most fully.


E. You come to the point indeed, and say more then ever I heard; and I hope
these your four books will make all this good that you have named.


D. They will indeed most plentifully: take them away with you, and keep them
even so long as you please.


E. I thank you most heartily, good Sir; you bring me to a feast indeed^ what
variety of dainty dishes have you set before me?


D. God in Christ Jesus bless them unto you.


An Advertisement to the Reader concerning Polanus his Symphonia Catholica, and
Mr. Robert Cook his book concerning counterfeit Fathers.
Polanus his Symphonia Catholica is written in commonplace manner, out of the
ancient Fathers and other good Authors, from the days of Christ and his
Apostles to the times of Luther, handling the principal controuerted points
methodically betwixt the Protestants and the Papists, written purposely to
satisfy that demand of Papists, Where was the Protestants religion before the
times of Luther? Oh that some good religious Scholar or other would translate
it into English, for the common profit of the Church of England, against the
insulting brags of Fisher and other Papists, who say, we had no religion before
Luthers times, that he hatched it, etc.

I wish likewise that M. Robert Cook his Latin Treatise concerning counterfeit
Fathers was translated into English, for the good of those who understand not
Latin; Papists alleging counterfeit Fathers so often.

FINIS.

