A DISCOVRSE OF CHRISTIAN WATCHFVINESSE.

Preparing how to Live, how to Die, and to be discharged at the Day of
Judgment, and so enjoy Life Eternal.

By JOHN ROGERS Minister to the Church of Chacombe in Northhampton-shiere.

Habbac. 2. 1. I will stand upon my watch, and will set me upon the Tower, and
will watch to see what he will say unto me; and what I shall answer when I am
reproved.



LONDON. Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse Street near Saint
Giles Church.

1620.

TO THE Worshipful and religious Gentleman, Master Thomas Bigges Esquire, and
Justice of the Peace and Quorum in the County of Worcester: And to the
Worshipful and right virtuous Gentlewoman Mr^^. Anne Bigges his Wife; grace,
mercy and peace from God the Father in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Worshipful Sir:
WE read that when a certain Lacedemonian Philosopher had made a New Book,
and was about in open hearing to recite it (as the manner then was) Antaloides
Pluna^^h in lacon apoph.
demanded whereof the argument was; who answering that it was of the praise of
Hercules: replied, But who dispraiseth him? intimating it a needless work to
praise whom all men admired. So I occasioned to declare my hearty affection to
your Worsh: for sundry extraordinary favors, which could not be performed
without relating of many excellent virtues, wherewith the Lord graced you: I
considering these premises, in the very enterie, retired lest I should seem
to undertake an unnecessary labor, in commending whom none dispraised.
Wherefore, diuerting from this purpose, I took it more beseeming for me to
join and ^oy with such as congratulate and praise God for you, who in these
your green years endued you with such piety, wisdom and gravity, which
few of gray hai^es in our Country attained unto; whereby, for your place and
Worshipful calling, you, in executing Judgment and Justice, releeuing the
Fatherless and Widow, Job. 29. 12
doing good to all, and iniuring none, of all sorts are highly magnified,
drawing as with a secret Lodestone the hearts and prayers of your people unto
you, and for you: and which is the Crown and Garland of all virtue and
generositie, approve a sincere favorer and furtherer of Christ's holy Religion,
and the professors thereof. Many for glory of the World, become famous
Commonwealths men, but few for the glory of God, approve good Churchmen and
Religious Gentlemen; for al-be it in policy they can afford brave salutations,
and reach the hand to some rare Preachers, yet is it but as Saul's 1 Samuel 18.
29. and 19. 6, 9, 10, and 24. 17. and 26. 21.
favor to David, by fits and fashions, being at continual war and hatred
with their own Parish Ministers, which made it a Proverb, That Gentlemen are
Venison in Heaven: but howsoever they take Religion to be but a foolishness,
and a base slavery to serve the Lord, yet is there not any thing that more
honors a Gentleman or Nobleman, then to be a faithful professor of Religion
and vpholder of his Ministers; as to your cost you do, which causes them take
up Paul's prayer for you and yours: The Lord 2 Timothy 1. 16
give mercy unto the house of Onesipherous, for he often refreshed me, and was
not ashamed of my chain, which shall one day do you more good, then ten
thousand worlds to the wicked and irreligious: For howsoever they brag in the
depth of their sensuality, that they can be godly when they l^st, and will the
while bathe themselves in impiety, yet try it who please (and I would it would
please them to try and go through therein) they shall find it an harder
matter to become truly Religious then they think (which I speak not to
discourage any from being godly, for God will sweeten and make casie the way to
all that seek his face:) but for your comfort, and the high commendations of
all Gods Elect, who for sake all with Peter Mat. 19. 27 Phil. 3. 7. 8.
and Paul for Christ, and account them but dung. And let them know that for men
and women abounding in all worldly contents, to forsake themselves, their ease,
their wealth, their pleasures and profits, and to give themselves wholly first
to God (as did the Macedonians) and then for his sake to his Church, 2. Cor 8.
5.
deuoting themselves wholly to his Worship and service whatsoever it cost them,
not only to the loss of their goods, but also of their lives (if the Lord call
them to it) is an extraordinary grace and unspeakable gift of 2. Cor. 9 15
God, for which they are ever to be thankful unto the Lord; for unless God
had by the mighty grace, and power of the holy Ghost wrought this admirable
work in their hearts, they could not possibly get that great victory against
their own self-love, Covetousness, distrust in Gods providence and promises;
yea, against the very power of the Devil himself and all his accomplices, who
with united forces labor, to hinder this work which they see brings so
great glory to God, credit to the Gospel, and Salvation to men's Souls. But
blessed be God, who (from among many) se^ected you to this high calling making
you heir not only to your Worshipful Parents possessions, but also to their
piety and godly profession. And albeit the Lord for causes best known to
himself hitherto makes you childe-lesse; yet to his glory, and your comfort,
has he made you and your most virtuous wife, parents of your spiritual
children; which (says Ambrose) are far better then any carnal posterity,
Ambrose.
or names of sons and daughters. In which respect may it truly and
comfortably be sald; Blessed are the barren, and rejoice thou barren that did
not bear, etc. for the desolate has more children then the married wife, etc.
Isa, 54. 1.
so that as King Cyrus, when Lysander the Lacedemonian Ambassador saw his
Orchard, Xe^ph^^ in O^co^. and citatur a Cicerone in Catone.
called the Paradise of Sardis, and admiring the highness and straightness of
the Trees, and how even the ranks were set quadrangle-wise, demanded who had
so set them? he answered: These trees have I planted, these ranks have I
devised, and many of these plants have I set with mine own hands. So when you
in the great Day of the Lord shall appear before God, accompanied with all
these your spiritual children, whom you and your most gracious wife have
begotten and nursed up to your Christ, and he demand of you, who these
multitudes be? you shall joyfully answer: These thy Ministers we ever
countenanced, cheered, and contributed vpto; to these Widows and Orphans
we have been as Father, and Mother; these poor afflicted have we relieved,
and many of these have we brought up in our own house, and all thine elect
people have we ever lovingly embraced: Whereunto the Lord of glory shall
answer, Well done good servants and faithful, Math. 25.
enter into your Masters joy. Which the Lord grant you both to do; for these
indeed are the right Hounds and Hawks (as Alphonsus King of Ar^^gons tells
an Ambassador, desiring to see his hunting Hounds) where with all good Nobles
and Gentlemen A^^eas Syl^ius de dictis. Alphonsi.
should hunt for the Kingdom of Heaven even Christ's poor afflicted members.
And as B^naiah and the people tell king David 1 King. (...) (...). 47.
of Solomon; God make the name of Solomon more famous th^n thy name, and exalt
his throane above thy throane, and as he has been with my Lord the King, so
be he with Solomon: so conclude* I, the God of Heaven make your name more
famous then your Fathers; and exalt you in all earthly preferments above him;
and as he has been with him in all heavenly blessings, so be he with you; and
the Lord say so too, Amen.

Good Mistress Bigges,

I have little to say to your Worship, for ^^^re plen^y makes me s^ant, unless
I should spe(...) of you as Grigorie N^zianzen did of (...)sius, (...)
(...)lin^ Athanasius; I shall (...) (...) it self, because be comprehended
(...) within him, and praising Virtue, I Crag. Haz. in Orat. ^uneb, Athan.
should praise God himself; from whom Virtue (...) to men, that thereby we
might be drawn unto him, etc. and so say I, if I should praise your virtuous
life, I should praise Virtue it self, and seeing this is too ample a field for
me to walk through, I will praise God for his rare Virtues bestowed upon you,
and withal, congratulate with you, that the Lord gave you so good an Husband:
many have loving Husbands, but few find good ones, who be helpers and partners
with them, not only in worldy but in heavenly and spiritual exercises, and I
doubt not but as an echo he finds you appliable to draw with him Christ's
y^ake, that so you both may be glorified together: And that as he prudently and
prouidently planteth Gods sacrifice and service early and lately in your house
and family: so you as the Mistress Be in this holy Hiue (for so Xenophon calls
the Wife) Xenoph. in O^^on.
will have a special care and Christian Watchfulness to see the same
practiced, and to keep your Hiue sweet and well stoared, suffering no Bees to
be idle, but ca^se them make fair hony-Combes and fill every Celler: cast out
all Droane Bees, suffer neither Waspe, Mouse, nor filthy worm to anoy your
Bees Qui mone^ vt (...), (...) iam facis, ille mo^^do la^dat, and hortatu (...)
probat acta suo. ^uid. de trist. l. 5. ^l^g. 14.
nor rob your Hiue: neither speak I this as persuading you to work, for
Bees need no exhortation to labor for Winter, for it is natural for them so
to do, but (as one tells his wife) to commend your endeavors herein,
purging your house from all profane and wicked people, that none from Room,
nor Egypt, nor Sodom anoy your painful Bees, and defraud them of your
labors, defile the Hiue, and discredit both the Master and Mistress Bees,
neither can I but joy to see you so directly tread the steps of godly
Placill^ the Emperor Theodosius wife, who being graciously instructed in Gods
Word, furthered her Husband much in piety, was exceeding bountiful to the
poor; would her self go to the sick, visit and minister unto them, and
would often speak to her Husband to remember what he was before he was Emperor
and what after, and called upon him to be thankful to God, and careful to do
all good to his people; and so I am persuaded you do to yours and must do, and
in so doing God will bless you both, that you shall grow Big both in this
and in the life to come. And whereas thankfulness would I should, for many
favors received, offer you some gratuitie, and supposing that nothing comes
more welcome to you then some jewel or ornament which naturally all weomen
affect, as Jeremy writes; Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her
attire: and these ornaments must not be Ier. 2. 32.
jewels of Gold, Pearls, pretious-Stones or Purple robes, but such as best
beautify you in the eyes of the Almighty (the Ornament 1. Tim. 2. 9. 1 Pet.
3. 3. 4
of Israel) and these be true godliness and Christian obedience in a constant
proceeding and careful watchfulness over your Calvin in Ier. 2. 32. ^^ertius
lib. 4. cap. 6. Mat. 13. 44 45. 46.
whole life, in weal or woe; this Robe covers all our foul and ragged
attire, and makes us more amiable in the Court of Heaven then ever was Ester
in Assuerus Palace, and although my penury cannot give you this (for herein
I am a beggar my self) yet I according to my poor skill, send you what
direction I can to purchase the same, hoping you will accept thereof, not as a
payment or requital, but as an acknowledgement of a debt. And that all the day
time you will use it as your aduiser and ouerse ^r of all your work, and at
night as a Curfu^ Bell to prepare you for your rest, and when you ouer-sleepe
your self, as a Midnight peale awaking you to serve the Lord, and at the
Dawning as a true Cock to prepare for your special calling, and after as a
Morning watch, calling to you betimes not to idle your precious time; when you
are in prosperity directing you how with Gods favor to continue and increase
the same, in adversity how to be rid of it, how to use your health for Gods
glory and good of men, and when you are sick to death, how to prepare your
self for God, and how after death to enjoy a joyful Resurrection: This does
Christian and godly Watchfulness grace you and all you take in hand, and so
bless you in all respects in the sight of God and men, that you shall be a
mirror to all the godly about you, so that whosoever passes by and beholds
your dwelling place, shall give it the name of the City of God, and pointing
at it, shall say, The Lord is there: and the hearers shall answer, The Lord
bless thee O habitation Mar. 13 33 Eze. 48. 35. Ier. 31, 23.
of Justice and Mountain of holiness: which the Lord for Jesus Christ's sake
grant, Amen. Chacombe this 20. of August 1619.

Your Worships in all Christian duties to commend JOHN ROGERS.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
Marvel not (Christian Reader) if in publishing this Sermon, whereas (it may
be) better, and more of this Argument (though I saw none) be extant, I incur
the same fault which Cato the grave Censour reproved in a certain Roman, who
taking upon him to write a Story in Greek, had rather crave pardon of his
fault, then keep himself clear from committing it Citatur a (...) in prim^
sex thesium.
: for when this Sermon was preached, I intended nothing less then the
committing of it to the Press: yet so it was, that being requested to Preach
at a Gentlewomans burial The occasion of publishing this Sermon.
and that upon a sudden, not having twelve hours, no nor scarce six, to choose
and peruse my Text, my warning was so short and the time busy, just two days
before Easter; and also before a iuditious and more then ordinary assembly, so
that I had not that liberty granted me which Bears Plin. lib. 8. cap. 36. and
Aclia(...) de hist. Auama(...).
have to lick their newborn foales, to bring them to their own fashion: yet
(as always) relying upon the Lords present assistance (who often gives better
success to short meditations, undertaken in his Name, then to longer studies)
I went to work, affecting more (as Augustine teaches) documenta, quam
ornamenta Austin. de doct. Christ. li. 4. ca. 19.
for profitable instructions to edify the Conscience, then Rhetorical
braueries to glow and tickle Attick ears; as speaking (with C. Lucilius) but
Tarentinis and Consentinis meis, who kindly gave me wished approbation in the
whole; Cicero de Orat. l. 2 and de ^inib. ^onorum li. 1.
yet this acceptance (as after it approved) was not so general; but some few
eying (as Augustine said) Aust. contra faust. li. 5. cap. 11.
the Chafe more then the Wheat of my Corn, disliked somethings causeless;
so that (which one said) Fabius Quintil.
is true, that foelices essent Arts, si de illis soli artifices, judicarent:
but when the fools of the people fall a censuring above their slipper Suitor
vltra crepida^.
: then then they to extol themselves, take their Teachers to be mad and void
of common sense (if they be zealous in Gods cause) and so Christ himself was
taken as is in Mark. 3. 21. Ioh. 10. 20. and so the Abderits Iuter epist.
Hypocra. and citatur a Rinald. orat. 13
did Democritus, who sent for Hypocrates to give him Helleber to cure his
madness (virtutis laborem in saniam arbitrantes) who coming, and admiring his
Wisdom, told them that they more needed Helleber then He: And therefore (I
say with Paul) 2 Cor. 5. 13.
; Whether we be out of our wits or in our wits, we are to God and you: and for
my part I acknowledge with Austine Angust. ad Pascentium epist. 174.
, that facile est, vt quisque vincat Augustinum, sed videris, vtrum veritate an
clamore: easy it is to deprave my labors, but let them see whether they do
it by unjust clamours or by truth: and with Hierome Hieron. dial. 1. aduers.
Pelag.
likewise: Breniter respondeo, nunquam me haereticis pepercisse; sed omni
egisse studio, vt hosts Ecclesiae, mei quoque hosts fierent: I never spared
gross transgressors (though truth bred me much hatred, and I had the more
enemies thereby) but ever plainly and openly reproved them, and therefore
often want there favorable allowance in my proceedings: and no matter; For if
I yet pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ Gal. 1. 10
. The issue then was, that my name was not only made a Tenis-ball and
Table-talke, but withal I was complained upon to the Ecclesiastical
Magistrate, where I was feign to answer it, and besides, was in private so
sharply rebuked (of such as hard me not) as unworthy of the name of a
Minister, so that I might well complain with Hierome Hieron al Theoph aduers.
Joan. Hierosolym.
: Ita nomen meum frequenter assumitur, and carpitur, ac si de libro viuentium
deletus essem. And although that be true, which one says, Hominem ingenuum
irrideri turpissimum cruciari humanum Iu Mena^dro.
: yet for my part, I give them thanks, for (as Plutarch Lib. de vtilitate ad
hostib. capi^nda.
teaches) it will make me more circumspect, but because that optima non vllo
causa tuente pe^it; I will use only that Apology which Sophocles did Cicero in
C(...).
who being accused of dotage, only recited a Con^edy called Oedipus Coloneus,
made lately by him, demanding of the Judges, if that Comedy seemed to be made
by a doter or mad man. So I, for my defense, do set forth the Sermon
verbatim as I preached it, not suppressing nor altering any one clause, only (I
confess) that in the penning thereof (as all men use in the like) my pen
ran somewhat swift, which made every part of the Sermon the larger, which I
take to be no fault, for so I (as with a Commentary) clear what was obscure,
dilate what was briefly delivered, explain things mistaken, and add some
things further for the Readers benefit. But Quam amanter, and fideliter moneo
conscientia mihi testis est; si paulo asperius, s Joan. Rainold. Orat. 13.
requirunt tempora; si minus cu^ fructu, meliora spero; si imprudentius,
incommodius; volui quod debui, praestiti quod potui; laudandum vo^uisse, non
prestitisse ignoscendum: gentle Reader peruse it thoroughly, and judge
charitably, and Gods grace be with thee, and his blessing upon thee, that long
thou may read, and much may thou profit, to Gods glory, thy comfort, and
benefit of his Church. Pax praedicantibus, gratia audientibus, and t Foxiu^.
gloria Jesus Christo,

Amen.
Thine in the Lord while thou art the Lords, John Rogers.

The Table or Contents of the whole book, according to the Paragraphs.
Sect. 1. THe Preample or Induction to the Text, and the danger of security. p.
1. Sect. 2. The specall occasion of choosing this text of watching, page 6. The
causes of the destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem. page 9. Sect. 3.
The first Doctrine, gathered of the premises, viz. That we are not to set our
hearts upon any worldly thing, seeing Jerusalem is destroyed, page 10, 11. The
Uses teaching that 1. the world, 2. riches, 3. dainty fare, 4. building and
apparel are momentany; so of oppression and sacrilege, ibid. and why we were
sent and set in this world, page 12. Sect 4. Diverse sorts of watchings, and
what it is to watch. page 21. The subdiuision, p. 23. Sect. 5. Of watching in
general page 24. and the necessity thereof. ibid. The second Doctrine, that to
watch concerns all men generally. ibid. Sect. 6. The first and second Uses
are persuading all men to watch. page 27. Sect. 7. The meaning of this word
watcch. p. 29. Sect. 8. The third Doctrine is against carnal security. page
30, and of sobriety, ibid. Sect 9. The first Use for instruction to wath page
33. The second Use for comfort to watchers. page 36. Sect. 10. The first part
of watching in special, and the fourth Doctrine. page 37 Sect. 11. The Uses,
1. how, page 40. 2 when, 3. over whom we are to watch. The Institution of a
child. p. 56. Who be the chief watchmen. page 63. sleepy watchmen. 67.
robbers of watchmen. 72, and wherein; their cauils confuted. page 84. Sect. 12.
The helps to watch are (page 97.) 1. to walk in the general, then 2. in the
special callings of true Christians: where i^ a Diary to watch, ibid. 3. to
put on Gods panoply. ib. 4. To keep mutual conjunction with our own pastor.
5. God stirs all his army royal to help us. ibid. Sect. 13. The second part
of our watching, is to prepare to die in the Lord. page 131. Sect. 14. The
fifth Doctrine is to prepare for Death. page 136 Sect. 15. The first Use of
Observations. page 139 for our general, and 2. for our special watch for
death. page 151. A Diary or weekly preparation for death. page 156. The second
Use, to mind us of Death, and the commodities thereof. p. 161. The 3. Use not
to fear death. p. 166. The 4. Use against the contemners of of this watch, and
of the terrors of Death. page 174. The 5. Use of the comfort of watching for
death. page 181. and of the benefits death brings us with it. page 184. The
6. Use for thankfulness in delivering from the second death. page 188. Sect.
16. The third part of watching against Christ's coming to judgment. page 191
Sect. 17. The sixth Doctrine to prepare for Christ's coming to judgment. p.
194. and the necessity of this Doctrine. ibid. Sect. 18. The Use for
confutation of Sadduces, Epicures, denying this doctrine. page 201 Sect. 19.
The 13. Motives to stir us to watch for Christ's coming to judgment. page
203. whereof the 1. is taken from the names of that day. p. 211. 2. from the
signs forerunning. 209. 3. from the uncertainty of that day, 211 4. from the
manner of their resurrection. 211 5. from the generality of the judgment, 219
6. from the manner of their appearing. p. 240 7. from the place where they
shall appear. 243 8 of two special signs foregoing his coming 252. 9. of
Christ's coming to judgment. 285. 10. of separating the elect from the
reprobates. 269. 11. of Christ's proceeding in judgment. page 282. 12. of
denouncing the sentence upon both. 297. 13. of the execution of the sentence,
with the Uses of every of of these thirteen Motives in their proper places.
ibid. Sect. 20. The conclusion of the whole, with an exhortation to watch. page
364. A prayer. ibid.

THE CHRISTIANS WATCH, PREPARING; HOW TO LIVE, how to die, and to be discharged
at the day of Judgment, and so enjoy life eternal.
Mark. 13. 37. Watch?
Wonderful and every ^^ay The preamble.
fearful was the sleepy and carnal security and (...) of (...) (...) King of
Babylon ^
described (...) (...) who being on every sid^ i(...) with dangers and (...),
as first* (...) in the high d(...) of Almighty God, for his cruelty, and
oppressing of Gods Church and people, (...). 14. 6. whose City and Temple his
grandfather had spoiled and destroyed, (...). King. 25. and (...) etc. Ier. 5^.
(...). Then (...) for giving his people and himself to idolatry and
superstition, I^r^m. 51. 44. 52. Dan. 5. 4. As also to Diuinatio^s, Sorceries
En^chantments, Don. 2. 2. Isa. 47. 9. and Dan. 2. 2.
lastly for his Sacrilege, and his profaning of the holy vessels of the
Temple, and blaspheming the Lord, Dan. 5. 3. 23. Dan. 5. 3. It is a fearful
judgment of God on man, to see a iudgee^t and not to lay it to heart.
Then besides, he had Darius and Cyrus besieging the City without, and ready
to take it, and within had his own subjects ready for his tyranny over them to
cut his throat, and of them his principal Courtiers, as Gadata, whom he had
caused a little before to be gelded, and Gobryas, whose s(...) he had slain
in hunting* who to be revenged, conspired Xenophon li^^, 7. d(...)stit. (...).
against him, b(...)yed the (...), and brought in (...) A^my; ^et (...) this
case Herod (...) Cli^. It is usual with the wicked in the time of judgment
threatened, to turn fasting into feasting, and more to depend on their own
strength, then Gods power.
and danger (...)ring nothing (...) confident in the strength and defense of
the City, which was compassed ^oth with high walls, and with the great river
(...), (...) also they had provision ^ayd up in the City (...) (...) y(...)
and more, which made him so (...), that ^ee made a great feast to a thousand of
his Princes, and to (...) against God and his people, who^ ^ee kept captive,
(in his drunken vain) ^^e commanded to bring him the golden and silver
vessels, which his Father N^buchadnezzar had Pride, a forerunner of iudgm^t
brought from the Temple in Jerusalem, that the King and his Princes, and his
Concubines might drink therein, not for any necessary and sober use, which had
been too much, Leuit. 27. 28. but in this drunken and lascivious feast, to
advance himself and his power above God, and that before his drunken
companions and harlots, and thereupon, which was the greatest impiety of al,
they praised their gods of gold and silver, brass, Read (...). 6. and Hero^.
lib. 1.
iron, wood and stone, not only giving them the honor of their plenty and
feasting, as was the manner of the Heathen in the beginning of their feasts to
sacrifice unto their Gods, but they ascribed also this victory unto their
Idols, when these vessels were taken from the Temple in Jerusalem, as though
their filthy Idols were stronger and more mighty then the God of Israel.
Whereupon his judgment was immediately written over against the Candlestick
upon the plaster of the w^ll of the Kings Palace, and the King saw the palm
of the hand that wrote. And according to the contents of this writing read and
expounded by Daniel, was Balthazar that same night slain, and the City utterly
destroyed, Dan. 5. Isa, 14. 4. 22. and 47. 11. and 21: 41 And that by this
stratageme, while they were feasting, Cytus caused the river Buphrates to be
divided into diverse channels, and so made it pasable, and then his army passed
over, and by the guiding of Gadata and Gobrias, they entered into the City,
and these two Courtiers slew him.

See what security and sloth brings Use. Gods judgments are most near to
the wicked, when they think themselves most safe.
upon men and whole kingdoms, when no danger and warning (as Daniel tells
Balthazar) will serve, Dan. 5. 22. and therefore his vanie glorious feast,
became his funeral feasts, and as of this Balthazar, so it fares with all
brutish and secure worldlings, and sensual livers this day, who though they
live in their sins end thereupon in the Lords danger and hatred, and wot not
how soon for their domerits, the Lord will by death take them away, and then
bring them to judgment, yet in this deadly taking are they so sleepy and
secure, so full of joy and gladness, when they should give themselves to
fasting, weeping, and mourning, to prevent Gods judgments, that they put far
from them the evil day, and approach to the seat of iniquity, as though no
evil The wicked ever hasten their own destruction.
could happen to them, give themselves to feasting, riot and excess, that the
Lord in the midst of their drunkenness takes them suddenly away, most
fearfully and unprepared for death or final judgment but as they lived
beastly, so they dye strangely.

Wherefore purposing (the holy Trinity assisting me) to deliver unto you my
brethren (holy and beloved in the Lord) some word of exhortation, and
considering in respect of the premises) that the chiefest things every one
ought to be most careful of as long as they live, are, first how to live
according to Gods holy will during our life here.

Secondly, how to leave this life in Gods fear and favor, and full hope of a
better life: and Thirdly, how to be discharged before Gods tribunal in the day
of judgment, and so enjoy life eternal.

In which 3. points wholly stands the glory of God and man's welfare, so much
as of man can be sought for, whereupon And man's happiness consists in 3
things.
for effecting of the premises, (...), at this instant can think of nothing
more behoofull, then to stir up your hearts to Christian watchfulnes, for the
time present, and for the day of death, and of our appearing before the Son
of God at the general judgment. Which task if we faithfully perform, we
shall be blessed in life, happy in death, yea, and for ever after death dwell
with God in heaven. Now for the fundamental ground of this exhortation. I
choose this Scripture, which directs us to examine.

1 The occasion of this exhortation. 2 The meaning and parts thereof. 3 The
instructions and uses for knowledge and conscience we are to gather hereof.
And for the first, the occasion may be 1.
gathered out of Math. 23 where our Savior denou^ceth woes against the Scribes
and Pharisees, threatening them destruction and desolation. Whereat his Disciples
being much astonished, think it impossible that their Temple should be destroyed
unless the whole world should come to an end, and be destroyed with it,
wherefore, as they departed out of the Temple one of his disciples showed him
how fortified the Temple was, how great were The Temple the statliest building
in all the world.
the stones, and strong the buildings; and indeed it was the stareliest,
strongest, and brauest building in all the world, for besides that, all Kings
and Princes of any name and fame, sent gifts to adorn and enrich it. Herod
wonderfully repaired it, the building was of white marble stones which were
each of them 25. Cubits long, eight Cubits high or thick, and some 12.
Cubits broad etc. whereof read Josephus Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 14. and de^^llo.
And lib. 1. cap. 16. and lib. 7. cap. 10. and Read Josephus.
Josephus Ben Gorion, in Hist. Heroid and Hegesippus lib. 1. cap. 35. de excid.
vrb. and lib. 5. cap. 42. and 43. where it is said of Titus, that Mirabatur
saxorum magnitudinem, metalli ^itorem, v^^ustatem operis, gratiam
pulchritudinis: nec immerito tantam fuisse ^oti celebritatem, vt eo ex lo^^
omnibus conueniretur, quia tantum non nisi summi Dei crederetur esse Domicilium
etc. But our Savior answering said unto him see thou these buildings? There
shall not be left one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down.
Thereby signifying unto him that no strength is able to withstand the Lords
judgments, how fortified soever: Then as he s(...)pon the Mount of Olives,
over against the Temple, (for he never entered into it any more) Peter and
James and John and And (...) asked him privately, when these things should be,
etc. Mar. 13. 1. to 5. and of the end of the world, Math. 24. 3. (which they
thought would come together with the destruction of the Temple;) whereupon our
Savior most graciously foretells them.

(...) Of the Jews calamities foregoing the destruction of the City, Mark.
13. 5. to 14. 2 Of the flering of the City and Temple, verse. 14. to 24.
Lastly, of the end of the world, verse 24. to 33.

Then to prevent all dangers ensuing, The wonderful care that Christ has over
his.
he exhorts them to watch, verse. 33. to 37. and lest they should take this
advice to be given them four only: he tells them that this exhortation of
watching appertains to all men, as well to people as Pastors.

Now the former part of this prophecy The cause of the destruction of the
temple.
came to pass just 40. years after Christ's Passion, in An. Dom. 73.

1 And that 1. because they regarded not the time of their visitation, though
the Son of God with weeping eyes besought them, Luke 19. 41. Mat. 23. 37.

2 They refused the Messiah to reign over them, saying they had no King but
Tiberius Caesar, Ioh. 19. 15. and preferred a murderer before him, Math. 27.
20. Luke 23. 18. Act. 3. 14.

3 They bought and sold at a most vile price the Lord of glory, Luke 22. 5.
Acts, 1. Note.
18. according to Zac. 11. 13.

4 They crucified him to death, after which time they enjoyed not one merry
day, but were more and more vexed and oppressed by the Romans, until in the
No power can withstand when the Lord comes with power to destroy. Use.
end they were all in a manner destroyed notwithstanding their strength and
fortified Temple, the miracle of all the world.

And therefore, this should be a fair warning for all, to be careful to
walk with their God only.

As for the second part of this Prophecy, which concerns the day of
Judgment, let us be assured that in his due time it shall be fulfilled, and
that as the Lord in full judgment, executed his wrath against the
Hierosolomits, for their contempt and Apostacy, he will likewise A good
observation for worldlings.
in that day take vengeance against al his enemies, who will not have him to
reign over them, regard not the time of their visitation, sell God himself,
and their souls, for the uncertain loan of this world, and with their
ungodly lives crucify to death the Lord of glory: neither shall the glory of
this world, nor pomp of wealth, and number of friends, nor their sinful lusts
and vanities in that day deliver them no more then the great stones of the
Temple, and their invincible buildings, protected the sinful Jews from
their enemies, and therefore let us watch and be wise.

The Doctrine that we are of the premises to collect before I descend to the
exhortation, is this: That we are not (...) Doct. 1.
our hearts nor eyes upon any worldly thing, We should not set our hearts on
worldly things.
wherein is no help, Seeing all is but corruption, and shall we wot not how
soon by fire from God be utterly consumed, as was Jerusalem and the Temple,
but wholly and only upon heavenly things, and the means leading thereunto: the
proofs be these, Solomon cries, that all is vanity of vanities, and vexation
of spirit, and the sum of all is, to fear God and keep his commandments,
for God will bring every work into judgment: and every secret thing whether it
be good or evil. Ecclesiast, 1. 2. Eccles. 1. 2. and 12. 13. 14
and 12. 13. 14. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world,
If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him etc. the word
passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of God abides
for ever, 1. Ioh. 2. 15. 16. 17. The day 1. Ioh. (...). 15 16. 17.
of the Lord will come as a thief in the night in the which the beauens shall
pass away with a great norse, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up: Seeing then
that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to
be, in all holy conversation and godliness. 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11. so These. 1. 7.
8. ^am. 4. 4. and 1. Peter 1. 24. 25. etc. 2. Cor. 5. 10. 11.

The first use we are to make hereof, Use 1. The world.
serves ^oradmonition to watchfulnes, for if (as in the above named
testimonies) this sinful world, and all therein be but vanity and corruption:
and shall shortly be fired, then is it high time for all sorts of people to see
to their souls, and to their sins, that they in that day be not consumed
with the fire of Gods wrath, and of hell; but the while, labor by all
religious means to be sanctified and purified, that as Daniels companions
walking in Nebuchadnezzars Oven without harm, we may stand upright before the
Son of God, filled with the fire of Gods spirit and love: which blessed fire,
blessed Lord kindle in us continually.

The second Use serves for instruction, Use 2. Riches.
for the use of worldly wealth, for we see in what short time, eue^ within the
space of seven Months: this noble City and royal Temple, full of worldly
pomp, jewels, riches, honor and glory, was connerted to dust and ashes. So
that now it is not known where this Temple was founded upon, not one tagge of
all the wealth thereof, is any where to be found. This meditation should teach
us moderation in diet, apparel, building, and hoording up for hereafter, and
why? but because we see all is corrupt and transitory, and vanitle of
vanities, which shortly (it may be ere seven Months come about) will not
only be fired, but cause thee be cast to hell fire, and so thy vanity of
vanities will bring thee to misery of miseries.

Now then tell me, were not he more then mad, that for vanity and vexation of
spirit would offend his good God, damn his own soul, the price of Christ's
blood, loose heaven and purchase hell, a frenzy of frenzies. O. that men would
believe that experienced Preacher, proclain^ing that all is most vain vanity,
then would not they thus be-dirt themselves, to heap riches unjustly, to climb
to honors ambitiously, to gorge themselves with worldly delights swynishly, to
forget their God impiously, and all for the loan of vanity for an uncertain
shadow of time, aelas what will thy dainty fare profit thee, when as for
staruing the poor, thou in hell cannot obtain Dainty fare
one drop of water, Luke 16, 25. Or thy Luk 16. 25 Buildings.
stately building help thee, truly, no more then the strong buildings of the
Temple did the Jews, who seeing their Temple burn, flung themselves into the
fire (as Sardanapalus with his riches) to burn together with their Temple they
so trusted in: or great Babel did, to deliver Nabuchadnezzar from Gods
judgments, Dan. 4. 27. Oh beloved, play not thus the beasts to trust in
stones, heaped upon stones: they cannot free thee from Gods, inevitable wrath,
but rather increase thy damnation: if thy buildings no outward privileges can
free the w^eked (...) Gods wrath
be (...) by (...) and oppression, as (...). 13. (...). 2. 9. shall thy
braueries and glistering apparel do it, the^ remember the (...) (...) and proud
Herod Agri^pa, where of the one was turned to hell, the other eaten up with
lies, (...) what is appalet, but moa(...)deate, and the sign(...) shame; for
had we never sinned, Apparel the figue of man's shame.
we had never heeded to wear it, bearing the gracious immage of God in our
bodies as souls, but now we are fain to cover the shame of our nakedness that
sin has brought upon us, which is so great in truth, that if necessity
would permit (as gentlewomen do with their gloves and maskes, though they
think not so) both hands and face to, should be covered; so sowly has sin
Note.
disfigured our excellent creation, that as a destowred Virgin we should be
ashamed to show our Egyptian or Black-Moore faces, and Chimney-Sweepers hands,
to speak nothing of the baseness and beggary of apparel; for what more base
then Apparel.
for a Lord or Duke to wear cloth, which is but the cast greasy garment of a
scabbed or ^otten Sheep? and what more beggarly then to dig into the Earth
for gold, to the Sea for Pearls, to the rocks for stones, to the flowers and
puddles for colors, to Hogs for grease, and a thousand things more, to
apparel and trim our sinful bodies the fuel of Hell The bodies of the wi^^d
are fuel for hell.
fire (...) for suffering the poor to dye for cold, and wan^ of apparel,
which we store up for moaths, and shall one (...) be a witness against thee,
James 5. 1. 2. 3. weep Iam. 2. 19.
loved, weep and howl for this madness and ensuing misery, and forget not that
fiery (...)ng day, the remembrance Remember the day of judgment: the devils
tremble and fear.
whereof makes the very Devils to tremble and quake, and should make every
sinful man weep and howl, repent and forsake this folly, which kindles the
coals of hell to consume us: oh my brethren beloved in Christ Jesus, would A
simily.
we not repute him unwise, that would rob the poor, (...)sse the widow
defraud the fatherless, steal from the Church of God to enrich himself, to
bestow it wholy upon a famous snowball, which in short space would ^hawe to
water, or to make an admirable Becon upon an hill for men (...) upon, which at
the first news of the enemies arriving should be set on (...) yet a Snowball
is sure to stand while the frost holds, and a (...) to continue (...) the enemy
land, but this (...) and the pomp (...) (...) not sure to stand one Day, and
who the^ would waste himself and endanger^llis soul (...) uncertain vanities
and (...)ments to finne and destruction but most certain letts to salvation
and well doing wherefore my Dearly beloved let us all, seeing and knowing
these vanities be wise to salvation and (omitting these mock beggar build-ings
of sinful devises, whereby worldlings think as the builders of Babel to get
them a name when they most work their own confusion bodily, and spiritually
labor to have our names written in heaven Luke 10. 20. and containing this
world and uncertain habitations with Abraham Heb. 11. 10.
the father of the faithful, labor, and look for a City having a
foundation whose builder and maker is God, and not fondly with Peter at a
glimpse of felicity (not woating what we do) wish to build Tabernacles hear
below, and so Mat. 17. 4.
to forgo and forget our felicity above, as we see all worldlings generally
do, this is to play foolish Hobab, who ready to enter upon the holy land and
possessions of the Cananits, after long wandering in the wilderness would not
enter in, but depart to his own country and kindred, Number. 10. ^9. then which
what more sottish.

The third use serves for admonition Use 3.
also for all men to see to themselves in time, for if this great Temple and
Queen city of all the world was in a short time converted to dush and ashes,
and if semblably all the world and the glory thereof shall be we wot not how
soon and suddenly fired let us then I beseech you consider our selves (poor
and sinful wretches) who whether the world stand or fall shall shortly be
turned to dust and ashes: for what is man but a vapor, a wind, a shadow, a
dream, a nothing, then which what more transitory and vanishing these do but
scarce appear and are gone straight, so is the life of every mortal weight,
to day a man, to morrow none. Baruch made care where and how to live when God
should visit the whole land.

The Lord tells him by Jeremy. Behold Ierem. 45. 3. etc.
that which I have built will I destroy, and that which I have planted I will
pluck up even this whole land, and seek thou great things for thy self,
seek them not? as if he had said, the whole land and people shall be
destroyed, the Temple and City shall be burned; so art thou more precious to
me then all these, thou art not to look to escape when others greater and
better then thee perish; take thy life for thy portion: use that well, else thy
soul and body shall be confounded, etc. His case is ours, we see all die and
must come to judgment, Heb. 9. 27. and 2. Cor. 5. 10. Romans 14. 10. And shall we
as great sinners as they look to escape? No, no, we must hence: let us prepare
and make ready. The like lesson gives Elisha to Gehazi. 2. King. 5. 26. 27.
Showing him this was no time to hoord wealth by hook and crook, but to fast
and pray for his own sins, and the sins of the whole land, and at no hand
touch this pestilent leaprosie. I would to God we all semblably would consider
that we were not sent to this world, to make our selves mighty men, as those
giants before the flood. Genesis 6. 4. Nor yet borne as hogs in sties to be
fatted, to eat, drink, take our ease, and be merry as that rich Cob, Luke 12.
20. 20. Who thinking thus to live to himself and for himself hard:
(unmerciful wretch as he was) Oh fool, this night will they fetch away thy
soul from thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? a
short and sore warning, yet his case is ours: we cast for many years every man
for himself, yet are not sure to live till the next morning: and the rather
because we discharge not the business, for which we were sent into this Why we
were sent to the world.
world, as to know God to glorify his name, to be reconciled to his Majesty,
to work our salvation, to believe in his name, to do good to all men, and to
repair his gracious image in us, and keep his covenant, etc.

Let us not then no longer deceive our selves with shadows, nor foolishly
delay, nor defer any time to come to God, and no longer serve the Lord with
smooky hay and stubble, 1. Cor. 3. 12. Nor yet as Lawyers use their Clients
with demurs, and heereafters, promising fair, performing foul, but God will
not be mocked.

Turn us again (O Lord God of hosts) cause thy face to shine upon us and we
shall Application.
be saved. So will we not go back from thee, revive thou us and we shall call
upon thy name? Psalm. 80. 18. 19. And thus far of the occasion of this
exhortation to watch and of the Coherence of this Text, and of the first part.

The second part concerns the 4. 2. Part. This distribution of this Text.
sense of the Text and meaning of this watch word, which we shall the readier
find if we observe the diverse acceptions, and sorts of watching as first.

1 Almighty God watches over his 1.
Church, continually, Psalm. 121. 3. 4. 5 out. and 127. 2. As also he watches
over his enemies, Ierem. 44. 27. Dan. 9. 14.

2. The Angels watch to do the 2.
Lords will, Dan. 4. 10. 14. 20. Psalm. 91. 11.

3. Ministers good and bad be called 3.
watchmen, Ezach. 33. 7. Isa. 56. 10.

4. Satan watches to hurt and 4.
harm us, 1. Pet. 5. 8. And to find matter to accuse us night and day, Revel.
12 10.

5. The elect watch, Psalm. 102. 7. Prou. 5.
8. 33. Cantic. 5. 2.

6. All creatures watch to defend 6.
themselves from harms, soldiers watch in the field, superiors watch over
their inferiors, wicked men watch to steal, etc. But the watch in this
Scripturement, is when we carefully prepare our selves for the coming of the
Son of God to judgment, as is largely set down in the former verses, Mar.
13. 33. to 37. Watch and pray for ye know not when the time is, for the Son
of man is as a man going into a strange country, and leaves his house, and
gives authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commands
the porter to watch, watch ye therefore (for ye know not when the Master of
the house will come at even, or at midnight at the Cockcrowing, or in the
dawning) least if he come suddenly he should find you sleeping: That is,
unprepared, as the five foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. 3. 8. And those
presumptuous Hypocrites, Matthew. 7. 22. The former without oil in their lamps,
the latter craving old acquaintance and deserts of the Judge. But this watch
we cannot keep, unless we before watch over our whole lives carefully,
ordering the same according to Gods holy revealed will; and with all, be
careful to leave this life in most willing, faithful, joyful, and godly
manner, preparing and waiting for a blessed departure hence, and expecting I
for a better life after death, suitable to our former lives, and to this
departure and resignation of our souls and bodies into his hands that gave
them us; whereof it evidently appears by the premises, that every The
subdiuision. Three watches.
man and woman, has three distinct watches to keep.

1. On over the whole course of our 1
lives from the beginning to the end.

2. The other for death. 2


3. And the third for our Saviors 3
blessed coming to judgment. From which three, we also may gather this
description of watching, to wit, that to What is it to watch.
watch, is to be exceeding careful and circumspect to behave our selves all
our life, holily, soberly, and justly in all our actions, according to the
Lords will expressed in his word, and ever to be heedfull to settle our selves
in such a wise and constant religious state of life, that we may ever more, as
good and faithful servants be found well occupied, and prepared both for death
and our Lords coming to judgment; without fear, blame, or check. And
because these three watches must be managed and effected in our life and health
time, and not in the hour of death, or upon the day of judgment. I will
dilate of every of them in order, but first entreat of some points in
general, which do alike concern these three sorts of watching, then descend
to discuse of the perticulars.

And because lightly no doctrine is much regarded, unless it be known to Of
watching in general. The necessity of watching.
be necessary for the auditorie in respect of time and place: I will in the
first place (God aiding me) show you, how needful this doctrine of watching
is, to make us approved and acceptable to Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit ^tite
(...)
God both all our life long, at our death, and appearing in judgment, which
being found necessary, then it must consequently be profitable, and therefore
pleasant, alluring, and binding all men and women, old and young, to the
practice thereof, unless wilfully, and madly they run upon the pickes of
their own destruction, which the Lord forbid.

My doctrine then is this. It is a most Doct. (...). Which teaches, it is most
necessary to watch.
necessary work for all men living, to watch over their lives, during their
aboade here; as also for the time of their transmigration hence, and for their
cheerful and joyful appearing in judgment, my proofs be these.

First, because (as I showed the second Proofs of the doctrine by Scripture
and by reasons.
in the exordium and entrance to this Sermon) these three points were the
chiefest things which every one ought to be most careful of as long as they
live; and wherein stands the glory of God: so much as of man ought to be
sought for in this life: And therefore are most needful.

2. God commands us in diverse places to watch, and pray, for these three
ends, as hear Matthew. 2. 4. 4. 2. Luke 12 36. and 21. 36. and 22 40. 46. and 1.
Pet. 4. 7. and 5. 8. Ephesians. 6. 18. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. 10. etc.

Now every commandment of God binds the conscience perpetually to absolute
obedience, for God that commands, is our great Lawgiuer: who is able to save
and destroy. Iam. 4. 12. To say nothing that Gods will is the only rule of
every man's will, unless he be a professed rebel, then God in the very
creation of Man and Angels: put this bridle in the mouth of all reasonable
creatures, that no man without extreme and manifest impudency, durst gainsay,
but humbly and speedily obey, any thing if it were apparently known to be
commanded by God; but this is known so to be, and therefore must be obayed.

3. There is not a more effectual doctrine to rouse the sluggard, then to
hear the drum of death, and Gods judgment sounding in his secure soul and
ears.

4. Watchfulnes is profitable to stir us up to serve God sincerely without
Hypocrisy.

2. It will cause us to survey our lives and judge our selves.

3. It will pull down our pride, and cause us loath the least thing that
troubles, or hinders our reckoning in that day, whether of the first, or
latter judgment.

4. It will cause us make no account of this world, then of an Inn or baiting
place, but joy to depart from i^ for here can I go about no good thing, but
Satan, or the world, or my ^^sts molest me, and many excellent ^en have fallen
sorely, for want of watching.

5. If I can watch without ceasing, I shall get in each action the peace of
conscience, which is an incomparable jewel, I shall be as a good steaward,
accountable to God of my talents without distrust, I shall stop the mouths of
my adversaries, and cause my religion to be well spoken off, by my godly
conversation: and be ready when death summoneth, and God calls me to judgment.

The first use, we are to make hereof, 6. Use 1. For admonition to all men.
serves for admonition to all men, that seeing watchfulnes is thus necessary,
and profitable, that we awake from the sleep of sin, and death, and trim
up our lamps to meet our blessed bridgroome, and no longer with the sluggard
plead for sleep, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little foulling of
the hands to sleep, etc. Prou. 24. 33. Least poverty comes upon us as on
that trauelleth by the way, and necessity like an armed man.

2. Seeing this doctrine concerns all men generally, rich, as poor, wise, as
foolish: all men are speedi y to watch and awake betimes, we see how every man
is ready and wise to coin excuses, to draw their necks from under Christ's
yoke and burden, how easy and light so ever, using all exceptions and
exemptions, and so shift of this Mandate, as not appertaining unto them, as now
at least: and wi I not seem to them so peremptory, but in some cases admits
relaxation, a common, but a pestilent sickness, infecting all the sons of
Adam: we see how Adam and Euah had their peraduentures and excuses, Gen 3. 3.
The recusant ghuests had their unmannerly demurres, and made light to come to
the wedding, Luke 14. 24. Martha was busy in providing Christ's dinner, Luke
10. 42. A good work doubtless, but on thing was necessary: the Lawyers could
not abide to be rebuked, Luke 11. 45. And when our Savior exhorted all to
watch: Peter expecting exemption to some, asks if he spoke to all, Luke 12.
41. So likewise here it is like they looked for a prerogative, but our Savior
preuents them, saying. Those things that I say unto you, I say unto all, watch.

Therefore beloved let us all as one man buckle our selves to this weighty
work: and know that all men must die, and come to judgment; and therefore
happy is he that is best prepared for it, this is a more precious work, then
to purchase lands, or buy oxen, yea then to dine Christ himself, or flee to
Tharsus, as Jonah from the face of the Lord. O Lord open we beseech thee, our
drowsy eyes, that we sleep not in death, least the enemy say I have
prevailed against him; or where is now thy God: and thus far as now of the
necessity of this Text, and of watchfulnes.

The next point is to seek out the nature of this watchword, which I suppose
The sense of this word watch.
is more evidently apparent (as colors of contrary die or hue) by the
contrary sense or speech. Now the contrary term to watchfulnes is to be
sleepy, careless or secure, how matters fare or fall, well or ill. Therefore
in saying watch, our Savior means sleep not, as we read in Mar. 13. 35. 36.
Watch therefore, etc. least he find you sleeping. And in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Let us
not sleep but watch and be sober. Now whereas there is a natural sleep, a
deadly sleep, or sleep in death, and a spiritual sleep, here the
spiritual sleep is only meant, which is a kind of dulnes of spirit, a satiety
and unaptness to any godly exercise, as drowned in prosperity, or carnal
contents and besotted in sin, whereby he loses all feeling in heavenly
things, as if he were in a natural sleep, or sick of a lethargy, whereof
men die sleeping, or without feeling, and this sleep our Savior Christ Jesus
impliedly under this word watch, as being the Antithesis thereof, commands us
to a void as the sorest enemy to watchfulnes, whereof I raise this doctrine.

If we intend to lead godly lives, and to prepare our selves for death, and for
Christ's Doct. 3. against carnal security.
appearing in judgment, we must not sleep in sin, nor fuffer our selves to
be overtaken with carnal security, or careless satietie in heavenly things,
the doctrine is proved out of the before named testimonies in Mar. 13. 36. and
1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Proofs by Scripture.
Where the Apostle teaches that the Thessalonians were not now in darkness,
that that day should come upon them as a thief, but were the children of
light, and for that cause were not to sleep, but to watch and be sober, this
sobriety also What sobriety is.
is a spiritual temperance and moderation in the use of the things of this
life, least we become fettered and drunken as it were with the allurements and
delights thereof so Romans 13. 11. He shows that howsoever formerly they slept
in security and sin, without remorse or regard, whether to please or
displease the Lord, yet now being converted to Christ, and every moment
expecting both for death and his coming to judgment, it was time to awake from
this sleep, to cast away all stupidity of mind, all security of life, all
pampering of the flesh, and to awake to God, to put of the old man, and to put
on Christ Jesus, the like places we have in Ephesians. 5. 14. out of Isai. 60. 1.
Examples show what harm security brings, as to the old world, Sodomits and
men of Laish, Luke 17. 26. 28. Judge. 18. 7. and Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20. Psalm. 10. 6.
12. and 36. 2. and 49. 7. etc.

And as no disease is so desperate, or past recovery, as that which grows
upon a man so extremely, that he has no sense or feeling thereof, or which
ouerwhelmeth him, with a sweetness delight or sleepines, as do the Lethargy,
consumptions, and strong poisons: so is there no sin so pernicious, as that
which pricketh not the conscience, as this sleepie security, and such as we
take to be small or no sins, as sins of custom, gainful sins, as usury,
cunnicatching, etc. sins of sport, negligences, sins of omission, and of
ignorance, etc. or such as we feel a holiness in the doing thereof, as in all
sorts of idolatry, and superstitions worships, human inventions in Gods
service, as in praying, and praising God, in lip labor without feeling, or
attention of heart, so charming sorcerie, coniuring, casting of figures, and
judicial astronomy, as also when we feel no guilt of sin, by reason of the
hardness of our hearts, and corruption of our lives, as do persumpters,
adulterers, murderers, thieves, swearers, etc. and yet take themselves to be
cockesure, by reason that sometimes they go to Church: mumble a few prayers by
rote, and tale, or for that they pay their tithes, fast, etc. As he, Luke 18.
11. and Isa. 65. 5. Or lead civil lives; Exhortation.
yet let such awake speedily from this deadly sleep; and know, that now Satan
prevails and keeps the possession when all is peace, peace, and thou in the
broad way to damnation; unless in this quiet storm thou fall lustily to the
tackling for thy ship is in the quick sands, ready to drown: fall therefore
to speedy repentance; cry to the Lord mightily; thy ship sinketh, procure his
favor in Christ, shake of thy drowsinesse least as a sluggish soldier thou
loose the day, and Satan get the victory.

The use serves for instruction to Gods children, to stand upon their watch Use
1. To be watchful.
knowing that our whole life is a spiritual warfare; and therefore beware thou
loose not the field: before the day of triumph come: for we see how Satan our
Arch enemy, knowing his time to be but short, redoubleth his forces to
vanquish us, therefore in this danger there is no sleeping; for then the hungry
roaring Lion will devour us; but be we wise to prevent his stratagems, and
never think that we are stronger in faith, nor holier in life, then Satan dare
adventure upon us. He sp^red not our Savior, nor any of Gods Elect in any age,
nor estate of life. What think ye of these pillars of the Church, Peter, and
Andrew, James and John? were they not Christ's chosen and best beloved Apostles,
and most mortified men, who had forsaken all for Christ, and had of long time
been continually schooled by the Lord himself; so that Peter had good reason
to doubt, that this commandment concerned them not, and yet see what sad and
serious exhortation our Savior gives them, not to snort in security? The
merciful God be gracious and merciful unto us. Is our corruption so
contagious, so far and wide crept, and every where so pestilent, that in all
the world not on man nor woman can be found, who can say, I need not watch. I
may sleep careless for thou Lord of thy goodness haste made my hill so
strong, my lamp ouerrunneth Psalm. 30. 6.
with oil, my sieve talents have gained ten, and I my self am so wise, so
holy, so mortified, that I need no admonition: I am holier then thou, stand a
part, come not near to me. Isa. 65. 5. No, no, neither Peter, nor Andrew,
James nor John, are exempted, I say to you, Take heed, watch and pray, and
what I say to you, I say to all (none excepted) watch, sleep not, and why? But
for that security, carelessness, and sleep, so inebriate men's minds, as a
continual drunkenness, that they neither remember God to know his revealed
will, nor stir up themselves to reform their lives, nor yet arise from from
this dead sleep, that Christ may give them life. And this deadness of heart,
(that nothing can awake them, with what pipe soever ye play) what is it else,
but as in Christ's time it was an infallible sign of the destruction of the
City and Temple, so now of the end of the world, when Christ shall not find
(as himself foretells) faith upon the earth. Luke 18. 8.


2. This serves for comfort to Gods Use 2. For comfort for such as watch.
Elect, who in watching and prayer, wholly submit themselves to Gods
commandment, do most carefully, shake off this drowsy sluggishnesse, in the
whole course of their lives: not forgetting they must die and be brought to
judgment; and albeit they sometimes cannot choose but slumber and sleep.
Matthew. 25. 5. Yet are they full secure and careless, there lamps purely
burning, and well stored with oil, for they replenished in hearts, with faith
and obedience in life, have ever a good conscience, are ever provided and are
sure that (there sins in Christ being pardoned) no evil can befall them; nor
separate them from the love of God. Romans 8. 38, 39. But may ever with David
cheerfully sing, I will lay me down and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord
only make me dwell in safety. Psalm. 4. 8. And what (beloved) can be more
joyful and comfortable to us, then by these means now in this life, to be
interressed to Gods heavenly regalties, and divine privileges, whereby this
kingdom of grace, wherein we thus converse, is made an entry to the kingdom
of glory, and not now only, but at our death will make us sanctifiedly secure
and joyful, when then a far off (as sailors upon the sea) we behold our
long wished haven and home, and thereupon breaking up our watch and ward, do
confidently in sure faith and undoubted hope of a glorious resurrection to life
eternal, commit our selves, souls and bodies into the hands of our gracious
God, and thus far of the Antithesis; next of the Thesis it self which is
watch.

This watchword I divided into three Part. 1. Of watching in special.
parts, for this life, for death, for judgment. In the first place I am to
show how we are to watch for this present life, that so we may live according
to Gods holy will, while we have our aboade here, and be the while secured of
Gods good acceptance of us, and all our doings and dealings: wherefore of this
first branch of watching I gather this doctrine: viz.

Seeing the whole lifo of a Christian is a continual warfare full of labor
and dangers, Doct. 4. To watch for the leading of a godly life in this world.
and we environed on every side with many and mighty, fierce and malicious
enemies, we must while we live in these earthy Taber nacles and tents (as
souldtours in the field and pilgrims in the world) in all carfulness,
piety, and sobriety, constantly watch over every periode of our lives and all
our actions, that so we may pass our days religiously and holily according
to Gods revealed will during our natural lives.

This proposition is thus proved. First Proofs by Scripture.
our Savior here, and in sundry places besides, stirs and commands his
Disciples and us all to watch: and in Luke 12. 35. to 49. largely discourses
of this point, concluding again and again, That blessed is that servant whom
the Lord when he comes shall find waking. And Paul in 1. Cor. 15. 34.
Exhorts us to awake to live righteously and not to sin, and 16. 13. To watch,
to stand fast in the faith, to quite us like men and be strong, and Ephesians. 6. 18.
To watch with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. Where he makes
watching a part of our Christian armor, against Satan and all his power, and
so does Peter, 1. Epist. 5. 8. And the Angel of the Church of Sardis exhorts
her to awake and watch, else threatens to oome upon her suddenly as a thief,
Revel. 3. 2, 3. and in Revel. 16. 15. Christ again calls them blessed who
watch and keep their garments least they walk naked and men see their
filthtnesse, etc.

Reasons enforce the doctrine: as first By reasons
God commands us to watch; which he would not, were it not behoouefull and
needful for us. Secondly, the imminent dangers we stand in, persuade thereunto
as the corruption of our nature: prone to sin and to all mischief; Satan's
manifold assaults and temptations; certain uncertain death; Gods wrath and
unsupportable judgments; the baits and allurements of this life; as with so
many cartropes pulling us to sin, and damnation, crosses, and death in every
creature we use; and under every stone lurketh a Scorpion ready to sting us to
death, if we be not vigilant and constant in prayer.

Thirdly, the benefits redounding to us hereof, should set us forward to this
duty, as namely: first, we shall live righteously and glorify God in all our
dealings: 1.
secondly, we shall be as in complete 2.
harness appointed, against Satan, the world, sin, and our own
concupiscences: thirdly, be helpful to 3.
men: fourthly, hurtful to none: fifthly, Blessed of God in this life:
sixthly, 4.
most happy in the life to come, etc. 5.
which the Lord of glory grant us all to do.

The first use we are to make of this Use 1. Is to declare how wear to watch.
sad doctrine serves to instruct us, wherein we are not to watch, and wherein
according to our Saviors will we must watch; where we are to understand that
our Saviors mind, is not in watching we should forbear natural sleep, which
is as needful and profitable for us as is our food: unless it be for some
part of the night, that we awake to God, and in that silent and solitary time
give our selves to prayer. So David says, he remembered God in his bed and
thought upon him when he was waking, Psalm. 63. 1. 7. At midnight rose up to
give God thanks. Psalm. 119. 62. And every night washed his bed and watered
his couch with tears. Psalm. 6. 6. and good reason had he so to do. For this
was the most convenient time to speak without interruption, and talk at large
and most familiarly with his God, which work in truth, was to be preferred
before any sleep, Then in the day time. He was so taken up with the affairs
of the kingdom, that he often had no time to call upon God in private, and
therefore would rise at midnight, to pray and praise the Lord. So our Savior,
when for the press of the people, and his indefatigable labor in preaching,
and teaching the people, and working of miracles, he could not talk with his
God in prayer, He would go out to the mount to pray, and spend the whole night
therein. Luke 6. 12. and 21. 37. And so should we do, for the night is the
fittest time for this holy work, for then may we have elbow room enough,
without any disturbance of wife, children, family or friends, nor yet of
secular affairs, to examine our hearts, if Christ called us at midnight to
judgment, or at cockecrowing, or in the dawning, Mark. 13. 35. we might every
way be ready prepared and waking, yea walking with our God; and also to power
out our hearts to our good and merciful God in prayer, and be heard. And yet
this is no warrant for swinish wretches, who if they pray at all, never pray
but in their beds, and that so drunken, drowsiely, and sleepingly, that in the
midst of their lip-labor devotion they fall asleep, and withal joy and
comfort themselves, yea brag it out, that they ever fall asleep in a good
work, that is, as if they said they were overtaken with sleep, in abusing
Gods Majesty with their lippe-labour prayer, taking his name in vain, and
offering unto him the sacrifice of fools, Eccle. 5. 17. and 6. 1. But by
watching, When we are to watch.
the Lord warns us to be vigilant and careful over our whole lives and every
part thereof, that Satan with his subtilties and sleights, nor yet the world We
must watch over our selves.
with the enticements thereof, nor sin with his deceitfulness, nor our own
nature, with the lusts and corruptions thereof, draw us from our faith and
profession, or from our loyal obedience to the Lord, and so defeat, us of our
joyful victory and hopeful triumph, in that great day over all gods and our
enemies, and withal deprive us of our incorruptible crown of glory: and for
this cause must we ever imitate the Hare, who though she sleeps, yet never
closes her eyes together, but ever pricketh up her cares to listen, if any dog
bark or trace after her: so though we sleep our hearts ever must be awake,
Cant. 5. 2. Job 9. 28.
and with Job must fear and examine all our ways, and know that in this holy
work we have no greater enemy then our selves, and therefore (as our household,
and ever flattering foe) we must watch, and distrust all our actions, and as
under an iron lock, keep in, and under, all our thoughts, words and works,
else they will lay broad open the gates of our souls for Satan's accomplices to
enter in and rob us of all graces temporal and spiritual, and then woe, woe
shall be unto us. Neither is this all our charge though this be We must watch
over (...) family.
more then well we can discharge: but we must further watch over such as God
charge us withal, as: first, the 1. As f^st over his wife.
Husband over his wife, that as before she was married to him she was ospoused
to a better husband, even in Baptism to Christ Jesus, and at his hand received
her to be his helper, upon condition, to see her keep faith and truth to her
first husband. So must he carefully watch over her that she break not faith
nor promise in any case, but daily walk more and more worthy of the Lord in
all sincerity, good conscience, faith unfeigned, and all loyal and renewed
obedience: and seeing she is the chiefest of her heavenly Fathers goods, be
sure to respect and keep her in all honesty, piety, and honor, as the
chiefest jewel of price committed to his safe custody, and in due time be
ready to restore her to God her Father, a pure and chaste Matrone without spot
or wrinckle. For having undertaken a charge, he must beautify and adorn the
same, and say of her as Augustus of Rome, I found it of brick, I leave it of
Marble, which he may well and easily perform, being first godly religious
himself, and know that his wife is his sweet garden, wherein he must
continually walk, and his most gainful vineyard, wherein he is ever to be
employed, neither will any (I trow) be so fond as to think to reap
commodity from his vineyard, if he plant not therein, continually the choicest
vines, whatsoever they cost, which set will quite cost, and prune and dress
his trees, nor to take delight and comfort of his garden, if he be not careful
to weed it of all unsavory herbs, and set therein the most virtuous, and
sweetest, plants as are to be found, else mad were he that would exclaim
that he can make no commodity nor gather any fruit out of his garden or
orchard, when as he never set on good herb nor plant in them one or other.
The like is every husband to deem of his wife, watch for her good, and she
will do thee all good.

Then secondly, every father is to 2. Over his children.
watch over his children, that they degenerate, and grow not from pure wheare
to wild oats, as Helies sons did, to the destruction of parents and
children. 1. Sam. 4. 17. etc. And this watch is hardest of all, because they be
the fruit of our bodies in which respect we are over indulgent, as was David to
Absolon. 2. Sam. 18. 3. and 19. 33. and to Adoniah. 1. King. 1. 6. And
therefore are they too often more rebellious and headstrong, then we can
rule, or willingly would bend, much less break or cast out of our houses, and
stone to death. Deuter. 21. 18. And who though he were full of eyes and never
sleeping, is sufficient for these things, and therefore parents with heavy
hearts often sing Moses song, in Numb. 11. 11. etc. Lord if I have found favor
in thy sight kill me, that I behold not my misery! What is here then to be
done? shall we in the most needful place give over our watch? God forbid. But
rather herein follow Salomons counsel in Prou. 22. 6. Train up (or Catechize)
a child (that is, while he is a child) in the way he should go; and when he
is old, he will not depart from it: And good reason, for look how the first
institution of children is, suitable thereunto will be their whole life,
continually aspecting thereupon, as we see the Sun ever sets even against
the place it first that day arose. And look what impression the wax takes
when it is new, it will retain when it is hard and old. Gods people were
careful hereof, for we see how watchful Job was over his children, how he
sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt
offerings according to the number of them all. For Job thought, it may be my
sons have sinned and blasphemed God in there hearts, thus did Job every day.
Job 1. 5. Abraham was commended for commanding his sons and household after
him, to keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment. Genesis
18. 19. Which how we l he performed, appeared in that in one day, he
circumcised himself, his son Ishmael and all the men in his house, Genesis 17.
26. 27. Whereof were 318. able men of war, Genesis 14. 14. And how could Joseph
approve so wise and godly a man departing from his fathers house at seventeen
A good president for all parents to train up their children in the fear of
God.
years, Gen 37. 2. Or Samuel so holy a Prophet, or Daniel and his three
companions so excellent, Moses and David men after Gods own heart, Solomon so
toward, Ezechias servants so gracious, that they penned a part of Salomons
proverbs, as Prou. 25. 1. Joshua and Prou. 25. 1.
Nehemiah, so zealous and godly governors, Nathaniel, Paul, and Timothy so
religious, but that from there cradles they were by their godly parents
continually trained in the fear, favor, and knowledge of the Lords word and
will. Mose: delivered Israel Gods laws, to teach them their sons and sons
sons, all their days, that is, every day while they lived, Deuteronomy. 6. 2. And
before his death, bound all Israel men, women, children, servants and
bond-slaues by an oath to keep and maintain Gods laws, all excuses set
apart, as writes Josephus Antiq. lib. 4. cap. vlt. which they failed not for
many years to perform most carefully, they in these last times not only from
their cradles instruct their children in the principles and sums of religion
which they call there little Bible, but at five years old, set them to read
Moses law at ten, the commentaries and expositions of there Rabines at
thirteen, rules and precepts moral, at fifteen the Thalumd controversies and
disputations of the Rabines law. Humphred. and Ioh. Buxdorph. Syn. Iud.
Simili^^.
cap. 3. So that their children, were compared to spungies, greedily sucking
from their parents the water of life, to houre-glasses measuring so their
hours that no minute should be misspent, to wine sackes, retaining the
substance of piety, and stilling out the sweetness to others, to ciues with
holding within the pure wheat of the word, but shifting out the dust, yea they
were so skillful and painful text-men, that they could tell you how many
times every letter of their Alphabet, was written in the book of Genesis,
which Willet testifies also in Genesis 50. at the end saying, this book the
Jews make such account of (meaning Genesis) that they have numbered the very
letters which make 4395. etc. Thus in old time little children became old men,
Grying even to Christ in the Temple Hosanna. Matthew. 21. 15, 16. But now old men
are twice children, to wit in age and knowledge.

Neither do I take it any sin besides holy writ, to show unto you how the holy
ancient Christians, were not sleepy in this work: as Leonides Origens father
was so painful in the education of Origin, that daily he exercised him
inreading Example of Origent training up of a child.
and learning by heart, set portions of the holy Scriptures, wherein the child
had such inward and mystical speculation, that many times he would move very
profound questions concerning the meaning of the Scriptures, that his father in
outward show, would reprove him for wading so deep into matters incapable for
his age, and often would uncover his breast being asleep and kiss it, giving
thanks to God that made him father of such a child, and being but seventeen
years of age, had such desire to suffer martyrdom for Christ with his father,
that his mother privily in the night hid away his clothes, that for shame he
could not go forth, but writ to his father, to take heed for affection, to
wife, or children to recant. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2. So in the time of the Tenth
persecution of the Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Primative Church, a little child of feuenteene year old made a glorious
confession of the unity of the Dietie and together with Noble Romanus suffered
martyrdom Prudent. de cor. Martyr. And when Valeus the Arrian Emperor sent
his deputy to slay all the Orthodoxe Christians congregated in a Church at
Edesse in Mesopotamia, a poor woman of the city hearing thereof, hastened with
her children in her arms thither, which the Deputy seeing, asked her whether
she would, she answered to the Church to suffer martyrdom, so godly given
mother and children were in those days Ruffinus, lib. 2. cap. 5. Theodoret
lib. 4. cap. 17. Tripart. Ruffinus l. 2. cap. 5.
hist. lib. 7. cap. 32. So Dionysia Africana when her most noble young son
Maioricus was martyred in the midst of his torments she exhorted her son to
constancy and to remember the holy Trinity in whose name he was baptized and
to keep undefiled his wedding garment, Victor. de perseq. Vandal. lib. 3. So
Frumentius a ladde together with his fellow Aedesius (Phoenicians) converted
India, as is in Sozomenus, lib. 2. cap. 23. And a prisoner woman converted the
Iberians Sozomenus lib. 2. cap. 6. And the king of Bulgaries sister converted
that country, says Zonaras: Athanasius but a child, would reason with his
plar-fellowes of the mysteries of religion, Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 14. So the
children of Samosata when Lucius an Arrian Bishop as they were at Ballplay had
with his foot touched their ball, they would not play with it, until they had
drawn it through the fire, Crying their Ball was defiled by the heretics
foot. Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 15. And no less worthy to be remembered are the
children of Merindoll in France who were so expert in the principles of
religion that questioning one with another before the Bishop of Cauaillon with
such grace and gravity as was marvelous to hear, thereupon a religious man
come lately out of Paris said to the Bishop: I must needs confess that I have
often been at the common schools of Sorbone in Paris where I have hard the
disputations of the divines, but yet I never learned so much as I have done by
hearing these young children, according to Matthew. 11. 25. Act and Mon. page 868.
Thus we see how Gods children watched over their babes from their infancy, and
what good effects it brought forth in and by them and so would with us, if we
did the like, the Lord open our hearts, and make us see how many millions of
babes, and infants, come to fearful designements, by reason of parents
sleepiness and security in this behalf.

Wherefore my next use shall be to Use 2. To nurture their children in the
fear of God.
admonish and in Christ Jesus to entreat all parents, to pity their infants,
and while they be young to nurture them in the fear and knowledge of God, and
that for these reasons among others.

1. Because God commands it, Deuteronomy. 2. Reasons.
6. 6. etc. Eccles. 12. 1. Lam. 3. 27. Psalm. 78. 4. 2. All the godly in all
ages performed this duty, whose examples we should follow and further know,
that as the Jews children were after the circumcision so soon as might be
instructed in the Lords ways, so should we after Baptism be in the laws of
Christ. 3. It is necessary for us so to do for all men know and confess, that
Satan spits and bears, an implacable hatred to young Satan's spite to little
children.
babes, and infants; because they be the seed of the Church, and therefore
labors to draw and keep them in all profaneness, as he caused the Jews by
an Apish imitation of Abraham's offering of Isaac to sacrifice their children
to Moloch contrarily, Leuit. 18. 21. and 20. 2. So in Popery be Priests,
Monks, and Nuns kept from lawful marriage, beget children, and in the birth
stifle them, witness Huldericke Bishop of Ausbrough who in an Epistle to Pope
Nicholas the first, relates how Pope Gregrorie the first, upon a certain day
sent unto his fish pond for fish, and above 6000 infants heads were brought
unto him which were taken out of that pond or moat whereupon he confessed his
restraint of Priests marriage to be the cause thereof, and if this was in one
pond, what was in every place and at all times. An^^logia. Papa page 779. Act
and Mon page 125. 14.
4. Every man is so full of original as actual sin, that unless we be
sanctified and from our cradles separated to piety we shall never or very
hardly be saved, for look what licour the new caske takes, it longest tastes
thereof, and we read how the fig tree was cursed, though the time of figs
was not yet. Mark. 11. 13. To teach us to watch, that at all periods of our
lives we should be fruitful in good works, and holy life, and we see how the
Bears tare in pieces 42. little children at Bethel that mocked Elisha: their
littleness excused them not. 2. King. 2. 23, 24. 5. The younger they be in
glorifying God, the greater blessing of God shall light upon them, for admit
they wot not what they say, yet God who hears the spirit speaking in them,
woateth and accepts of their words, as if they understood them, as we see in
Math. 21. 15. Mark. 10. 14. etc. Psalm. 8. 2. And we see how fearful it is, to
hear a little child swear, curse, or name the devil, though he knows not
what he speaks, all will presage that he will approve an ungracious child,
and is of an unclean spirit. Let parents then as the Eagle and Pelican, build
their nests on high, that the old Serpent come not nigh their young, and know
that the best in heritance they can provide for and bequeath their children, is
pictie: And hear would I willingly for comfort and ease in this long Watch
(for long a breeding but soon done away) to parents; give some poor direction
and open my mouth for the dumb, Proverbs 31. 8. And speak with a stammering
tongue, precept upon precept, line unto line, there a little and there a
little, Else how will babes be taught knowledge, Isa. 28. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore
for the right institution The institution of a child from his cradle.
of a child, I presuppose the parents to be religious, and not of that number
who will laugh when their children sin, but weep if they be godly addicted.

I would have the mother who is the 1.
nurse, else is no better then an Ostridge, and worse then the Dragons, which
draw out the breasts and give suck to their young, Job 39. 17. Lament. 4. 3. So
to frame if she can, her childs speech, that the first word he speaks
should be God, to perfume and sanctify the rest of his words, and meet this
should be so, for she nurceth now the son of God, and therefore should be
taught to name and call upon his heavenly father: then to this word add,
bless me, next Jesus save me, and blessed Spirit of God sanctify me.

2. As his utterance increases, teach 2.
him at his vprising to say, I praise God for my sleep, Lord keep and bless
me this day, and likewise to thank God for his food; going to bed, to
commit himself to the Lord, ever being careful that no unclean thing, nor
person, nor any of the children of the wicked corrupt him, in word nor deed.

3. Then in this progress as wit and 3.
discretion with plainnes of speech comes, teach him by rote the Lords
prayer, then the belief, after the Decalogue and so pithie questions, and
answers concerning the principles of Religion, then some short graces, which he
is before and after his meals to say, with some short prayers for morning and
evening to say upon his knees: which will be all he can do the two first years
after he begin to speak, that is, until he be full five years old.

4. Then to learn by heart some parts of the Bible as he grows capable 4.
thereof. And to this work must the father likewise reatch his helping hand,
and if there be more children of riper years in the house whom he uses as his
play-fellowes let them in their sports teach on another; the elder the younger:
and so their recreations shall be the more sanctified, and they will learn
sooner and with greater facility the on of an other then of an elder
instructour.

5. And if the father perceives him to be of ready and quick capacity he 5.
may acquaint him as he thinks best with his book: which shall keep him
from bad company or being idle and ill occupied, then let him drop into him by
familiar terms the name and right meaning of God his Creator, of Christ his
Redeemer, of the holy Ghost his sanctifier, then of the holy Trinity in the
Unity of the Dietie in as plain easy and brief manner as possible he can,
neither shall he labor in vain, for God will give a wished blessing and
comfort to his own work.

6. Thus the sixth year of his age 6.
completely passed and the seventh current: then must he provide him a
faithful and godly schoolmaster to train him further on in learning and
virtuous educatio^, yet so that he forget not himself that still he is his
father, and therefore is to watch over him and must teach him privately: as his
Master publicly to know and love the Lord, and to render some reasons thereof
as thus: we children must love God above all because he loves us, he made us
of nothing then God loves us, for he gave his Son to die for us, and gave us
his Spirit and word to sanctify us, and bring us to him and therefore must we
obey the same and love and praise God, for by these means he gathers us to
the mystical union of his sons body, and to the communion of his Elect
Church. Finally, God loves us, for after death he will raise us to life, and
we shall ever live with him in heaven, and therefore must we love and glorify
him in every thing. Then teach him to fear and abhor sin, in thought, word,
and work. And first to know as much as conveniently may be by the ten
commandments what sin is, and the temporal and spiritual penalties thereof.
As thus also: we must not sin for then God will be angry with us, then will
he take his grace and peace from us, then will he send us troubles, sicknesses,
death, and cast ve to hell with the devil and reprobates. And let him learn
to doubt of his doing, and demand of his parents, if this should be done or
undone, if the Lord bid or forbid it, if he love or hate it, and to conclude
that if God will it: I will do it, if not, to die rather then do it.

7. The seventh year complete and the eight current, acquaint him with 7.
the Bible and the principal stories thereof, as of the creation, fall, and
recovery of man, of the deluge and burning of Sodom, of Isreal's departure out
of Egypt, of the whole acts, and life, of our Savior Christ, etc. Then with
other parts thereof: and withal to make some use thereof, as we must not
break Gods commandment, for this brought sin and misery upon the world, we
must nor mock the ministers, for this caused God to send Bears to kill the
children of Bethel, maids must not be gadding about, so Dinah was defloured, we
must not break the Sabbath, for he that gathered sticks that day was stoned
to death, nor blaspheme the Lord for the blasphemer must die the death, nor
with Absolon dishonor our parents, nor with Cain commit murder, etc. Only be
careful not to ouercharge him with too many things at once, nor yet to cloy or
over weary him, for there is nothing more pernicious then sacietie in well
doing, this will cause him forsake all: but let his labors be works of
liberty, freedom, and sport, knowing that the schoole-house is called not
Carnificina a butcherie, but Ludus a sporting and playing place, where all
things be taught and learned with ease and delight. Thus let him proceed till
he be ready for some calling, but evermore the parents must be watchful that
he be not carried away with ill company, or infected with the sins of the
time, place, or his age, but that ever he proceed according to these
beginnings, and while the parents be parents, let them watch and command over
their children, and they ever obey, etc.

Then thirdly, Masters are to watch over their families, with as great care
Over his servants.
for the time being: as over their children, and also over their kindred and
friends, and every one over another, that their hearts be not hardened with the
deceitfulness of sin, and at no hand be of Cains humor to say or think,
am I my brothers keeper. Gen 4. 9. But because it were an endless labor to
speak of all sorts of people: and of all duties belonging to them, and to
every period of men's ages, where of their be already entire volumes extant: I
will surcease and speak of on or two more and refer the rest to every godly
man's consideration.

The next use serves only for a memento Use 3. For Preaching Ministers.
to the godly Ministers, not to forget their names: but as in Scripture they be
called watchmen, Ezech. 3. 17. and 33. 2. 6. 7. So must they carefully and
faithfully watch over the poor sheep and lambs of Christ Jesus: And
howsoever most men take this to be no labor at all, and that such as are in
this work most wakefull, to be busy bodies taking more upon them then need,
for these sheep are as wise, and careful for their salvation as they, else it
were pity of their lives, etc. Yet Gods servants find it an Art of Arts, and
a Science of Sciences, to ouersee, and superintend this wily flock, ever
distrustful and suspecting all plain dealing, taking their friendly loving
watchman, ever to be their greatest and most malicious enemy, and at every
bray, labors to hide themselves from him; or to escape out of his fould, so
that they may be resembled to fish, which be so sharp sighted, fearful and
distrustful, that were it not, there be so many fishes in every brook and
river, Genesis 1. 20. and 48. 16. The fisher could hardly catch any: and so if the
Lord wrought not miraculously by his word and spirit, with his painful
Minister, he should never catch on of them, so wild, and intractable they be:
nay he shall be so far from catching them, (be he an usurer, a Church
robber, an oppressor, etc.) that unless he well see to himself, the fish
will catch the fisher, and make him more the child of hell then themselves,
and therefore no tongue is able to express his care, vigilancie, labor and
travel, never at rest, that whereas all others, work the six week days:
yet they rest from their labors upon the Lords day, but this poor shepherd,
is to expect no rest, but as the Sun running his course: labors all the
week; but most of all upon the Lords day, and what remedy, but that as Ierem
10. 19. It is their sorrow and they will bear it Episcopius Printer in Basil
had this Emblem in the first page of the books he printed, An Herne standing
upon on foot upon a dead man's tomb A simile.
or a Crosiers staff, or sheephooke, with a stone in the other clawe spying
about and ready to fling it, if he spied any enemy with this Impresse under a
Bishop aluding to his own name; which signified so much, intimating that a
Bishop, or Minister, must as the Herne be a continual watchman ready to
encounter with every adversary of Gods truth, and ever ouerseeing his charge,
remembering, that a man with one foot in his grave, he must die and render
account of his stewardship, but seeing I my self have more need to be
instructed of them, and who of their own accord are so wakefull, and watchful
over their charges severally, that for want of sleep their eyes be almost
sunk in their heads, and for want of rest, their blood and strength is out
worn, that few of them live to the years of the life of their fathers, so few
and evil their days be, for that they (good men) voluntarily take more weight
upon them, then their weak nature is able to sustain, in so much, that the
image of death appears: not only under their feet, as to the Herne but in
their faces also: above all othermen. Thus dying to the world and to all the
comforts thereof: and living to God. The Lord God of heaven strengthen them,
lengthen their days, increase his graces in them, bless their labors and
their flocks, and make us ever thankful to God for them, and obedient to
their healthful admonitions, and instructions. And ever blessed be the Lords
holy name, who has multiplied the number of learned and zealous Ministers; in
these our days and country, and that in greater abundance then in any age
before us, and those two men of singular hope, full of Gods Spirit, graced with
most excellent gifts, whose virtues and holy life in their young years do
shine far above the gray heirs of their forefathers, would God we were but
half thankful enough, for so admirable blessings. The joy of the whole earth,
and the gladness of all the world, that is, the blessed hope of the Gospel
shines not a little in their gracious contenances, the Lord increase them a
thousand thousand fold, and give them double and triple his spirit, that they
may be greater then all his enemies, and abide ever faithful that through
them, the King may rejoice, the Magistrates be glad, their fellow Ministers be
backed and encouraged, the people edified, sin abolished, Idolatry rooted
out, Antichrist overthrown, Satan trodden under foot, hell confounded, the
Gospel highly far and wide flourish, righteousness shines, and God have
all the glory: So be it, and the Lord say so too and ratify it.

Another use serves for reproof of a Use 4. For unpreaching watchmen.
contrary generation, who in Scripture be also called watchmen: but full
sleepie and snorting, even at noonday, and therefore may as well be called
watchmen of waking over their flocks, as mountains of moving they are
blind, they have no knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark,
they lie and sleep and delight in sleeping, and these greedy dogs, can
never have innough, and these shepherds cannot understand, for they all look
to their own way, every one for his advantage, and for his own purpose, Isa.
56. 10, 11. They eat the fat, they cloth them with the wool, they kill them
that are fed, but they feed not the sheep, etc. Ezech. 34. 3, 4. And whereas
the watchmen of Ephraim should be with my God, the Prophet is a snare of the
fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of God, Hos. 9. 8. That is,
they should bring men to God, and not to be a snare to catch and pull them from
God, which is abominable, and what more lamentable then to see them so hard
hearted, that though the children cry for bread: yet no man breaks it unto
them, nor afford them on grain of salt to eat with their meat, and yet as
they be (improperly I grant) called watchmen, so are they called the salt of
the earth, Math 5. 13. And therefore should season: the carnal and unsavory
souls of their people, else they themselves are no better then unsavory salt.
If a Gentleman's table be laid, and ouercouered with abundance of meat and
varitie of dishes, yet if the meat be fresh and no salt upon the table, to
what use serves all that provision, but to cast it to dogs; salt is it that
seasoneth all things, so if a Minister come (I will not say to Church, and
season not the souls of the people; with the salt of the word) but if he come
to a Gentleman's house: and sit at table, if he season not the company, with
the (...)rye salt of his divine knowledge, what is he, but the shame and
disgrace of the company; and contemned, yea, cast out and trodden under foot:
as unsavory salt. Whereas, he ought both at Church, and at home, and
elsewhere with this spiritual salt, cover and cure the putrifactions and
diseases of the people. For hear it fares with men living, as with beasts
dying, which anon putrifies, scrawle with worms, stink and serve not for
man's use, unless in due time they be wisely and carefully salted, so man when
by sinning he loses the life of God: and becomes wholly earthly minded, he
forthwith begins to stink, and to scrawle with the worms of carnal lusts and
sensuality, with beastly and devilish affection, which not only fill the
heart and soul, but withal most fearfully come out at the mouth, in
scurilous filthy talk, horrible and bl^sphemous oaths, and cursings, and at
the hands, feet, and whole body, in most ungodly gestures, actions, and
behavior. Whereby he is unfit for the table, of his heavenly Father, unless
the faithful Minister, forthwith step in, and ouercouer it with his salt,
and so sweeten and purify it again, else will all whoope at this unskillful
cook, that spoileth all his Masters provision for want of salting it in due
time, and who if he saw a Goliath come to a town: with full intent to murder
and kill all the people therein, would not rise against him, but this is a
murdering of the souls of a whole Parists, if the Lord give them not the more
grace to provide for themselves. What more treacherous: then to set a man a
watchman over a city; who for a bribe will open the gate at first to the
enemy, to slay and spoil all, and do not these by their sleepie silence,
open for sin and Satan, to seize upon Christ's inheritance, regarding nothing,
but their private commodity, thinking when they enter upon a living, they
enter upon a farm to live upon or a flock of sheep, and yet watch not herein,
not so well as the shepherd of Bethlem did over their sheep. Luke 2. 8. And
who sees not, how foolish and dangerous it is to set upon the walls of a
city, besieged by the enemy, a drowsy sleepie and sluggish watchman who can
but snort all night, in the morning tells his dreams as they in Ierem. 23. 25.
28. I have dreamed, I have dreamed, etc. This sin is so heinous before God,
that he in this life (to say nothing of that to come) punishes it: with on of
the greatest plagues as can be named, to wit, with blindness of mind,
hardness of heart, and sleepiness and want of feeling of the sin, ever
pleasing themselves herein, and condemning painful laborers, (...) more busy
then is cause: yet no watc^man so slothful as will sleep whiles his captain
is present in the camp, but Christ is present ever with his drawn sword, Ioh.
5. 14. And walks in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, still crying
to every Peter love thou me, feed my sheep, feed my lambs, feed by
word, by Ioh. 24. 15, 16, 17.
life, by hospitality, etc. Andlo, Hanniball is at the gates, and dare thou
sleep in this ca^^? Godly was that Minister: who at his first entering upon
his charge, began to make his grave, to mind him of his charge, speedily to be
discharged, and of his mortality, that he was to die and come to judgment:
and answer for his Ba^lywick, and withal appointed a watchman to ouerwatch
him, and cry daily to him, finish thy grave for death hastneth for thee. Whose
example I would these bold fellows would imitate, and that their people would
awake, these sleepers and cry to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry, that
thou have received in the Lord; that thou fulfill it, Coloss. 4. 17.

The ^a^t use serves for terror to a Use 5. For robbers of the watchmen.
worse rort of people then these; who kill and murder both the watchmen that
the Lord set upon the walls of Jerusalem, and together with them the people,
they watch over, in a word Ministers and people committed to their charges in
taking from them, that holy tribute which God himself at the first
establishment of Church government gave his Ministers, for their service in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; and made it a law to continue for ever, as
appears plainly in Numb. 18. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Josh 13. 14. L^ui^. 27. 30,
31, 32, 23. And because this allowance was to scant, godly men bought and gave
lands for ever. Likewise Deo and Ecclesiae (for upon those terms their
Charters run,) now these also are taken away, whereby Gods Ministers are
robbed, pressed down, kept in plain beggary, and contempt, unable to relieve
themselves, or to furnish themselves with necessaries for their calling, and so
consequently the people are for nothing, robbed of the tenth part of their
goods, under color of paying them for the service done for them in the Church
of God; when they do nothing in the Church, but rather are enemies to God, to
his Ministers, and to the poor people, who (by reason of this want) die
Atheists, for want of preaching and instructing them in the Lords way, and the
greater is this sin, because few regard it, and so many are accessarie to
this sin, that to speak against it, is to make war against all the world,
and yet we see otherwise, the greater the insurrection is, the more is the
danger specially when men rob and invade the King of heavens liberties, and
territories, this threatens universal destruction as in the old world, the
sin of the Sodomites, etc. and of the Cananites and Jews. Nay, this sin is
so glazed and silver guilt over, that none can spy nor suspect the mischief
thereof, much less are able to preach against it (Satan using so all his
skill to cover it, as a sin of sins, and a sin that deceives many:
otherwise very godly men, which if they saw the horriblenesse thereof, would
never touch it to gain a thousand worlds) save they only, as suffer it and are
robbed and undone by it: yea, these hiue robbers besides the depriving of
people and Ministers of their goods, that they keep under their feet both
Ministers and people, that they shall not mute once against their Sacrilege,
lest these drone Bees, sting them to death, and whereas all men make title to
Gods Church and thereby contribute some portion to the maintenance of Gods
service, they blush not to brag, and vaunt, that God nor his Church, shall
have a pin from them, whiles they live of all they possess, nay they will
take and snatch from God and his Church by force, all possibly they can; and
what title can such have to God or holy Church that impudently without law to
rob both. A lamentable case that covetousness and ambition, should so
ouersway any bearing the name and nature of a man; much more of a Christian,
that to puff up himself in pride and contempt of God and his ministry, and
to prinke his wife and children in sinful bravery, riot, and excess
idleness and sensuality, should make no conscience to bath himself, and his
posterity in the blood of his brethren, yea the known price of Christ's sacred
blood, and that in all Genesis 4. 10. 11. and 9. 5. 6.
ages, and for ever too, we say (and see it by daily experience) that blood
will have blood, and the Lord himself says so to, in those that but kill men's
bodies only, as we see in Ahab and Iesabell, in Naboths matter, but what shall
become of such as kill men, women, and children, souls and bodies, and so
far forth as in them lies, send them to hell fire. David would not drink of
the water fetched from the well of Bethlem, because it was the blood of three
men that went in ieopardie of their lives for it, but they eat and drink the
blood of infinite numbers, yet make no conscience nor scruple thereof. 2. Sam.
23. 15, 16, 17. The last of the ten plagues of Egypt which was the soarest
of all the rest, was the killing of the first borne of man and beast, for then,
Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians
and there was a great cry in Egypt for there was not on house where there was
not one dead: etc. Exodus 12. 29. to 34. but this is much more fearful and
lamentable, whereby these Church-champions staruing, persecuting and molesting,
with an implacable secret hatred, the Lords watchmen and stripping them of that
God gave them, not only one in every house, but every on in every house, of
every Parish, they set foot in, is unmercifully and cruelly slain and that
not only in bodies, but also (if Gods mercies prevent not, in souls too,
Ioptah took this a strong plea against the king of Ammon, Judge. 11. 24. that
as he ought rightfully possess that which Chemosh his God had given him to
possess; so Iphtah and Israel ought to possess what the Lord their God gave
them, and by like consequent may we so reason, look what allowance the Lord
gave us, and ours for ever, that ought we to enjoy, but he gave us this holy
tribute, and therefore ought we quietly enjoy it, unless by express word he
revoke this donation, which he never did. But if you answer, that this is true
if we could prove that that donation in Numb. 18. 20. etc. Were perpetual and
never to be abrogated, then the tithes might stand ever iure divine and no man
take them away: without permission from God. I answer, all the learned
preachers in the land almost, and all that come to Paul's cross in London, in a
Preachers and writers against sacrilege.
manner affirm and confirm it, and so do all writers, that writ books of
that subject also (as Euerard Digbies dissuasme, with Celsus of Veronas
Dissuasme, Rob. Ponts 3. Sermons against Sacrilege Master * Samuel Gardener
against sacrilege.
I. Howson now Bishop of Oxons 2. Sermons. Pet. Rebuffus, and D. Tyn^arus de
decinus, Richard Eburnes, maintenance of the Ministry: Fulk. Roberts revenues
of the Gospel. Roger Fentons Sermon of Simony and Sacrilege, Master John
Rainolds upon Obadiah Verse. 5. 6. Ric. Bernards of the Ministers maintenance.
Mast. George Carletone Bishop of Landaffe of tithes: William Sclater of the
Ministers portion, Sir Henry Spelman de non temerandis Ecclesiis: Sir James
Sempils Sacrilege against Josephus Scaligers Diatribe and John Seldens
history of tithes.)

But if you object, that the tithes be Object.
leuiticall, and therefore since Christ's resurrection abrogated; and in that
respect the Ministers by divine right cannot claim them. I first desire to
learn, by what Scripture do you warrant this assertion is, that they be
abrogated, but if you cannot, then by Ieroms rule Contra (...)liud.
what soever cannot be proved by Scripture, it may with the like authority be
denied as affirmed. But if you will have them so to be, because you say so,
therefore to grant it as upon Pythagor as word; were to glory in men. And
therefore I would be resolved, whether any part of the Leuiticall rites be
abrogated, except only such as figured the spiritual fulfilling thereof; by
Christ, or his Church; and which be they; but in my opinion tithes figure
nothing in Christ to be fulfilled, in any of his two natures, or three offices:
and therefore are not Leuiticall nor abrogated, but stand as sure as first they
were enacted, unless you say that as the tithes given Levy, for serving in
the Tabernacle should stand firm until the Messiah came, who would then
himself discharge all Gods Ministry, and after never use man's service therein:
which we see is not so: Or else that in his days and ever after, the Church
should in it self be so thoroughly instructed, that it needed no Ministers,
which is not so neither, and therefore tithes be no figurative right, and if
not, I demand, A dilemma.
why should they be abrogated unless we arrogated to our selves, wisdom
above the Lords, and could devise a better way for the Ministers maintenance,
then the Lord could. But admit the tithes be Leuiticall as you would have
them, and that they figure some mystical secret we be not worthy to know: then
must you confess (as you do) that they be abrogated, now Christ is come, and
being fuifilled in him, are not to be exacted by any, nor to be paid by any
Parishioner to any man, for this were to join with the Jews, that the Messiah
is not yet come, which is to deny the faith, and so Christ shall profit us
nothing at all, as Paul proves of Circumcision, Gal. 5. 3. And if so, why
should any Minister demand tithes, much less any secular man, or any
Parishioner pay any, seeing this is to deny plainly, that Christ is come, but
while we pay tithes, we look for another, else by paying Leuiticall tithes,
you hold all the rectors and parsons appropriate, and also all the people in
the land which pay or receive tithes in a Jewish error, and infidelity. And by
the like right, may you compel the people to pay you, sheep, and oxen, flower
pigeons, and what not: which in old time were brought to the temple for
Sacrifices and offerings, which is most deuillish and absurd and this done,
seeing the tithes be Leuiticall and abrogated, you must out of the spiritual
truth, and meaning of the Leuiticall law in Numb. 18. 20. Draw out a spiritual
true certain law, for the Ministers portion for ever, in all places of the
world, and that as all changes under the Gospel be 2. Cor. 3. 7. 8. Heb. 12.
22. and 10. 28. 29.
far more excellent then those under the law, so the Ministers maintenance
gathered out of the spiritual sense of this ceremonial law, must in all
respects be far better, richer, and plentiful, then the legal tithes and
offerings were, which yet all the learned in the world have not found, nor
never shall, which plainly shows, that this law in Numb. 18. 20. Is an
evident explanation of a principal branch, of the fourth and fifth laws
moral, and that the tithes are and ever were, since the first establishing of
the Church government, due by divine right, to the Ministers of Gods Church in
all ages alike. And the like is to be said of all donaries, and Abbey lands due
to the Ministers.
gifts given in former time to God and his Church, that is for the maintenance
of Gods holy and true service in his Church, (whether they were yearly
pensions of money, or lands, as the Abbey lands) to serve God in such places,
as the Abbeyes were situate, which now ought not iure Diuino to be alienated
from Gods Ministers, and given or sold, to secular men, and that for these
reasons.

1. What was given to God and his Church, (that is to the Church men, Reasons
Providing it.
that served God in the Church, yearly and weekly) for ever, ought not
without Gods express commandment be taken from them: and we see how Calvin in
Hosean cap. 1. ver. 3. sharply reprooueth King Henry for this fault. 2. Those
lands were given for ever, for the service of God in those places only, where
the Abbeis stood, and therefore, were never to be alienated from them, that
served God in those parishes; how soever religion altered, from worse to
better; but then to be the rather appropriated to the Ministers, then being
from generation to generation, because the lands were given for the true and
holy religion of God, but now the Ministers serve God in better measure, and
manner, then did the Monks, etc. And therefore ought they the rather, now
possess them all, and they not be taken away from them. This may be confirmed
by David's practice, who, when the Levites were to cease to carry the Arc, and
Tabernacle, from place to place, for the on and other, were to be put in the
Temple, which was shortly to be builded, David, though the Levites office
ceased, took not away from them their lands, nor livings, but disposed
otherwise of the Levites for the service of the Temple, 1. Chron. 23. to 27.
And so should it be done hear.

3. That which is once dedicated to holy uses, ought never to be converted to
profane exploits, how worthy or unworthy soever, but should continue to the
service of God, whereto it was given for ever, and therefore the taking of the
Abbey lands from the Ministers, was wrongfully done, as Leuit. 27. But if any
will hear be contentious; we have no such custom, neither the Churches of
God. 1. Cor. 11. 16. And for me, let every vessel sit on his own bottom.

Yet (will you say) Our learned Ministers teach us a contrary doctrine to
Object.
this, else would we forsake this sin, repent and make large restitution?

Answ. And so had you need indeed, and I would your learned men, that hold
you in Sacrilege and unbelief had more learning discretion, and better
consciences, then to break Gods commandments and teach men so to do; and
this we ever see, that all evil that Math. 5. 19
comes to the Church, comes ever from Church men, who with the ministers
arrows, pearce the Ministers hearts. For says Cyprian, the devil has
invented a new devise under the name of De simply. Plator.
learned and reformed Christians to deceive the ignorant and simple, and what
dealing is this, shamelesly upon opinion of Seraphicall excellency, to violate
Gods express laws, and to detain ignorant blind people, in their deep
Sacrilege, and to rob the Ministers of their right and portions, and why,
but because our reformed Ministers forsooth, sooth us so, and therefore it is
so, alas (poor good men) that pin their souls and salvation, to other men's
sleues and what is this, but to exalt men above Gods truth, and to glory in
them and not in the Lord, and because ye love your sins; use all means to
retain them: but I wish your reformed Ministers were better informed, that so
you by them might be reformed, and not thus live and die in your fearful
sins, but this truth, (to depart from your Sacrilege) is to tart, and ye
therefore love it not, and you know what Paul writes, in These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Because men receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies,
that all they might be damned which believed not the truth but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Sorry I am, that this should be verified in you (in whom
otherwise shine many good things) which was spoken of Micha, who hiting a
Leuite to be his priest, said, Now I know the Lord will be good unto me, seeing
I have a Leuite to my Prophet, Judges 17. 7. 13. But he (good man) was fowly
deceived, for albeit he exercised a superstitious worship, knowing no better
being ignorant of the truth, yet he after his manner was well affected, desired
the best things, and regarded not what he bestowed upon a priest, so that he
might be trained in the true worship and right service of God, and finding
this Leuite, He thought to find plain dealing and to be thoroughly trained in
piety. But the Leuite seeking his own, and not Michas good, (as is apparent
in Judge. 18. 20. Who for better preferment theeuishly forsakes him, and did
leave him to live and die for him in (his sins) treacherously deceived him;
whereof the Proverb arose, Good Micha met A proverb.
with a bad Leuite, and so lost labor and cost. But if Micha had taken a right
course, and entertained a faithful Leuite, I mean a rough-tell troth, and a
down right reformer of his corruptions) who had withal taught him the truth of
God sincerely, then might he justly and upon good ground, persuaded himself
that his heart being upright, and his life blameless, it should have gone well
with him. And so might you, who brag of your great rabbynesse, and build the
houses of your faith upon their words, saying to you, what we say is holy, your
case differs not much from Michaes, for men (as that Leuite) be witty; to
provide for themselves, and foresee that to please in ticklish causes and
matters of conscience, is their best way (which policy when John Baptist could
not brook (poor man, he lost his head) and therefore they will (good men
forsooth) teach true doctrine but for their sweet and dearly beloved sins,
Mel in or^ verba lactis fell in cord fraus in pactis cauek.
as sacrilege, and abusing their Ministers oppressing their tennants, robbing
the poor by fine, rents, and unmercifulness, regarding their brave and
sumptuous proud apparel, their costly buildings, their excessive diet, with
the like vices, which will not soon, nor willingly be forsaken, they shall rot
in them ere they will awake them, or fall out with them on Gods behalf, or for
their salvation, which causes our chiefest professors who abound in learning,
and knowledge, yet still retain their pride, ambition, covetousness, excess,
and their old sins unreformed, to be ill spoken of, and their religion and
profession not regarded, and how can they: when their Levites reprove them not,
but by silence and consent, and further encouragements (as in this matter of
sacrilege) give them wished allowance and back them therein, and do they not
well deserve their hire? But beloved in the Lord, what dealing is this, to
strain gnats, and to swallow camels: to be precise in toys, but to wink at
horrible impieties, to stumble at strawes, and leap over blocks, truly says
Mr. Perkins on Matthew. 5. 43. This is an infallible A subtle and false teacher.
note of a false teacher to temper so the word of God to men's affections, and
so to expound it, as both the truth of the doctrine and an evil unreformed
life may stand together and thus for Michaes meting with bad Levites, so if the
Lord in time convert them not, many fall to destruction, but if the Leuite
(watch not over us, let us all watch in every point, we know) to do his will
and the Lord will watch, to do us good in this life, and better in the life to
come.

Well I see (will you say) this is an heinous sin, but to make restitution,
would undo me and mine. I know God is merciful, I will with Naaman in this on
thing pray God to be merciful unto me, I will not restore it, let the
Ministers live or starve, if God forgive me, I regard them not: I answer, this
is to be like the soldiers, that came to a Church and hearing the people, pray
for peace, said, phy pray not for peace, how shall we then live. So you must
live, though (as they) upon the spilling of your brethrens blood, yet to cure
this frenzy, I will Minister you a better salve for this soar, for prayers
are to no effect, while your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1. 10. to 21. and
66. 3. Ier. 7. 9. Amos 5. 21. to 25. And it is a book case, first, satisfy
the plantife, then agree with the King, first put away Achans theft, and then
the King of heaven will be appeased, else fasting and prayer is to no purpose,
Isa. 58. 3. 6. Zach. 7. 9, 10. and 8. 16. Mich. 6. 6. etc. Consider all these
quoted Scriptures and deceive not your selves. Only be not like that young
Gentleman, who Men will be demned rather then forsake any one sweet sin.
would know what good work to do to obtain eternal life, and when he was
told that he wanted but on thing, he would not do it, he stood with and
against Christ even for on thing, and so lost heaven and all. Mark. 10. 21. And
so we see most men have on sweet sin, as sacrilege, oppression, whooredome,
drunkenness, or the like, and in other things are unreprovable, for this on
sin, they will with your Siran, 2. King. 5. Pray Gods mercy, else to be
damned they will not forsake it; as Cain for his hatred to his brother Herod
for his brothers wise Elie for correcting his children, etc. And deserved they
not worthily to be damned? who when Christ did all things for them, to the
spilling of his heart blood; will stand with him for on thing, a worldly, a
transitory, a sin, a shame, a damnable and a cursed thing, in the judgment
of God, man and Angels. But to the question: first I must say with Solomon, It
is a snare or a destruction for a man to devour holy things, and after the
vows to enquire, Prou. 20. 25. That is very fearful, it is for men to make
again and game, or sport of robbing the Church, vexing and abusing the
Ministers ouer-mastering them, with all reuilings and indignities, as if they
were the greatest thieves, and robbers living, unworthy to breath upon earth,
and after to enquire if it be impiety, or how for this transgression to break
the snare of Gods eternal curse, and torments in hell: truly the snare is
soon broken by restitution, Numb. 5. 7. Leuit. 5. 16. Ezech. 33. 15. This
point not I, but Austin thus explaneth saying. Those kind of people be worst
of all others Epist. 54. ad Maccd(...)um.
who desire to be released from the punishment of their heinous offenses and
yet will still possess the stolen thing to such the medicine of repentance is
not available at all, for if other men's goods, for which the transgression was
committed be not restored when it may be surrendered, his repentance is not
true but counterfeit, but if he deal truly in the matter, let him know that
the sin is not remitted except the the^^ be restored, Object.
etc. Oh will the Church-robber say: We will repent and will not that serve,
God requires no more of any, and are we alone debarred from the general
conditions of all the world? Answ. No God forbid, and far be it from me to
increase any man's sin, more then the Lord does, or to cast unnecessary and
false scruples into any man's conscience, but this I say, none can repent
without faith, and where faith is, their must needs be new obedience, if then
there be no amendment of life, and detesting of the sin, it cannot be called
true, but counterfeit repentance. For who can say that a fornicatour, abhors
whooredome, so long as the harlot lies in his bosom Isai, wills the
transgressour wash his hands from blood and then come and not before and talk
with God, Isa. 1. 16. to 19. and so is it in this case, and this is evident in,
Mich. 6. 10. Where he shows a reason that he cannot but smite them, saying,
Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, etc. For as
the taking of the tithes does begin, so the detaining of them continue the
sin, and so long as they continue with thee thy sin is unpardoned. Most
woeful and lamentable it is to see, what a world of iniquity the subtlety of
the serpent has breathed, and suggested, to entangle and snare poor souls at
unawares: we make Queries: and put cases, and beat our brains to deceive our
selves against the day of the Lord: were it not fair easier (omitting this
patching) at once and for altogether to forsake sin, and to discharge our
souls, and without all Queries or doubts, to be sure of Gods blessing in this
life, and salvation in the life to come, and not to sell our souls to Satan,
for the loan of stolen goods for a moment, and seeing there is but on thing
that hinders thee from thy God; why will thou coming so nigh the land of the
living, as foolish Hobab Leuit. 10.
for on sin, renounce thy God, forfeit thy self, and thy family to
perdition: which God forbid; on sin made the Angels devils, on sin expelled
our progenitors from paradise, on sin kept Moses, and on sin kept all Israel
above 20. year old from possessing the holy land: two only excepted, and will
God above these dispense with your one sin of sins, more heinous in humane
judgment, then any of the former, and which is more, for the loss of this one
capital sin, you shall find treasures in heaven. Oh stand not, nor stick
for one sin, what greater infidelity then to distrust our God, willing us to
prove him, if he bring our tyth to his storehouse, if he will not open the
windows of heaven unto us, and power a blessing without measure? Mal. 3. 10.
Else a contrary curse, and what will be the end but bitterness. Wherefore
beloved in fear and reverence, put thy case to trial, and prove the Lord if
he will not open the windows of heaven to thee, etc. Prove him if he will not
multiply thy little unto much, and bless the nine parts more for this tithe,
ten times then before, and that little thou now have remaining, more then all
thy former unlawful and ungodly tithes, prove him if he will not send a
learned Minister to all parishes in the land, men able and willing to stand in
the gappe between us and Gods wrath, and prove him if with a crown of glory
he will not honor them that honor Object.
him in heaven eternally. But oh will on say, this counsel is harsh, for a 2.
Sam. 17. 7.
man upon a sudden to strip himself of so sweet a portion few or none can
abide it. Answ. So said Hushai in another matter, This counsel is good but not
now: yet know what our Savior said: with men this is impossible, but with God
all things are possible, Matthew. 19. 26. Genesis A remedy against sa(...)ledge.
22. verse 14. Ezech. 37. 1. etc. If thou cannot suddenly do it, then do it
by degrees. As thus: first, consider that thou and thy predecessors have
gotten your money, you laid out to buy these Abbeyes, and appropriations, with
increase ten times or twenty times more. 2. Consider the injury and harms
you did to the Ministers and people, defrauding the on of his bodily allowance,
and comfortable fruits of his calling and labors, and the other of the food
of their souls, for both which thou must answer, if amends prevent not in
faith and new obedience. 3. Desire God to incline thy heart to his testimonies
and not to covetousness and to work in thee a detestation of the price of
blood. 4. Confess thy sins to God, and use all means to be reconciled to
the Minister and true owner of thy wealth, and as often as thou can and need
requires, let him gather the crummes of his own living (which otherwise thou
give to dogs and hogs under thy table,) ever comforting him and renewing
thy heavy case thus encroaching upon Gods Church and tribute. 5. Lay up and
purchase of the overplus a farm else where, and give to God what is Gods. 6.
Or if that will not be, become a tenant to God and his Church, and yearly pay
the Minister so much as thou reapest above thy pains and charges in gathering
the fruits. And fail not to bind thy posterity in all ages, to pay the
Church this yearly anuitie and holy tribute, but if thou do neither, be
assured thou shall not long prosper, for this is a crying sin against thee and
thine. And I doubt not but the Lord beholding the affliction of his Ministers,
the cruelty and unmercifulness of these transgressors, and the famine and
oppression of the poor blind and ^ame of this land, will in time stir up the
heart of some Noble Nehemiah, or godly Ebed-Melech, to speak to our most
gracious Sovereign for redress of this Malady: and so far of this use and
remedy.

Having proceeded thus far in the Sect. 12.
first member of watchfulness, for this life present, which in deed is most
difficult and of largest scope, and without which the other two are to small
purpose, and seeing that this weighty work concerns all men, all women, all
ages, all functions, and all dealings in the world, yea in every thought, word,
and work, we must carefully watch, for under every stone lies a scorpion
ready to sting us to death; and yet to enter to every of these particulars were
infinite, I therefore for better discharging of the whole thought to annexe a
few helps Help to watch.
to further you the more cheerfully to undertake this watch with vndoubred
assurance (the Lord assisting) to effect it to Gods glory and your comfort.
Whereof the (...) help to watch in all our affairs, The first help to walk
in a general calling.
is for every man to betake himself to a calling, which will keep him from
idleness; and many sins, this calling is twofold, general and special:
first, the general calling of a Christian is (by all godly means ordained by
God) to endeavor to become truly religious, according to the Lords gracious
covenant, made and sealed at our Baptism; the reasons why we must make this
our calling and daily exercise; is first, for that we are full of impiety,
Reasons. 1.
original and actual; and so liable to eternal damnation by due desert,
unless we labor to abolish it and become godly: and the nature and powerful
working of Gods religion is such, that as a precious ointment, it perfumeth,
sweetneth, and sanctifies, with the graces of Gods Spirit, the whole man
otherwise, is no better then an unsavory carrion in the nostrils of the
Almighty. 2. Then the doctrine of eternal life is so heavenly profound and
ample, that we cannot in any sufficient measure, be furnished therewith,
unless we make a continual labor and practice thereof, so thoroughly are we
inuenomed by the stingings of the old serpent, and ouercouered with the
leprosy of sin, that we are wholly vnnaturalized, and unapt for any, good
thing, unless we betimes enter into this holy trade of life, this is our
plough wherewith we must manure the Church, gleebe of our hearts, else it
ouergrowes with briars and weeds, this is our paradise wherein we must ever be
occupied in dressing it, else it will become a desert full of Serpents, hear
must we ever be learning else we forget, ever watching else our enemy
prevails, no sleeping in sin, then the envious man sows tares among our
wheat, no truce with Satan, for then The second help to walk in a special
calling.
he conquereth, no looking back, then unfit for Gods kingdom. The second
help is for every man to set and settle himself in a special calling, and
honest trade of life, whereby he may get a sufficient maintenance both for
himself, his family, and the Church and poor, to Gods glory and good of his
Church, and this is Gods ordinance. Genesis 3. 19. that all creatures should be of
some special calling, but man above all the rest, else that he should not
eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. to 13. And the law of equity requires it, that as we
enjoy the fruits of other men's callings, they should likewise of ours, and so
increase unity and amity as brethren, and this is our paradise wherein we
should ever be occupied, else we walk not in the way of all creatures, Satan
excepted, who is of no calling, yet neither idle nor well occupied, we walk
inordinately, busybodies, troublers of such as walk in the callings, open to
all temptations and vanities, and yet therein so conceited and wiser then seven
that can render a reason, Prou. 26. 16. And such as at no hand can keep true
watch, but ever disturbing and persecuting the watchmen of their souls,
excluded from the protection of Gods Angels; a graceless generation, and if
you observe what heavy judgments befall the wicked, you shall find that they
are cast upon them by the hand of God, when they ranged out of their callings
as to Sampson by Dalila, to David in the matter of Vriah, to I^^as, going to
Tharsus, to Peter at the high Priests fire, etc. And contrarily, that most of
men's wealrh and prosperity comes to them by their godly and painful
walking in their vocations.

But because worldlings would cast of their general vocation to embrace this
special only: and idlers would not labor but pretend walking in their
general calling, both complain they cannot discharge both vocations in on
day, and therefore take it sufficient to serve God on the Lords day, and
themselves all the week days. I for satisfaction herein thus as in a diary
digesting A di^y for Christian watchfulness, In both callings.
order both callings together, and what is spoken of on days work may be
meant and applied to every day. First, then so soon as thou awakest out of thy
sleep, stand upon thy watch, and awake to God, for the tempter with his
unclean suggestions, is at hand (and know that if our first thoughts be holy
after our sleep, we be such, if vnpure, we be wicked) then offer to God the
sacrifice of prayer for thy sleep, and life, and thine, that so the Lord being
first in account with thee, may graciously hold with thee all the whole day. 2.
2.
Then think of all thy sins thou can call to mind, and the punishments
due to them, temporal, as eternal, pray for pardon for them and be thankful
for thy happy deliverance from them, by Gods mercies, Christ's merits and
working of Gods Spirit in thee, which thou shall the readier perform, if thou
think of thy death of Gods judgment day, of the pains of hell and joys of
heaven of the vanities and afflictions of this life, as of the momentanie
pleasures thereof and how blessed are such, as furthest estranse themselves
from them, and draw nightest to God in all Christian obedience. 3. This done,
think upon the discharging of thy special calling 3.
this day, to Gods glory, thy souls health, and good of all men, and the
furthering of thy peace at thy death, and of thy reckoning in the day of
judgment. These meditations will first keep thy 1.
mind from bad thoughts, and Satanicall temptations: secondly, will sanctify
thy 2.
soul: thirdly, will be forcible 3.
motives to prayers, and thanks giving, and fourthly, will cause the Lord draw
4.
near thee, and bless thee and all thou do this day. Fourthly, rising pray
4.
alone privately, and then publicly with thy family, and read in their hearing
some portion of holy writ, as a matter to meditate upon all the day, which done
betake thy self in the name of God, to thy special calling, and if thou
think that these circumstances will take away a great part of thy days work,
then rise the earlier, and continue the longer, and so have the godly in all
ages done and do, and hear watchfulness shows it self to be a principal
part, to be performed of every Christian. 5. Entering upon thy work, 5.
be careful to carry a simple godly heart in all thou take in hand, for if
Satan step in, by any corruption to defile thy heart, all the thoughtfull
streams that from this spring flow will be unclean, and therefore whatsoever
thy calling is, set thy self ever in the presence of God, ever fearing to omit
any godly duty, or commit any the least thing displeasing his Majesty but
ever let the Lord be thy fear. 6. Then in doing 6.
thy work, beware thou so mind thy private gain, that thou cool not any grace
in thee, or quench the Spirit, but do diligently, and painefully thy earthy
business, with an heavenly mind, thy heart in thy work ever inditing a good
matter, and thy tongue uttering the same to them that are about thee.
Seventhly, do thy work skilfully least it 7.
turn to thy reproach, do it faithfully, not depending upon the means, but
upon Gods blessing, do it constantly, not starting from it, and do it
cheerfully, using in every thing a good conscience, as if you were to die
before night, and discharge those duties daily which thou would wish thou
had done, if now you were a dying.

Eighthly, live upon thy trade and not cunning fetches, Prou. 27. 23. Let thy
expenses be no more then thy coming in, yet stick not to spend where God and
charity requires, and what remains, lay up for supply hereafter as
occasions shall require. At meals look up to God, and being as careful to
feed thy soul as body, read some part of Scripture, performing some duty
of prayer before, and singing some short Psalm after, not forgetting to turn
thy fragments into thy Alms basket, thou must not forget to catechize thy
family upon saturday, and prepare them for the Sabbath, and after the exercises
in the Church upon the Sabbath examine what they learned that day, and then
repeat the Sermons out of thy penned notes unto them, and thou and they
practice them all the week following in this work be discreet, kind and
merciful to thy family, tire not, nor chide them. 2. Do all in season. 3. Be
not tedious. 4. Praise and reward them. 5. Keep constantly this order. As thou
did begin the day religiously so end it devoutly, and grieve not as men
climbing a steep hill you look backward, so take a careful view of thy
actions all the day, consider what thou did well, and wherein thou fa^l^st or
fallest be thankful for the on, and ^ull penitent for the other, and let not
thine eyes sleep, until thou be persuaded of the forgiveness of that, and
all other thy sin, and look with what devotion thou began the day, with the
same or the like end the same, and as prayer was the beginning to open the
morning, so let it be the bar to shut the evening, and thus watching over
both callings, thou can not in thy worldly affairs sleep nor do amiss.
Heareunto may be added a third help, that whereas Satan (a vigilant Bishop in
his own circuit as Latimer calieth him) watches to do us all harm, as a
roaring lion haunting after his pray, we must to withstand his assaults be
sober and watch, 1. Pet. 5. 8, And says Paul, put on the whole armor of God.
Ephesians 6. 10. to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. to 12. For it is no good fighting with Satan
with his own weapons he is a sophister, dispute not with him in his own
Logic, he is an Orator, beware of his eloquence, he is a prince, take heed
of his power, but as Satan in his own cause must use his own strength, so we
in our cause are to use the Lords strength: and therefore the third help is,
to put on the whole armor of God. that we may be able to stand against his
assaults: for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, etc. In vain therefore it is for us to go about to defend our
selves with holy water, crucifixes, or relics of Saints or sword, and spear,
for as that Leuiathan, Job 41. 17. ^0. He will laugh the^eat, nor with Saints
weapons and armor, 1. Sam. 17. 39. 44. But with the whole armor (and not a
piece) of God, for the enemy will strike that part of the body that is naked,
and what booteth it to leave on sin and lie open in many, 2. It must be Gods
armor of his own making and bestowing, for in temptations no learning but
Gods, no wisdom, but heavenly can help us, the Lord knows the force of
Satan's darts, his treacherous ambushments and peircing bullets, and therefore
made this armor of huge proof, and able to repel all the battery of Satan's
suggestions: whereby we must learn, not to esteem our spiritual fight as a
May Game, but as a time of trouble and adversity, wherein we are assaulted by
mighty enemies, and oftentimes foiled and wounded, and therefore must be
valiant, and not snort in carnal security, that so we may obtain the victory
and triumph. 3. This armor must be put on, else what avail the means of 3.
salvation, if we use nor practice them. 4. We must not be dismated stand to
it, 4.
that is as in the camp every man has his place appointed him, and his proper
colors under which he is to keep him: so all Christian soldiers have their
stations, that is, their two vocations (as is above showed) whereunto they are
called of God within the limits whereof they are to contain themselves, and not
thrust themselves into temptations, and leave their standing, and if we be
assaulted not flee away but stand to it, for no armor is prepared for the
back, or fligh, for that is to Apostate, neither is there hear any mention
made of putting of our armor, for Satan is never at truce with us, nor we
with him. 5. He shows what graces 5.
necessary for a Christian, whereof one is the girdle of verity. For
soldiers in 1.
old time had a broad studded beetle, where with the joints of the breast plate
and that armor which defended the belly, loins and thighs, were covered, so
should we have uprightness and sincerity of heart, the band of all virtues,
in the profession of the true religion of our Lord God. The second is, the
breast plate 2.
of righteousness, whereby is meant a good conscience, true sanctification,
and a godly life; this Judas wanted, and therefore Satan entered into his open
naked heart: Thirdly, Our feet must 3.
be shodde with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; where he alludeth, to
the custom of soldiers in former times, who going into the fields strongly
armed their legs and feet, with leg harness; wargraues or buskins, to
prepreserue them from the injury of the weather, the peircing of briars,
thorns, and such other things, as might hurt them, in the way as they marched,
and from the violence also of their enemies blows, when they were incountered;
for all which uses, the Gospel serves, in our spiritual warfare; for they who
are armed with the true knowledge thereof, and are assured of the merciful
promises therein contained, may safely walk, in the ways of godliness,
though they be full of the briars and thorns of afflictions, and persecution.
For being prepared for this profession, no thorns of adversity, can flight or
h(...) them, the ^eete of their affections shod with the zeal of Gods glory.
Fourthly, The shield of faith, that 4.
as soldiers have their shields, to cover and defend their bodies, from the
1. Pet. 5. 9.
strokes of the enemy, so must a Christian, have faith in Christ, 1. Pet. 5.
9. As David fighting against Goliath, and this is an armor of proof, to defend
us, against 1. Sam. 17. 36. 45.
Satan's fiery darts, whereby the Apostle alludeth to the custom of soldiers
in ancient time, who maliciously poisoned their darts, whereby the bodies of
those who were wounded therewith, were so inflamed that they could hardly be
cured, or eased of their raging and burning pain, and such darts are all
Satan's temptations, wherewith he wounds us, if they be not repelled and
quenched with the shield of faith, they will inflame our lusts to sin, and on
sin will inflame our hearts to another, till their be kindled in us a world
of iniquity, as in David, Judas, etc. 1. Sam. 11. 5, 6.
So that if we (...)ll admit one of his fiery darts, they will inflame us to
receive another, and so our burning wounds, will torment our consciences, and
most hardly admit any cure. The fifth piece of our Christian armor, is the
helmet of 5.
Salvation, which in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Is called, the hope of Salvation, and Romans
8. 24. We are saved by hope, for as soldiers, when they go to the field, put
on their Helmets, to defend their heads from their enemies blows, so we
fighting this spiritual battle, must to keep us from desperation, put on hope
of victory, and the crown of salvation. The sixth, is, the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word 6.
of God, This is defensive, and offensive, fit to defend ourselves, and offend,
repel and foil the enemy, for as a soldier, will not go to the field
without his sword, both to defend himself, and foil his enemy, no more must
we hope, to defend us from Satan, nor to chase him without Gods word, we must
fight and fence as did our Savior, in Matthew. 4. 4. 7. 10. Else we fight
blundly or with our fists, as they in 1. Sam. 13. 19. and 17. 39. The seventh,
is prayer so soldiers 7.
ever pray, and heareby, obtain we strength to fight, and victory over our
enemies; Matthew. 6. 13. Luke 22. 40. 46. (and in Exodus 17. 11, 12. Sword and
prayer beioyned together.) The eight, is watchfulness, as soldiers do in
the field, 8.
who by night, as by day, are in danger, at unawares to be assaulted by the
enemies, and seeing, Satan knowing his time to be but short, redoubleth his
forces and watchfulness to destroy us, we must semblably, redouble our care
and watchfulness in seeking to prevent his force, malice, and subtlety. Hear
we have, the Panoply of a Christian, who thus armed, with constant, sincere,
and upright faithfulness of heart, in his general and special calling,
leading an innocent godly life, keeping in all things, a good conscience, not
fearing to profess, and preach Christ, yea to die for the truth of his Gospel
of peace, Romans 10. 15. continuing zealous for his glory, having faith in
Christ, with assured hope of salvation, carefully, and wisely using the word of
God, to defend himself, and repel Satan's temptations, praying to God, with
watchfulness and perseverance, cannot fail, but win the prize from Satan,
not that we trust, so much in the armor, and means, as in God himself, who
blesses the means. The fourth help. To make mutual coniuncton between
pastor and flock.


The fourth help, for Christian watchfulness, is in all matters, great or
small, (if they be of any importance, or concern salvation, or damnation) to
use the aid, direction, and counsel of the watchman of our souls, and to
suffer, no shadow of dislike, to weaken, much less break, the mutual
conjunction between us and our Pastor: which point, though it be not
regarded, but of few, (for what faithful Minister, is almost any where
reverenced, and respected, of his own flock; yet it is more important, then
many be aware off: for if you will observe, the reason, why men be so sleepie
in their Christian watchfulness, and why Satan, so foulely and fearfully,
deuoureth millions, who never thought of any such mattor, you shall find the
principal (if not the only) cause to be this; that they love, nor fancy, nay
hate the watchman of their souls, and affect better, by many degrees,
strangers then them, and so straying from their own fold, are to often in the
ruff of their spiritual pride, caught in the briers, and devoured of the
roaring lion, by pastor (that you be not deceived) I mean, their learned and
painful preacher, and not any dumb watchmen which I reproved above) though
they can allege, many reasons, for their vagaring, for (...) the sluggard, is
wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that can render a reason: Prou. 26.
16. This I take to be Satan's subtlety that preaching shall do the people no
good.
a secret subtilty, and an exceeding deep fetch of Satan, who as ever he
labors, to sow tares in Christ's wheat field, Matthew. 13. 25. And to
transform himself into an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11. 14. And when he does
most mischief (as in tempting Euah) will not be seen to have any hand in the
work, Genesis 3. 1. So hear most s^ily and wylely he powers out, all his
poison, to inuenome, and destroy (if possibly it might be) the whole body of
Christ's Church, and that under a visour of piety, and the holy communion of
Saints, and who would think it? For, he seeing the people cannot be
reconciled to God, but by the preaching of the word, 1. Cor. 1. 21. and 2. Cor.
5. 20. Which is the power of God, to salvation, to every one that believes,
Romans 1. 16. And beholding, how the Lord, daily thrusts laborers to his
harvest, whereby Satan's forces, are much weakened, and kingdom ruinated, yet,
he being in this case, unable to stop the Preachers mouths, or peoples ears,
deuiseth to weaken the power of the word, in pastor, and people, first by
traducing the Ministers good name, and labors, then by deceiving him, of some
parts of his maintenance, or troubling him in law, etc. Which sins as they be
practiced but in few places, and by the worst sort of the people; and therefore
the malady cannot be universal, but is soon extinguished, but rather by
infusing (I wot not how, but to our sorrow we feel it) a general dislike, and
cause less suspicion, and distrustfulnesse between pastor, and flock, and
so by degrees dissolueth all holy fellowship and conjunction, between Minister
and people, for on the one part, the godly painful Preacher, seeing the
stubbornness, and waywardness of his charge oppugning his instructions, and
admonition; and (as it were of purpose, to despite him) to set up disorders,
and for all his labors, for their reformation, to follow their own ways,
hereupon he persuades himself, the people love not, nor regard him, nor his
teaching, nor yet any pains he takes with them, further then stands with their
lawless lusts, howsoever formally, they give him, civil salutations, and
plausible terms of courtesy, yet in secret, they traduce, and censure him, and
his doctrine, whereupon being discouraged, and cast down, as taking his seed
sown upon stony ground, he has no heart, to recall them from their sins,
but finding familiarity to breed contempt, and truth hatred, he weepeth in
secret, wishes he had never come among them, but either fled with Jonah to
Tharsis or Jonah 1. Ier. 9. 1.
had with Jeremy some secret cottage, to finish his days in, and never to
preach to them in the name of the Lord. And so eating up his heart with sorrow,
estrangeth himself from them, gives over his watch, takes his best course,
to be to live to God and himself, and as for his charge, to deal with them,
a far off, in general points, and as it were at the staves end, as they can,
and will abide handling, being a contentious and unthankful people,) and so,
if they peerish, they peerish; the fault is theirs, and it is long of
themselves: and thus the power, soul, and strength of his ministry is quite
brooken, and lies without life in the dust. And because he would do some
good, and get some comfort, of his ministry he busieth himself in other men's
charges, and so steals the hearts of the people, (Absolon-like) 2. Sam. 15. 6.
from the lawful Pastor, to himself; with thanks, and amends, (to say no
more.) His people, on the other side, not abiding any admonition, much less
reproose, at a Ministers hand, contemned, distrust, and suspect both his
doctrine and dealings (being men of malicious and base minds) deeming, he does
all in subtlety, and of hatred, to rule them, and set up new orders, and so
abridge them of the old customs; and albeit, he otherwise be an honest man
innough, yet is he to holy for them, for by his too often preaching, they find
him already an enemy to their peace, good neighborhood, pleasures, and
profits, and ever and anon in his doctrine, girding some, riding and deriding
others, ^awning upon his sect, and favorites, disquieting poor honest men, and
therefore is not for them, they would give the best sheep they have, to be
rid of him, if not, they will be to hard for him, do what he can, etc. Thus
they cease not all, to grow on an head against him (as sheep when on runs to
the water, all the rest will) to censure, carpe, and scanne all his words,
trace his steps, pry into his private and public carriage, wrest all to the
worst, and in what they can, meet him at every style, and though his learning
be good, yet they would, he would follow it himself, and hope to find on day
to be fully revenged upon him, for his wrongs to them, honest quiet men, and if
there be any wicked Gentleman in the Parish, to him will they flock, to open
their griefs and crave help, and counsel to drive away their Parson, who in
adiuellish hatred, to all Ministers, and secret emulation, (taking all honor,
and reverence given the Minister) to be taken from him, and that (if he be
patron) thinking if he could firret him out, to get all to himself, and put
in a dumb dog, for seven pound a year stipend, to murder the Parish, and
teach his children too, and what cares he, He can make friends, toward all
blows, thereupon (in color to gratify the people) he will play Achitophel,
and plod all he can against him, be it true or false, all is on, and these
pernicious sots will swear to any thing, so that he tell them what it is (for
memory sake) that they must swear unto: and so will he not cease, first
secretly, then impudently with open forces, to assault the tired Minister,
either to expel him, or to bring him under his ferula, to speak nor do no
more, then will stand with his worships pleasure, (forsooth,) or if he cannot
bring him to this slavery, yet, (to keep him in continual trouble, sorrow,
and vexation of spirit) will set the whole Parish against him, will favor, and
applaud every on that speaks or does any thing against him, will joy, and
solace himself, when any gybe, jest, mock, flout, slander, or abuse the
Minister any way, and be a bitter enemy to every on, that likes of or
speaks well of their Preacher, and so will not spare, to turn the hearts of
the people, wholly from him, that his Ministry shall never do them good,
whiles he lives; which is all the devil himself would have them do, and is
so true, that it cannot be denied at all neither do I speak all I know
herein; the Lord give them repentance speedily, for otherwise, the blood of all
their Parishes, and the Ministers blood also whom they thirst after, will be
required full dearly at their hands, yet they this while, are jolly and
iocund, and think, they do God good service, in persecuting, Ioh. 16. 2.
and murdering his Saints, and are sorry, they cannot find some heinous
accusations against them, to dispatch them out of this life, which is plain
wilful murder in heart, whereas they ought to do them all good, deliver
their own souls from death, and blood guiltiness, and use all means to bring
the people, whose goods in great measure they possess, and whose bodies do
them all service they can, to the knowledge and obedience of God, being
themselves foremost in the work, and not thus show themselves religious in
nothing, but in persecuting the Ministers, and turning the hearts of the
people, from hearing and obaying Gods word. The Lord open their eyes, to see
their sins, and make them truly religious; else remove them from his Church
and Ministers, etc. Now Satan having thus far, infused his poison, to
Minister, and peoples bosoms (as we to our shame, and sorrow see it in to many
places,) the holy conjunction between the Pastor, and the flock, from this
little sparkle, of suspicion at first, is quite, and for ever dissolved, and
they (as man and wife) quite divorced, and separated in heart, and loving
affections. And therefore, I would have my faithful Christian, to be exceeding
watchful against this malady, and to suffer, not so much as the least shadow
of dislike, to arise between him, and his Minister, else all the exercises of
religion, executed by his Minister, for his salvation, shall become
distasteful, and loathsome unto him, for which contempt the Lord will bring an
heavy curse upon him, for treading underfoot, his ordinance, and who will then
absolve him, and therefore, to prevent all mischiefs, and Apostacy, or
Atheism, let him instantly pray the Lord, against this rupture, and strain
himself against all dislikes, or reports, to love his pastor, as his father,
to honor him as Gods servant, to reverence him as his guide to eternal life,
and think nothing he possesses to good, for him no more, then did the
Galatians, who received Paul, as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus, and if
it had been possible, would have plucked out their own eyes and have given
them to him. Gal. 4. 14. 15. And sure it is, that never was their godly man,
that hated his own Minister, but ever his feet were beautiful to him, never
was bad man that loved him, and therefore deserved the dust of their feet to
be shaken against him, and so let my watchman prefer his own Pastor, and in
heart sincerely (as a chaste matrone her husband) embrace him abone all other,
how learned, or godly soever, and never depart from him, to hear any whiles he
teaches, let him have his due honor and desert for deserving best, meet it
is he should be best respected and it is meet it is, that he that has the
wintering of them, should have the summering; for in time of plague or greatest
troubles, when the flatterers forsake thee, yea and in death it self he must
stick unto them) and that the gifts which his parishioners (in a pharisa^call
spirit) bestow upon strangers, who do them l^tle good be given as an
ouerplussadge unto him, to cheer up his heart, and encourage him in his
vocation, and so ever in all his meetings let him have the chiefest place, and
acceptance, and so should you win the Pastors heart, and cause him
cheerfully watch over you, for your good, and be careful, with all his
cunning, and power to direct you in your private watchings, so that if you
slept in sin, he would awake you, whereas your strange teacher, will rock
you on in the cradle of security, if you strayed from Christ's fold, he would
turn you home and not run with you, if he followed noisome lusts, he would
sharply reprove you, and not wink thereat, or glaunce a far of, that you
should not perceive it, if you sinned of ignorance, he would instruct you, if
of negligence, he would call upon you, if of infirmity, he would direct you,
if of malice, he would rebuke you, and so meet you at every style, that you
should not depart from the Lord, if he conferred with you, it should be about
our sins, if he advised and persuaded you any way, it should be to your
salvation, where you did well, he would commend you, if amiss, be sorry with
you, if things fell out crossely with you, he would advise you, he would
rejoice at our prosperity; in your adversity he would comfort you in your
sickness, and deepest disdresse, he would be our faithful physician, if ye
mourned he would weep with you, if ye lived he would live with you, if ye,
died to do you good, he would die with you, and would ever, as well by night
as day, pray God for your peace, and praise the Lord for appointing him
watchman over so gracious and thankful a people, when as by forsaking and
contemning him and his Ministry and following strangers, you shall cause him
neglect, you and the rest of his flock eat up his heart with sorrow, leave
you open to all assaults, of Satan, the world and sin, and finally, draw Gods
judgments upon him and you. But of this more elsewhere.

But to draw to an end, for endless would it be to me, to recite all the helps
the Lord provides to assist, and uphold us, in this holy watch; for who sees
not, how God watches over us, in every good work, to prosper us therein, then
his Angels, attend upon us, all his creatures in heaven and earth favor, and
to their power help us, the The fifth help. All things help us to watch.
law directs us, the Gospel comforts us, the Magistrate (whose life the Lord
preserve) shieldeth us, the Ministers instruct us, the godly confer with us,
all Gods Saints pray for us, the time inuiteth us, being peaceable, so that we
may safely repair unto the house of the Lord, and every of us, in these
halcion days, (the Lord be highly praised for it) are freed from all lets, and
perturbations, so that we need not go in fear of the enemy, nor read in
fear, nor pray in fear, as in the Marrian days, when none could read a good
book, but still at every period, they must be looking about, to spy, if any
came to look, and to accuse them, so that their state, was not unlike the
Jews, returning from captivity, Who were feign to build with their trowels in
the one hand, and their swords in the other, as is in Neh. 4. 17. But now, (if
thou be not afraid of thine own shadow) thou may securely sit under thy
vine, and pick up the food of thy soul, in peace, and work leisurely with
both hands, because the Lord himself protecteth and watches over thee: so
that no sooner art thou tempted by Satan, or allured to sin by his members,
to leave or forsake thy watch, but forthwith the Lord of Hosts sends forth
his spirit, his Angels, his graces, and all his creatures, as troops of
soldiers, and an army royal to aid and assist thee, yea with united
forces, to fight for thee, and so to compass, and keep thee that thou shall
not give over thy watch, nor disgrace thy holy profession. And to give
instance, in some on temptation; as for example, in whooredome: If (as was
Joseph) thou be solicited to adultery, Genesis 39.
and so to cut thy self from the Lord, 1. Cor. 6. 15. And depart from thy
watch, and to open the gates of thy soul, for sin and Satan to enter in, and
rob thee of thy chastity, and all other graces, and so make thy soul an
habitation for devils, Matthew. 12. 45. Thy danger is great, and hear (as a
virgin in Gregorius Nazianzeus Orat. in Cyprianum.
danger to be defloured, Deuteronomy. 22. 24. 27.) must thou mightily cry to the
Lord, for present help, else thou art undone, now (the Lord hearing thy prayer)
forthwith sends out his army royal to rescue thee, as thus. Before thou
yield to the temptation, he grants thee time sufficient to deliberate,
whether to yield, or not. In which time, steppeth in Gods law as thy chief
counselor to dissuade thee, condemning adultery Exodus 20. 14. Heb. 13. 4.
to hell, and commending marriage as honorable: next in the neck thereof all
to mind Gods plague, the executioners of the sin, threatening Gods curses, in
this life death and eternal damnation in the life to come; this past, Gods
fear frighteth, and terrifieth thy very soul, and spirit, which causes the
soul, with all the powers thereof, to quake and mourn within thee, and thy
conscience utterly to condemn, and accuse thee, then Christ sends his
spirit, to mind thee of his sufferings, and holy covenant, the Gospel sets
broad his holy promises, the holy Spirit tells thee, that thou must not
defile his temple, the Angels (thy blessed watchmen) dread thy fall, and labor
to pull thee from this pit, Satan watches for thy ruin to accuse thee, the
torments of hell, as flames of lightning flash in the eyes of thy soul, hell
it self gapeth for thee, the watchman of thy soul thundereth in thine ears,
crying, stand in awe and sin not, thy profession proclaims high treason
against the Almighty, Christian fortitude encourages to constancy, the shame
of the word, and the preservation of thy good name, deter and violently keep
thee back, the defiling of thy bed, abusing thy wife, blemishing thy
posterity, make thee ashamed, the love of God, of his word, of his image in
thee and her, of the Church, and of heaven dissuade from this frencie, yea
chastity in treats thee to refrain from this uncleanness, the filthiness
of the fact, and the troop of sins accompanying it, cry shame upon rhee.
Finally, all creatures in heaven, and earth (Satan, and reprobates accepted,)
call unto thee, to imitate their obedience, and loyalty to thy Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and not to break his covenant, damn thy soul,
forfeit thy Baptism, and not receive the grace of God in vain: see then how
God himself by these helps, and many more, is a present defender of thy
chastity, even of this one gracious virtue, and in the midst of thy temptaon,
opening thee away to escape with Joseph, 1. Cor. 10. 13. And as of this, so of
all other graces, and of the whole man; blessed be God evermore, for his
continual and constant watch over us all both in life, and death: And
therefore beloved, thou being thus compassed with a cloud, yea with all helps
in heaven and earth, be not wanting to help thy self: be sober, watch and
pray, let nothing hinder nor trouble thee in this holy course of life, nor yet
discourage thee, but cheerfully go on in this watch; set thy self ever
before the Lord, walk with thy God, let thy cheifest and only care be, while
thou live here, how daily, and evermore, to pass the time of thy
peregrination here; according to Gods holy will revealed in his sacred Word,
and so constantly and faithfully perseuering unto death, the Lord will give
thee a crown of life, Revel. 3. 10. which the Lord for his Christ's sake grant
thee, and me, Amen. And so far of watchfulness for this life.

Having discoursed hitherto how we Sect. 13. The second part of Death.
ought to watch over ourselves, during our lives, thereby to live according to
Gods holy will, and to be beloved and blessed of God in this life. It follows
Transitio.
next to exhort my vigilant Christian to watch and wait for Christ's coming to
judgment, to receive at his hands, the Crown of glory, laid up as the price
and reward of a godly life, according to Paul's exepctation, saying; I I have
fought a good fight, and have finished my course, I have kept the faith; from
henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge will give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing, 2. Tim 47. 8. And Peter says, Feed the
flock of God, etc. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive an incorruptible Crown of Glory. 1. Pet. 5. 2, 4. This then should be
my Christians next Watch, were it not that there lies a soar and narrow
bridge in the way for all flesh to pass over; and that is death, the mean and
limit between life and judgment; for so we read, It is appointed unto men
that they shall once die, and after that comes the Judgment. Heb. 9. 27.
This is inevitable, and none, be he never so wise, foolish, strong, weak,
ancient, rich or poor, or be he what he can be, shall escape, but he must
die, Psalm. 89 48. and 2. Sam. 14. 14, and therefore it is called the way of all
the world, Josh. 23. 14. This is the set ordinance and inviolable Decree of
God, that every one that comes into this world, comes upon this condition,
charge, and arrest, not to have any longer rest, stay, or abode here; as have
the trees which are fastened here by the roots, but quickly to pass away, as
does the sliding and running water, and then for ever to depart, so soon as it
shall please the Lord to call for him hence: so that of all terrible things
this is the most fearful, this is the last act of the Tragedy of man's
miserable life to kill him dead, and look how Death leaves us, so shall the
last judgment find us; for in this act Satan wins or loses all: and to
aggrauate the matter, Death is not only implacable, sparing none, which caused
the Heathen (though otherwise ouer-superstitious) never to sacrifice to Death,
because it Orpheus in (...).
would be bribed by no offerings nor prayers, but uncertain is his coming;
for we wot not when, where, nor after what manner it comes, but often when we
least look or wish him, when we are worst provided, when we would feign yet a
little dress our lamps, and buy the oil of Grace, then comes he in poast,
and most terribly vexes us to the renting of soul and body, and how in the
very agonies of Death, or in the point of our departure out of this life, he
handles us, further then we see with our eyes, which is doleful enough, we
cannot tell, and therefore cannot to any purpose command and charge the watch.
In other cases we are enlightened by the word, and our own experience
concurring. Here the word is silent, and experience have we none; and which is
more, none of those men mentioned in the Old and New Testament, to be raised
from the dead, as 1. Kin. 17. 22. and 2. Kin. 4. 34. 36. and 13. 21. and Math.
9. 25. 27. 52. Luke 7. 14. Ioh. 11. 44. Acts 9. 40 and 20. 10. nor yet Mat. 17.
3. spoke a word, nor left any thing in writing concerning the state of such as
departed this life in that moment, neither what apparitions they saw at their
last expiration, nor what temptations, what accusations of Satan, what manner
of appearance before Christ's tribunal sear, how acquitted, how condemned, which
if they had, then should we have spoken by sure experience, and known how to
watch for the things done in Death, but knowing nothing, our wisdom is to speak
nothing: and seeing al men die, some soon, some late, some after one fashion,
some after another, but all full of sorrow and heaviness, as every one that
goes to the house of mourning may perceive it stands us much on hand to watch
for it, and in all places, and at al hours to be ready appointed for it, that
watches us in every place, and at al hours of the night, as day, to kill us:
neither booteth it us to waste our goods on Physicians to keep us from it; for
albeit they promise fair, yet they and their babes die as soon as others, our
Lawers cannot in this book-case plead, no not for their own lives, no King so
welthy, no Sampson so stout, no horse so swift, no spear so long, no armor of
proof so sure, but as the Behemoth and Leuiathan, Job. 40. 41.
he scorneth all. Therefore to prevent all the hurts and harms that accompany
Death and such as die unprepared, I gather this doctrine.

All Gods children, must whilst they live Doct. 5. To prepare for Death.
here (seeing they know they must die) be exceeding careful to watch and
wake for Deaths coming, whenever it be, least it come suddenly upon them,
and so surprise and take them away unawares and Proofs by Scripture.
unprepared: the proofs be in Isa. 38. 1. The Lord said to Hezekiah by Isaiah,
Put thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live. And this did all
the godly Fathers before their death, as Abraham disposed and provided for his
children before his death, Gen 25. 5. 6. Isaak and Jacob blessed their
children, Genesis 27. and 48. and 49. so did Moses bless the twelve Tribes,
exhorting them also to serve the Lord: and the like did Joshua, Deutr. 33. Josh
23. and 24. and David did the like, providing further for the Temple and the
functions thereof, 1. Chron. 22. to the end of that book, that God might be
served after his death, better then while he lived Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph,
had an holy care for their burial, Genesis 23. and 49. and 50. Simon and Paul
desired to die in peace and be with Christ our Savior, and Steven commended
their souls to God, forgave and prayed for their enemies, etc. Then Moses
desired God to teach him to number his days, that he might apply his heart to
wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12^ This also by a voice from heaven is confirmed to be a
blessed thing, as Reu. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which hereafter die in the
Lord, even so says the Spirit; for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them: And contrarily, how fearful it is to die unprepared, we
see in that Corn hoorder, who when he made most account to eat, drink, take
his ease, and be merry, that night his soul was taken from him, Luke 12. 15.
to 23. Reasons ratify Reasons.
this truth likewise.

1. All our former watchings over all 1.
our life is lost labor, if in this point we become sleepy and secure.

2. To die is one of the greatest works 2.
and most dangerous ro^kes man's life is subject unto, if here we make
shippewracke, we are undone for ever; for what avails it to live godly, and
die wickedly? not one jot, as Ezech. 18. 24.

3. At our death time Satan is most 3.
subtle, busy, and fierce, to overthrow our faith; for if now he prevails
against us, he has gotten his wished desire, but if now he be vanquished, he
is out of hope ever to prevail, and so lays down the bucklers at our feet
for ever: therefore stands it us much on hand to watch, and for want hereof
many go merely to the pit of perdition.

4. Death by this premeditation and 4.
preparation will be more welcome unto us, for dangers foreseen are less
grievous.

5. I shall more easily contemn this world, by often thinking that I am a 5.
stranger in it, and abstain from many sins which otherwise I would commit,
and will repent of all my sins committed, and omitted, and the rather, because
all Gods Elect did so and were saved and so shall I.

6. God commands us to watch, for commanding us to watch for the day of 6.
judgment, he will have us make a godly death, for as we die, so shall we be
judged, and therefore must be watchful, and pray much for a godly end.

7. If we perform this duty, many 7.
commodities accompany it, if not undoubted damnation to all that die in sin
unrepented; for death in it self is the way to hell to the wicked, but to the
godly a portall, by which the soul passes out of the frail body to heaven;
or is as the Angel that guided Peter out of prison, and sets them at liberty,
Acts 12. 8. 9. whereas to the wicked it is a cruel Sergeant to arest and cast
them into prison. Sect. 15. Use 1.


The first use serves for instruction for my vigilant Christian, how he is to
watch general and special for death: The first general care whereof is, in
leading 1
a godly life, and then shall he be sure of a godly and blessed death; for
eternal life, has three degrees, one in this life, when a man leads a new
sanctified heavenly life, and can say truly that now he lives not, but Christ
lives in him, Galath. 2. 20. and this all such can Observations for
preparation to die well.
say as do unfeignedly repent, believe, and obey, justified from, and
sanctified against their sins, and have the peace of Conscience, with other
good gifts and graces of the holy spirit, which are the earnest penny of their
salvation; The second degree is in the end of this life at our death, when the
body goes to the earth, and soul to God; the third at the last judgment,
when body and soul reunited do jointly enter into eternal bliss, and of
this first watch, I have spoken in the first part before.

Then secondly we must watch and be 2.
in readiness for the second degree of eternal life, even for death; for man
goes to the house of his age, as Eccles. 12. 5. that is, toward his grave,
and therefore must prepare for it, and labor to pluck out of our hearts that
erroneous imagination, wherewith every man naturally blesses himself,
thinking so highly of himself, that though he had one foot in the grave, yet
believes he shall not yet die: and what a folly is it for man to stumble thus
at the threshold, ere they be aware of the house, many charge, and chide, old
age to come upon them unexpected, but who compels them thus falsely to
conclude? So if any complain of Deaths unlooked for approach, we may answer,
Who bade them be so foolish, as not to look for him? Cruel and unmerciful
Death makes league with no man, though (as Isai says, chap. 28. 15. 18.) The
wicked make a league with Death, that is, in the fond imagination, thinking
that Death will not come near them, though all the world should be destroyed;
and seeing this natural corruption is in every man's heart, we must daily fight
against it, and expel it out; for so long as it preuailes, we shall be utterly
unfit to make any preparation for death, but will be like the foolish debtor,
that keeps no account of his debt, and then maruells how the Creditor should
remember to demand it: thou have owed this debt ever since thou wast borne, and
before thou wast borne, and is it strange, that now, after some years past,
thou art called upon for it? what if the day of payment be not expressed in the
counterpane, that which is presently, and at all times due, must continually be
in readiness.

Thirdly, we must labor to meditate often and seriously of our death, and of
the state of the dead whereunto we all hasten; for rich and poor shall lie
down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them, says Job. chap. 21.
23. to 26. but because our self-love and world inesse is so great, that we
account nothing so bitter and untoothsome, as the meditations of our departure,
as Ecclus. 41. 1. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
lives at rest in his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him,
and that has prosperity in all things, yea unto him that is able to receive
meat: and therefore let us strengthen this practice with prayer, as did David
and Moses, Psalm. 39. 4. and 90. 12. so we may be enabled to resolve our
selves of death continually, for how soever by a general speculation we
think sometimes something of our ends, yet unless the spirit of God be our
Schoolmaster to teach us this duty, we shall be never able soundly to resolve
our selves of the presence and the speedines of death, for he alone must
lighten our minds with knowledge, and fill our hearts with his grace, that we
may rightly consider hereof, and so esteem of every day and hour, as if it
were the very day and hour of our death. So the dangers foreseen will be
less grievous, and we shall more easily contemn this world, with the vanities
thereof, and keep our selves in good fashion, (according to the Proverb,
Remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss, Ecclus. 7. 36.) and approve
right Christians: for (as says Gregory) The life of a Christian is nothing
else but a continual meditation of Death; and as a watchman ever thinks and
looks for the enemies coming, and therefore will not sleep; so must we
often meditate of death, and make account that every present day shall be our
dying day, and every night our bed to be our grave: and so for that remnant of
time we have to live ever walk in the fear of God, and so he shall never
need to fear Death, who by a godly life has given due entertainment to the
fear of God.

We must not only be every day willing 4.
to die, but be ready with oil in our Lamps, esteeming every day the last day
of our lives; which that we may the more cheerfully do, we must endeavor
before death come, to pull out the stings of death, that is, the power and
strength thereof, by true repentance and faith in Christ Jesus. Sampson was
soon vanquished when the Philistines found where his great strength lay; and
thou may put safely a serpent in thy bosom, if thou pull out his sting, so
take sin away which is the sting of Death, then may Death (as a Be without a
sting) hum and buzze about thine ears, but not harm thee: wherefore if we
would live when we are dead, we must die to sin, and to the world and flesh
while we are alive, and not omit these duties.

1. To humble our selves for all our Duties. 1.
sins past, confessing them wholly against our selves, and in prayer crying
instantly to God for pardon of them.

2. For the time to come, to turn to 2.
God, and to carry a purpose, resolution, and endeavor in all things to reform
both heart and life, according to Gods word.

3. We must ever believe in Christ, by whom the sting of death is taken out,
for they only fear Death, who fear and doubt whether Christ died for them;
if then Death has bin slain by Christ Jesus, then now to the faithful it is
no death, but a sleep, a separaration, a passing from the world, and a going
up to God, a disioyning of the soul from the body, Philip. 1. 22. 23. Ioh. 13.
3. and a consecration (as if we said) it is a solemn ceremony by which the
faithful are wholly consecrated and dedicated unto God, to the end that
hereafter they should render unto him, no other sacrifice, nor exercise, but to
sing and set forth the praises of God, and to sanctify his holy name, and so
it is called Baptism also; for that by Death we pass (as Israel through the
red Sea and Jordan) to the Holy Land of the living: for the thing that makes
us most fear death, is, that we behold it in the myrrour of the Law, which
sets it forth unto us under a shape, and show that is very fearful to look
unto, and under the form of a Sergeant, armed with the anger and wrath of God,
and accompanied and guarded with all the threats and curses of the Law, against
all those that violate and transgress the same, who comes violently and
implacably to serve his writ to arest us, to appear before Gods high
Tribunal, (all excuses set apart) and to receive the sentence of damnation to
hell fire eternally, without ease or release, bail or maine-prize; which
dealing of Death is so terrible to the flesh and soul of a sinner, that the
very remembrance of it is exceeding bitter to a man that is sowsed and soaked
in the pleasures of this world; for it now flattereth none, regards no
persons, weighs not friendship, cares not for rewards to look unto, but in
imagination is very grimme, ougly, and cruel, and kills downright without
mercy where it hitteth, and who can abide his coming. Now to free us from this
sight, fright, and fear, we are to behold Death in the myrrour of the Gospel,
stinglesse, disarmed, and conquered by Christ, and so swallowed up in victory
for us his Beloved and Elect.

5. Seeing then that the sting of death is sin, and that the power and force
of every man's particular death and judgment lies in his own sins, we must
herein be exceeding watchful to spend our time and study in using all good
means, that our sins may be removed and pardoned; for see how many sins be
in thee, so many stings of sin be in thee also, which wound thy soul to
death: therefore let not one sin remain, for which thou have not humbled thy
self, and repented seriously: and if we will live eternally, let us begin to
live that eterna'l life before we die, which is the first degree of eternity.
Let us now rise to a new life, by the first resurrection, that we may have part
in the latter, Revel. 20. 6. and now labor for saving knowledge, that we need
not be Catechized on our deathbed. Now labor we for true peace of conscience,
that we be not to agree with our adversary when we are arested, and when it is
too late, we having nothing to pay, yet we see to our sorrow, that of all
business this is least respected, much care is for the tenement the body,
little for the tenant the soul, and least for the Landlord Christ Jesus. But
such as hasten not their work, show they look not for their Master, and they
that take no care of paying their rent, show they despise their Landlord, to
their own loss, hurt, and confusion.

6. Study, and exercise daily the Art 6.
of dying, most men lay how to live in the world, but a Christians care should
be how to die well out of this world, and that master-care carries about all
the inferior and subordinate cares and affairs of this life: therefore let us
invre and accustom our selves daily, by little and little to die before death
come; for he that leaves the world before the world leaves him, reaches the
hand to death, as to a welcome messenger, and with Simeon departs in wished
peace: and as men that are appointed to run a race, exercise themselves
before in running, that they may get the victory, so should we begin to die now
while we are living, that we might die well in the end; so Paul, 1. Cor. 15.
31. said, that he died daily, not so much for that he was daily in danger of
death, by reason of his calling, but for that in all his dangers and troubles
he inured and exercised himself to die; for when men do make the right use of
their afflictions, and endeavor to bear them patiently, humbling themselves as
under the correction of God, then they begin to die well: and to do this
indeed, is to take an excellent course. He that would mortify his greatest
sins, must begin to do it with small sins, which when they are once
reformed, a man shall be able more easily to overcome his miseries; so likewise
he that would bear the cross of all crosses, namely death it self, must
first of all learn to bear small crosses, as sickness, troubles, losses,
which may fitly be termed little deaths, and the beginning of death it self,
and we must first of all acquaint our selves with these little deaths, before
we can be able to bear the greatest death of all. Against the afflictions and
calamities of this life, are as it were the Harbingers and Purueyors of Death,
and we must first learn how to entertain these messengers, that when the
Master shall come, we may in better manner welcome and cheer him.

7. As many as be able to do any 7.
good service, either for Gods glory or his Church, or Commonwealth, or to any
private man or woman, because his departure hence is uncertain, and the night
of his day draws on, he must hasten with all speed to do it, lest death
prevent him, and it be laid to his charge, so that he loose his reward, for
this point note, Eccles. 9. 10. John 9. 4. Galat. 6. 10. And he that has care
to spend his days in well-doing, shall with much comfort and peace of
conscience end his life, for he that labors for the good of others, shall be
beloved while he is here, and lamented when he is gone; but such as only make
work for themselves, as hogs at the trough, both live without being desired,
nor beloved, and dying are never missed, nor lamented. Let us then do all to
Gods glory and men's good, and thus far of our general watch.

Next follows our particular vvatch for death, as thus.

So soon as we feel sickness seize The particular watch for death.
upon our bodies, then is it high time to begin our particular watch and
preparation for death: where,

1. We must consider whence our 1
sickness comes, even by the special providence of God; and the cause of
this affliction is our sin, as Lam. 3. 30. Mich. 7. 9. Math. 9. 2. John 5.
14. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin, and
though there be no other causes of our death, yet sickness comes ordinarily
and usually of sin: and therefore speedily must we make a new examination of
our hearts, and all our lives passed, and say with Israel: Let us search and
try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord, Lamen. 3. 40. and so labor to
be reconciled unto him in Christ, though we have formerly been long assured
of his favor.

2. We must make a new confession unto God of our new and particular sins,
not forgetting the old, specially the sins of our youth, and ignorance before
our calling: and thereto. Thirdly 3.
make new prayers, and more earnest then ever before, with unexpressed sighs
and groans of the spirit, and that for pardon of the same sins, and for full
reconciliation with God in Christ. In the exercise of these three duties stands
the renouation of our faith and repentance, whereby they are increased,
quickened, and revived: and the more sickness preuailes in the body, the more
should we be careful to put them in ure, that spiritual life might increase,
as temporal life is decayed, then are we to forgive, and desire to be forgiven
of all the world, specially of our own Minister.

4. If our pains and sickness discourage us, we are to set speedily our 4.
house in order, and then send for our Parish Minister, who if it may be, must
not be absent from us while breath is in our body, but to exhort, persuade,
encourage, answer our doubts, pray with us, and for us, help us in our fears
and temptations, and (as a Bride for her Bridegroom make us ready, attyring us
in the wedding garment, and robes royal, for the marriage of the Son of God:
neither must their godly neighbors be now absent, but as they have been
formerly privy to our godly lives, so if we accuse and condemn our selves,
they must testify the truth of us, further then the Ministers knowledge
extends, and so comfort and set them as eye and care-witnesses of our former
life, in assured hope of undoubted salvation.

5. And because no godly means 5.
must be omitted to preserve life till God take it away, the Physicians skill
is not to be refused, observing this order; that where the Divine ends there
the Physician must begin, and not contrarily; for let us never look for health
in body, until we have a faithful and sanctified soul, desiring God to
bless the means he uses for us, which we truly cannot do until our
Consciences persuade us of the pardon of our sins.

6. This done, let us set our souls in 6.
order, and see how we stand in the favor of God, and so shall we die more
voluntarily, quietly, and patiently, and let us labor that our sins die in
us, before we die in the world: and consider we, what an excellent thing it is
for us, to end our lives before our deaths, and in such sort, that at that
hour we have nothing to do but to die, and that then we have need of
nothing, no not of time, nor of our selves, etc. but sweetly and comfortably to
depart this life.

7. This sanctified preparation will 7.
cause us, not only ioyfu^ly and cheerfully to depart this life, but withal
(in full and hopeful assurance of a glorious resurrection) First to commit our
wives 1.
and children, and people, unto the protection of Almighty God, to receive them
at his hand in his b^essed Kingdom again. Secondly, then to render 2.
up to the Lord, our special callings and talents, with their well-occupied
increase. And last^y, (as to the best keeper, our bodies, life, and souls)
beseech his Grace, as he in mercy and of his unspeakable love gave them us,
and all temporal and spiritual good things with them; he will now in like
favor and mercy receive them again, and keep them safe for us until the day
of judgment, and then bestow them and himse^fe upon us, and grant we may ever
be with him, and he with us.

8. In the last agony of death we must 8.
draw unto us al strength of body and soul, and now in this ^ast combat quit
us like men. As 1. we are to rest by faith upon 1.
the present favor and mercy of God in Christ, persuading our hearts and
souls, that now, Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Princip^lities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be abie to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, R^m 8. 38. 39. and so plucking up ^^r broken hearts,
show our selves to be that which long we labored for, viz. to be true
Christians. 2. Then let heart, 2.
tongue, and voice be employed only in prayer to God for patience in our
anguish, for comfort in this our greatest distress, for strength in our
temptations, and for wished and victorious deliverance from them, for a godly
end and a joyful receiving, and conducting of us by his holy Angels, unto
Abraham's bosom, yea, endeavor to dye praying; for now our weapons be but
prayers and tears, sighs and groans, misery must ca^l for mercy, and let our
last words be, Lord be merciful to me a sinn^r: Lord Jesus receive my soul:
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And thus with our ^iues let us break up our
watch. And thus far A Diar^, o^ We^ke^worke for prepa^^tio^ to die.
of our watch against Death: yet there be, that for better keeping of a true
watch, and performing of this most necessary necessity thoroughly, contriue
this preparation unto a weeks work, or weekly Diarie, sorting for every day
of the week unto themselves certain devout exercises and meditations, so as
though they were to die presently, that day; as thus: The first day of the 1.
week, they wholly spend in this meditation, that they are morta^l and must
die; and therefore they so use and dispose of the commodities of this life, and
their callings, as though before night they must hence, laboring to obey that
commandment of Christ, Luke 12. 35. 36. Let your loins be g^rt about, and
your lights burning: And ye your selves like unto men that wait for their
Master when he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and
knocks, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants whom
the Lord when he comes shall find waking, etc. and so, set their house in
good order, for they must die. The second day 2.
they spend in meditating upon death, the precedents and horror thereof, to
whom they willingly yield, yet so, that by faith in Christ, true repentance,
and renewed obedience, they sweeten the ta^t sharpness thereof, whereby they
shall be able (they doubt not) cheerefu^ly and comfortably to drink of this
cup, Math. 20. 22. 23. The third day they think 3.
upon their sins, and with broken and contrite hearts confess them to the
Lord. Psalm. 32. 5. 6. 7. and that with such vehement feruency of spirit, and
earnest sweating agony in soul, as if within that day or hour they should by
death be attached. 4.
The fourth day, with their greatest devotion, and most careful preparation,
they come to the holy Communion, which they call viaticum, and so victual
themselves therewith for relief in their journey to heaven, joining thereunto
the reading and preaching of Gods sacred word, applying the same to the present
purpose, so nigh as may be, suting and agreeing with Christ's last Sermon in the
Chamber before his death, John 13. and 14. 15. and 16. not without prayer, and
praise to the holy Trinity. I he fifth day they spend in meditation and prayer,
for the more lively and effectual 5.
working of Gods holy Spirit in their hearts, the better entertainment of Gods
sacred word in their souls, and opening of their eyes to see their weakness,
wickedness, and accursednesse, and for wished power to overcome all
temptations assaulting their souls, specially at their death-time. The sixth
day in all humbleness of heart, and feruentnesse 6
of devotion, they pray for a spiritual death, wholly, heavenly, free from all
doubtings, grief, temptations, or fears, with an infallible sight of the Son
of God, in some, though small manner, and most comfortable feeling and
apprehension of the joys of heaven, and contempt of this world, with the
perfect fulfilling to them of all Gods promises, made to them for the life to
come; and that whatsoever holy duty is in them wanting, by ignorance, or
weakness, the holy spirit of God would suggest unto them, and supply, that so
the whole glory might be the Lords, and to them in life and in death, Christ
should be advantage, Phil. 1. 21* and that walking through the valley of the
shadow of death, they should fear nothing; for the Lord would be with them,
and his Angels safely conduct them to Paradise. The 7.
seventh day they give hearty thanks to Almighty God for the innumerable
benefits bestowed upon them, spiritually and temporally, beseeching his majesty
to continue the same so far forth as he sees expedient for them, vowing to
make the rest of their life (if any part be remaining) a perpetual Sabbath
unto the Lord, until they be translated to his kingdom, where, with all his
Angels and Saints they shall solemnize an everlasting Jubilee: then, this day
they use a deep meditation and repetition of all the exercises of the six
days going before, and to every of these days, they select certain fit
Psalms and prayers, etc.

And thus according to my skill have I charged my watchman in the best manner
I could devise, to prepare for death; and when I have done all, I find my self
unable to find the depth of this principle for want of experience, which I
cannot learn until I dye my self: Only this I know, that albeit this watch
be unreprovable and necessary for all Christians, yet (as we see in a Master
of Fence) if a strong champion set upon him, he will soon set him out of all
his fence, and make a fool of him; so if Death assail us above our nature and
strength, we will soon forget all these instructions, and fall to cursing and
blaspheming, and no man woteth with what violence death will assault him,
therefore would I wish him ever to lead a godly life, and keep a careful
watch, annexing to the first observations, this weekly Diary, and that
circularly, that is, week after week to renew it, to our dying day, and then
(to both) to desire the Lord himself to watch over us, else all will be in
vain, when we have done all, we are so weak and corrupt, yea and ignorant of
this way by Deaths door to Heaven, but if the Lord assist us with his holy
spirit, we shall not miss of a prosperous voyage; for if God be with us, who
can be against us? and questionless he will be with us, if we carefully keep
this watch; and though we know not the way, further then with our eyes we see
it, yet he knows it, and every balke, and temptation, and stumbling stone, and
will both put in our hearts how to answer every temptation, Acts 1^. (...).
and (as Peter out of prison) will lead us safely that nothing shall let us,
for his own Names sake. And therefore let us confidently stick unto the Lord,
and he will stick unto us, for he has said, I will not fail thee, neither
forsake thee: Josh. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 5. Luke 22. 43.

The second Use serves to put us in Use (...) To put us in mind of Death.
mind of Death; for seeing it is thus convenient and profitable for us to
watch against Death, and so dangerous, and pernicious to forget death, until
it suddenly takes us away unprepared, we must subscribe to the judgment of
the godly, and also of Heathen writers, who would have man's life to be but a
meditation of Death, because it meets both young and old at every style, and
for that nothing is more dangerous nor comfortless to any, then at an
unawares, full of sin, and full of the world, to be arrested by Death; for if
thou look about thee, thou shall find Death painted in every place and work
thou do. And therefore think upon it, not as thou would of a thing that
were to come, or some devised figment, but even as Gods messenger now present;
and withal, not as a thing appertaining only to others, but belonging to thy
self: The Indian Gymnosophists, called Brachmanes, A good example.
were so careful to make their lives a continual meditation of Death, that
they had their graves always open before the gates of their houses, to the end
that at their going out, and coming in, they might ever be mindful of their
passage to death: and this house of earth, (to wit our graves) is the school
of true wisdom, where God teaches those that be his, the misery and vanity
of this life; and whereas the world considers no more but the painted face of
Iezabel shining gaily at a window, and not the miserable and extreme parts of
her, which (after her body was eaten up of dogs) God would have to remain
whole, that thereby, as in a figure we might see, that the world is another
manner of thing indeed, then it appears in show, and that we should in such
wise consider the face of it, as also to be mindful also of the extreme
griefs and sorrows, wherein the glory of it ends. 2. King. 9. 30.

1. Let us then prevent this misery, The commodities of thinking upon our death.
and think on our death, for this will first make the proudest Peacocke ^ay
down his fairer feathers, so often as he thinks upon it, though he prick
them up again when he draws his eye from this glass.

2. It will make us serve God sincerely, the fear of whom is the beginning of
wisdom. Mariners while they sail peaceably, give themselves to all riot and
disordered excess; but when the tempest beats into their ship, and death
is before their eyes, they cry mightily to God: so we, rocked in the cradle of
security, as in a ship, glutte the forbidden fruit; but stricken in adversity,
loath this life, and labor for a better.

3. The memory of Death causes us to know that none of these things can be
called ours, which we cannot carry with us out of this world; and therefore
while we have time, we should do all good with them we can.

4. In what calling soever a man be, he cannot choose but deal vprightlie in
most things, if he do but remember he must die; for what ambitious man would
be proud of his honor and offices, seeing he must die, when all honor, wealth,
and glory shall forsake him, and another shall step in his room as proud as
he, and when his glass is run out, another shall succeed him, etc. until
Death catch all as fish in his net: and to what purpose should I hoord money,
or purchase Lands, etc. seeing that Nakedness shall be my last end, Job 1. 21.
Of the want of this consideration, arise all errors and deceits; for who
vvou^d have a spark of presumption to sin, that knevv his end shortly to be
dust and ashes, or would make his belly his God, that were sure shortly his
belly should become worms meat: or would bestow one penny in building, that
were persuaded the grave should become his Palace: or brave himself in
braueries, considering he shall be turned (he knows not how soon) out of
all, yea out of house and home, in a poor winding sheet. Therefore (beloved)
let us adhorre all vanities, which do but make us unwilling to die, and open
the gates of our souls to all our spiritual enemies: a rule in policy it is,
to vvatch and ward that City which is beseeged round about; and such as would
keep their cities in flourishing estate, must ever be watchful, as if their
enemies Hannibal adportas.
were at the gates: so our Savior, seeing that we have enemies on every side,
and that Death, the terriblest enemy knocks at our gates, and foreseeing the
danger might come of our sleepie security, commends to his Church, and
commands watchfulness; and therefore let us not be wanting to our own
salvation, but ever desire the Lord to grant us this grace, to number our days
aright, and above all, to persuade our faithless hearts, that we cannot here
long continue, but must die.

The next Use serves for comfort against Use 3. Not to fear Death.
the fear of Death; for, 1. If against the coming of Death we be watchful,
and every way prepared (as is above said) then need we not fear Death, for
then we shall die in the Lord, and the Angel, and Gods Spirit pronounces from
Heaven, that such are blessed, as is, Reucl. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that
die in the Lord from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. If then it be a blessed thing to die in
the Lord, we need not fear it; for all manner of sear presupposes some evil
and danger, for we are not afraid of a good thing, but affect it offered us,
and receive it cheerfully. If then we be not in danger of the second death,
as none that die in the Lord are, it is folly to dread it, seeing it is a
blessed thing. If a town be well furnished with victuals, (as was Babylon,
which was provided for twenty years, as writ Xenophen and Herodotus) though
the town be besieged, the people within are secure, but being vnstored,
quaketh for fear, whence we may judge of what importance it is, to prevent
dangers, and be well prepared in time; for that which astonisheth many at their
death, is, that they are suddenly taken at unawares, and unprovided, and this
makes them impatient, and to cry for some respit, to make them ready for Death,
that is, the Lord must stay for them still: but let them watchfully prepare for
Death, and wait for the Lord as is meet, and say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

2. The unprepared want faith; for had they never so little faith, it would
free them from this fear, and would animate them against all terrors, as Psalm.
46. 1. etc. for as the body, so long as the soul remains therein, lives; so
man, so long as Faith abides in his soul, needs not fear Death, no more
then we fear sickness, whiles we enjoy perfect health, or poverty while we
abound in wealth.

3. There is no fear of death, where there is no sin; for sin is the cause
that God depriueth us of life, but the vigilant and godly, in time pull out the
stings of Death, and in Christ their sins are covered, and not imputed unto
them, Psalm, 32. 1. 2. Romans 4. 7. and they sin not, 1. John 3. 9. yea now, to
them death it self is slain, and swallowed up in victory, by the death of
Christ, 1. Cor. 15. 54. 55. 56. foreseeing that the prick or sharpness of
Death is sin, and the power of sin is death, Jesus Christ has accomplished
the Law for us, and thereby taken away the sting of Death, so that it shall
never hurt us any more, and so to us death now is no death, but an entrance to
life.

4. God is ever with the Elect in their troubles, and will not for sake them,
and though they walk in the valley of the shadow of death, they will fear
nothing, Psalm. 23. 1. 4. Genesis 46. 4. Luke 22. 43. he being with them, how can
they fear; to say nothing, that he is in league and covenant with them, to do
them all good, and to remove from them all harms and hurts, as Isa. 43. 1.
etc. Fear not, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by name, thou art
mine, when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through
the rivers they shall not ouerflow thee, when thou walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, etc.

5. Death is but a passage or way to life, which now is so broad and smooth
beaten by all Gods Saints, that a man may blindly, in the dark, tread it
without stumbling.

6. Such as die in the Lord, rest from their labors, and their works follow
them: and what laboring man after his days toil and travel would not rest
from his labors, and betake him to his bed, and sleep: so we by death shall
rest from all the miseries whereunto this life is subject, and shall sleep as
in our beds, and what a bliss is this, specially to the godly, who of all
others in this life be most miserable; for they are subject, not only to the
common calamities of this life, as of sickness, poverty, losses, etc. but also
besides these, the world does hate revile and persecute them, and that so
bitterly and extremely, that many of them be imprisoned, racked, and
tormented, and cruelly put to death, as Heb 11. 36. etc. and 2. Cor. 11. 23.
etc. So that to them it is a great happiness to rest from their labors, and
yet to rest from their labors by Death, is but a part, and not perfect bliss
or happiness; for then a laboring Ox, or traveling Horse were happy when they
died, yet they loath and tremble to die: but they that die in Christ, have
another increase of happiness, for they enter into glory, and their works,
that is, the reward of their works follow them: for they shall be in
everlasting joy, why then should Gods children fear death, seeing it is an end
of present evils, and a beginning of felicity eternal.

7. Death brings us in glory to see God our Father, and Jesus Christ our
sweet Savior, and the Holy Ghost our sanctifier, of whom we have seen
nothing hitherto, but his pourtrait described by the Prophets and Apostles,
which one thing ought to move us more then any thing to desire our dissolution;
for if the Queen of Saba came so far to see Solomon, and to hear his
Wisdom, how far should we go to hear a greater then Solomon, Luke 11.
31. Saint Austin wished he had lived to see, Roman triumphantem, Paulum
praedicantem, and Christum in carne: but those sights were nothing to these in
the highest Heavens, where Christ with all his Angels and Saints triumph in
glory; for now shall that blessing of our Savior in Luke 10. 23. be perfectly
in us fulfilled, viz. Blessed are the eyes that see the things that ye see; for
I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see these things which
ye see, and have not seen them, etc. the only contemplation of whom, will make
us fully content, and will dampe and take from us, the remembrance and sense of
all other profits and pleasures whatsoever. Then with him we shall see all the
Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and Saints of God, who have in
all ages excelled in virtue and godliness, with all the holy Preachers, who
shine as the Sun and Stars in the firmament of Heaven; a sight surpassing
that which Socrates hoped after his death to see, to Plato in Apol. Socrat.
Cicero, Tuscul. quest. lib. 1.
wit, the Noble Heathens that lived before him, as Agamemnon, Ajax, Ulysses,
etc.

8. By Death our souls shall be separated from our bodies, and made more free
and capable of the profound mysteries of Gods Hierarchy, and Heavenly Kingdom:
for then the veil being removed from our eyes, and (as Nazianzen Nazianzens
saying of the joys of heaven.
writes) Our heavenly souls no longer pressed down by our earthly bodies,
we shall see the Lord face to face, and know him as we are known, 1. Cor.
13. 2. and plainly behold that which we now worship; for them shall we enter
into the sanctuary of our God, even to the Holy of Holies, and there will God
show unto us, (as to his entire friends) the whole glory and riches of his
house and blessed kingdom, and keep nothing back from us. Blessed Death,
will thou not make have to come and conduct us thither, for thou art the
wholesome Physic which curest us of all diseases and afflictions, and by
casting us into, and under the earth, liftest us to the highest heavens, to
live with God for ever.

9. Death is to us the beginning of life, which Epaminondas a Heathen, at his
Death could see, saying to his friends, Epaminondas his saying. Ignatius.
Be merry, for now I begin to live, and so Ignatius, Now I begin to be Christ's
Disciple) so then in truth, death is life, and the life we here lead, is but
a limping death, only the one and the other are masked under false visages;
for (as writes Chrysostom) Our life which is full of misery has a fair
visour on, which causes fools to love it, and Death, which is the beginning
of life, has a foul visage to fright boys and fools, which causes it to be
feared and hated for want of wisdom and true judgment, but take off the
mask, and thou shall see Death very amiable, and life odious and terrible.

10. Death is to be desired before life, and the day of our decease, before the
day of our Nativity. (I mean in respect only of temporal good and evil,
prosperity and adversity, else not) for by our birth we enter to sorrow, and
by death end it, and go up to God, wherefore in old time Sepulchers were
built in Gardens, as Ioh. 19. 41. not only among our sports to put us in mind
of our ends, and so to use the same moderately; but also to teach us that joy
and pleasure is a consequence of death, and an entry to Gods Paradise of
pleasure: and therefore let us live to God, and Death shall not hurt us.

The fourth Use serves for terror to the wicked, who hearing of this early Use
4. Of terror. Object.
watch and preparation for death, will none of it, they be not so foolish as
to defraud themselves of the comforts and delights which God gave them with the
frightfull thoughts of ghastly death: this would be able to fright a fearful
simple body out of his wits, and to draw honest neighbors to desperation, and
what needs this pudder? shall not we be saved as our neighbors, and what do
we desire more? does every man so as you say, or shall all that prepare not so
as you prescribe, be damned? our fathers, nor forefathers ever taught us any
such matters, and we will not, nor desire to be better then they: as for you,
ye be uncharitable men, God forgive you. I answer: here is a great deal of
good stuff pact together, if we had time to undo and consider it. But in the
mean while, know ye that we desire nothing of you more then the Lord exacteth
of his dearest children, and therefore not to be trodden under foot by you; for
we live not by examples, but by the Laws of the Almighty, whereunto all men
ought in all humility be obedient, before father, or life it self, neither is
here any thing pressed, but what your selves know to be requisite, and could
wish ye did, if you (as many and most men do, and you must) lay upon your
deathbeds, knowing and feeling what they miserable men do. Yet if you refuse
this diet as over tart, take then your own, no man will blame me for giving
you good counsel; and because I give you over, yet follow wise Salomons
advise, and that the rather, for that without compulsion, you often, of your
own accord, use it, viz. Go to the Go to the house of mourning.
house of mourning, for there is the end of all men, and he that is living,
takes it to heart. Eccles. 7. 2. where he would have all men bestow sometime
daily to think what pressures and agonies shall assault us at the hour of
death; and for the better consideration hereof, he would have us go to the
house of mourning, (and not of banqueting) and there behold a man dying, and
that we should mark the heavy accidents, and painful passions of that hour,
and take it to heart; for as it fares to day with him, so shall it tomorrow
fare with thee, and with all the world: this thou can learn without his or
any further direction, for coming to the house to visit thy neighbors, there
shall thou see a very sick man, forsaken now of natural heat, Eccles. 12. 2 to
8.
his senses without much moving, his face like lead, the bowls of his eyes
sunk in his head, his mouth full of fleame and some, his throat rattling, his
tongue swollen, his neck winding every side, his breast beats and pants
for life, ready to burst for pain, the veins still, all infallible tokens of
death. Now take this to heart, and take the case to be thine own, for this is
the way of all the world, and then now seeing and viewing such perplexed
extremities in others, reflect, and represent the like image to be shortly in
thy self, Imagine that thou lay upon thy deathbed, that thy Physicians had
now given thee over, thy friends and kinsfolk stood weeping and wringing their
hands about thy bed, unable to help or comfort thee, but rather augment the
grief of thy departure, and thou the while speechless and helpelesse: O how
dreadful shall this departure and last farewell be, to thee and to them! where
wealth shall not asswadge thy woe, but plunge thee deeper in the gulf of
calamity, neither honors assist thee, for thou must leave them with like
vehement smart as thou gottest them, with greedy desire, and badde conscience
thy wonted delights breed within thy soul, that neuer-dying worm, and
neuer-quenched fire: what counsel will thou here take, who formerly have
refused all good connsell, could not abide to hear of death, no more can
now, to go out of thy body, will be too intolerable, to abide within is
impossible, to defer the time (to end thy will but until to morrow) will not
be granted, death is in poasthaste, now art thou abashed that thou did not
watch and prepare for this hour: Oh had thou wist, but it is too late, now
thou cryest, fie, fie upon thy brutish behavior, and now for fear and horror
would flee from thy self; for then shall thou see thy self beset with
horrible monsters, that is, with thine own sins, which (as furies) pursue
and hedge thee in, all the time past shall seem unto thee as the twinkling of
an eye, but the time to come, endless, pitiless, and remediless; so that
thou may truly say, The snares of Death compass me round about, and the
pangs of hell got hold upon me, and I shall find trouble and heaviness, etc.
Psalm. 116. 3. 4.

But return we to our sick man again, whom unexpected Death frustrateth of
all his counsels, and could not come in a worse time; for now he curteth off
violently the webs of all his devises, and with one pellet overthrows all his
castles built in the air: then comes in the Physician with his; It will not
be, think (good sir) no longer of life, you must be gone: These be heavy
tidings, then his sorrows shall be unspeakably increased, when he recounteth
with himself, that his body, which now has some life in it, shall after an
hour be deprived of sense, life, spirit and soul; for if it be an hard matter
to be pulled away from these things which no doubt so nearly touches man,
how bitter (I pray you) will be the separation of the body from the soul; for
such two loving familiar friends (which have always lived sweetly together)
cannot be divided without unspeakable grief, if the Ox do commonly low and
mourn when his yoke fellow (which was wont to draw with him) is taken away,
how will every one of us mourn, when the soul shall be separated from the
body, and as Satan in our life time, set forth to him Gods mercy, and nothing
but Mercy, hiding his Justice; so will he now extenuate his mercy, and press
his justice to draw him to desperation, so that now all his sins which he
in his lifetime committed, unrepented, and with so great facility, shall
violently at once rush upon him, as an armed host of bloody enemies, which
with open eyes, he shall now to his shame and damnation behold; oh how heavy
and grievous will they then seem to be, which formerly vve^^-so sweet and
pleasant. Thus the soul fights with painful sickness, heavy temptation,
and fear of Gods judgment, with many mo^ troubles, temporal as spiritual,
at one instant on man, a sick and a dying man, not vvoting whether to turn
himself, nor yet what shift to make; for if he look vpvvard, he sees the
sword of Gods justice; if downe-vvard, his sins accusing him; if to the time
past, all his vanities past like a shadow; if to the time to come, eternity it
self, and what shall he do? recoyle to the body he cannot, longer to abide
in this sort, he shall not be permitted, but forsaking God in his life time,
shall be forsaken of God in Death (if repentance prevent not) and thus in the
end, the soul remoueth to his place, and the body to the earth whence it came:
now this is thy case, and therefore though we cannot escape Death, yet let us
escape the sting and bitterness of this Death: for the true vvisdome of man
is, to measure all his actions by the squire of his short life, and so to go
through all temporal affairs, that he lose not the eternal, and if some
small loss of goods or preferment take away our sleep, what should the
meditation of assured death do? should we not do as in games of actiuity at
Olympus, exercise our selves some five years before, that in the day of
trial, we might win the prize, so we should now consider al inconveniences
in death, and against the game day be sure to get the prize, and go to heaven,
let forewarned be fore-armed.

The fifth Use serves for comfort for Use (...). To pull out the stings of Death.
Gods elect, who take warning betimes, and hasten to prepare themselves
against this fearful guests coming, and to take away all frights and fears
he brings with him, meet him half the way, not to entreat for their lives,
(as Shemei did David) 2. Sam. 19. 18.
but to iustle with him ere he come to his full strength, to pull out all his
stings while he (as Sampson) sleeps: and as we see when bloody vvarres be
at hand, such as doubt of the victory, betake themselves either to a foreign
country a far off, or to some noble man's service, who is the general and
commander of the whole field, and so escape. And so use wise men, seeing it
impossible for them to escape death and judgment, they take godly courage, and
with all carefulnes prepare for his coming, and when all this is done, seeing
he is like to be too hard for them in this combat, they in time betake
themselves unto the service of the Lord of life and death, who will not see
his servants at any hand miscarry, and if they believe in him, though they were
dead, yet should they live, and whosoever lives and believes in him, shall
never die, John. 11. 25. 26. for though death (as an armed man) assault them,
to the separating of their souls from the bodies, yet all this shall to them
turn to the best; for Death now having no further Dominion nor power over them,
departs as a dastard curre that has bit one of his Masters sheep, yet not
slain it, whereby the shepherd tendereth it the more: and man thus torn, is
not slain, but dismembered a little, but the shepherd of our souls will
recover and fully cure it: and in the mean while, the body freed of all fears
and troubles, shall be honorably buried, and the Lord of life will see it
shall not be awaked, abused, nor miscarry, until he awake him up to life,
never to die any more; and as for the soul, his Angels shall carry him to
Abraham's bofome, and what loses he now by this combat, for though he be over
come of death (as Christ his Lord and Master was) yet he gets the victory,
and by dying, conquereth death; and thus the day of Death is the master day,
and judge of all other days, the trial and touchstone of our life, the last
Act of the worlds comedy; for if we die a godly death, it honors all our
actions, but if an evil, then it defameth and deformeth them all, yea the
death of the righteous (that is of every believing and repentant sinner) is a
most excellent blessing of God, and brings with it many The benefits by Death.
worthy benefits: for,

1. Death is to us converted into a sweet sleep, and our bodies shall lie in
our graves as in a doulne bed, freed from all dangers, cares, vexations, and
temptations, and is the complement of the mortification of our flesh, and we
now are freed from sin.

2. They are blessed that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them, Revel. 14. 13.

3. It separates us from the company of the wicked.

4. It seateth us in heaven, where we shall see God face to face, and Jesus
Christ in his glory, which sight so rauisheth the holy Angels, that it is the
fullness of their contentation, as Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will show me the path of
life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Yea this far surpasses Salomons royalty commended by
the Queen of Saba, 1. King. 10. 1. 8. 9.

5. It puts us in possession of all these benefits that Christ has purchased
for us, Psalm. 126. 5. 6. for so ong as we are in this world, we are saved but
by hope, Romans 8. 24, but when we die, we shall fully enjoy them: a joy it was
to the Israelites, after their long bondage in Egypt to enter into the land of
promise, so to a Prentice to be made free, much more to us to be set at the
liberty of the sons of God in heaven.

6. If there were no death, sin would never end with us, but we should be
ever* filled with iniquity, our sorrows and labors would never forsake us,
but we should be ever in soul and body most miserable, if we died not, who
would regard the death of the soul, nor prepare against the day of doom.

7. It opens unto us the gate of heaven, ever since we were borne, we have
been sailing to this Haven, and now being within sight of it, we row backward
from it: yet no Sailer, beaten with tempestuous waves, but would be at the
haven: no traveler passing dangerous ways, but would be at home, and no
godly man but would be at rest. If an old aged man would make true relation of
his life, from his conception to his dissolution, and declare all the sorrows
he passed through, and the heart utter all her greefes and gripings it
sustained all this while, I suppose, that not only we our selves, but the
very Angels would be astonished and wonder thereat, and every man would take it
an high blessing of God to be quickly rid therefrom. Hegesias a Cyrenian
Philosopher, did with such eloquence dilate of the miseries H^^esias h^s
excellent exam* (...) for Christians to follow.
of this life, that many of his hearers desired wilful death, whereupon
Ptolomy the King forbad him to dispute further thereof in the Schools, Cicero
in Orat. and lib. 1. ^uscul. quaest. Yet (will you object) by dying the godly
lose many a good Object.
thing, and the doing of many excellent works: then to the godly, Death is
still an enemy, fills us with terrors and diseases, renteth the soul from
the body most grievously, causes our bodies to rotte in their graves, and be
converted to worms meat, and then to dust and ashes: then the grave is the
land of darkness and solitariness: then death drives us out of our
vocations, and out of Gods Church, and deprive us of all worldly comforts, and
brings us to judgment: all and every of which are distastefull and fearful
to Gods Saints.

Answ. All this is true, and we may Answ.
thank Sin and Satan for it; for had we not sinned and yielded to Satan's
temptation, Genesis 3. we should not have tasted of Death nor misery, but Sin
brought Gods curse into the world, and specially this; for the reward of Sin
is Death, and do we marvel that it (as a cursed ship is ouer-laden with
cursed merchandise) nay, we all may thank God it is no worse with us, yet see
Gods mercy wrapped secretly in his heavy curse: for 1. though Death be our
implacable enemy, yet is he disarmed and vanquished, and swallowed up of life,
and though bodily death remains unto Gods children: for the exercise of their
faith, patience, etc. yet all that makes it fearful or grievous, are
removed, prevented, or changed and altered to the better, for none of these
can hinder us from serving the Lord, and calling upon our God. 2. Neither can
our dissolution, 2.
diuorcing soul and body, impair our bliss, nor sever us from Christ; and
this parting is but for a time, the while it rests in hope. 3. Though the
body see corruption, yet never destruction, 3.
but ever we expect a day of restitution. 4. Though we lie buried, yet the 4.
memorial of the righteous shall be blessed. 5. Though we be out of our earthly
5.
calling, yet are we in an higher and more honorable service among Gods
Angels and Saints in the Church triumphant. 6. And though we be deprived 6.
of earthly contentments, yet our exchange is with greater advantage in heaven.
7. Death cannot be uncertain 7.
to them that know they must die, and daily provide for it: and as for
judgment, we will watch and provide for it, but woe to the unprepared. Use 6.
For thankfulness in delivering us from the second Death.


The last Use serves for thankfulness to God, for this vnspeakeble mercy to
us, as in all other, so namely in this, that whereas we all, the sons of Adam
had violated Gods sacred Law, Genesis 2. 17. and brought death eternal upon our
souls and bodies, Romans 5. 12. etc. so unspeakable was the love of our
heavenly father to us, that to deliver us from this body of Death, he gave his
only begotten Son to suffer Death for us, and to be made a curse for us, to
redeem us from the curse of the Law, Galath. 3. 13. and changed this second
eternal Death, to a temporal momentany death, making it now the gate of
eternal life, and albeit that so also this temporal death seems, and is the
greatest and most grievous and terrible of all temporal plagues and torments,
and the strength and end thereof, so that thus yet it is intolerable to all
the sons of Adam, the Lord hear also, for his sons sake mitigateth to us
his Elect, this first death also gives us his spirit and grace to pull out by
degrees the stings thereof, that it shall not hurt us no more then a Scorpion
that embraces us about, the sting being pulled out, and withal gives us
Christian fortitude in this last combat, to gripe with and overcome death and
the terrors thereof, and which is chiefest of all, not only sends his holy
Angels in that agony to comfort us, and to be about our beds and paths as he
did to his own Son, Luk 22. 43. but is with us himself in this troble to
comfort and to deliver us. Psalm. 23. and 41. 3. and often to the greater
comfort of such as surviue, fills our hearts, while we be hear, with joy and
gladness, and with an unspeakable heavenly light, and feeling of the very joys
of heaven, whereby Gods blessed Saints, are in this case, so far from fears
and terrors, that having faithfully and blessedly past, all temptations of
Satan, and relikes of sin, which be their afflictions, they as men and women
rapt to the third heaven, desire, and cry for death pray heartely to be
dissolved, and be with their Christ, their Lord and their God, and when death
comes with his last stroke, to finish his work, then is he most welcome,
and most joyfully received, and entertained by them. The Lord hereby, putting
a plain difference at this time, between the death of his holy and elect
saints, and the reprobates, as Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold
the just, for the end of that man is peace, etc. and the end of the wicked
shall be cut off. The Lords name be glorified ever, for this unspeakable gift,
and all others in Christ, Amen. And so far as now of our watchfulnes for and
against Deaths coming.

The third kind of watching, concerns Sect. 16. The third part. The sense.
our preparation against the day of judgment, and how to be then with comfort
discharged, and so enjoy life everlasting which depends indeed upon the other
two former watches; for if we during our abode here, live godly, and depart
hence (well prepared) in the fear and favor of God, it cannot be but we shall
be well prepared for judgment, which is nothing else but the just reward, or
due punishment in the life to come; for the things acted or committed in the
time we lived here. And this care likewise must be thought upon in this life,
and as our preparation for death: so this for life eternal is a forcible
motive to lead a godly life, and faithfully to occupy our talents, until our
Masters return from receiving his kingdom, Luke 19. 13. 15. as we see in
faithful and trusty servants, who in their Masters absence will be careful to
give the servants their portions in due season, and themselves to be found well
occupied, Luke 12. 42. etc. but if they hear of their Masters return shortly,
they will afresh see that all things be in good order, that they be not blamed
in any respect, but if they receive tidings that he approaches, and is at the
doors, now they use a third onset; oh how now they bestirre them (...) how
they sweep the house (though swept again and again before) they make up the
beds, dress and trim the chambers, and what not? that so they may be freed
from all blame, receive their Master with joy, and be of him commended and
rewarded. So, though Gods Elect be through the whole course of their lives, and
for death also very watchful, that so they may be approved of God, (come he
when he please to judgment) yet if by Gods messengers they be advertised that
his coming is by infallible signs at hand; then they prepare and trim their
lamps a fresh, and so use to the two former, a third more special watch, and
so a threefold Cable will not be soon burst, and thrice blessed are those
servants whom their Lord when he comes shall find so doing, Luke 12. 43.
which being so, I, out of this third member and sense of my text arise this
doctrine.

Whosoever will escape the dreadful sentence Sect. 17. Doct. 6. Prepare for
Christ's coming.
of condemnation in the day of Judgment, and be received to eternal glory,
must most carefully watch for our Savior Christ Jesus coming to judgment.
Before I descend to the proofs of this doctrine (so little respected of many)
I will show the The necessity of his doctrine.
necessity thereof, that so my godly Christian may be persuaded more carefully
to stand upon his watch. As first there is not a more effectual Doctrine to
rouse the sluggard from his deadly security and sleeping in sin, then to blow
in his ^are, this fearful trumpet, to call him to judgment, and in time
prepare for it: no man almost so dead in sin, but will be awaked at this
Alarm. 2. Who sees not the sensual licentiousness of this age we live in,
that they neither regard heaven nor hell, but (as an horse to the battle) rush
upon the pikes of all wickedness with greedines, and therefore ought to be put
in mind and terrified with Gods judgments, and allured with his promises for
the ^ife to come. 3. A book case it is, that all must die and come to
judgment, Heb. 9. 27. Romans 14. 10. 12. and 2. Corinthians. 5. 10. 11. as thou
tenderest then thy salvation, remember that thou art a man and a Christian: in
that thou art a man, needs must thou die, yet not as a beast, to be quite
extingui^hed; for thy body shall but rest and sleep a while in the grave, and
for that term of time, thy soul shall be carried into a region of weal or
woe. And in that thou art a Christian, believe this article of the Christian
faith, that thou must in body and soul rise and come to judgment: and therefore
prepare for it, and that now, for it is high time, and thou have idled
ouer-long, and it is ouer-late to make any delay. 4. Satan, man's deadly enemy,
labors to hide from us this day, so fearful, and feign would persuade us
that there shall be no day of judgment, and prevails with all Mockers,
Sadduces, and Atheists his scholars, though he can never persuade himself
therein, which makes him believe and tremble, Iam 2. 19. and though it be, yet
it is not in haste; for the days are prolonged, Ezech. 11. 3. and 12. 22. out:
and though it come, it shall not come so suddenly; but a man may make some
shift to hide him in that throng, or have respit to say his prayers, or cry
Lord have mercy upon me, and mark it (will Satan say) i^ thou should
entertain N^te Satan's policy to hinder the said. (...) full.
such frightfull meditations of death, of hell, of judgment, etc. they would
deprive a man of all worldly comforts, and make them weary of their lives:
therefore needful it is for them to know how it is likely to fare with them,
if they repent not, and I would that but the very remembrance of that day,
which is so fearful to Satan, that it causes him to fear and tremble, and
which should make rich men weep and howl, Iam. 2. 19. and 5. 1. were deeply
infixed in our hearts, and then should it not greatly need to call upon them,
once, twice, and thrice to watch, for then every man would be a Niniuite, Ion.
3. 6. and would at every temptation remember this counting day, whereas now
(alas) no sooner is the thunder-clappe of Gods temporal judgments past, but
with Pharaoh their hearts be hardened, with Israel they repent of reformation,
and with hog and dog return to their weltring Ier. 34. 16 2. Pet. 2. 22.
in the mire, and to their old vomit, as though there were no God, no heaven,
no judgment, no hell. 5. The world is wholly drowned in infidelity, Luke 18.
8. and needs must be convinced thereof, and drawn to repentance, faith, and
new obedience, that we all may cheerfully meet the Lord in the clouds, and
be saved. 6. The due meditation upon this day, will enforce us to contemn the
world, and all the vanities thereof: Seeing then they must be fired, and we
judged for abusing them; he that believes this will soon contemn all
present vanities, and hasten to future felicity, and ever will be thankful
to God for giving him this warning, to pull the stings of that day out of his
conscience before dooms day come, that so that day be not terrible unto him,
but a joyful wedding day, translating the nature of it, from a day of
judgment, to a day of redemption, and converting it from the door of hell to
the blessed gate of heaven. 7. This doctrine of the last judgment, is moreover
in sundry respects profitable: for,

1. It will stir us up to serve God sincerely, without hypocrisy.

2. It will cause us suruay our lives, and judge our selves, that we be not
judged of the Lord, it will also pull down our pride, and loath the best thing
that will hinder our reckoning in that day.

3. It will cause us make no more account of this world, then of an Inn, or
baiting-place, and to joy that we have occasion to leave it, and the vanities
thereof.

4. It is Gods day of redemption, and our year of Iubely, to warn us to enter
into the possession prepared for us before all worlds. Thus of the premises we
see that this watch appertains to all men, and that none must refuse this so
necessary a work.

Now this Doctrine is proved true and sound, and is confirmed in Math. 24. 42.
Proofs.
and 25. all. etc. Mark. 13. 33. out. Luke 12. 35. to 49. and 17. 20. out. and
21. 25. to 37. John 5. 27. etc. 1. These. 4. 15. out, and 5. 1. to 12. and 2.
These. 1. 7. out, and (...) Tim 408. Apoc. 20. 12. out, and 22. 20. all which
places call and exhort us to watch and prepare our selves for this great day.
This is figured in Exodus 19. as the Lord commanded Moses to sanctify the
people against the third day: so Christ bids (...) against doomes day. 2. as
God gave signs of his coming, so did Christ. 3. as Moses brought the people
to meet the Lord, so the Angels gather the Elect to judgment. 4. as the people
(...) the thunders and trumpets, so shall they fear in that day. 5. as God
then delivered the Law, so then will he judge the violaters thereof. 6. as
that day wa^ for the good of the Elect, (so will this be to). Reasons enforce
this Doctrine.

1. Because the Judge himself commands Reasons. 1
us so to do, Luke 11. 28.

2. Gods justice and mercy calls for this 2.
day, to punish the wicked, and crown the godly.

3. The Lord sundry times, and after 3.
diverse manners forewarned us hereof; as 1. by pronouncing the sentence of
Death, for sin, before it was committed, Genesis 2. 17. 2. by often repeating
the same sentence in the Law, Deutr. 27. 26. 3. by the evidence of every man's
conscience, summoning (as it were) all men to appear at the day appointed,
before the great Judge of all the world, Ioh. 8. 7. and 1. John 3 20. 21. Romans
2. 15. 16. 4. by his special temporal judgments, that figure it as upon the
old world, Sodom, Babel, Canaan, etc. 5. by many signs and tokens,
fore-running and presaging the same. 6. by delivering his talents to be
occupied until his coming again, Luke 19. 12. 7. 7. by the word of God
warning all to judgment.

4. The ends for which Christ comes 4.
to judgment, justify the same: as 1. for the glory and praise of his
Justice, for all eternity. 2. inrespect of the complete fulfilling of Christ's
three offices, And then shall he deliver up the kingdom to his father, when
he has put down all power, rule, and authority, 1. Cor. 15. 24. ande. 3. for
the crowning of the Elect with immortality in heaven; for having abolished
Sin and Death, and reconciled the Elect, he shall deliver them to his
Father, to be crowned with eternal glory, and shall triumph over all his
enemies for ever. 4. In respect of men, that every man may receive his just
deserts, be they good or evil. 5. for the deliverance of the creatures from
the slavish bondage of corruption, whereunto it is subject, Romans 8. 20. 6. meet
and right it is that the Lord should be revenged upon Satan and all his
accomplices, for troubling his Elect, and consequently upon all the world, for
persecuting and afflicting any manner of way his holy Church; who now (as the
blood of Abel) cry against their oppressors, Revel. 6. 9. ^0. Luke 18. 7. and
with their prayers hasten the Lord to judgment, and so likewise do the cries
of the poor, of the hireling, the stranger, widow, and fatherless, Deuteronomy. 24.
14. 15. Genesis 18. 20. and 4. 10. and 6. 5. 6. 7. Iam. 5. 4. the complaint of the
Angels, of Satan's sowing t^res, Mat. 13. 27. the accusations of Satan, Reu.
12. 10. and the sins of all the world, crying to God, all which hasten his
coming to this great assizes, and the while he stays and delayeth his
coming; for causes best known to himself, as the complement of the Elect,
etc. also he is feign by strange, fearful, and extraordinary judgments to
punish the world; when for want of executing Justice, men hiding their eyes,
Leuit. 20. 1. and to visit countries, and people, with strange plagues and
calamities, and that for the peace of his Elect, else the world would grow out
of frame, and Satan and his kingdom become ouer-insolent, and the poor and
weak be trodden underfoot, and therefore there must be a day of general
judgment.

The Doctrine thus proved, it follows Sect. 18. Use 1. To confute Atheists.
to give some uses for the edifying of the conscience, whereof the first serves
for confutation of all Atheists, Sadduces, Epicures, ignorant Sotts, Mockers,
and whosoever besides of that cursed crew and litter, who impudently and
desperately deny there shall be any day of judgment, and therefore without
reremorse give the raines of liberty to all sensuality, and abominations,
Math. 22. 23, and Acts 23. 8. and 1. Cor. 15. 12. Phil. 3. 18. 19. and 2. Pet.
3. 3. 4. The reasons of these foolish-witty sinners be these: the whole world
stands of believers and unbelievers; but there is no general judgment day for
neither of these; for the believer has life everlasting, and shall not come to
judgment, but passes from death to life, Ioh. 5. 24. as for the unbeliever,
Tremel.
he is condemned already, John 3. 18. and needs no further judgment, and
therefore there shall be no judgment at all, for it is needless. I answer. By
judgment is meant sometimes absolution, as Math. 25. 34. other while
condemnation, John 5. 24. now God will judge the just and the wicked, Eccles.
3. 17. the believer shall not come to the judgment of condemnation, yet shall
he come to the judgment of absolution, Math. 25. 34. 40. 41. they reply: that
all men at their several deaths and departure out of this world, are judged,
and what needs the general? I answer. That (notwithstanding this particular
judgment, (granted) only upon men's souls) there must and shall be a general
Sessions, and that for the above recited reasons, as also,

1. Because in the first particular judgment, the soul only is judged, and
the body is interred in the grave, therefore meet it is, that as soul and body
honored or dishonored God together, both should be paid or pained together,
and therefore must both appear, that day to be judged according to their
works.

2. The Lord in pronouncing his sentence of absolution, as of condemnation,
will be justified and glorified in the face of all the world.

3. The Lord will have this to be a day of general triumph over sin and
Satan, and there must a day be assigned for it, and therefore are we to watch
for it. Use 2. Is to use motive for instruction to the Saints.


The second Use serves for instruction for Gods children to be wise and
watchful, for seeing there must be a general day of judgment, we must
without delay or procrastinations prepare for it; which (I take) we shall
perform the better, if we use the few motives offered to your considerations,
to stir up your hearts for this work, whereof I raise my first motive from the
very Sect. 19. The first Motive from the names of that day.
names and attributes of that fearful day, for the names in part show the
nature thereof, whereof some be fearful to rouse the sleepy sluggard, others
comfortable, to encourage forward the godly, and both in time to regard their
salvation, as

1. This day is called, the day of judgment, Math. 12. 36. Luke 10. 14. and
who knows not, that to judge, means properly to do justice upon
malefactors; for it is contrary to the name of saving, delivering, or
redeeming, Ioh. 12. 47. 48. and therefore thereby is meant a day of damnation,
which implies thus much; that in that day Christ the Judge will be so
offended with his enemies, that he himself will sit in judgment upon them to
condemn them to hell; and we know that Monarchs sit not in judgment for toys,
(howsoever reprobates make but a sport of sin, Pro. 4. 19.) though they tread
under foot, the very blood of Christ the Judge himself.

2. It is called a snare, Luke 21. 35. because, as birds when they fare best
and misdoubt no danger, are unawares caught in a snare; so when the wicked are
most secure, this day (as a snare) entrappeth them: and therefore good were it
for them not to sleep in sin, nor feed on every bait, lest being circumvented
by Satan's snares, they cannot fly to the heavens, Psalm. 124. 6.

3. It is called (as an appellatiue proper) that day, Luke 21. 34. that is, a
day of note, known to babes and children, from their cradles, to fright them
from sin, at the name of which day Satan trembles, infalix felix quaketh,
Balthazar sinketh, the rich weep and howl, and all workers of iniquity are
quite confounded.

4. It is named a great day, Reuelat. 6. 17. and 16. 14. because the great God
that day will do great works, and determine of great matters, of the life and
death of men and Angels, and great is it, in that it includes in it the works
of all ages.

5. A day it is of Anger and Wrath, Romans 2. 5. Reu. 6. 17. for then all shall
drink the cup of Gods wrath, that formerly have provoked his wrath against
them; for he will pour upon them his wrath, in floods of indignation, and
streams of anger, Psalm. 11. 7. and 50. 1. 2. 3. in such exceeding measure, as
no wit can conceive.

6. It is called the day of the Lord, 1. These. 5. 2. and 2. Pet. 3. 10. 12. and
the day of Christ, 2. These. 2. 2. and the day of God, 2. Pet. 3. 12. thereby
insinuating, that all other days were the days of men, wherein they did what
pleased them; and this while the Lord was silent, Psalm. 50. 21. but this is
Gods day wherein he will speak, and thou shall be silent: so there be but two
days of all the world, thy day, and Gods day. Now in this thy day, thou (as
Lord of all) do what pleases thee, to anger the Lord withal; but in that
day, he will break silence, of so many days and years, of so many injuries
and indignities done to him and his, and will answer for his honor and glory,
and then show himself to be God of Gods, and Lord of Lords: and as man in
this his day, did all things here below out of order, to Gods great dishonor;
so the Lord in that day will reduce them all to their own order, to man's
confusion, and as it is greater sorrow, pain, and grief to put an arm, once
out of joint, in his right place again, then it was at first to put it out; so
shall the wicked find this cure, this day more sharper and bitterer then the
putting of it out of joint was in their day, and it is well; for as we see
when Rebels and Traitors be imprisoned, the land is quiet, and the Prince
secure; so when these rebels be cast into hell, then is God universally
glorified, and the Church secured: and as there was a time when Christ wept,
Luke 10. 41. and thou did laugh, so in this day thou shall weep and howl,
and he will laugh at thy destruction, Prou. 1. 26.

7. It is called the day of the declaration of the just judgment of God,
according to the Gospel, Romans 2. 5. 16. signifying, that howsoever, now
matters be out-faced, and the verity of the. Gospel contradicted, and that
worldlings make no conscience of sacrilege, violence and oppression, and the
impotent fatherless stranger, and widow, appeal (being wronged) unto Christ
the just Judge, Psalm. 26. 1. to be judge between them and their enemies that
molest them, and yet now this appellation is not regarded, yet in this day God
will declare who have right, who does wrong, and will be revenged upon the
workers of iniquity, and highly reward the wronged, for he is merciful.

8. It is called the day of refreshing, Acts 3. 19. we see how here the godly
are persecuted, afflicted, and of all men most miserable, but in that day they
shall be comforted and refreshed, and have all tears wiped from their eyes.

9. It is called the day of redemption, Luke 21. 28. Romans 8. for then all the
Elect shall be sure to receive the effects and fruits of their former
redemption purchased them, by the death of Christ, and therefore are the godly
with joyful hearts to watch and wish his coming, and the wicked in time to
prepare their lamps: And so far of this first motive and appellations of this
day.

The second motive to watchfulness The second Motive (...) the signs of his
coming.
for Ohrists coming is, that the signs of his approaching are fulfilled by
the judgment of the learned, these signs be of three sorts: some long ago
fulfilled, others more near at hand, and some to be fulfilled at his coming:
of the first sort, are the preaching of the Gospel, through the world, Math.
24. 14. Romans 10. 18. and 2. the revealing of Antichrist, 2. These. 2. 3. of the
second are the departing of most from the faith, Luke 18. 8. and 2. These. 3. 2.
and secondly, terrible and grievous calamities; Math. 24. 6. 16. thirdly,
deadness of heart, with secure sleeping in sin, Math. 24. 37. and 25. 6. to
13. 31. Luke 17. 24. etc. as in the days of Noah and Lot, fourthly, the
calling of the Jews, Romans 11. 25. fifthly, many false Christ's and false
Prophets and seducers: sixthly wars and persecutions: of the last and third
sort are the signs in the Sun and Moon and stars, Math. 24. 29. and the
sign of the Son of man coming in the clouds, of which signs further to
consider, I refer to every godly man's private meditation, Use.
and as he acknowledges them fulfilled, so to prepare himself, and where he
doubts of any of these first eight, to confer with the godly learned, and
not harden his heart, but ever be thankful to our good God, who in mercy
gives us these signs of his most gracious and glorious coming, least we
should be taken unprovided: as when a mighty Similie.
Monarche, to repress the rebellion of his treacherous subjects, intends a
Parliament, and sends forth his messengers, with proclamations, throughout
the Empire, to summon and admonish all estates upon pain of death, personally
to appear at the appointed day and place: so the father of mercies, by
determinate and foretold signs, summoneth all the world against that
appointed day, to appear before his glorious tribunal, to render a strict
account of their lives, since the first creation, to that day, and to receive
their rewards accordingly, good or evil: and for their further instruction in
the premises, it pleases his Majesty to sort his signs, so as they may be
lively vocal preachers, to direct them in the nature of the thing they
signify, and that hereby men may prognosticate without a teacher, not only
the nighnesse of this great Assizes, but also the greatness and dreadfulnesse
thereof, and so at no hand be taken sleepy or unfurnished: and so far of the
second motive.

The third Motive is the consideration The third Motive (...) the uncertainty
of the day.
of the uncertainty of that day, Mat. 24. 36. Mark. 13. 32. Luke 12. 39. 46.
and 1. These. 5. 2. Revel. 16. 15. all which quotations, with one voice and
consent, proclaim his certain uncertain sudden coming, as it were flying
upon the wings of these signs, Luke 17. 24. to 31. which cannot but be
exceeding frightfull to unbelievers. In earthly Assizes A Similie.
there is ever an appointed time, summons are sent abroad, sufficient time of
preparation granted, that the while ma^efactors may procure friends or pardon;
but here is neither day, respite, nor warning, to King nor Keysar, to Pope nor
Prelate, but it rusheth upon us when we less would, even as a thief in the
night, while people are asleep in sin, and that suddenly too, that the
foolish virgins have no time to trim their lamps, nor the Pharisee to say his
long loud prayers, nor the Sadducie to recount his error in denying the
resurrection and judgment, nor the hypocrite to repent of his dissembling, nor
the Atheist Epicure, worldling, swaggerer and swearer, once to cry God for
mercy, but now in poste-haste, in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the
trumpet, appear they must, be they ready or unready, a sharp and short
warning (God wots) to such as never thought of any such business; this
suddenness is to the wicked, the very door and beginning of hell, oh happy
might they be, if now they might trudge directly to damnation, and not see the
Judges face, whom they buffeted, and whose blessed body they sundry ways
pierced! oh that they might now hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks
of the hills, or that hills and rocks would fall upon them, and hide them from
the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
for the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to endure, Reu. 6. 15.
16. 17. Oh how suddenly does this trouble and heaviness fall upon them as a
storm, and their misery like a tempest, Prou. 1. 27. Oh what unexpected
speediness is this, that he hasteneth ere they had space to point at him with
the finger, and say, Lo there he comes; alas, alas, what shift can they make
in this narrow strait? how shall they answer, there so many inditements? but
they should know, that they formerly had sufficient warning, by Henoch, by
Moses, by the Prophets, by the Judge himself, and his Apostles and Ministers
in all ages, by judgments temporal, as afflictions, sicknesses, signs and
wonders, death, and all the messengers thereof, but then they despised and
scorned all, Prou. 1. 24. Isai. 65. 2. and to despise holy admonition, is to
despise him that in love sends him the warning; which how heavy a practice
it is, appears by Gods heavy judgment upon Balthazar, who made no use of
Gods judgment upon his Father, and therefore befell it upon himse^fe, Dan. 5.
5. Luke 19. 27. and full just it is, that such as refuse the Lords proffered
mercy, pardon, and peace, should feel his justice and prepared judgments: and
if a these cannot abide a privy search, let him forbear stealing, then he
need not fear it: if thou can not abide to hear of Christ's sudden coming
to judgment, then watch before hand, and he cannot come unexpected, and
unprepared to thee: else what King (think you) would take in good part to be
denied lodging or entertainment at his A Similie.
own subjects hand, though he came suddenly; much less if he sent him
warning beforehand of his certain coming, though the very day were
uncertain to himself: if such, after such fair warning should shut him out
of doors, ought he not to proclaim him a traitor? and should not the Lord in
equity do the like to us, seeing he is so often foretold of his sudden
coming? If a thief should foretell that he one night or other (he wist not
when) would come to rifle and rob their houses, they would watch, well
appointed every night, yet that loss would be nothing comparable to this. Let
them then know, that as nothing better expels sloth, then the certainety of
dangers imminent (as is this of Gods coming to judgment) so nothing moves
watchfulness* sooner then the uncertainty of the time, when these dangers
shall come. And therefore to press and imprint th(...) principle Similies of
Christ's ^econd coming to judgment
into our souls, our Savior compares his sudden coming to judgment to the
days of Noah and Lot, when in the midst of their iollities, sudden
destruction came upon them, Math. 14. 37. 38. Luke 17. 26. 28. 2. To the
coming of a the^fe in the night to rob, 1. These. 5. 1. 2. who never gives
warning before hand, when he intends to come; for did he, then the Master of
the house would watch, Math. 24. 44. Mar. 13. 35. 3. To a lightning, Luke. 17.
24. then which nothing is less expected, nothing more sudden, more fearful,
nor yet more hurtful; none can prevent it before it comes, and after commonly
ensues a fearful thunder-clappe; so this great day, coming unexpected can
by no power of man be stopped, and being come, after follows the frightful
thunderclap of Gods eternal curse against reprobates. 4. It is like to a
snare, Luke 21. 35. because as birds, when they less doubt, are suddenly
snared and stifeled; so the wicked when they be most secure in their excess,
and ruff of security, (as Nabal in his feast, Balthazar in his sumptuous
b^nquet, Dan. 5. 5.) then this day as a snare catches and stifeleth them al.
5. Paul resembles it to a woman in travel, 1. These. 5. 23. which be she Lady,
Queen, or Empress, she shall not escape her labor, nor delay one day nor
hour, but must yield and bow thereto, as well as the basest beggar, and so
must all yield to this summons: no friend, no worldly treasure, no entreaty
will exempt, only due watchfulness will secure them.

Object. But (alas) if it come thus suddenly, Object.
who possible can prepare him for it? Many things are to be performed at that
very instant, as to pray his Majesty not to enter into judgment with us; now
to remember his gracious covenant, and promises made to us, and now to give us
his spirit to comfort us, his Angels to guide and help us, and himself to
strengthen us: but this suddenness excludes all. I answer. Solomon tells us
of four impossibilities, yet by watchfulness performed; as 1. to know the way
of an Eagle in the air, of a Serpent upon a stone, of a ship in the sea, and
of a man with a maid, P^ou. 30. 18. 19. yet, albeit a man know not the way of
an Eagle in the air, to beware of him, yet (come be what way he will) a wise
man will see to his Poultrey, and though he see not the way of a Serpent upon a
stone, to beware of his stinging, yet will he see to his footing, that he tread
not upon him, nor discern the way of a ship upon the wa^es, yet will he see
to his beasts and cattle, that they become not a pray for Pirates. And finally
though he is not to suspect any harm between a man and a maid, yet will he
see to his daughter that she be not defiled by any man. So, though it seem
impossible for us to know at the instant, Christ's sudden coming, yet (if we
be wi^e) we will watch and pray, and set all things in as good order, as if
now he were coming, and at the door: And so far of this third Motive.

The fourth Motive to watchfulness is, to consider the manner, how they shall
The fourth Motive (...). (...) the manner of the re^urrection.
rise to judgment, and to meet the Lord in the clouds, which the holy
Scriptures teach us to be thus. The Judge will send his Angels with a great
sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four
^^indes, and from the one end of the heaven unto the other, Math. 24. 31. Ioh.
5. 28. 29. and 1. Cor. 15. 52. and 1. These. 4. 16. for as God now in his Church
by his Ministers, who cry aloud, lifting up their voice like a trumpet, Isa.
58. 1. and speak to them to li^^ and raise them up from the deadness of
sin, and gather them to Christ, so in the last day will he speak unto them,
in the voice of the Archangel, and in the trumpet of God to gather them to
himself, that such as had part in the first resurrection, Revel. 20. 6. might
have now their part in the second.

The Use hereof ^^rues to forewarne Use.
and fore-arme a^l men in the fear of God, to make a careful conscience of
their ways, for though they d^e once and rot in their graves, yet must they
rise to judgment, and then shall it be our only comfort, to hear the voice of
the Arch-Angell, awaking us out of our beds, to come before our Savior, and
with him to enter into his glory; for now shall the body be released from the
prison of the corrupt grave, and (as Joseph to appear before Pharaoh, Gen 41
Genesis 41. 14
14) be newly attired in robes of glory, and (joined again to his soul)
joyfully appear before the Lord, whereas the wicked (as those tares bound in
bundles to be burnt) shall be drawn and ha^^d (as thieves and malefactors to
the bar) to be arraigned and condemned to hell fire, Math. 13. 30. And so
far of this fourth Motive.

The fifth Motive to watchfulness, is The fifth Motive (...)o^ the generality
of thi^* judgment
the generality of this judgment: for all shall appear before the judgment
s^at of God, Math. 25. 32. Ioh. 5. 28. 9. Rom 14. 10 and 2. Cor. 5. 10. Acts
24. 15. Reu. 20. 1. 13 and 1. 7. and is figured in Ezech. 37. 2. 3. rich and
poor, old and young, none shall be privileged, the Priests shall not claim
sanctuary, nor the people beg exemptions, nor the bidden ghuests coin
excuses, no bribing of the Angels and Summoners, no answering by Proctor, no
appearing by Attorney, the Judges themselves must this day stand below to be
judged, the Lawyers are put out of Plea, the Popes who absolved prodigally all
others, must now beg for pardons for themselves, no demurres admitted, nor
appealing to General Counsels, or higher Courts, this being the highest of
all others, the husband shall not answer for his wife, nor the father for his
son, nor the mother for her daughter, nor the nurce for her babe in the
swathes, all must personally appear, yea even those which were burned to dust
and ashes, and after their ashes were scattered abroad with the wind, and part
spread upon the waters, that they should never rise again (as Eusebius. Eccles.
lib. 5. c. 1.) yet all shall rise, and that day See Eusebius. Eccles h^st. lib. 5.
c. 1.
only Adam shall see all his posterity. And if but one had been exempted from
this appearance, thou might conceive some hope to be absent, but seeing all
must appear, prepare to meet thy God. O Israel, Am^s 4. 12. for who that
day has oil enough for himself, or is so just that he may entreat for
others, this were not only supererogation, but superarrogancy, and what place
dare harbor a Sheb^ against David, a traitor against his King, a runnagate from
his Master, and a Jonah from the Lord, if the Angels be judged, shall men look
to escape? nay (as Iael Sisera) every creature is ready to take part with the
Lord of Hosts against his enemies, insomuch that the grave, sea, death, and
hell will that day deliver up their dead, and conceal not any from him: and
which is worse, (and mark it O thou wicked man) thou must rise, and when thou
appearest in judgment, thou shall show thy self as sinful and wicked a man
in the presence of God, and all the world as presently thou live here and
shall be at the time of thy death, and shall bring with thee all the
abominations of thy sinful life and death, to judgment; so that all that
shall behold thee, shall (pointing at thy filthiness) say, behold the man and
his works! for thy body dying, shall rise an vng^orious, base and shameful
body, full of corruption, yet immortal, and thy wretched soul, as it
departed out of thy body full of sin and shame, Reu 14. 13.
so shall it rise again: and therefore consider, if thou would now be loath
to be rapt thus in thy rags of sin, and in the case thou presently
stand, to judgment: then fall not now to amend thy life, else thy
abominations all (as a dog his Master) will trace, yea, go before thy face
to Gods tribunal; for it is not the grave, nor any fire, but only the blood
of Christ, that shall cleanse thee from thy sins, and make thee accepted of
God, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, and
now is ife eternal by thee either gotten, or quite lost, think upon it and
watch for it. But here against the reprobate cauilleth, and says, ^ush Object.
this is a tale, the case is not so hard, but a man may make some shift, I am
but low of stature, I will couch down and hide me, and how then can I be seen
or missed in such a throng and multitude, and in so busy a time: Yet consider
thou Gods word in Psalm. 139. 1, 6, 7. Ierem. 23. 24. Obad. 6. 3. 4. Amos 9 1.
2. 3. Revel. 6. 15. 16. 17. and 20. 13. Ecclus 16. 17. and thou shall find
this fancy impossible, and that nothing will nor can hide thee from the
all-seeing eye of the Lord, and seeing nothing works thee this days shame and
sorrow, but thy sins, then amend now whiles thou art here in this life by
true repentance, faith, and new obedience, and he will both cure and cover all
thy sins; for Christ alone is the place to hide thee in, and he will preserve
thee from trouble, he will inform and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall
go, and he will guide thee with his eye: and thus shall every one that is
godly, make his prayer unto him, in a time when he may be found, but in the
great water-flouds, they shall not come nigh him, Psalm 32. 1. to 10. this is
the only place to hide thee in, even under the wings of Christ's merits and
mercies: there and no where else shall thou be full secure. But the Gauiller
will reply, Object.
that this requires much business, and it is a death to many a good fellow,
to A Petition for no day of judgment.
leave his folly, and labor for piety, and therefore we know, when our
Savior. walked upon earth, he was so meek and merciful, and is so still,
that he would deny us any thing that we requested of him, and will he not now
likewise be entreated at the general supplication of all poor people
appointed to death, yea almost of all the world, to grant us this one (and
never but this one) petition, that there shall never be any day of judgment,
then should we live merely, sleep careless from all fears and frights, and
die joyfully, and as for any estate after this life, we should look for none,
nor yet trouble him to provide for us while we be here, for we would shift
every man for himself, and live by our wits, and (me thinks) he should not
deny all the world this one request, so easy for him to grant, and so tending
to his honor and glory, and beneficial to us, for now would we serve him
duly, and offer every man bountifully unto him gifts and offerings, yea, and
restore to ho^y Church for Gods service, all the spoils taken from it; so all
things considered, he should be no looser; for what loss to him to deprive a
few of life eternal, seeing he has the fullness and perfection of all glory
in himself, and needs not our prayers nor praises, and better that a few busy
fellows should ever loose heaven, then that all reprobates, being so many
gentlemen, and so tall, proper, and fair conditioned men, should for ever
boil and fry in hellfire: This supplication questionless would soon be
granted, and if all will not ioyn with me, (I know God respects neither
persons nor multitude) I will my self request it, I know he will not deny it
me.

I answer. This indeed would be a fine Answer to the worlds pention.
devise, to gather heaps of gold and ^^l^er; for if any covetous Balaam or
Judas who sometimes were in high favor with God, were bid (as once Solomon was,
1. King. 3. 5.) to ask what he would have granted him, or as Elisha did the
Shunamite, 2. King. 4. 13. 14. Methinkes I see in my mind what concourse and
suite would of all the world be made unto them, not to desire wisdom nor
children, nor any temporal boon; but that there should be no day of judgment
to as many as at a reasonable rate and price would buy it at Judas hand, every
man according to their ability: and as for kingdoms, riches, honor, and
glory, he should not be to seek; for Herod would give Master Judas the half
of his kingdom, to live securely with Herodias: Balthazar would make him third
Ruler in the kingdom, cloth him with purple, and put a chain of gold about
his neck, to deliver him from the handwriting upon the wall: and Felix to
deliver him from this fear of that day, would show him no small friendship,
Esau to pleasure him would sell his birthright; Satan the God of the world
would give him all the kingdo^es of the world, and the glory of them, to secure
him from this day: nay, who would not make a purse for this collection and
contribution, yea crouch and kneel too to master Judas, to buy this immunity,
no pardon to this, never was heaven so little regarded, nor immortality at a
lower price, nor God himself, as now when most men are content to forfeit
heaven, and deprive themselves of all the good things of God, and withal to
give to the most accursed of men (even to the Devil Judas) masses of gold and
silver, which they would never do to the poor members of Christ, to procure
this cursed pardon; and now Judas fault is, that he is not covetous enough, oh,
that he would for this pardon ask abundantly, gold, pearls, jewels, and
what not; and he should have it with thanks, though they themselves lived
beggars ever after; for now the covetous Judge would pour out his bribes, the
deceitful Counselors his Angels, the double-faced Attorney his double fees;
the Oppressors and Sacriledgers, their ill gotten goods and spoils of Gods
Church; the crafts-men their cousening money; the Physicians their spoils of
the sick; the Usurers their bags, the inordinate livers, as hunters,
faulkners, seruing-men and banquerupts, their idle and false profane
theeueries, yet the poor harlot will sell to her very petticoat, to get money
for Christ's poor Apostle, yea all thieves and robbers, murderers and
adulterers, all rogues and vagabonds, and who not, will now spare no labor nor
cost, by hook or crook to satisfy master Judas his greedy gutte, that he
shall never need hereafter to sell his Master for money. To conclude, what
ungracious hypocrite, miserable corne-hoorder, inordinate pestilent liver out
of a calling, egregious malefactor, theeu^sh cutpurse, subtle conycatcher,
filthy and beastly liver, swaggerer, swearer, drunkard, and idler whosoever,
yea the very A theists (howsoever otherwise they contemn all, yet) would sell
all for this freedom; for then would they open the very gates of hell to
entertain Satan himself, and all his children, not regarding what mischief
they did, being now exempted from judgment and hell-sire: neither is this my
devised fiction to sport and recreate your minds; as it is a lamentable truth
to be mourned and sorrowed of all Gods elect; for go through the whole world
and enquire of this point, wishing every man, as in the sight of God, to
declare his Conscience, and (if they doubt not) you shall find, that not only
malefactors, but infinite swarms of Professors are of this mind (if wishing
would prevail them) that there should be no day of judgment, for howsoever
in their troubles they desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ, yet as
weomen great with child Similie.
desire they were delivered; but when their hour comes, they cry out and
wish it were further off. So when the time of their dissolution approaches,
they abhor death and judgment, which notes they have not yet learned to
die, nor prepared for judgment, but with that hypocrite in Micha 6. 6. Would
bow, and bribe the Lord with burnt offerings, and calves of a year old, with
thousand of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of Oil, and give his firstborn
for his transgression, and the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul,
which plainly conuinceth that there is no faith upon the earth, Luke 18. 8.
This is the case of all men almost, that they would give any thing that there
should be no day of judgment, and that because their consciences tell them,
that the day of judgment is their very day of execution: and therefore to
escape this day, regard not though they deprive all Gods Elect from heaven, yea
God himself from his honor and glory, Christ Jesus from his body mystical,
the Church and themselves be transformed to beasts, in body and soul dying
together. And this is a notable touchstone to try man's present state Godward:
If with Simeon, Paul, and A great d^fference between the Elect and Reprobate.
John he mourn for death, and cry Lord I^su come quickly; he would not
contribute one penny to this pardon, if otherwise, it is high time to awake
from this sleep. A godly Matron desires the return of her husband, and
rejoices to hear he is at hand; but a strumpet is contrarily affected: and
so it is in this case between the Elect and Reprobate. But whosoever thou art,
(to answer this impious request) thy money perish with thee: no money will
alter the decreed counsel of the God of Heaven, for his Elect: the Judge of
all the world will not be bowed at any man's petition to deal unrighteously, no
though Noah, Job, Moses, and Daniel entreated him, Ez^. 14. 14. to 20. for God
is not as man that he Numb. 24.
should speak and not do; he abhorres thy money-marting, and will not fell
thee for money, that which was never bought for money, Psalm. 49. 7. and if there
should be no day of judgment, Gods Elect would wish they had never been born,
for this day makes them full amends for the manifold vexations and indignities
of this life, and delivering them from this body of sin, clotheth them with
Christ's righteousness, as with a weddinggarment, and joins them to him as
the body to the head, or wife to the husband eternally: Let this be then the
conclusion forall, We must all appear before Gods judgment seat, and give
account to the King of Kings of all our works, and as many as have tasted the
forbidden fruit, must (if repentance prevent not) dye the death. But yet,
because thou shall not depart comfortless from me, I will show thee a ready
and easy way to procure the Lords favor, that there shall be no day of Means
that there shall be no day of judgment.
judgment for thee; that is, that thou be not damned with the wicked, never
run to Balaam nor Judas, for they are out of favor now with the Judge, and
cannot help themselves: nor yet to any Angel nor Saint, for they have oil
little enough for themselves, and when they have done all, they are
unprofitable servants; but do thou (following the Judges advise in Luke 14.
31.) distrusting thy weakness and disability beforehand appease his wrath
with these holy subtilties.

First, let us (thou and I) examine our souls thoroughly, and suruay our whole
lives, then speedily from our hearts confess and repent us of our former
unreformed lives, and upon the knees of our hearts (with the Publican) cry
mightily for pardon and peace at the Judges feet, and he is merciful and ready
to forgive, and judging our selves we shall not be judged of the Lord.

Secondly, then by a sted fast faith, let us apprehend Christ's merits, and we
shall not miscarry, for he never failed any true believer.

Thirdly, let us reform our lives, and walk before him in new obedience,
without halting or looking back, and show our faith by our works, and the
money which we would so prodigally bestow upon Judas for this supposed pardon,
let us bestow it totally upon Christ himself in his poor members, and he
will reward it in the day of judgment with eternal life, Math. 25. 34. 35. 36.

Fourthly, Watch in Prayer, and continue in well doing for Christ's coming to
judgment; and whereas thou fear and abhorrest the day of Death and
Judgment, acquaint thy self with God and with it daily, by degrees and holy
meditation: and as a man that carries Similie.
an ouer-heauy burden does lighten it by pulling out the sticks one by one, so
endeavor thou daily to lessen and pull out thy sins, and then thou shall not
need to fear that day, if so be also (as thou forsakest thy sins) thou have
a care to grow in grace and favor with the Judge: and as Fencers which are to
play the Prizes of Trial, do daily try their strength and exercise their A
Similie.
weapons, bending their whole minds how they may best foil their enemy, that
when the day comes, they may have honor and triumph: so ought we to do,
(for whom a greater reward without comparison is laid up) if we will die
well, and appear upright in judgment; but if otherwise it come to pass, we
shall be punished with unspeakable shame and reproach: and this our
meditation of judgment shall be handled in no other order then the same our
death and departure brings with it: For as they which are to run A Similie.
a race do oftentimes lead their horses up and down the running place, that
they may see and be the better acquainted with the stones and uneven places,
and other impediments in the same, that when the day comes, they may finish
the race without stay or stop: so we (which must measure the pace and race
of Death and Judgment whether we will or no) shall do very well, if now in
our mind and meditation we frame this race, and diligently consider all
things which are in the same; specially seeing the way is obscure and
perilous, and many for want of this consideration miscarry. This do now, and
thou need not then fear to appear in judgment.

The Use serves for comfort to the Elect, Use.
that albeit the reprobates arise, and against their wills (as bears to a
stake, or fellons to the bar) are haled to judgment, for greater increase of
their sorrows, yet this shall be an exceeding joy to the faithful, that they
are sent for to appear before their heavenly Father, who is to be their Judge,
and wh^ would fear to come to judgment, that were assured his Father should
be his judge? yet Christ loved us above any Father, Psalm. 27. 11 Isa. 49. 15.
and spilt his blood for us, and how then can he condemn us? then this
joyful appearance is to us the fruit and crown of our watchful godly life,
and holy death, and therefore the day of our reredemption being come, we shall
enter to the inheritance purchased us, by the blood of Christ, and be freed
from all fears and dangers. He that stands upon a sure rock, may laugh when
others weep and drown, and he that is built upon Christ the Rock, is safe
when others sustain shipwreck, and howsoever the reprobates find it a
terrible day, to us it shall be right heartily welcome, as a day long wished
and expected for; and shall be so far from all trembling, that it shall fare
with us as with a Kings son taken prisoner by the Turk, and put up in hold
in close Prison, which his father hearing of, comes hastily with an exceeding
Army Royal, lays siege against the Castle, and with his Ordinance*
(...)tereth the Walls, which causes the ^^emies within to tremble and quake,
but the Kings son much rejoices; for now he shall be set at liberty, and
return to his country with much joy and triumph: and so shall it be with us,
if we approve Christ's true hearted subjects and children, we need not fear,
but much rejoice at this summons, else woe unto us: So then you see that to
Gods chosen, this shall be a most joyful day.

1. In respect of Gods singular mercy A joyful day to the Elect.
toward them, above all other people.

2. In regard of the holy Angels awaking and comforting them in the Lord.

3. In respect of their own persons, for now soul and body shall be combined,
which formerly by death were parted, and shall now, and for ever (as the Sun)
shine in the fullness of glory.

4. Now shall they enjoy the company We shall see and know one another at the
resurrect. (...).
of all Gods Saints, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and all Gods elect,
know them and they us, and their enemies also, and be thankful to such as did
them good, and this is so certain, that it can not be denied.

For first we shall see God, and know him as we are known, 1. Corin. 13. 12.
though not absolutely, whereof the Angels are incapable, he being
incomprehensible; but as a man standing upon the shore of the Sea, sees the
Sea perfectly, and yet sees not the depth nor breadth ofit; so the Elect shall
see God, yet not comprehend the depth of his greatness, nor breadth of his power,
nor height of his Essence, Majesty, and glory: Then we shall see and know one
another, the King his subjects, the Pastor his people, the Parents their
children, the Husband his Wife, the Master his servants, and they them; and if
they be good, be thankful to God for them; if bad, thank God for pardoning
their sins if they be saved; if damned, justifying and praising God for
executing his just The Reasons.
judgment upon them. This is confirmed out of the word of God, Zach. 12. 10 1
John 19. 37. They shall see him whom they have pierced, Math. 7. 22. and 25.
37. 44. Luke 13. 28. and 16. 23. Wisd. 5. 1. etc then our knowledge shall be
perfect. 2. 2.
the soul by departing from the body, loses nothing of his former knowledge,
but rather his knowledge is cleerer and more perfect, else how could they
remember that they heard Christ, ate and drank in his company, wrought
miracles in his name? reason with him, when saw they him hungry? etc Math 7.
12. and 25. 44. This is so plain in Nature, that the very heathen thought this
to be a great benefit, that men, specially wise men, had by death, that their
knowledge, should be perfected in the other world, and that none could possibly
attain to perfect wisdom and knowledge till he came thither, and as for that
Pythagoricall fancy, that men by washing in the River Lethe, forg^t all they
formerly did, It is a plain fiction, more to be derided then confuted; and
Plato in his Apology of Socrates, relates how Socrates being condemned by the
Judges, rejoiced, that if the souls were immortal, then should he see the
famous men that lived before him. And Tully in his first book of Tusculus
questions, brings this as an argument not to fear, but desire death: and
Tertullian, lib. ad Martyr, says, That the Martyrs shall judge their Judges,
which they could not, if they knew them not.

5. Christ our Savior will know us, and call us to himself, Come ye blessed
of my Father, etc. and they shall see their desire upon their enemies,
according to their prayer in Reuelat. 6. 10. Now considering the premises, what
child of God would desire there should be no day of judgment, or would seek
a place to hide himself, or give a penny to buy a pardon, to exempt him from
appearing, and for ever lose God, heaven, and all the company of heaven, and
communion of Saints, and not wish this day; and give all vvorldly treasures,
that this day might be hastened, and incessantly cry, and pray, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly: for now such as sowed in tears, shall reap in joy, and have all
tears wiped from their eyes, and live in perpetual joy, and their reioycings
shall no man take from them, nor ever end.

Secondly, knowing these things before hand, this should be a fair warning Use
2.
for good and badde to acquaint themselves now with the Judge, and labor for
grace, that being well prepared, and their Talents well employed, they might be
sure of the Judges acceptance, and the favor and comfort of all his Saints. And
so far of the fifth Motive.

The sixth Motive to Watchfulness, is The sixth Motive from the manner of his
coming to judgment.
the consideration of Christ's coming to judgment, who now will not come
poor, contemptible, and in the form of a servant, as in the time of his first
visitation, but in most glorious triumphant power, might and majesty, and as a
Lion most victorious of the Tribe of Judah, to take vengeance of his enemies,
and highly to reward his loyal Subjects. So we read in Math. 25. 31. When the
Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then
shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, etc, The day was, when he (poor
man, meek as a Lamb) stood before the judgment seat of Pontius Pilate,
proudly vaunting that he had power to crucify or loose him, Ioh. 19. 10. but
in this day Pilate and all Potentates must stand and stoop before his
foote-stoole to be judged, and shall know, that he only has all power in his
hand, to save and condemn.

The use we are to make hereof, is to The Use.
give the Lord, now all honor and glory, and to kiss the Sun least h^ be
angry.

Then secondly, we are to observe the mystery of this, that is said in Math.
24. 30. He shall come in the clouds of ^eauen, with power and great glory:
which is to humble and to teach us, that if we will hereafter joyfully behold
him coming in the clouds, we must thankefully and gladly receive and
intertaine him now coming unto us in the clouds of his holy Preachers, who
instill the gracious deaw of his Gospel into our souls.

Then thirdly, consider further in what blessed estate his Angels stand in,
who shall accompany the Lord to judgment, and most joyfully and securely
behold his glory, and now together with all the Saints of God, receive the
fullness of all felicity, (all enemies trodden under feet) and if thou could
wish then thy self to be one of his number, and not of Satan's damned
rabblement, then now labor for holiness and true righteousness, that thou
may then be numbered amongst the Sons of God: then contrarily mark in
what a miserable taking shall these accursed wretches be, in that they scorned,
were ashamed of, and crucified our Savior to death, reviled and persecuted his
word and ministers, flouted them and their appeals, against the sentences,
cruelty, and unjustly denounced against them, which now shall be favorably
heard, and they severally plagued, so that to their cost anon they shall know
how the Lord will take part with the Lambs against those savage Lions, let
them then become now such as then feign they would be found and reputed. And
thus far of the sixth motive.

The seventh Motive, concerns the The seventh Motive. The place where the
Judgment shall be.
place where the Judgment shall be, which is evidently expressed, but guessed
diversely of diverse men: when our Savior was demanded this question in Luke 17.
37. Math. 24. 48. he answered prouerbially, yet doubtfully, thus; Wheresoever
the body is, thither will also the Mira narrant (...) Aquila histori^^
Aristotel de histor. animal lib 9 cap 32. A^^anus de animal, h^st. lib. 1. c
44. Plini. lib. 10 cap. 13. Gualter in Math. 24. ^om. 279. and in Luc. 17 37.
ho^il. 165.
Eagles resort: where he draws them from the curious question of the place
to an higher demand, whether in that day they shall flee for safety and
succor, even thither where the body is, meaning under the harbor of his
blessed wings, there shall they be secure, and no where else: where he
compares the godly to Eagles, which are most sharp sighted, and smell soonest
from their nests where their prey is, as Job. 39. 31. 32. so the Elect should
in this dangerous time with the eyes of Faith look unto him, and by the
direction of his spirit, smell (by the afore-going signs) that his coming is
at hand, and so prepare themselves to meet him, who is both the food of their
souls, and their only protector. This is all our Savior speaks of the place,
but others labored to find the place, to wit upon earth, even in the valley of
Iehosaphat, abusing Joel 3. 2. 12. where he speaks of the restitution of the
Church, and the judging of the enemies thereof: and least men should think
this impossible, he alludeth to that great victory mentioned in 2. Chro. 20.
22. (and it had need be a large valley that should comprehend all the world)
S. Paul says; Then shall we which live and remain, be caught up with them 1.
These. 4. 17.
also in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. No further can I speak
hereof; but our wisdom is, where God is silent, not to be talkatiue nor
curious; sure it is, we shall be gathered to meet the Use 1. To be readily
prepared to meet the Lord, and avoid security.
Lord, and to be judged. Therefore let us, (as the Eagle for her prey, and
conservation of her life) labor now by true repentance, a lively faith, and
new obedience, to be gathered to the Lord, and then wheresoever we meet the
Lord, we shall be ever with him, the members with our head: and as Luke 21 34.
avoid drunkenness, and surfeiting, with all other vices which benum the heart
and soul, and steal or dampe all Gods graces so in us, that we cannot mind,
nor hearti^y amount up to the contemplation and love of the heavenly life,
Philip. 3. 18. out Romans 13. 13. and 1. Tim. 6. 6. Luke 12. 20. for (to our
sorrow) we see that the whole care of most men is so fixed and settled upon this
life, that they never take comfort (but fear rather) of meeting the Lord in
the air, nor never mention the day of judgment, unless it be in swearing, as
God shall judge their souls, etc. as if they had been set in the world, but
to learn to blaspheme, swear, and curse themselves; whereas the while their
meditations should run upon this point; how they might most joyfully and best
prepared meet the Lord in judgment. But these Mammonists (as watch) so
turmoyle themselves upon this earth, that they cannot spare any time to look
up for the Lords coming to judgment; and are like to Husbandmen manuring
their ground all the yecre, but forgetting to sow, so they labor for life,
but forget death and piety, and so loose all the harvest croppe; and which is
the more to be lamented, these be not the fewest number of men, for sin and
sinners never more then in these days since the light of the Gospel abounded.
If an Ass or Ox fall into a pit, all men will lift them up; but if man's
soul (then which nothing is more precious) perish, Plurima pessima presiosa
non vniuersa.
no man regards it; The wise man could say, that the most men are the worst
men, and that good men are odd men, waspes and hornets swarm, but few
painful bees that gather the sweet honey from the flowers of Gods word, for
the winter of eternal life, treasuring up the combs of faith and good works
in the hiues of their hearts: Ask the earth, and it will tell thee, that it
affords more matter for base pots, then ockre for gold: ask the Gardener,
and he will answer, that he has more Nettles then Roses, weeds then flowers;
ask the Traveler, and he will show thee, that many tread the broad, but few
the narrow way. And finally, ask thine own conscience, and it will certify
thee, that it has a large Catalogue of dead works, but scarce one good
thought, word, or work; and is it marvel they cannot look once toward the
place our Savior comes to judgment.

The next Use serves for terror to the Use (...). For terror to co^mers
unprepared
wicked, who when they come to this place unprepared, full of their sins and
uncleanness, with guilty consciences and more heavy hearts and countenances,
where will they stand then, seeing as Psalm. 1. 5. The wicked shall no^ stand in
judgment, nor the sinners in the assembly of the righteous, etc. and the Judge
will be then so far from showing them mercy, that they shall not be permitted
to stand upon the same ground, as the Elect do. A time there was, that when
they came in place, all the company would give them the hand, the best and
highest rooms, and would be glad that they would accept of their company, but
now Harlots and Lazats are magninified, and they placed among reprobates, and
the worst people living: does the Just now heed what he does, in displacing
Gentlemen, and men of great worth, and placing poor and base fellows above
them? this is just Salomons Censurer, who saw servants on herses, and Princes
walking as servants on the ground, Eccles 10 7. Oh this, dealing at the first
appearance is enough to kill a proud heart! and yet there is no hope to help
it; for now thy Sun sets at Noone, Amos 8. 9. and thy light is clean put
out, Ezech. 32. 7. etc. and thou must trudge hence to utter darkness, where
is weeping and gnashing of teeth, insomuch as what way soever thou cast thine
eyes, there is nothing but increase of sorrow, and of infinite perplexities of
heart, and happy were thou now if thou might still abide and build thee
here a tabernacle, but it will not be; for he that showed no favor nor mercy
to Christ's members shall now find none of Christ, and he that scorned and
disdained the Church militant, shall find no community with No help any where
for the wicked.
the Church triumphant, but be debarred from all comforts; for if thou look to
the bounty of God for one drop of water, now the well-springs of mercy are
locked and dried up, and remember how thou had comfort, and Lazarns pain. If
to Gods justice, thou can not answer him one to a thousand. If to his mercy,
thou refusedst it offered thee, this is a day of Justice. If for delay, thou
have delayed ouer-long, and the abusing of thy time cries for vengeance; for
hitherto time and tide has been at thy beck and thou regardest it not, and
now Gods turn comes, who will not regard thee. If to the world, behold, it
is all on fire, and that for thy sins that defiled it. If to thy kindred and
friends, all obligations of natural affections cease, and they are zealous for
Gods glory. If to wife and children, they are (for husbands and parents
impiety) separated from God, and stand in the same transgression. If to thy
Minister, he it is whom thou have ever hated, robbed, persecuted, and which is
another vexation, he shall anon sit in judgment upon thee. If to the Saints,
they have not oil enough for themselves. If to thine own good works, they as
smoke vanish, being all done in hypocrisy, and for vainglory, and from an
unregenerate heart. If to thy former life, behold a black cloud of treacherous
inditements against thee. If to Satan thy suggester, he now stands in the like
condemnation. If to the Angels, they are the haruest-men sent to gather the
tares, and to cast them into the fiery furnace. If to the Judge himself, he
calls thee to surrender thy talents and stewardship. If to carnal shifts and
helps, the Judge will not be corrupted with bribes, nor moved with flattery,
nor deluded any longer with promises, nor terrified with threats, nor touched
with pity; thy threats will not be respected, wringing of hands, pulling of
hair, tearing of thy flesh, weeping, howling, and endless lamenting will not
be regarded, prayers be but babbling, vows past date, no truce, no sureties, no
appeal, no repriuing, no delay, no repentance; a wicked life calls for
justice, sin, for death; contempt of God, for final damnation: turn thee what
way thou will, there is no comfort, every creature proclaims that the mighty
must be mightily tormented; and woe is to the wicked, for now it shall go
evil with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him: What shall
thou do? look up to heaven, it is shut against thee, to the Judge he comes
to denounce the sentence: under thy feet hell gapeth for thee, within thee is
a condemning conscience, without thee, the books opened, about thee, the
reprobates mourning; to go forward is impossible, to go backward is not
permitted, to stand still thou can not, to run away is bootlesse, no
remedy, but miserably to sustain and undergo all torments and extremities of
this fearful day and place, unless now thou repent, join with Gods Church,
forsake thy former wickedness, and that thou may die the death of the just,
live the life of the godly: and if thou vvilt have a wished place in judgment,
and after in heaven with Gods Elect, get thee a place here upon earth with
Gods Church, be not now separated from them in the exercises of religion, and
holy communion of Saints, and thou shall not be divided from them, in the
enioyments of the fruits thereof; both in death, judgment, and glory eternal
in heaven; for look what place and profession thou choosest here now among
the godly or wicked, and the like place shall thou find with the like company
in judgment, and ever after: Behold, I set before thee life, and death, good
and evil, etc. as in Deuteronomy. 30. 15. to the end: And thus far of the second
Motive.

The eight Motive to watchfulness, Two signs for(...)g Christ's com^ing.
is, the consideration of the glorious coming of the Son of God to judgment,
immediately after the whole world is assembled to the appointed place: but so,
that first two evident signs shall go before, the one immediately before his
coming, or (as I may say) at his setting forth, which is this.

1. There shall be signs in the Sun, etc. as in Luke 21. 25. The Sea and the
Waters shall rore, and men's hearts shall fail in them for fear, for the
powers of Heaven shall be shaken, Luke 21. 25. 26. As for the signs in the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, Math. 24. 29. says they shall be darkened, (that is
to say, as the learned expound it) Christ's coming unto judgment shall be with
such resplendant and unspeakable glory, that even the most excellent creatures
shall be thereat astonished, so that the Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and
the stars, (as if they fell from heaven) give no light; that is, these most
glorious and bright-shining creatures, shall be clouded, obscured, and damped
by the inconceivable brightness of Christ's coming to judgment, whereat the
wicked shall despair for fear, as Revel. 6. 12. to the end, (which place is
an evident fore-running figure hereof, as that also in Exodus 19. 16. to 20.)
Then (the sea and waters shall for fear roar) least now they shall be turned
to nothing: such as dwell by the Sea side, observe, that against tempestuous
weather the Sea roareth; but this being a most fearful day in respect of Gods
inquisition for sin and sinners, and all other accessaries thereunto, and no
storm to the tempest of Gods wrath, they not only roar, but as it were set
out their fear, with all the strength and power they can, that so the Lord
might respect and preserve the miserable senseless creatures, abused by man's
sinfulness, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken as threatening a
downfall, by reason of man's sin, and the Lords indignation, and punishing of
all sinners. As Similie.
when the Father of a family punishes and whippeth in his anger any one of the
servants, all the house, as the very children and servants will fear, and so
is it here when the Lord in his wrath comes to punish all workers of
iniquity, the Angels, the Heavens, and Saints of God, all subject, and guilty
of their infirmities, compared with Gods holiness and perfection, cannot but
tremble and quake (as we read the Prophets did in all their visions) much more
in this. So likewise when the Master Similie.
of a great family dies, the whole house is troubled, the wife takes on, the
children weep, the servants lament, the retainers mourn, the house is turned
vpside-downe, hospitality given over, and all come to ruin, and desolation: so
here, when man (the center and glory of this world) draws to his end and
trial, and is like to be utterly confounded in hell fire. Oh Lord! What shall
become, or to what use serves this world, the heavens, the earth, the sea, and
all the powers thereof? but with man to be turned to nothing, or set upon a
light fire, to be consumed to dust and ashes, (if the Lord in mercy do not
otherwise determine and dispose of them) and is it any marvel that they
tremble, quake, and roar for fear, and how much-more should man, the cause
hereof (seeing and knowing all these things) tremble, weep and howl for his
sins, now while time serves, and he may be heard but in these great
water-flouds of misery, they shall not come nigh him, nor be heard. We see
that only an earthquake, if it be any thing vehement, is exceeding
fearful, and the least extraordinary inundation of waters very terrible, but
now when the whole massy globe of this world shall thus totter and shake; the
mightiest seas and waters rore and rage for fear, and the glorious heavens
become dark and dusky, how shall the hearts of men be appalled with dread and
terror to behold the same, and the cause thereof? wise men prevent dangerous
diseases, lest they take away their color, and kill them; how much more should
we here by the diet of sanctification so prevent Gods judgments, that we may
expect them cheerfully, and be nothing aghast, and escape this terror; for no
earthquake to this shaking, no thunderclap to this noise and fright.

The second sign is joined with his The world shall be fired.
most glorious coming, which is (in deluge wise) the firing of the whole
world, so that it shall appear no more, till it be renewed, (according to
these quotations, Psalm. 50. 1. 2. 3. and 97. 3. 4. and 102. 26. Isa. 66. 15.
16. 22. Dan. 7. 10. and 2. These. 1. 7. 8. and 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11. 12. 13. Revel.
20. 12. and 21. 1. Math. 24. 35. Romans 8. 21. Heb. 1. 10. this fire shall (as a
lightning before a thunder) go before his presence (as Exodus 19. 18.) and this
the learned take to be the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, that is, when
this terrible fire shall flash before his presence, then all men expect his
appearing: Mat. 24. 30
which fire, though it fill the world, yet shall it not consume, but purify
it, and cause it shine more glorious (as gold the corruption consumed, as Romans
8. 20.) as at the first creation, to receive his Lords coming to judgment, and
so it shall appear, as a new Heaven, and as a new earth, Isa. 65. 17. and 66.
22. and 2. Pet. 3. 7. 10. 13. Revel. 21. 1. and this sight shall be exceeding
terrible to the wicked; for now, they see what manner of one the Lord is,
(which before they would never believe) even a consuming fire, Deutr. 4. 24.
Heb. 12. 9. and now again are the words of Isai chap. 33. 14. 15. etc.
forefiguring this day verified. The si^ners in Sion are afraid, a fear is come
upon the hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the d^^ouring fire, who
among us shall dwell with the everlasting burning? He that walks in justice,
and speaks righteous things, refusing gain of oppression, shaking his hands
from taking of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and shutting
his eyes from seeing evil, etc. which things because formerly they did not,
now this fire shall ceaze also upon them, as the beginning of their sorrow, and
a taste of Gods fiery wrath, and burning displeasure. But to proceed further in
this hot subject, I cannot, nor list not, neither is it needful. Only let the
terriblenesse hereof, now whiles time serves, move us to due and careful
watchfulnes and preparation, that then Use to watch against this fire.
this fire, nor any other, annoy us not, no more then Daniels companions were
in the fiery Oven, but rather that we ever labor to be filled with the
heavenly fire Dan. 3. 19.
of Gods love and spirit, which will consume, cool, and quench all other fires
whatsoever.

The ninth Motive to watchfulness, is Christ's sitting in judgment, upon The
ninth Motive. Christ's sitting in judgment upon the throne of his glory.
both Elect and Reprobate; for thus we read, For when the Son of Man comes
in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
throne of his glory, Math. 25. 31. whereby it seems that a throne of Estate
shall be set for his Majesty, and the rather, because in Mat. 19. 28. the
Apostles are said, that they shall sit also upon twelve thrones, and judge the
twelve tribes of Israel: but what manner of Throne this shall be, we cannot
well define, because we have here nothing but the name thereof (viz. the
throne of his glory) and therefore we are not to be ouer-curious herein, but
suspend our judgments, rather then to imagine any particular likeness of the
majesty hereof in our minds, till in due season we shall joyfully behold it
with our eyes: but sure we are that it is a throne of glory, because it is
mentioned in so many places (as in Dan. 7. 9. 10. Psalm. 9. 4. Math. 25. 31.
Revel. 4. 1. 4. and 3. 21. and 6. 16. and 20. 11.) albeit I deny not, but that
many things here spoken, are delivered in figure, according to man's capacity,
and proportionable to the manner of worldly Monarchs and Kings; who, when they
show themselves to their subjects in their Royal Majesty, and do sit in
judgment, then they use to ascend to the Thrones of their kingdoms, and there
in all glorious, grave, and solemn, high and magnificent estate show
themselves unto their people, and such as they judge: so it is here
undoubtedly, when our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus is this day to show
himself in most magnificent, triumphant, and glorious manner, before all
Princes and Nations of the world; meet it is that he should show himself in
the highest degree of his honor, power, and majesty, and sit upon the throne
of his glory, to judge all the world, and that in such honorable and dreadful
manner, as all flesh, enemies, and loyal subjects be enforced to glorify his
holy and blessed name. This throne is figured (in 1. King. 10. 18. 19. 30.) by
Salomons throne, which he made, not only Salomons Throne compared with
Christ's, whereof it was a figure.
to set out his royalty (for other Kings could have made the like) but for the
use thereof, which was to signify what virtues and graces should be in a King
and Judge above all other men: and withal to prefigure the excellent graces
which should appear in the Prince of Peace; and Judge of all the World, as
thus briefly, viz. 1. For the form Pet. Martyr Mar. ^orchaus in 1. Kin. 10. 18.
thereof: It was a great throne, for the great King: so this throne of glory is
said to be in Revel. 20. 11. John saw a great white Throne (and great indeed
must that Throne be whereupon sits he who is called the great God, as Tit.
2. 13. Luke 1. 32. and 7. 16.) then it was white, signifying the innocence
which should be in a King, and so figuring the glorious and divine brightness
and integrity in the King of glory, Cantic. 5. 14. 2. The matter was yuory and
gold, signifying that the Kings heart ought to be simple, innocent, pure, and
void of all corruption, and Christ herein passes all Judges. 3. The Throne had
steps to ascend unto, Genesis 28. 12 13.
to signify that judgment should be given with advise and deliberation, and
not hastily nor rashly, Genesis 11. 5. 6. and 18, 21. and to signify that he
should excel all other in virtue, as Christ does. 4. The top of the seat was
round behind, to signify the simplicity and perfection of the Kings hearts. 5.
The stays or pummels whereon the King leaned, declared that the Kings estate
stood upon these two stays; to wit in defending the godly, and punishing the
wicked. 6. The Lions noted that he ought to be strong and courageous in his
rule and government, and yet mild and loving, and the footstep was of gold (as
2. Chr. 9. 18.) to signify that a King should contemn bribes and rewards
which blind Judges eyes, etc. and all these virtues are foretold and found to
be in Christ, as in Isai. 11. 2. to 11. Psalm. 45. 6. 7. Luke 11. 31. Heb. 1. 8.
Then moreover it is called the throne of his glory, because his judgment shall
be such, as shall redound in all respects, by all people, Reprobates as Elect,
to his honor and glory; for he will so sincerely, uprightly, justly, yea and
mercifully judge the world, that even Satan himself, and al Reprobates (how
wicked and malicious soever they be) cannot choose but rebound all glory unto
God, and say Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments, Psalm.
119. 137. though notwithstanding they could wish that the execution of the
sentence were reuersed, yet (howsoever) they shall confess that they have
justice with favor, ministered unto them, far infinitely above their desert,
as Fathers use to their rebellious sons, they cast out of their houses, and
stone to death, Deutr. 21. 18. etc. So that God shall be glorified by the
damnation of the wicked, as by the salvation of the Elect, and then shall be
fulfilled that figure in Reu. 5. 11. etc. and 7. 9. etc. Ibeheld, and lo a
great multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and kindred, and
people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed
with long white robes, and Palms in their hands, and they cried with a loud
voice, saying, Salvation comes of our God, that sits upon the throne of
the Lamb, and all the Angels which stood round about the throne, etc. fell
before the throne upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying Amen. Praise,
and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and hanor, and power, and might, be to
our God for evermore, Amen. Now the reasons The Reasons why Christ is said to
sit upon the Throne.
why our Savior Christ is said to sit upon the throne of his glory, to judge
the world, are these.

1. Because God the Father committed all judgment to the Son, John 5. 22.
27. Acts 10. 42. and 17. 31. Romans 14. 10.

2. Because according to his holy and gracious covenant, he shed his blood
for all mankind, which some received, and Io^. 1. 51. Mors ^hristi suff(...)
sed ^os efficiens omnibus.
others refused, Heb. 10. 29. etc. for though it was sufficient to save all, yet
by reason of their unbelief, it was not efficient to all, Luke 19. 14. 27.
John 1. 12. and therefore meet it is that he shall glorify the believers, and
punish the wicked.

3. The Church was to be glorified, by whom it is justified, and that is Christ
Jesus John 1. 29. 36. and 1. John 1. 7.

4. For the comfort of the godly, that they need not be afraid of this day, for
he that is their Father and Savior shall be their Judge.

5. Meet it is, and right, that he should judge such as judged, and
persecuted him, and his Elect, formerly, etc. yet we are to understand that
albeit the whole judgment is committed to Christ; the father and the holy
ghost are not excluded simply and altogether, The whole Trinity judges.
for this were a dividing of the unity of the deity: true it is, Christ shall
judge his people, but in all respects according to the will and decree of the
Father, and the holy Ghost, who shall also sit in the throne, and give together
full assent and consent, authority, power, and approbation thereunto, as at the
delivering of the Law at Sinai, Exo. 20. 1. Christ spoke the words, and
delivered the Law, as the messenger and foundation of the covenant, and
reconciler of mankind to his father, but the father and the holy Ghost were
there present, and agreeing thereunto: so here this judgment shall proceed
from the plenary approbation of the whole Trinity, though the Son only sway
the whole action and be himself the Administrator and Pronouncer of the
sentence, which done he shall deliver the Kingdom to his Father, that so God
may be all in all, 1. Cor. 15. 24. 28. But as the sitting and Throne Use.
shall be very comfortable to all Gods Elect, Men and Angels: for now the
Church Militant and Triumphant shall be perfected, and glorified, and freed
from all fears, labors, afflictions, preeminences, and henceforth enjoy
everlasting felicity; so will it be most fearful and terrible to the Wicked,
who hence must all with heavy hearts depart to the place of Execution without
remedy, there to be tormented eternally in hell fire. Then that this Throne
shall The figure of this Throne opened.
be terrible to the wicked, both in respect of the throne it self, and of him
that sits thereupon, appears out of Daniel 7. 9. 10. who thus figureth it
out; I beheld Calvin.
till the Thrones were set up, (which were as inferior seats for the Lords
assistants) And the ancient of days did sit, (that is, God so called in
respect of his eternity, Job 36. 26. and of his wisdom, Job. 12. 12.) whose
garment was white as snow) noting his authority, Genesis 41. 42. (and the hair of
his head like pure wool) signifying his innocence and integrity in Judgment.
Then (his throne was like the fiery flame) to signify that God is a consuming
fire, to consume his enemies round about, and that God dwells in Hugo Card.
a light that cannot be attained unto, and Quintus.
as the fire is bright and gives light: so all things are known to God, and
that Pererius.
his judgment shall be manifest to all the world: then his throne is compared
to fire, for he shall come to judge with the Lyra. Glossa inter.
zeal of Justice, as hot as fire; and as the fire purifieth gold, and
consumes stubble, so God shall come as fire to punish the evil, and purge the
good: (and his wheels as burning fire) shadowing his Polanus.
incredible swiftness to judgment; and E^^olampadius.
they are fiery, because his coming cannot be hindered: (a fiery stream
issued, and came forth from before him): first, by the flood, signifying the
perpetuity of the punishment of the wicked: secondly, by the fire, the
sharpenes thereof: thirdly, by the issuing or swift motion, ^ugo.
the power thereof, which as the Pola^.
course of a stream, cannot be stayed: so that here we have three properties
of Gods judgment: 1. it is most constant, as the flood always runs: 2. it
lightneth all places, as the fire: and 3. goes through every where, as a flood
issuing Iunius.
forth, and running along, etc. Now if The Use for terror.
the shadow of the Judge, and his throne be thus fearfully set forth in a
figure, (whereof every child is capable) how terrible will the body and sight
it self appear to the wicked, when he can see nothing on every side but
consuming fire, and that in such ghastfull manner, as no wit, nor mind of
man can conceive, and if before the sentence be (by the Ancient of days
sitting upon the fiery throne of judgment) denounced, the terrors and frights
be thus vnspeakeablie fearful to all reprobates, that they (as in greatest
thundering and lightning) cannot abide to behold it, but are ready to sink,
even to hell it self, what shall they miserable wrethes do, when the sentence
is given, and fully executed upon them? if the eve and vigill of the second
death be thus dreadful and comfortles, how ghastly and woeful shall the feast
it self, and the time of this holy solemnization be? if the suburbs be so
fiery, what burning shall there be in that hellish city? and if the Devils
themselves being spirits cannot abide this burning, how much less shall
corporal men do it? all fears be nothing to this terror, al torments be but
sports to this death, what then shall we do to prevent all this, but as is
aboue-said, and even as Isaiah, chap. 33. 14. 15. advises, saying; who among
us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? He that walks in justice, and
speaks righteous things, refusing gain of oppression, shaking his hands from
taking of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and shutting his
eyes from seeing evil: He shall dwell on high, etc. and so much of the throne
of God: And so far of the ninth Motive.

The tenth Motive to watchfulness, The ^enth Motive. Of Christ's separating the
Elect from the Reprobate.
is the manner of Christ's proceeding in judgment: for first, before him shall
be gathered all Nations, (He being set upon the throne of his glory) and he
shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd separateth the sheep from
the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on
the left, Math. 25. 31. 32. 33. Where first note, here is no producing of
Witnesses, nor impanelling of Iuries, because the Judge himself knows the
very secrets of all hearts, and is perfectly privy to every man's ways,
according to Revel. 2. 23. All the Churches shall know that I am he which
search the reins and hearts, and I will give unto every one of you, according
to your works. And besides this, every man's guilty conscience shall be (as a
thousand witnesses, and as a book of inditements and evidences against him)
assenting and consenting to this proceeding of his Judge, Romans 2. 15. 16. and
John 8. 9.
1. Cor. 4. 5. Math. 16. 19. Revel. 20. 12. and so remain upon the file that
day: this separation of the wheat from the tares, of the sheep from the
goats, and lambs from the wantonkyddes, is the entrance and beginning of the
execution of Gods judgment upon the wicked, which how gastfull and
distastefull it will be to the devils themselves, as also to all Reprobates, no
heart can conceive, nor tongue relate. In this life the goatish worldlings lord
it, and scorned to be set on the worser hand, but now they are feign to stand
below and give place to their betters, for the Judge of all the world can
easily discern between the precious and the vile, and place either of them in
their proper ranks: and now Esa. 65.
the wretches full of sorrow see how the day is like to go with them; for the
Judge himself many years before told them upon which hand the Reprobate
should be placed, though they regarded it not, but applied it to others,
judging others for left handed men, and not themselves, but now the conscience
gnaweth, and cries guilty: formerly they were full of presumed faith and hope,
never doubting to say they do it to be thus placed, but now the wretches which
they scorned to place with their dogs, appear cheerfully with great
boldness on the better hand, before the faces of such as tormented Wisd. 5.
them, and took away their labors; this kills the proud and haughty heart,
and casts them down to hell gates; now could they wish they had never been
borne, or being borne, had led Lazarus life: now with the Leaper they put
their hands upon their heads, and cry, I am unclean, I am unclean, Leuit. 13.
45. Now they see all the gates and well-springs of mercy locked, and quite
dried up; now the worm of Conscience (as a greedy Wolf, Viper, or Vulture)
begins a-fresh to gnaw their hearts, and will never die; and thus before the
Judge speaks a word, they judge themselves, who would not do it, when they
were required so to do, and now they see, and for grief eat their hearts,
and weep in their souls, that for so momentany shadows of pleasures and
profits, they were so mad as to renounce God, forfeit heaven, sell themselves
to hell torments, and dispossess themselves of eternal bliss, which might
easily be attained, if in the time accepted they had accepted thereof: Oh that
they might but once again, but for a little time, return to the world again!
oh, how would they (knowing what they know) repent, fast, pray, yea do all
good works, specially to Christ's brethren, how deeply would they lament their
sins, reform their lives, and in all things obey the watch men of their
souls, who ever formerly they hated, and whose hearts and souls, of set
purpose they vexed and grieved with their drunken abominations: since the time
their souls were separated from their bodies, their case was ever lamontable,
yet desired to see this day, in hope of some comfort, when they received their
bodies, and when the Lord came to judgment, but now every way the case is
worse, soul and body must together trudge to hell fire for ever, and who is
able to abide that burning: they desired poor wretches, to appear soul and
body this day before their just Judge, and to come once more to hearing, and to
have their causes more thoroughly heard and scanned; but (alas) how are they
repelled, as unknown, and workers of iniquity, Math. 7. 22. 23. Now could they
wish that soul and body had never come together, but that the body had still
rotted in the grave. Alas! now what shall they do? there is no place to hide
them, nor flee unto for relief, seeing they have so hainously provoked the
Lords wrath, while time and tide served, they regarded it not, now Gods turn
comes with his sword of Justice to cut them off, and so this day is turned
unto night, woe be unto them that ever they sinned.

The use we are to make now in good Use. To repent in time.
time, of this doleful appearance, serves both for terror to the wicked, to
repent in time, and for wholesome admonition to the godly to beware of
hypocrisy, or apostacy, or backe-sliding from the Lord; we see here the
lamentable perple^ity of the wicked, and reward of sinfulness, and how the
whole state is in one moment ouerturned, and that such as took themselves in
respect of their salvation cocke-sure, do fall to desperate ruin, albeit in
their lifetime they thought they had such abundance of faith, and the same so
powerful, that they could not perish possibly, and if faith failed, yet
entreaty and crying for mercy would effectit, but now (foolish had-I-wist)
comes in too late: as had I wist of this, I had not made my belly my God, my
lands my heaven, my (...)mon my master, my goatish lechery my solace, this
world my portion, nor gloried in that whereof I am now confounded, and ever
shall be ashamed. Now they repent, and ever shall repent, that they no sooner
repented, but this repentance is but the feeding of the worm of conscience: now
they (though too late) find who is the greatest liar, Michaiah the true, or
Zedechiah the false Prophet: the faithful Preachers, or deceitful hypocrites:
the word of God, or the persuasions of the world: the counsel of the
faithful, or deceifulness of sin: the warnings of the zealous Ministers, or
the damnable wiles of Satan. But now what remedy, it is too late to be wise,
there was a time when Remedies to escape Hell.
they might escape hell, but now shall be no time for evermore. Yet to us that
as yet live there is remedy enough, if we will accept of the acceptable time,
these frights and fears shall not touch us.

1. If first, we will every man betimes watch and wake to God, and seriously
with mature, sad deliberation, consider in what a doleful case man's sinful
soul shall that day stand, and what pains, endless, pitiless, and
remediless, are ordained for all prouokers of Gods wrath and vengeance, and
therefore now let us prevent his judgments, embrace his mercies, be thankful
for this timely warnings, and not delay amendment of life.

2. Consider how heartily thou would wish then, that in this world thou had
reformed and framed the whole course of thy life, according to Gods revealed
will in all points, and do so now speedily, and no longer heap to thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, but yield unto the Lord the honor due unto his
name, Romans 2. 4. and 2. Cor. 7. 1. else thou shall wish in vain, that thou
had abated thy haughty stomach, and humbled thy self under the mighty hand
of God, obeyed his Ministers, and watched for this day, but all too late.

3. Look what pain and penance thou would then gladly undergo, to obtain
salvation, if in that dreadful day it should be granted thee, and do it now
voluntarily, assay, labor, and live so now in such sort as thou would wish,
then thou had lived in, that thou need not hereafter take up the fools
proverb, I never thought of it, else be sure the Judge will ouer-turne all thy
stuff, more thoroughly then Laban did Jacobs, and search all the corners of
Jerusalem as with a ca^dle, and thou shall be unable to hide the least thought
from him, much less the original as actual impieties, and abominations of
thy sinful life.

4 Consider, that as his promises be most free to all that in due time will
accept thereof: so in that daywil he in justice most severely punish the
contemners thereof.

5. Mark here with me the superexcellent purity, and divine sincerity of
Christian religion, and the upright integrity it requires in every man, and
with what exquisite preciseness it exacteth the same purity in daily practice,
and therefore see that against the day of death and of judgment thy croppe be
answerable to thy seed sown, Galat. 6. 7. 8. Ier. 12. 13. and therefore
setting now and for ever aside all profaneness and union, or communion with
the wicked, and all wickedness; address thy self, (if thou will then escape
this punishment) to lead a pure, sincere, and upright life, according to the
contents of the fifteenth Psalm; and to the purity and sole sincerity of the
religion thou professest; for thou now see that the ungodly shall not stand
in judgment, nor the sinners in the assembly of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 5.
therefore approve now thy self a wise man, strive for this heavenly prize, and
look not back to Sodom with Lots wife, when thou may escape hell fire: the
difference between a wise man and a fool is; a wise man will foresee a
mischief ere it come, and avoid it: but a fool will do neither.

Here first we may see what shall be Use 1.
done unto the men whom the King of Kings will honor, they shall be preferred
far above the honor King Assuerus bestowed upon Mordecai, Ester 6. 9. and 8.
15. and 9. 4. for as in great Assizes Noble men, and men of worth, are for
honor sake made to sit on the bench with the chief Judge: so the Elect (as
standing below in a place too low for them) are now called to sit upon the seat
of judgment, with the chief Judge, to judge the wicked, as Luke 22. 30. which
passes all the glory of this world by infinite degrees, and yet such honor
have all his Saints, and after thence go to greater, even to life eternal,
the excellency whereof, the wit of man in this life is incapable: and therefore
as I have no tongue to describe it, no more have ye ears to hear it, only
let us believe it, and never cease to pray for it, until we come and enjoy
it, and in the mean while, seeing the Scriptures (as of purpose) be sparing in
describing these celestial joys, I will not be copious in relating them, but
contain my self within my measure and labor, to be wise with sobriety, which
the Lord grant me to do.

The second use we are to make hereof, Use 2.
is this, that seeing the joys of the Elect, and the glory of the Kingdom
prepared for them, is unspeakable, glorious, and blissful. It stands all men
and women upon to long for it, and by all means whatsoever it cost them, to
labor to obtain it, and no longer to fix their hearts upon this life, and
world so decoitfull and transitory: and if Cleombrotus Cicero lib. 1. Tusc. qu.
an Heathen man, reading but a book of Plato, concerning the immortality of
the soul, and the felicity thereof, was so ravished with the desire of that
estate, that to enjoy it speedily, he cast himself headlong into the Sea: and
yet Plato being a Pagan, writ of that subject but plain, naturally, blindly,
and uncertainly, but we have a sure Word, and are taught hereof in Christ's
own School, not blindely, but plainly, divinely, and most truly; and that
not by Plato, but by the Judge himself, who will not deceive, nor be deceived:
and yet are (for all that) still lumpish at the report hereof, Thom Moor. in
V^opia.
and as it were dead, our hearts (as is to be feared) testifying unto us that
we have no part in that heavenly Country, specially because we be so desirous
and eagre of this life, as if soul and body lived and died together without
hope of resurrection, or eternal life; else surely we would, as that Merchant
and Ieweller Math. 13. 4^, 45. G(...). 25. 33
in the Gospel, sell all to procure it, and not as Esau resign our
birthright, and all title to Heaven, for a mess of read broth, or for a
trifling pleasure or profit, lose an inestimable good, and what are the best
things in this world, but vanity and vexation of spirit, and God forbid that we
for such should lose an invaluable prize: a wise Pilgrim will forbear all
delights, that hinder his return home, and reserve all pleasure, until he
come to his own country; and so should we poor pilgrims in this strange
country, cast up our eyes to heaven our country, and iourneyes wished end, and
be much grieved when by the least means we are out of our way thither; and be
sure ever to use the things of this life as a Pilgrim does his staff, who
makes much of it, while it furthers him in his way; but if it trouble him, he
flings it away: and questionless, whosoever desires earnestly, and persuades
himself of salvation, will little regard the joys of this sinful,
troublesome world, but still will call, Come Revel. 22.
Lord Jesus.

The third Use should serve for a warning Use 3. Is for warning to the wicked.
to the wicked, who cannot abide in his heart any of Gods Elect, if he bear
the name of a godly man, nor yet of his Ministers, if he be a strict reproouer
of his sins, but ever rides and derideth them, slanders, reuiles, and
abuses them with all indignities, and ioyeth in nothing more, then in
spoiling, beggering, and persecuting them, but one day they shall hear our
Savior, and their Judge, name them the blessed of his Father, and call them
cheerfully to him, to judge them, Math. 19. 28. Luke 22. 30. and 1. Cor 9. 1.
2. and do they not now Mat. 25. 34
make a fair hand, to mis-^all such as Christ calls blessed, that is, entire
and dearly beloved to him and to his Father, precious and glorious in his
sight, what welcome and entertainment do they hope for this day? when they
stand before the Ministers, they reviled, robbed and persecuted: what favor
can thou O bloody persecutor and robber of Christ and his Ministers! expect
at their hands, or with what face can thou desire them speak a good word for
thee, that thou may be received to heavenly Tabernacles, but rather look
that they will aggrauate thy sins to the Judge, to reward thee as thou did
serve them, and to execute judgment merciless to thee, that shewedst them no
mercy, love, nor kindness, not so much as to a dog. Be wise then in time
and make them thy friends, that (as Abraham for Abim^lech and Job for his three
friends) Genesis 20. 7. 17. Job 42. 8. 9.
they may now pray for thee, and then give testimony of thy reformed and godly
life, else thou art like to find as little favor from them, as the rich
glutton found of Lazarus, Luke 16. 25. 26. but above all, humble thy soul in
true faith and repentance, and make now whilst thou here live, the chief
Judge himself thy friend, and he will fully secure thee, and if the chief
Judge take thy part, all the bench will, and whom the King favors, all the
Court will do so likewise: And so far of the tenth Motive.

The eleventh Motive to watchfulness, The 11. Motive. The (...) ^ner of
Christ's proceeding in judgment.
is to consider the manner of Christ's proceeding in judgment upon the Elect
and Reprobate, which shall be by a true and just trial of every man's
particular life here led, be it good or evil: none shall complain of
partiality, or want of due trial, not indifferent ^earing, for, shall not the
Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18. 25. Psalm. 96. 13. yes, Christ's
proceedings that day with all the world, shall be most righteous, sincere, and
upright; for as at the bar of an earthly Judge, the prisoners are from the
goal, brought forth and presented before the Judge, and there the books are
opened, their causes examined, and they according to the produced evidences,
acquitted or condemned: so in that great day, shall every man without
exception, be brought before Gods tribunal to be tried, according to their
works, 2. Cor. 5. 10. Math. 25. 35. 42. because their outward works are plain
evidences of their hearts and inward graces or vices. Now the manner of The
manner twofold.
this manifestation is twofold: first, their works must be made known what
they be: secondly, they must be proved to be good or evil. The revealing of
the works is said in Dan. 7. 10. Revel. 20. 12. to be by opening of the books
(not that What meant by opening the book.
God has or needs books to register all men's works; for this would imply,
that his memory were defective, brittle, and failing, as man's; and so were he
not a most wife, perfect, omniscient, and an all knowing God, in and of
himself, but it is so said in respect of the weakness of our capacity, which
otherwise cannot conceive Gods mysteries, but by earthly similitud^, and
comparisons, as Isa. 28. 9. for we are very children in heavenly things: tell a
child of the latter judgment, and the circumstances thereof, and he
understands nothing thereof at all, no more then if you told him parables,
and why? but because he is a child, and this book is to him as clasped (or
sealed) as that in Revel. 5. 2. 3. so the natural man perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2. 14. Therefore
the Lord in mercy humbles himself, lispeth and speaks after the manner of
men; for as Judges when they come to the bench, and the prisoners are set
before them, then the books of their information, evidences, and inditements,
etc. are opened and read before them, whereupon a Jury is impanelled, to
determine whether the parties be guilty or not, and then accordingly the Judge
gives sentence: so shall it be here, that albeit all things are open in his
sight, and he ever knows all men's works, (as if he had written and read
them out of a book, Psalm. 139. 16. Ier. 23. 23.) yet it is said, that then the
books shall be opened. These What, and how many books be opened. 1. The
book of Gods word
books be, first, the Word of God, which is the ground and foundation of all;
for as the Law was delivered at Sinai, to be a rule for every man's life, and
the Gospel a rule for faith, so now must all be judged according to that
book. So our Savior affirms in John 12. 48. and 17. 20. The word that I
have spoken shall judge him in the last day: and says Paul, Romans 2. 16. At the
day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my
Gospel. The second book is the book of every man's Conscience, Romans 2. 12.
14. 15. 2. The book of conscience.
They shall show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their
Consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusing one
another, or excusing: for the Lord by his secrets and omnipotent power, shall
in that day so awake and touch every man's conscience with the guilt of their
sins, (which now is rocked in the cradle of security, and sleeps as a
snorting dog, or as a clasped book is shut up, that it dare not peep nor
mutter) that they all shall be brought as fresh and perfect into their
remembrance, as they were the very day they were done, with all the
circumstances thereof, that possibly they cannot be denied, 1. Cor. 4. 5. So
that being left excuseless, needs they must confess them, as men at the
gallows, and holding up their hands, cry guilty, as Genesis ^. 13. Job 20. 20.
Math. 27. 4. John 8. 7. 9. for their Consciences shall be as a thousand
witnesses, enforcing them to accuse, judge, and utterly condemn themselves,
before the Judge do judge or condemn them, which will be the cause that they
shall not be able (as wicked as they be) to find any fault with the Judges
proceeding against them, for they (confounded at the sight of their sins)
will abhor themselves, and confess they deserved all punishments as God will
put upon them, and more too, and so the Lord shall be justified by the
Reprobates themselves. The third book is, the book of life, that is, of man's
Election, Revel. 20. 12. 15. mentioned also in Psalm. 69. 92. Dan. 12. 1.
Philip. 4. 3. Reu. 3. 5. and 13. 8. and 17. 8. and 21. 27. and 22. 19. Ex. 32.
32. 34. Isa. 34. 16. Now according to The book of Life and Election.
these three books the world shall be judged, whereto may be added the
fourth book, which is the book of Gods The book of Gods works.
works, which for 2000. years instructed the world, and by which the holy
Patriarchs profited exceedingly; witness the Patriarchs all from Adam to
Moses, and also the book of Job, and that this shall be judge, may be gathered
out of Romans 1. 19. to 26. Psalm. 19. 1. etc. and 8. 2. etc. and these books may
properly be said to be so many witnesses, for, or against them that day.

The Uses then we are to make of The 1. use of these 4. books. The use for
Gods word.
these books are these:

1. That every man be watchful to study the whole book of Gods word, seeing
we must be judged by the same, that so they may know what to do, and what to
leave undone: we see thieves, though they regard no Laws nor equity, yet
when they be attached, and see they must appear at the Assizes, they will be
very careful to peruse what statutes make for them; or against them, that so
they may in that day be able to answer according to Law, and by Law plead,
defend, and free themselves: and how much more should we do so, seeing the
danger is greater, and we know we shall be judged by this book of books,
especially seeing we are beforehand foretold and commanded so to do? (as
Deuteronomy. 6. 6. etc. Josh. 1. 7. 8.)

2. Then, in that we shall be judged Use 2. ^or Conscience.
by the book of Conscience, (the great Chancery book) we must be careful so
to live according to the prescript rule of Gods word, that we sin not
against our consciences, nor knowledge in the word of God; for there is no
burden to the burden of a wounded conscience, ever forecasting fearful
things, iudgeing and condemning himself (as Judas, who seeing the greatness
of his sin, (and not of Gods mercy) accused and hanged himself, not able to
abide the horror thereof) and therefore if our conscience control us, let us
in prayer, reperitance, faith, and new obedience, speedily be reformed, and
quiet it, else let us assure our selves, that howsoever worldlings say, that
Conscience is hanged, it will revive and hang us; for it is resembled to a
bawling Mastiffe, which though at his Masters door it fall asleep, yet if any
awake him, he will take him by the throat; and so will a wounded Conscience
Tenera res conscientia, quae ^ec tangi, nec angi potest.
awake when the Lord by any judgment touches it, and cause us destroy our
selves: for the Conscience is choice and tender, like the Apple of a man's eye,
the least moate will chafe it, and disquiet the whole man: and therefore must
we charily keep it as the apple of our eye, which is done by eschewing all
evil, and doing all good we can to all men.

3. In that we shall be judged by the book of life, that is, if God has
before To Use for Gods election.
all worlds elected us to salvation, then shall we undoubtedly be saved, else
not: Now for the making our Election sure to our selves, or rather, for the
assuring of our selves, that we are elected, we must have an earnest care to
lead godly lives stored with all heavenly graces, as Peter exhorts, saying,
Join virtue with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge
temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godliness, etc. Make
your Calling and Election sure; for if you do these things, you shall never
fall, 2. Pet. 1. 3. to 12. for we must know, that as God called us to the
end, that is, to be saved of his own undeserved mercy; so he calls us to
the means, whereby we may come to this end, which is by leading a godly
life, as Romans 8. 29. 30. Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. and therefore must we labor by
hearing, reading, and practicing Gods word, to serve Gods election, and make it
sure to our selves, that we are elected, and shall questionless be saved:
but if we contemn the word, resist the spirit, and regard not to lead a godly
life, but follow the torrent of the wicked, it is plain, we were never
elected, and never shall be saved, but be put out of the book of life, as the
Lord said to Moses, whosoever has sinned against me, I will put him out of my
book, Exodus 32. 33. that is, it shall be evident his name was never written
there; and the like speech is in 1. Sam. 2. 30. wherefore the Lord God of
Israel said to Eli, I said that thy house, and the house of thy Father, should
walk before me for ever. But now the Lord says, it shall not be so; for them
that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be despised. So
that we need not climb up to heaven, to see if our names be written in the
book of life, but descend into our selves, and examine our lives, if we lead
godly lives we are surely elected; for else we could never have the grace to
be godly, and contrarily.

The fourth Use is to contemplate and Use 4. For Gods works.
meditate in a devout and thankful heart upon all the works of God, and
abuse them not, but convert them all to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10. 31. and
to the good of his Church.

The next Use serves for terror to the The second Use, for terror.
wicked, who when these books be open, and first the book of life be shut
against them, that they have no hope nor help to be saved: and next when the
books of Gods word be opened, and it testify what a great despiser and
persecutor thereof, and of all the Articles of the Covenant of Grace, therein
registered thou have been, as also of the Preachers and Professors thereof,
reuiling all good men, and blaspheming thy Judge, extinguishing and spiting the
very spirit of grace; and heereunto thy Conscience (as a thousand witnesses)
will give testimony, and cry unto God for judgment; and the book of Gods
works, yea all Gods creatures, but specially the poor, widow, fatherless,
and stranger cry against thee for spilling innocent blood, for detaining the
hirelings wages, for oppressing the impotent, and for thy Sodomitry, and all
creatures rise in judgment against thee, what will thou do for shame and
sorrow? yea what pain and confusion of face will it be to thee, when by the
wide and broad opening of these books, all thy sins of omission and
commission, all thy mischiefs and treacheries, thy blasphemies, scornings,
scoffings, reuilings, buffetings, persecutings, and all thy indignities done
formerly against the Judge himself, his Church, his Ministers and people, with
the Sacrilege, Oppressions, Thefts, and Robberies, etc. shall be all
discovered, and laid open in the face of all the world: yea, besides these, the
villenies (which hitherto thou have so closely covered within the secret and
dark corners of thy heart and habitation) which thou deemest should never come
to light, are now before God, and all the world detected, so that both God and
Man, Angels and Saints, thy Conscience and all creatures shall howt thee,
abhor, and in disdainful and scornful manner, pointing at thee, say:
Behold the man and his works! How shall thou then at this clamor (no more then
a thief or a traitor, hold up thy head) show thy face, be able to stand in
judgment, or hope for release, or any favor from thy persecuted Judge, or his
Ministers, (thy ancient enemies) when (as thou did to Gods people) they
hate, loath, abhor and spit at thee and all thine abominations, yea laugh at
thy destruction, saying, Depart from us thou cursed into everlasting fire. Be
wise then in time, watch, and pray, repent, and lead a new life, and thou shall
escape all these outcries and be numbered among the sons of God.

The second point to be observed in Their worksmust tried to be good or evil.
the manner of Christ's proceeding in judgment, is, when the works be thus
manifested, they must further be convinced to be evil or good, and so to
deserve hell, or (by Christ's mercy) heaven; and that trial must be done after
this manner. First, such as live out of the Church, and never heard of Christ,
neither was his word preached among them, they must be judged by the Law of
Nature, Romans 2. 12. 14. 15. and the covenant of works, and testimony of their
conscience, together with the book of Gods works, Romans 1. 18. to 26. and
secondly, such as live in the Church by the Law of Nature, and the Law written,
and the Gospel: as also by the book of their Conscience, and the book of
Gods works, John 5. 45. and 12 48. for the sentence of the Judge shall be
nothing else but a manifestation declaratory, and ratified execution of the
sentence formerly pronounced by the Preachers out of the Word, and lightened by
nature.

The Use is for admonition to the ignorant, Use for admonition to the ignorant.
to submit themselves to the means ordained for their salvation, and never to
forget that Christ will come with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance unto them that do not know God; and which obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. These. 1. 8. and therefore not with the wicked to
degenerate from men to goats, and beastliness, Isa. 13. 21. but rather of men
to labor by using all godly means of men, to become sheep, and the Saints of
God by regeneration, Isa. 11. 6. etc. and beware we to sell for gold or
silver, that which was not redeemed with gold nor silver, but it cost more to
redeem their souls, Psalm. 49. 7. so that the whole world cannot ransom man's
soul, Math. 16. 26. and therefore more then mad are they that will forfeit so
precious a jewel to Satan, and damnation for the love of any trifling pleasure
or profit whatsoever. And so far of the eleventh Motive.

The twelfth Motive to Watchfulnes The 12. Motive. The denou^ cing of the
definitive sentence. The necessity to know Christ's judgment upon the wicked.
is, the upright denouncing of Christ's definitive sentence upon all the world,
which is indeed the very doom and judgment it self. All that hitherto has
been spoken, is but preparation to this period, and this Judgment is necessary
to be known of us, because it makes much for the well ordering of our lives,
and preparing for the same in serious watchfulness and prayer; for if it be
better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting, because
this is the end of all men, and the living shall lay it to his heart: and
again, the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of
fools is in the house of mirth, Eccles. 7. 4. 6. and whatsoever thou do,
remember the end, and tho^ shall never do amiss, Ecclus. 7. 36. Then verily
the consideration of Gods mighty and terrible judgment, should much more move
our hearts to due preparation for this day, which is more He^viuunt bomines
ta^quam ^ors nulla futura est aut velut inferaus fabula vanaforet
fearful by infinite degrees then death, and whereas men now live without
regard of God and godliness, as if there were neither God, heaven, death,
hell, nor judgment, but man's end, as the end Mors tu^, mors Christi fraus
mu^di, gloria coeli, and dolor inferni, sunt medi(...)da tibi: finis ci^^s
coelum ^on solum.
of a beast, and therefore care not what mischief they do, so they may escape
the Magistrates sword, and as for the day of judgment, they scoff at it, as
2. Pet. 3. 3. 4. Jude 18. Ezech. 12. 22. out, yet in this day the truth of the
Ministers predictions and threats will appear true, according to Acts 17. 31.
and then shall they see and feel to their cost that which formerly they would
not believe, though it was told them, and was an article of the faith. Now this
sentence is The first part of the sentence upon the Elect.
twofold, according to the two diverse sorts of people who are to be this day
judged, that is of the Elect upon the right hand, and Reprobate upon the left:
but first, he will deal with the Elect; for in this case it shall fare with
the world, as if an earthly King should sit in judgment, to arraigne a number
attainted Similie.
of high treason: yet so, that before he comes to sit in judgment, he
knows by their former private examinations, confessions, and evidences, who
be guilty, who not, so that when the prisoners be presented before him, he
forthwith causes the guiltless Earls and Lords to be vnbolted, arraied in
clean apparel, and stand apart, or come up unto him, and sit upon the bench,
and then declaring before all the assembly, their innocence and wrongs
acquitteth them, with all favor and honor, and as his truest and trustiest
subjects, causes them (as joined in commission with him) to judge and testify
what they can inform against those rank traitors: so hear when the Lord
sits upon the throne of his glory, and separateth the sheep from the
goats, he foreknowing by their former lives led upon earth, the innocence of
the Eiect will in the sight of all the world justify, absolve and acquit them
from all guilt and punishment, saying unto them, first ofal, Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the
world, etc. Math. 25. 34. and withal, declares unto them the reason of this
high prerogative and preferment; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat,
etc. verse. 35. 36. against which reason when they (good men) answer,
acacknowledging in all humility that they remembered not any good, they
(miserable sinners) did to him, but all came of his mercy and merits: he
replieth, that what they did to the meanest of his poor brethren, they did it
to him, and therefore meet it was that he in royal bountifulness should
remember, acknowledge, and highly reward them, answerable to the love he bare
to his distressed and afflicted brethren, whom he loved better then himself,
and so rewards them now, as himself receiving them to his own inheritance and
glory. But first causes them to sit upon thrones, to judge the wicked with him
according to his former promise, and covenant made with them in Mat. 19. 28.
29. Luke 22. 30. and 1. Cor. 6 2. 3. not that they shall simply judge the world,
for all judgment is by God the Father committed unto the Son, John 5. 22.
but because they shall sit as assistants and witnesses, and approouers of his
just judgment against the wicked; for it fares here with the Lord, as with
a Noble King when he comes to sit in judgment upon a matter of importance,
he being set upon his Throne will call (as assistants) his next and best
beloved kindred of the blood royal and nobility to sit next him, then the
inferior Judges and Justices to judge with him, not that they manadge the
business, and give judgment as they will, but because by their presence they
witness and approve the equity of the Judges sentence, and so shall it be here
on that day.

This sentence shall first be pronounced The Reasons why the Elect sit to judge
the wicked
upon the Elect, to absolve and justify them, and to call them to him, to
judge together with him, that is, to witness and approve his proceedings
against the wicked, not only because he is most inclined to mercy, and slow to
wrath: but

1. First, Because he is to honor them with this dignity, to judge the world.

2. For that this is the Elects long expected day of triumph over the wicked,
their afflicters and persocutors, and therefore meet it is, that before their
eyes they should be advanced to this glory (according to Wis. 5. 1. 2.) to
their great sorrow.

3. The Apostles and Ministers and all Gods Saints, are members of Christ's
mystical body, and therefore meet they should sit with him, as a fullness of
his perfection and glory, the head and body conjoined together as one person.

4. Christ this day will have his adversaries all stand and stoop before
himself and his whole Church, whom they sometimes abused and judged wrongfully.

5. They shall judge the wicked by testifying against them for contemning their
doctrine, and examples of an holy life, and so make the wicked excuselesse;
Math. 25. 26. Luke 11. 31. and such honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149. 9.
far above the honor done Mordecai by Assuerus, Est. 6. 9. and 8. 15. and 10.
23. or by any King to his Subjects.

But heere^t may be demanded how the Elect then are judged according to Object.
Or question how the Elect are judged according to their works
their works, (as is said they shall be, in Romans 2. 6. and 2. Cor. 5. 10. and
11. 15. and 1. Pet. 1. 17. Revel. 2. 23. and 20. 12. 13. and 22. 12.) when they
themselves confess and acknowledge that they did no good works? Math. 25. 37.
38. 39.

I answer, Our Savior takes better notice of the good works of the
faithful, then they do themselves, for they (good men) ever eyed their
sins, and the corruptions of their nature, and heeded not their good works,
(according to Math. 6. 4. 5.) but our Savior did, and calls them good
works, Math. 25. 35. 36.

2. We see also the godly themselves when they be accused and traduced, as
workers of iniquity, they to clear themselves, appeal to Gods judgments,
Psa. 26. 1. etc. and then can make large Catalogues of their good works, as
Job 29. and 30. and 31. and David in many of his Psalms, and so many others:
and therefore did good works to testify of their justifying faith.

3. Admit they all did not good works, but some were sinners; yet God,
according to his Election, imputed not their sins to them, but forgave them
all, and with the Ysope of Christ's merits, washed them in this life, and world,
from all their sins, as Psalm. 32. 1. and 51. 2. etc. and 1. Cor. 1. 30. 31.
and 6. 9. Heb. 9. 13. Revel. 7. 9. 14. and being in his covenant and thus
purified and washed, they shall this day appear as clean as if they had never
been defiled with any stain of sin, and so are we saved by Christ's merits
(as Jacob was blessed in Esaus apparel.)

4. They were elected before all worlds to salvation, and to the means
thereof, and they by their holy life and innocent conversation served Gods
Election, and so their names being in the book of life, could not be blotted
out; nor they miss of salvation.

5. Heaven was their inheritance, and so nothing, except felony or treason,
can defeat a man of his inheritance, nor that neither, if the King do pardon
it, and all other his offenses and transgressions; and so did Christ here, as
Psalm. 103. 1. 2, 3. etc.

6. They ever believe faithfully in Christ, and so were justified by faith, and
Christ took away and bore in his own body, the curse due for their sins,
Romans 5. 1. etc. and 8. 1, etc. Galat. 3. 13. and so cannot justly be condemned
this day. And therefore Christ will use no partiality, but do true and strict
Justice in absoluing and receiving the godly to mercy, according to his
gracious covenant.

Let the wicked repent, and do the Use.
like, and they shall with all love and favor receive the like sentence, and
be advanced to the like honor and glory then and ever after.

But if you object that this is contrary Object.
to the proceeding in all Courts terrene, to have a man's enemies to be his
Judge, as the Ministers be to their persecutors, may they not except against
them (as selons use here on earth) no, for this is just, that as upon earth the
judged the Saints to death, spoiled, injured, reviled, and unjustly persecuted
them: that they this day should do them the like; measure for measure by the
Law of retallion, Exodus 21. 24. Judge. 1. 7. and 1. Sam. 15. 33. Luke 19. 25.
but if thou will escape this Iiry, abuse them not, love, and do them all good,
and above all, procure the favor of Christ the chief Judge, and then all the
Court of Heaven will entreat them kindly.

The second part of Christ's defintiue The second part of the sentence upon the
Reprobate.
sentence, shall be directly against the Reprobate, and is already registered
in Math. 25. verse. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into the everlasting fire, etc.
The reason is set down in verse 42. for I was an hungered and ye gave me no
meat, etc. and the same sentence is ratified in verse. 45. In as much as ye did
it not to one of the least, etc. And this is the sentence of condemnation,
because our Savior condemns them to hell fire; for that they in their life
time here would not repent of their sins original nor actual, but daily
more and more provoked the Lord to wrath with their inventions, neither would
they convert and turn unto the Lord, take him for their God, nor believe in
his name, nor by any means be persuaded to walk before the Lord in new
obedience, and therefore refusing God, and his word and covenant, and being
ashamed of him before men, he now refuses them, and is ashamed of them before
his Father; his Angels, Mat. 10. 33
and Saints, and cuts them from him to eternal damnation.

The Uses we are to make of this heavy Use.
sentence, are first to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and not
stand upon our gentry or reputation in the world, to scorn or set light to
serve the Lord, lest a day come when our Savior will pull down our pride, and
say, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire: a rough speech, and heavy
greeting (God wot) to such especially as when they were here were in Sermons
called with all reverence, Right Honorable, Honorable, Right Worshipful,
Worshipful; and if it please your Mastership, and if it may stand with your
favor, and under your correction good sir, and I beseech your clemency pardon
my boldness in reproving, with an hundred such like titles, contrary to Job
32. 21. 22. but now see how they be saluted with the Devils own title, (thou
accursed). There was a time, that if Christ or any of his Ministers had greeted
them thus, they would soon have put their honor in the dust, with vae vobis,
and God should have (where they Lorded) no more service public, then they with
their favors allowed him, which should be little enough: and his Ministers,
for all their preaching in his name, should have as little joy and comfort: And
what abasing of them is this? (and that in the face of all the world) yet we
see pride must have a fall, and their case and style is altered, now they are
termed cursed, and outed from the Judgment Luke 4. 29. Act. 21. 28.
seat, yea to hell, and just it is; for there was a day when they outed the
poor, and Christ himself in his members from them: and as then they were
ashamed of him, he is so of them now, (as the shame of all his creatures, Mat.
10. ^8.) Oh, what child, servant, wife, or subject can abide to hear from the
mouth of his dear father, loving husband, godly master, or most gracious
Prince this terrible term, Depart from me thou accursed, and that to hell for
ever: so full of implacable indignation and wrath, anguish and sorrow, much
less uttered from the mouth of so mild, merciful, and gracious a Savior, and
at such time as he most needs his help and favor, then to forsake him, kills
the heart, yet right meet it is, that as formerly he had abhorred God, and
scorned to obey his Laws, the Lord now should not favor him: Oh consider this
ye that forget God, and kiss the Sun least Psalm. 2.
he be angry; and withal mark the nature of these words, Depart from me ye
cursed to everlasting fire, and thou shall find couched within these few words
a world of woes, present and future, and in this one curse, all curses
included, and observe, he does not now in execrable terms curse them, but
shows how by leading heretofore a cursed life, and condemned by the
Ministers, now our Savior ratifieth it, Mat. 16. 19. and 18. 18. Then consider
the manner of uttering of this sentence, from the gracious mouth of God
himself, full of majesty, full of power, and full of furious indignation and
justice, most strict and severe, able to make not only the hearts and souls
of sinners, but the very center and whole frame of heaven and earth to tremble
and quake, nay, to be dissolved to nothing. Moreover, what can be more woeful
to a sinful wretch, that sometimes had been in high place, thus to be
rejected, and to see many Lazars, and Beggars, and Harlots, riffe-raffe sots,
together with a rabblement of peevish preachers, (as Kings now) to sit on
thrones royal, to give sentence and judgment upon his life and actions: nay,
which Note this ye hypocrites.
is more, to see his own parents, brethren, wife, children, and friends,
forgetting all obligations of nature, amity, and humanity, to show no token of
sorrow, to speak no one good word for him, in nothing to comfort him, but
justifying the Lord, to laugh at his destruction: never was poor wretch, how
great a felon or traitor soever, condemned by an earthly Judge, how merciless
soever, but his sentence of death should ever end with this speech; And God
have mercy upon thy soul, and many others taking him by the hand, would
comfort him, and say, God help thee, we will pray for thee, be of good
comfort; but here is not one word of comfort, but here soul and body
deprived of all mercy and hope, is with a most terrible voice surpassing all
united thunderclaps, cursed to everlasting fire, without pity or comfort.
Finally, see Note here O you that forget God.
hence what it is to be separated for ever from God and all his Angels and
Saints, and to be thrust among a rout and rabblement of Devils and Reprobates:
and this is an hell it self. We see how heavily a sucking-childe takes it to
be separated but for a moment, and cast out of his mothers arms, how will he
cry and take on, how nothing will please nor pacify him, and yet the nurse
will soon take him again, neither did she cast him away in displeasure; but
when Christ in his wrath casts out a sinner, he never takes him, never
pitieth him, for here no tears, prayers, suits, cries, yellings, nor
mournings can be heard, none will meditate nor speak for him, to reuerse or
stay judgment, but must without farewell be presently tumbled to hell. And
here consider yet all this while, and ever after what guilt of conscience is
in the condemned, what biting envy, what horror in mind, what distraction of
wit, what muttering and murmuring, what cursing of themselves their Parents,
friends, and dumb Ministers, what wringing of hands, knocking of breasts, what
cries and howlings, filling heaven and earth: and what now would this damned
person give to obtain Christ's favor, and to hear him say; Come thou blessed
of my Father, but it will not be.

The only remedy is, now to turn Use.
while time serves, and to be reconciled while he requesteth thee, by his
Ministers, 2. Cor. 5. 20. and then need'st thou not doubt of his favor and
grace, else hereafter shall thou knock long enough at the gate of mercy, and
not be heard. Therefore beloved in the Lord, seeing we know the terror of the
Lord this day, 2. Cor. 5. 11. and 2. Pet. 2. 311. Let us stir up our hearts
to conceive and know these terrors of the Lord: I mean not only in judgment
to conceive them, but also in heart and affection to be persuaded of the
terrible fearfulness of this last judgment, and in this regard not to
content our selves with the gift of knowledge, and with an outward profession
of piety, (as they in Math. 7. 22. and 25. 3. 44. Luke 13. 26.) but to labor
for soundness and sincerity of faith, of repentance, and new obedience, both
in heart and life endeavoring always to have a good conscience toward God
and man, else vanity of vanities, will become misery of miser^es; for while the
thief steals, the hemp grows.

The second point in this terrible just sentence to be considered, is, the
reason why Christ commits them to the fire eternal; because, that when he was
hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked, sick, and in prison, they relieved him
not, in his members, which bewrayed they had no faith in Christ, for had they,
then would they love his children, which was the fruit of faith, and having no
faith, they could not apprehend Christ, nor appropriate his merits unto them;
and failing herein, Christ profited them nothing, and therefore they being out
of Christ, were reprobated, neither does our Savior press here justification
by works for we Thom. Aqu.
are justified effectiuely by Christ, apprehensiuely by faith, and
declaratiuely by good works; for albeit the kingdom of God is given us for
the Election and promise sake, which the Saints receive by faith, yet because
faith and inward graces are hidden from men's eyes, therefore are good works
commanded, commended, The benefits by doing good works.
and rewarded as the proper effectual fruits of our faith and Election, and in
doing good works.

First, we perform the duty of good and faithful stewards.

Secondly, we refresh the bodies of the best stayed servants and Saints of God,
to wit, his Ministers, and therewith lighted the heavy burden of their cares,
and mittigate their sorrows, and so make their toylsome lives more comfortable
unto them, and give them occasion to power forth many an hearty prayer to God
for us, with much thanks to the Almighty for using us instruments in so
heavenly a work.

Thirdly, it gathers much cheerfulness, peace, and assurance to our selves
that we are in Gods favor, and Pauper via et p^^ta coeli
under the blessing of the prayers of the poor, which is the highway to
heaven, even by the poor man's door, and is as a principal protection sealed
unto us, as it were with the broad seal of the Kingdom of Heaven, Job 29. 13.
18.

Fourthly, and we are blessed of the Judge himself, with all kind of
blessings in this life, and shall most comfortably leave this world, whenever
the Lord shall call us hence, Psalm. 41. 1. 2. 3. and be most blessed of all in
the day of judgment, Math. 25. 35. 36. 40. when our works shall be crowned
with the garland of Gods glory.

The Use we are to make hereof, serves Use 1.
for admonition to the godly, to labor to be bountiful and liberal to the
poor members of Christ, of that portion the Lord blesses thee with, and in the
day of judgment they shall be rewarded to the full; for then shall they be
received to everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. Reu. 14. 13. which should move
us to lay aside some moity of our goods for that use: and for the ready
effecting hereof, we must cut off all superfluities in feasting, in building,
in attire, in hunting, hawking, and the like unnecessary sports and pleasures,
and withal be thankful to God for this unspeakable gift, in making us able
and willing to do his Saints good, 2. Cor. 9. 15. and reputing us worthy 1
Chro. 29 9. ^0 20.
of the ouer-sight, nursing and feeding of his blessed people, but specially to
be Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers', to his holy Ministers, who advance
his honor and glory, (as Ebed-Melech) did to the afflicted and distressed
Prophet Jeremy, so that the rags he gave him, are recorded in the Bible,
Jeremy 38. 11. and 39. 16. whereas the memorial of the wicked does rotte.

The next Use serves for terror to Use 2. For terror to the wicked.
the wicked, who can prodigally waste their goods in any thing, rather then
upon the poor; and yet will be bragging of their good works to the Judges
face, whereas in truth they never did any good work, but in hypocrisy, and
therefore the Judge puts them from his presence, calling them workers of
iniquity, Matthew. 7. 23. and 25. yet true it was, they were bountiful
housekeepers in deed, entertained many guests, and (as Nabal his
Sheepsheerers) feasted them as Kings, in so much as at the same thereof, all
the fools of the people, and out-scowring of the World repaired to them, and
were vvelcome: as idle profane gentleman, swaggerers, faulkoners, hunters,
swearers, lazy seruing-men, drunkards, whoremasters, and the like vicious
rabblement, and at Christtide and Wakes, sheep-shearing, and meddowdaies, kept
open houses, come who list, (if he were of any fashion) and were ouerall the
country renowned for it, yea wasted more in such riot and excess in a day,
then many a poor man would spend in a year, and this they intimate to Christ
in Matthew 25. 44. When saw we thee an hungry, etc. and did not minister unto
thee, etc. they entertained all, unless they were some peevish Preachers, who
would be always finding faults, and carping at their best works, or some
precise Professors that would be catching at every several oath or speech a
man uttered, or some base poor Lazaresses being full of very fulsome
diseases, all which were the disgrace of a gentleman's house, and to receive and
feast such, were to drive all good company out of their houses. Otherwise they
spent and wasted all their annual revenues, and more to, and set themselves,
many of them, over the shoes, that they could never recover it again, and all
to keep good hospitality, and be good to the poor for their souls health,
and see how now it is regarded of the Judge, and no marvel; for as well had
all this meat and drink thus misspent (contrary to Christ's commandment in Luke
14. 12. 13. 14.) When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends,
nor thy brethren, nor thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, etc. but the poor,
the maimed, the lame, and the blind, and thou shall be blessed and recompensed
at the resurrection of the just: as well (I say) had it been cast to dogs and
hogs, then thus upon Christ's enemies, as they in Amos 6. 3. etc. for all this
was done in hypocrisy, and for vainglory, but were not touched with the
afflictions of Joseph, nay for all these shows, most of them so afflicted
Joseph, that the iron entered Psalm. 105. 18.
into his soul, and were so far from giving, that they took by sacrilege,
oppression, and violence, and cunningdealing from the poor, that which was
their own, and that which God and good men gave them, so that if the Ammonites
and Moabites were debarred Gods congregation unto the tenth generation, because
they met not the Israelites with bread and water when they came from Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 23. 3. 4. and if the rich glutton and corne-hoorder in Luke 12. 20. and
16. 23 went to hell for not giving their own to the poor, what shall become of
them that not only give them nothing, but take from them that they have, and
persecute them too? and if they did give them, yet how could the spoils of the
poor, and of Gods Church, be taken and accepted for Alms by God. Nay Deuteronomy.
23. 17. 18.
(but you will say) Many of these bountiful housekeepers were professors,
devout in prayer, prophesied, and by his name cast out Devils, and did many
great works: they ate and drank in his presence, and heard him teach in their
streets, Math. 7. 22. 23. and 25. 44. Luke 13. 26. and shall they be damned
too: (and so it is now) but we are to learn, that most excellent gifts will
not avail to salvation, unless we have true faith, sincere repentance, and
new obedience, whereby we do the will of God; and this is a point of great
weight and moment, and worthy of observation: that men not only in this life,
and in death, but even at the last day shall thus plead for themselves, and yet
not be regarded, because that all was done in hypocrisy, and not in sincerity,
and this should teach all men to beware of sprituall pride, self flattery, and
self-love, delighting in their external gifts, as Pharisees, Luke 18. 11.
Isa. 65. 5. whereby they flatter themselves in their estate, ouer-weening the
good things they have, and falsely thinking they have that blessing of God,
which they have not, whereas in truth we should labor to be purged of this
pride, and ever suspect the worst of our selves, to judge our selves severely
and strictly in regard of our unbelief and hollownesse of heart; for this will
be a means to make us escape the judgment and condemnation of the last day,
and this is the property of Gods Elect to think worse of themselves then God
does, as we see in Math. 25. 37. but the reprobates have ever better persuasion
and opinion of themselves then God has, as Math. 25. 44.

To conclude then, let us be upright and sincere, both in profession, and
practice, and in continual prayer for grace, and bountiful willing hearts to do
good works; for this is the mere gift of God, and without prayer cannot be
obtained, for we are naturally so covetous, so didistrustful in Gods providence
and promises, such lovers of our selves, and hard-hearted to others, that
without his special love and favor to us, it is impossible for us to get this
great victory over our selves; to be merciful, no not to Christ himself, nor
to his Ministers, that maintained his honor and glory, and therefore of all
others ought most to be respected and relieved, and yet I wot not how (as a
field vine, subject to every of wind and tempest) they be of every body most
rejected, and least regarded, as the out-scowring of the world, and sheep
appointed for the slaughter: neither can we afford the crumbs from our tables to
Christ's poor members, but rather give them to dogs, hawks, horses, whoores,
and for Tobacco to urge drunkenness, to make us sober and circularly able to
be drunken; so that it cannot be, but the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God in the land, but stealing, and lying, and whooring, swearing and killing,
Hos. 4. 1. 2.

Ranulphus Cestrensis in his Polichronicon, Ranulphus worthy example.
lib. 5. cap. 10. and anno 610. writes of John Patriarch of Alexandria, that
being at his prayers upon a time (as is said) there appeared unto him a comely
virgin, having on her head a garland of Olive leaves, which named her self
Justice, saying unto him, and promising, that if he would take her to wife,
he should prosper well: whereupon he after, became so liberal to the poor,
that he assayed to strive in a manner with the Lord, whether the Lord should
give him more, or he should distribute more of that which was given, and I
would the maid Mercy should be married to more then this Almoner, (for so,
after, he was surnamed) that the maid Mercy should not live so long a Virgin,
as that a few or none will marry her: yet our Savior commands to sell what ye
have, and give alms, make ye bags which wax not old, a treasure which can
never fail in heaven, Luke 12. 33. and to take heed that your hearts be not
oppressed with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and lest
that day come on you at unawares, for as a snare it shall come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth: Watch therefore and pray continually,
etc. Luke 21. 34. etc. And so far of this twelfth Motive.

The last and thirteenth Motive to The 13. Motive. The ^^^cution of the
sentence upon the Reprobate.
watchfulness is, the consideration of the execution of the sentence upon the
Reprobates, for these shall go into everlasting pains, Math. 25. 46. In
which words we may see two express torments inflicted upon the wicked.
First, a departing from Christ (in these words and they go from Christ)
according to those words of the sentence in verse. 41. Depart from me ye
cursed. And secondly, the place, which is to e^erlasting pains; agreeable to
the judge, (to everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.) These
two members of the execution of the sentence, point out two sundry punishments
to be inflicted upon the Reprobates: the one privative, the other The priu^^i^e
pai^^.
positive. The privative, is a depriving of them from Christ their head, and
from all goodness: from Christ, so that they have nothing left in them but
sin: as a boulter, when the flower is boulted out, there remains nothing in
it but brannes; so they, deprived of all Gods graces and life, have nothing
left in them but the brannes of sin, and the second death. And thereupon (as
formerly the badde Angels) are made, or rather become, as devils incarnate.
This privative pain, some term the pain of loss, or the loss of all
bliss, which although it inflicteth no external sensible punishment, yet has
it within it, a positive effect; for as the absence of the Sun causes and
brings darkness, Similies.
and the want of food death; so the absence of Christ Jesus the Son of
righteousness, brings darkness to the soul, and the want of the food of
life, death eternal: then which, what torment greater, then utter darkness,
and everlasting death; for as the fullness of joy is gotten by inioying his
presence, Psalm. 16. 12. so the fullness of sorrow is attained by his absence,
and as he is the life quickening all creatures, so the want of him is the
deprivation of life, and a second death. So then, this privative What this
privative punishment i^.
punishment, is a violent cutting of man from Christ his head, and center of
his life and bliss, and a remoouall from all goodness whatsoever, even the
smallest: and this sorrow of want of God and all goodness, is everlasting;
because the Judge is infinitely angry, and for ever absent from all help to
sinners; for here all light is away, all the The pains of los^e.
candles of comfort quite, and for ever, put out, and nothing remaining but
utter darkness, and gnashing of teeth; all plenty wanting, all scantnesse
abounding, not so much as one drop of cold water can be obtained from Abraham,
(sometime rich in good works) all springs of mercy be close locked against
such as showed no mercy, not one word of comfort to him that would not comfort
heretofore the poor comfortless, (no friend in ^heape-side, no friend in
Court) poor rich Lazarus now scorneth the rich poor gl^tton; here gentlemen
be beggars, and cannot be heard, and beggars gentlemen, and scorn their
scorners, who now (but too late) rue, and to their cost feel, the heart of a
poor man. Now judgment is merciless to them that showed no mercy; for as
they stopped their ears at the cry of the poor, so now Gods ear is stopped
against them a day there was when they howted the poor from them, now the time
is come when Christ how^eth them to hell: and just it is, that he that forsook
God, and was ashamed of his word, and af(...)icted Saints, that GOD should
forsake him and his Saints should so likewise: and as the shame of all
creatures, be ashamed to know or regard him, Math. 10. 28.

The Use serves for admonition to all The use to consider what loss it is to
be separated from God.
Gods children, to consider before hand, what an unrecoverable loss it will be
to any creature, thus in wrath, and for ever to be separated from his God, and
from all goodness, and to be made a Devil; for what made the falling Angels
Devils, but the depriving and stripping of them from all graces and gifts of
God, and to be cast to all heavy designements. Then consider what child, what
servant, or subject can abide or endure to hear such terrible words, Depart
from me ye cursed, so full of indignation, wrath, and anguish from the mouth of
the most merciful and ever blessed Savior of the world, knowing and
foreseeing what loss follows upon the speaking of the words, and what
unspeakable torments shall in the neck thereof seize upon his soul and body,
and that for ever in hell: and what a shame of shames is it now to be thus
disgraced and degraded before all the world, and that at such an instant, as he
most needs, and is most friendlesse and helpelesse; and stands upon his
doing or undoing for ever: oh! this would kill a man's heart, and will cast
down the stoutest heart living; no sentence, no prison, no execution to this
shame. Consider A Similie.
but the case of a married wife, who though she lose all her friends, and live
in extreme penury, yet so long as she enjoys her husbands favor and love,
she will comfort her self against all indignities; but if she play the harlot,
and he say unto her, depart from nice thou accursed whore; this kills her
heart, she loses all the benefits of wedlock, incurreth the hatred of all
men, and is cast into extreme misery and shame in the world to her dying day,
and yet is this but a temporal loss, and in losing him, she ^o^eth not God
(if she repent and amend) nor heaven, nor life: but here in losing this
bridegroom of the Elect, man loses with him all goodness, and is endowed and
possessed with all badnesse. This point is further strengthened, if we
consider and meditate upon Psalm. 27. 12. Isa. 49. 15. Ezech. 10. 3. 4. and 11.
^2. and 43. 2. Exodus 33. 3. Josh. 7. 7. Judge. 2. 2. out of which places we may
see what it is to lose so good, so loving, and merciful a God: who worse then
Cain, Esau, Saul, and Judas? yet Cain could not abide the burden of sin, and
loosing Gods favor, persuaded his soul, that whosoever met him, should kill
him. Esau sold his birthright, and though he sought the blessing with
tears, he could not find it, Heb. 12. 17. Saul could not abide that the Lord
would not answer him, and Judas hanged himself; yea it was a death to Absolon,
though a treacherous parricide, to be debarred his Fathers presence, 2. Sam. 14.
30. yet these had contentments in this life in full measure (unless it were
Judas) but here contentment is to be expected in nothing, no more then a
swinner can drowning, who can catch at nothing but water: so these wretches
swimming in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, can catch and lay
hold on nothing but at fire to help them withal. If David mourned that he was
exiled from the Tabernacle, Ps. 42. 1. etc. and 84. 1. etc. and 132. 1. and 1.
Sam. 26. 19. and Theodosius that by Ambrose he was forbidden the Church,
Theodoret. l. 5. c. 16 17. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 24. Tripart. l. 9. cap. 30.
Niceph. l 12 cap. 41.
how much more shall these excommunicate persons mourn and lament when they be
exiled Gods presence, and Church triumphant, and thrust into that hellish
synagogue, where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth: when Assuerus
spoke but one angry speech to haughty H^m^n, Ester. 7. 8. as the word went out
of the Kings mouth, they covered his face, and led him to execution, and yet
that was but a temporal, but this is an external execution: and Use.
what would a damned person in this case give to recover Gods presence and
favor? that do thou now, and thou shall not miscarry; whereas all tears and
lamentations spent in hell, will be insufficient, therefore repent in time. We
repent and are right sorry for temporal losses, as Adam for Paradise, Elie for
the loss of the Arc, Re^oboam for his kingdom, but no loss to this, when
after thy sentence denounced, thou must without delay trudge the black way to
perdition, with many a deep sigh and comfortless sobbe, to sup in that full
hungry palace of perdition and confusion with the Prince of darkness and his
accursed accomplices, at the terrible table of Gods vengeance, and then will thou
with Caine cry, My punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13. for the
greater the good thing we lose is, the greater will be our sorrow; but God is
the greatest good of all, and to lose him brings the greatest sorrow and
grief: then God is the center and rest of man's soul, therefore as there is no
separation to that of the soul from the body, of one member from another; so
is there no grief to this separation of the body from the head of one member
in this body, from another, and of man from his good God, in whom he lives,
moves, and has his being, and all his felicity, and therefore this loss is
unsupportable, and as some think greater and so^er then the pains positive,
viz. the losing of God; for what hypocrite or heart of man can now abide to
hear Angel or Devil say, Where is now thy God? Micha. 7. 10. Psalm. 42. 3.
and 143. 7. The remedy, for all, then is this, to think now of this
deprivation, and to prevent it, to perform such duties of faith and obedience,
as we would then vvish we had performed in true and hearty repentance, and
remember 2. Chro. 15.
here now to exercise stoutnesse against sin, Satan, and all worldly
vanities, Malachy 3. 13. and not for them against our good God and his Saints,
and withal, as an effect of a true lively faith, use all mercy to the poor,
and love to Gods Ministers, and ever draw nigh to God, that he may draw nigh in
that day to us: and so far of the first member of this execution of the
sentence, and of the privative pains or sorrow of loss, and therefore in time
prepare against it.

The second point is, of the latter part of the execution, which is called the
pains positive, or pai^es of sense, because The posi^^ue pains.
they are afflicted as well upon the outward senses of the body, as upon the
inward faculties of the soul: and these pains are twofold, the one remote,
These pains a^ twofold, outward, and inward.
or without man, the other propinque near and upon man's soul and body: the
outward pains, removed from the whole man, are such external torments as are
accidental, and seize upon him by reason of the place or prison it self, and
the company therein; As for the place where the wicked shall be tormented, is
called Hell: the names thereof express the nature of The names of Hell. 1.
Let^^.
the same: and first, the Heathen illuminated only by the light of nature, and
rules of equity, call it first, a forgetting of all goodness. 2. a desire of
evil. 2. Piegeton. 3. Atheron.
3. the waters of greese, and renouncing of all joys. 4. weeping and
lamenting. 4. Co^itus. 5. Stygia palus. 6. El^ades. 7. Sop^^s. 8. Tartarus
5. a Lake of misery and everlasting loathing of the former works. 6. a dark
place. 7. darkness it self. 8. a place of terror, trouble, and vexation,
where dwells no order, but confusion and everlasting horror. 9. wringing.
10. an 9. Orcus. 10 Pluto^i^^ 11 Auernus 12 Abyssus 13 Infe(...)
infectious hole. 11. a place breathing exhalations of brimstone. 12. a
botttomles pit, etc. where we see how nature justifies the Lord in men's
consciences, and how natural wits devise, acknowledge and judge of
diversities of torments due for sinners, though they never were taught them out
of Gods Word, yet they judge these to be the worthy reward of sin and
sinners. Secondly, the Scripture terms the place by these names, Hell, Math.
10. 28. Everlasting perdition, 2. These. 1. 9. A Lake burning with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death, Revel. 21. 8. the deep, Luke 8. 31.
Gehenni, or the valley of the sons of Himmon, Ier. 7. 30. and 19. 6. Math.
23. 23. Tophet, Isa. 30. 33. and 2. King. 23. 10. utter darkness, Math. 23.
13. unquenchable fire, Mat. 3. 12. and 13. 25. a place without, Revel. 22. 15.
which names as fearful as they be, express not the thousand part of the
ineffable pains thereof: only (as in a figure) by these names the Scripture
lispe to our capacity, rather then in express terms, do utter the full
effect of Gods wrath upon sinners, and therefore in speaking of these torments,
we must carefully beware that that which is figuratively spoken in Scripture,
be not taken not expounded A Caution
literally as some do; but learn and advertise our hearers, that whereas we
cannot conceive nor utter the extremity of these torments, nor the fulsomenesse
of this horrible prison; yet the Scriptures express them by the sharpest and
most intolerable punishments we know or can conceive; as fire, brimstone,
darkness, weeping, etc. and yet when we have heaped together all the
attributes and names we know, all are insufficient to declare it, being
incomprehensible, only let us believe what we cannot utter, and carefully
avoid that cursed place betimes, lest then we be made to feel that which now
we will neither believe nor eschew, which God forbid, and so far of the
names thereof.

Secondly, the nature of the place teaches The nature of hell.
what shall be the tortures and torments of such sinners as shall be cast into
it (neither will I be curious in this bloody point, which nature abhors to
be prolixe in, but only by some few circumstances, refer the deeper
consideration thereof to every man's secret meditation, praying Almighty God to
work in them and me hereby such effects, that we may ever avoid the the
things that bring us to it; as for the nature of the place:

1. Hell is described to be a prison, or dungeon prepared for the Deuili and
his Angelis, Math, 25. 4. Christ's, his, and our adversaries, and must not God
be revenged upon his enemies? and the more Christ powers the vengeance of his
revenge upon Satan, and all reprobates, the more is he glorified, and his power
magnified, and therefore hell must be such a wide place as shall contain the
whole wrath of God in the highest and extremest degree, and therefore the place
must be terrible, where is nothing but vexing and tormenting iustruments of
Gods wrath.

2. The best places and sweetest upon earth, if they be not kept clean and
sauoury, will soon become fulsome, much more will hell, made a place of
dishonor, and of the execution of his wrath; for we see how all places wherein
God inflicteth the judgment of his wrath, are full of horror, as Jerusalem,
Math. 23. 37. Babel, Isa. 13. 19. Bozra in Edom, Isa. 34. 11. 12. Nineveh,
Z^ch. 2. 13. 14. etc. much more hell, whereupon light all Gods curses.

3. If worldly prisons and dungeons become so fulsome, that in short time men
lose therein their health and lives, for the stinch and want of contentments,
much more in hell, for all prisons be paradises to this, and the horror thereof
passes all horrors; so that the very devils desire respit, not to be sent
thither, Luke 8. 31.

4. Here are all the torments of Gods wrath, as fire, brimstone, and such fire
as burns even spirits, surpassing all fires: Oh what anguish and torment
sustaineth he that is subject to these instruments.

5. This further aggrauateth the terror and horror of the place, in that it
contains not only all the tortures and instruments of Gods fearful
vengeance, but is a place of utter darkness and blackenesse, that is void of
all comfort, far beyond Pharachs plague of 3. days palpable darkness,
Exodus 10. 21. but this for ever the soarest punishment that can be inflicted
upon man, is to cast him to a dungeon or dark place, and yet this is nothing
to that; a plague of plagues, fitting such as sin in darkness, and that call
darkness light, John 3. 19. Ezech. 8. 12. Isa. 5. 20. Ephesians. 5 8. 11. etc.

6. Then the company they find there, be the Devil and his Angelis, all
Reprobates and badde people, as full of malice, hatred, and all villeny, as
ever they were when they lived upon earth, albeit the close prison keeps them
from practicing it: and what a death is it for a man to be constrained to live
ever in such a company, where Satan and his Angels hatred to man is now
greater then ever it was? for now to their eternal confusion, they feel the
full reward of their wickedness wrought to man, who might have stood in their
Angelllike state, had it not been for man, and therefore cease not in all
they can to malign all Reprobates, and the like do one Reprobate to another,
as agents of one another misery.

7. Their exercise in hell is weeping, and gnashing of teeth, so that they
cannot speak nor think any one good thing. Thus we see both the name, nature,
and circumstances of this fearful place, and therefore being so terrible, it
were wisdom for all men to beware of it, and labor for heaven to dwell in
ever.

The other sort of the pains positive The inward positive pains
be called the internal pains inflicted upon both soul and body, which may
be guessed partly, by that which has been spoken of the prison, and partly
by the punishment which shall be laid upon the soul it self, and all the
faculties thereof, as the cogitation, memory, understanding, will, and
affections, etc. then of the body, and of every member thereof, for wherein
every man sins, therein is he tormented: But these torments are partly
unknown, and so I pray God they may ever be, and partly so lamentable, that no
Christian heart can abide to dwell long upon so doleful a subject, and
therefore I refer you to others that writ largely thereupon; beseeching
Almighty God to give us all grace to consider wisely, and in time of all that
has been said, and to make a ready use thereof to Gods glory and our
salvation, and not to run sottishly upon Gods judgments, denying there is an
hell, as do Sadduces, Atheists, Idiots, Infidels, and Nullifidians, and
ungodly liuels, whose lives proclaim it (...) and 2. such as deny there is any
heaven, as Epicures, Belly-gods, Worldlings, Sodomites; Inordinate livers,
idlers out of a calling, etc. 3. all Thieves, Oppressors, Sacriledgers, poor
Cony-catchers. 4. all Protestants at large, Christians without faith or good
works, Self lovers, Hypocrites, Mis(...)cordists, Origenists, etc. but let us
watch and pray.

The first use we are to make of this thirteenth Motine, serves to show how
necessary it is for all men to know this principle concerning hell, and the
reward of the wicked, and that in these respects.

1. It brings the wicked to the Use. 1 Rea^ons proving it necessary to know
that (...)re is an hell.
knowledge and fear of God, for when they consider the unspeakable power that
is in the mildest word proceeding from Gods mouth, they must needs accuse the
hardness of their own hearts, upon which it cannot work, unless it be to
their destruction, whereas here we see the commanding voice of God (to depart
from him.) to be so forcible and powerful, that neither man nor devil is able
to withstand it, but all as slaves from the whip will run to hell fire, and
therefore should they now not sin against the Lord, whose very voice is more
terrible then hell it self, and this reason uses David, in Psalm. 29. 4. out,
to exhoxt all men, and by name the mighty Nimrods betimes to obey his glorious
voice in his word.

2. Satan would persuade all men that there is no hell, thereby to set all to
work iniquity without remorse, and therefore this doctrine must be often
whetted upon them to fear.

3. Most men, yea Professors (though they can discourse hereof) are so wicked,
even in the very bosom of the Church, and live so loosely, as if there were no
hell at all; for how few will for fear thereof, forgo on^ hours pleasure, or
one mite of profit, or avoid any temptation Satan can cast at them, and
therefore needful it is to set before them often, what dainty fare they shall
find in hell, whether they hasten: and if this will not reform them, nothing
will, seeing it is the last remedy in the Bible used to press men with.

4. Were there no heaven to enjoy, no God to reward, no hope of immortality,
yet should men for fear to burn in hell, forbear now to sin; for we see
how men for fear of temporal penalties, forbear to transgress the Laws of
the land; yet Gods laws, penalties, nor promises, which far surmount these are
not regarded: here a felon or traitor may be pardoned, there no obstinate
malefactor shall, and though for a while he respiteth him in this life, it is
but to reach his hand the higher, to let the weight of his stroke in the life
to come to fall upon him the heavier, and his deferring is the more to infer
the thicker and surer blows, and of no ill payment shall he need to complain
that has the wages of his wickedness withheld from him in this life, to
receive the total sum together, and for ever in hell, this would breed in the
most valiantest Atheist living, such a gasping terror, and quaking dislike,
that ever after he should abhor, not only the least branch of sin, but
withal every thing alluring or aspecting thereto, and vvithall should have
hell it self pictured in every corner of his gardens, orchards, banqueting
houses, and places of delight, in more careful manner then ever had the
Pharisees Gods laws, broydered upon the fringed Phylacteries of their
garments, and so would, notwithstanding now all parents and superiors do well,
and their duty it is often to relate to their families the pains ordained in
hell fire, and so admonish them to beware of that burning place.

5. The knowledge that there is an hell is behoofefull in sundry respects, as
1. it rectifieth the conscience, when the neuer-dying worm gnaweth thereat,
and signifies unto us that still we have some unrepented sinners, summoning us
to judgment and damnation, 1. Ioh 3. 20. 2. this should cause us in all our
carriage to misdoubt our actions every of them, and ever setting the Lords
blessed word before us, fear him who is able to cast soul and body to hell,
Math. 10. 38. 3. it should make us wary never to forfeit, but still to retain
sure our title to Gods kingdom, and therefore be careful never to commit any
of those sins that deprive us of Gods kingdom, as be in 1. Cor. 6. 9. Galat.
5. 19. Ephesians. 5. 3. etc. 4. It makes us thankful for our Election, and withal
teaches us to be careful to observe the same in the whole course of our lives,
lest wilfully we relapse, and ever fear all our ways, Ephesians. 1. 3. to 7. 5.
This is a forcible means to weane us from the world and all sinfulness, and
to cause us to hasten to enter in covenant with God afresh, and so open a door
to heaven, and to all Christ's treasures of grace, which God grant we do
speedily.

The second Use serves for reproof Use. 2. There is an hell.
of such as deny there is any hell, and therefore will not watch: these be
Atheists, Nullifidians, Epicures, Worldlings, inordinate livers, malefactors,
etc. but that there is an hell, appears by the above quoted titles of hell. 2.
By our consciences, accusing when we sin. 3. the very Heathen in all ages and
places (how profane soever) affirmed, that malefactors should to hell. 4.
Chysostome in his Homelies 48. and 49. and 50. Ad populum Antiochenum,
confuteth this error. And therefore let all men stand in awe and sin not; but
believe, lest they approve worse then the Devils, who believe and confess it,
and tremble at the minding thereof, James 2. 19.

The third Use is for admonition for Use 3.
all men generally, that seeing there is an hell, and the pains thereof
unspeakable, yea so great, as no heart can conceive, only by the names of the
extremest punishments upon earth, as fire, brimstone, darkness, death, an
euereating worm, and never dying, they be shadowed, because we can conceive
no soarer nor greater torments, all vvorldly torments be finite and temporal,
these infinite, spiritual, pitiless, easelesse, remediless, a pain beyond
all pains and grief, surmounting all greefes at the very names whereof the
very Devils, how hard-hearted and graceless soever tremble and quake: here
all springs of mercy are locked against such as showed no mercy, no one word of
comfort to such as denied comfort to the comfortless; here Lazarus the beggar
scorns to be at a gentleman's command, to reach him a drop of water, for that
he denied him the crunme^ that fell from his table, which now to his cost he
rues it, and feels the wants and heavy heart of a poor man, and just it is
that such as stop their ears at the cry of the poor, should then cry and not
be heard. Oh doleful place that yields no comfort! and oh more wretched people
that foresee not this misery to prevent it! but most miserable, that now
hearing and knowing it, no warning will serve them, no calling will awake them,
no threatenings, no not hell fire will terrify them, and therefore such as
haunt mischief shall fall into it: But O ye holy watchmen, Exhortation to the
Ministers to warn the people hereof.
and sheepheards of the people! for Christ's sake cry out aloud, lift up your
voices like a trumpet, give thosee sleepers no rest until they be awaked from
their deadly sleep; and you godly Christians exhort one another whilst it is
called to day, lest your hearts be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, and
this day come suddenly upon you, and take you away when a man's house is set on
fire, all the town and country will forthwith arise to help to quench the
fire, and it is very well done; but here man's soul and body is set on hell
fire, yet to prevent this danger, (which is more then the burning of an house
or town) no man helps, the watchman is asleep, the gentleman, though the
house of his soul be all fired, snorts in his sin, and must not be awaked,
the neighbors help to rock him in the cradle of security until death comes
and arests him to come to judgment, and then the man and his works fall in
the fire; and what misery finds he not there? the guilty conscience, the
neuer-dying worm, the flames unquenchable, the darkness frightfull, comfort no
where, pains without, and terrors within. The holy Martyrs burning here in
the flames of fire, felt no such matter, they died in a good cause, had a good
conscience toward God and man, were very cheerful, forgave their enemies,
prayed for the Church, exhorted one another to patience and constancy,
persuaded, comforted and confirmed the people in the truth, rejoiced in spirit,
sang praises to God, prayed instantly to the very last gasp committed their
souls to God, in full hope of a joyful resurrection; and finally (as in a
burnt sacrifice) more then Conquerers, ascended up to Heaven, which should
animate all men to retain a good Conscience, lead a godly life, and be sure
of a blessed comfortable death, and resurrection: whereas contrarily, a bad
Conscience, and the guilt of a wicked life, portendeth a fearful death, and an
heavy resurrection to be executed in hell fire.

But here the wicked coin objections, Object. Reasons why sinners torments be
so great in hell.
and demand how it is that the merciful God can find in his heart thus
strangely and severely to punish any sinner, seeing our sins cannot hurt him,
nor our piety benefit him, Job. 35. 6. 7. and 32. 3. If all be in heaven, he
is not the richer, nor if they be all in hell, is he the poorer.

I answer. 1. God is almighty, whose infiniteness of power, wisdom, and
justice, makes him willing and able to inflict upon sinners the most exact and
sharpest punishment, as pleases his Majesty, and therefore as he is a God, and
mighty in all his works, that is to say, great, wonderful, and terrible,
Nahum. 1. 1. etc. Cant. 8. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 20. so specially shows he the same
in punishing Reprobates, and for that cause is called the God of
righteousness, and the God of vengeance, Psalm. 94. 1. 2. and seeing all his
other works be wonderful, and full of Majesty, we may be assured he is so in
smiting the wicked.

2. As his mercy and patience is unspeakable great in inuiting and waiting for
sinners repentance, Romans 2. 4. so is his justice and impatience as great if he
be contened; for in God mercy and justice are termed Gods two arms, and
therefore must be of equal length and bigness, as well in punishing the
wicked, as pardoning the godly.

3. Sin is a most odious and impudent adversary to God, and to all his
works, provoking his justice in the highest degree, laboring to bring the
Author of all Being, to a none being, and all his creatures with him, and
therefore must God be revenged upon it, and his favorites, as upon the greatest
enemies to his glory in the highest degree.

4. This is Gods ordinance, that such as fear and obey him in this life should
to heaven, and the others to hell: this is the principal condition of his
gracious covenant, and therefore it must be so.

5. All transgressions against the Kings person, or blood royal, are high
treason, to be punished with the extremest tormens as can be devised, but the
Reprobate sin against the King of Kings in crucifying and killing his Son
and heir apparent within his own Court, reigning Heb. 10. 29
in heaven, and therefore no punishment is great enough for such as crucify
the Son of God to death, to say nothing, how they conspire, with Satan to
disturb and persecute his Church to rob the Lord of his honor and glory, and
to bring all to confusion.

6. A Reprobate is an heart-murtherer, of God himself, and a destroyer of all
his ordinances, wishing there were no God, no Judge, no heaven, no hell no
resurrection nor life immortal, and therefore should be severely punished.

7. The godly cry against them, and so do their bloody sins, and therefore
Revel. 9. 9.
the r^ghteous Judge must do i^stice upon them according to their demerits.

8. In sinning there passes through every man's heart a practicke discourse of
the understanding, laying before the sinner as it were in the one scale of the
balance, the delight, ease, pleasure, or profithe reapes by sinning; and in
the other, the wrath of God if he sin, and hell torments with the loss of
Gods favor, kingdom, and all his goodness, which all in respect of his
greediness to sin, he renounceth, makes a covenant with death and hell, and
now is turned to it, and receives his own mad choice.

The next Use then is for us, not for Use 4.
lust and lustiness in sin, thus to set at naught the Lord and his
regalities; for though this be but the first degree to the pains of hell, and
as it were the suburbs thereof, yet all the tears spent in hell are
insufficient to bewail the loss of Heaven, and of Gods presence, and yet we
see millions prefer the loss of their least commodities before it; but they
shall find this a greater loss, when without delay they must, after the
sentence denounced, trudge the black way to perdition (with many a deep sigh,
and comfortless sobbe) from God and all the company of heaven, to sup in that
full hungly palace of confusion with the Prince of darkness, and his
accursed company, at the terrible table of Gods vengeance.

The second point of the execution of the sentence of damnation, is the
continuance The second part of the continuance of the torments upon the
reprobates.
of these pains in hell, which shall be for ever; And they shall go into
everlasting pain, Math. 25. 46. and this sentence is most just every way, as
decreed before all worlds, revealed to the world in all ages, and shall be
executed Reasons why reprob^tes be punished eternally.
in the end of the world, and that for these reasons.

1. Because the hatred of the wicked to God and man is eternal, it must so
long be punished.

2. As man sins against his God, who is eternal and infinite, so just it is
that man should be punished eternally and infinitely. But (will you ask) might
Object.
not the Lord have killed them outright and there an end, and not suffer them
to fry in torments eternally. Ans. No, for that had not satisfied his justice.
2. Then the conditions of the covenant required eternity.

The Use then is for every man to beware Use. 1
of that prison, out of which he shall never come forth, and to consider how
long is that whipping that never ends, tedious is that day that yields no
evening, and hard goes it with the tormented that would ^aine die and cannot.
If a damned person were persuaded that he were to sustain his torments in hell
no more thousand years then be stars in the sky, sands in the sea, grass
pills upon the ground, and creatures in heaven and earth, though this time
would be past telling, yet would he comfort himself in that one day, though it
were long, the fire would be quenched, the worm would die, the chains of
darkness would wear out, the prison would be laid open, and the miserable
man should be set at liberty, but (alas) never to come forth, this word (never)
kills the heart, seeing the pains be intolerable, and the continuance
eternal. If sinners would deeply and sadly consider this point, they would
not buy repentance so dear, nor be so mad as for a moment of transitory
delights, profits, or ease, boil so long in a Lake burning with fire and
brimstone* pitiful and fearful it is to see how the fools of the people in
these days of light, make but a sport of sin; not thinking how close, and of
what endless continuance the prison shall be there; and others more wife, yet
not much more religious, pack up all sins upon Christ's mercies, not
regarding his justice, nor their own infidelity, much less abnegation of
themselves, and amendment of life, and yet there is not lightly any so foolish
or sottish, if he have in hand any matter of importance among them, if
specially thereupon his estate relieth, but will carefully before hand cast for
it; yet in this (then which there is none more weighty) most men sleep and
snort, and what, says the Judge, shall in the end become of them, but that the
Judge will come when he looks not for him, and hew him in pieces, and set him
his portion with unbelievers, Luke 12. 46. Thus far of the execution of the
Lords definitive sentence upon the Reprobate, namely, that they go into
everlasting pain, and there I leave them, where God leaves them; for how can,
or should I be more merciful unto them, then the most merciful God is unto
them, 1. Sam. 28, 16. or then they themselves were to themselves whilst they
lived here, and might have easily prevented these tortures but would not, but
contemned all admonitions.

Next it follows to speak of the execution of the second part of the
sentence The execution of the sentence upon the Elect.
definitive upon the godly, which is thus; And the righteous (shall go) into
life eternal. But what these joys be, you must pardon me, if I be sparing in
Reasons why I speak sparingly of heavenly joys.
the relating thereof; for our Savior Christ who came from heaven, discoursed
very little thereof, though he could do it best of any, nor yet Paul who was
rapt into the third Heaven, 2. Cor. 12. 4. speak nothing here of to any
purpose, as not bin given himin commission, and also 2. for that the nature of
these joys is transcendent, infinite, ineffable, incomprehensible, and remote
from our weak senses, and incapable capacities, and therefore being unable to
conceive them, we are to believe life everlasting. 3. When Christ himself, his
Prophets, or Apostles go about to describe Christ's spiritual kingdom, they use
wonderful enlargings, surmounting and comparatiue speeches, taken cheefely of
such things as the Tabernacle, Arc, and Temple were made of, to figure thereby
to us, the heavenly Tabernacle, and celestial Jerusalem, and holy Temple,
typing the same by such things as men set most price by, as gold, silver,
pearls, precious stones, and the like; and yet when all is done, they come
short of the joys themselves, and therefore the safest way is to be wise with
sobriety. 4. There be some mysteries in the word of God, the perfect and full
manifestation whereof, the Lord reserueth for this due time and place, which is
the life to come, whereof I take this to be one, and therefore let us in hope
expect that time and place, and not the while build Castles in the air. 5. We
ought rather to labor and study to know and practice the means directing us to
heaven, then to trouble our selves on Seraphicall questions, nothing so
necessary for us. 6. I deny not but we may discourse hereof, so far as the
candle of the word enlighteneth us; and Paul prays that this mystery might
be revealed unto us, Ephesians. 1. 18. and unthankful to God should we be, and
enemies to our comfort, if we would refuse to search for, and to understand
what the Lord reuealeth, yet for my part, I had rather be silent then err
herein, and by my silence want a fault, then when it is committed to crave
pardon when I needed not commit it; specially, seeing there be diverse
learned men that have comfortably discoursed hereof, who out of the Word
taught us, that there is an Heaven, and therein joys unspeakable and
glorious, that God himself is the Author ther^of, that it is eternal, that
the twelfth Article of our faith is thereupon grounded (and the very Pagans
affirm the same) who they be that shall enjoy them, then, that the nature of
these joys is privative and positive, the positive internal and external,
etc. unto whom I refer you as my self for satisfaction, if we stand
unresolved, which we need not.

The Use every man is to make of Use. (...)
these joys, serve for admonition to the godly to be vvatchfull, lest he
loose the same, and with Satan drop to hell, and therefore must have a care to
lead reformed lives, to assure them of their salvation, else every comfort will
be converted to a sentence of condemnation: and what avails it thee to
discourse of such an excellent country, whereunto thy conscience tells thee
thou have no title unto, no more then it does Satan, who can speak more of
heaven then any of us; yet the thinking of that country much increases his
sorrow: and so will it be to the wicked in the midst of their iollities a sting
in their souls, and as a tart sauce, making their sweetest melodies sour and
deadly. If this meditation were helped with the light of a lively faith, it
would (as Elishaes salt) sweeten all the waters of Jericho; and as Elias fiery
Chariot, soon lift us up to heaven, and the while make all the bitter pains of
this life comfortable to us; for if the love of Lands, and desire of Riches,
cause the pains taken for them to seem nothing; what should the love of
Heaven effect in our souls? should we for this Country refuse any toil?
we know how all condemn Esau for selling his birthright for a mess of
read pottage, and what are the very best things in this world, but vanity and
vexation of spirit, and God forbid we should loose our birthright in heaven
for the love of uncertain pleasures: a wise pilgrim will forbear all
delights that hinder his return, and reserve all pleasures until he come
home, and so should we, else we will not come thither in haste. Abraham obeyed
God, calling him out of his country, Heb. 11. 9. because he looked for a City,
whose maker was God, and Paul was content to bear all afflictions, because
he looked for things that were not seen, 2. Cor. 4. 17. and 5. 1. 2. and
whosoever assures himself of heaven, will little regard this sinful life,
which one point should cause worldlings to look about them.

The second Use serves for thankfulness Use. 2.
to our good God, for redeeming us from hell, and all miseries, whereunto by
our sins, and the sins of our sorefathers, we had wretchedly plunged our
selves, and of his unspeakable love and mercy made us his elect children, and
heirs of his kingdom; and if thou take this to be but a slender benefit, then
co^der what a damned soul would give, if he had wealth, to be thus freed; and
do thou now the like, for by nature thou wast the child of wrath as well as
he, Ephesians. 2. 3. And therefore if Noah escaping the Deluge wherein millions
were drowned, and Israel delivered from Pharaohs tyranny, and David from Saul,
forgot not due thankfulness; much more ought we, delivered from the floods
of Gods wrath, tyranny of Satan, and cruelty of all enemies, yea and from the
everlasting pains of hell, be ever thankful in this, and the life to come
for this most gracious deliverance and blessed advancement to his holy kingdom
in heaven.

The third Use serves for comfort to Use 3. Of the joys of heaven.
the Elect which go to everlasting life, and to heaven, and that in three
respects.

1. Of the ends why eternal life was ordained: 1. that God might manifest the
riches of his grace to his Elect: 2. that the godly might enjoy the full fruits
of Christ's death, and the promised rewards of their labors and indignities in
this life sustained: 3. that they might magnify the great works and mercies
of God wrought for them.

2. In regard of the effects of eternal life; 1. that they may be as the
Angels of God, Math. 22. 30. not in substance, but in conditions: 2. that we
may be made partakers of the dignity of Christ in his three offices, as Kings,
Priests, and Prophets, though not in the same excellency.

3. In regard of certain degrees of heavenly joys, whereof the first degree
of our comfort and joy, shall be in respect of the general resurrection.

1. For it shall be a joyful day to us. 1. For the Angels will awake and
comfort us in the Lord. 2. Joyful it shall be, for that our souls and bodies
separated by death, shall now again be joined together, and glorified together
eternally. 3. Joyful shall it be in respect of the holy communion of Saints
whereunto we shall be joined to praise the Lord.

2. A second degree of glory will this he, that we shall appear before Christ
our Savior, be absolved and sit with him to judge the wicked, and enter upon
his sweet promises of eternal life.

3. A third degree of glory is, that he will justify and save us from our
sins.

4. The fourth degree of joy is, in that we shall be honored with the dignity
of Judges.

5. A fifth degree is, after we have thus triumphed and trodden our enemies all
under feet in most glorious and triumphant manner, we shall with Christ our
head, and all his Angels and Saints, go to life eternal, which is the end of
all our wishes and desires, where for ever, we shall enjoy the presence of the
holy Trinity, where the inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem be all Angels
and Saints; for Nobility, all the Sons of God; for unity, brethren; for
wisdom and knowledge all taught of God; for experience, they al overcame the
world; for multitude they cannot be numbered; and for amity, they live in
continual peace; their work, praising and serving the Lord; for piety, they
keep a perpetual sabbath, every day an holy day to the Lord.

6. The 6. degree is in regard of our continuance in heaven, which is
everlasting without end, but if these joys had had an end, then had it not
been an heaven; but it is eternal, without end, grief, weariness, oldage, or
any corruption: for when Death is swallowed up in victory, how possibly can
we die, our Savior being life it self.

7. The seventh degree is, that the Lord will pour into our souls and bodies
all the communicable graces of his Spirit; for when we are united to Christ our
head, and then by virtue of this union and communion mystical, we be in all
created gifts and graces belonging unto all and every part of our souls and
bodies like him, but not in the same degree.

8. The eight degree of joy is, a freedom from all miseries whatsoever,
belonging to body and soul, and in stead thereof be enriched with the contrary
blessings, which the Lord grant us. And thus far of the thirteen Motives for
watchfulness against the day of judgment, and of the timely uses we are to
make thereof. Sect. 20. The Conclusion.


Having dwelt thus long upon these Motives, I will now draw in my sails, and
hasten to the shore, exhorting every man in the Lord, that as this triple
watchfulness is necessary, and concerns every man that every Christian
particularly watch, and prepare himself accordingly; for while the arrows of
the Lords wrath fly over every man's head, and are not yet fallen, every man
may see and provide for himself, and escape: were it proclaimed that for some
privy fault, only known to himself, the King (whole life the Lord long
preserve) would execcute in every town some 100. ^0 or 10. persons, nay but two
in every town, whom pleased him all would fear, and by all means labor to
exempt and secure themselves, least he should be one of that number; but we
know that the fewer number in every Town or Hamlet shall be saved, Mat. 7.
22. 23. Luke 13. 23. 24. and every man's conscience tells him, that if the
Lord should call him to judgment upon a sudden, he should not be able to
answer him one to a thousand, Job 9. 3. and 40. 4. 5. and 42. 3. and that
there is no way but by careful watchfulness to escape this doom, and yet our
eyes for all this, are heavy for sleep, as were the eleven Apostles in their
greatest danger, who could not watch one hour with Christ: or if a lying
Wizard should foretell that Mat. 26. 40
of many, that passed that day over a bridge, one should drop over and drown,
all the passengers would see carefully to their footing (though he were but a
lier) but when the holy Ministers out of the infallible word of God, admonish
them to watch, they here mock and say the days are prolonged, but surely so
dangerous a case admits no mocking; we should hastily see to our watch, and the
rather, seeing our Savior has blown his trumpet, the day approaches, the
summons are sent forth, the sentence is drawn, and we all wait but for his
glorious coming to denounce it, and therefore the while let us as good porters,
watch at the gates of our souls, that Satan step not out to cast us to the
dead sleep of sin, or to steal us from our selves: there is not any of us but
has a secret watch within to give him timely warning hereof, in every thought
word, and action, we take in hand to tell us that we for the present are liable
to Gods temporal judgment, and if we escape them not, we must doubtless die,
and come to judgment, and this is the watch of our consciences. Oh that we
would regard it in time, and at every stroke of the clock, bewail how little
good to further our reckoning against death and judgment we did that hour
past! and that we would consider, that every hour we are nearer and nearer to
our end, which if we did sadly remember, we would not do amiss Many idle
gentlemen for a bravery carry golden watches in their bosoms to warn them how
their golden time passes, and yet are the while neither idle, nor well
occupied, but no watch to this of thy Conscience, if we would listen unto it,
which runs truly, as well by night as by day, and gives us a check every
munute, never standing still, unless it be rusty, or choked altogether with
the filth of sin, yet let us know, that when iniquity has played her part
upon the Theater of this sinful world, then will vengeance, speedily
succeed, and set up a tragedy bloody and tedious, without end rufull, without
mittigation, and continual without ease and release; and look how many drams
of delight here thou impenitent wretch have tasted of, so many pounds of
endless pains shall thou there receive, the Comedy is short, but the Tragedy
is ouer-long, bloody and bitter.

Save and protect us (good Lord) from this Lake of misery, work in us speedily
A prayer.
true repentance, faith unfeigned, with due obedience to all thy commandments,
that so standing upon our watch, and serving thee ever in spirit and truth, we
may live with thee ever in Heaven: and as Ambrose in his funeral Oration for
Theodosius, supposes that the Angels carrying his soul to heaven, should in
the way ask him, what did he while he lived here upon earth, and he should
answer, Dilexi: I have loved: So we pray thee (O sweet Savior) both to prepare
our selves while we be here to live before thee in all Christian
watchfulness, and so likewise for death and judgment, and withal, to grant
us thy holy Spirit and grace, in such powerful and abundant manner, that when
thy holy Angels shall gather us from the four winds to appear before thy
judgment seat; and thou the great Arch-Angell shall ask us what we did all
the while we lived h^ere, we may truly and cheerfully answer, both that we
loved thee (O blessed Savior) above all and loved our neighbors as our
selves, and withal, that we watched continually over our whole lives, and
against death and thy coming to judgment. O Lord grant us this grace for thy
great name sake. To thee dear Savior, with thy Father and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory given by us, both now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
AN ADMONITION to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, although the Printer has desired and used his best care, that
this book should come forth with fewest faults, yet by reason of the duskie
obscurenesse of the hand, and absence of the Author dwelling far off; it
could not be, but some faults escaped us, not only in pointing or
mis-pointing, in omitting or adding sometimes a letter, and in the Sections,
either not placed, or mis-placed; but in omission and alteration of words,
obscuring the sense in some places: which the godly Readers judgment and
diligence must help, or charitably pass by, and not impute them neither to
the Author, nor the Printer. And so Farewell.


