A SERMON PREACHED AT THE SECOND TRIENniall Visitation of the RIGHT HONORABLE
AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of London, holden at
Keluedon in ESSEX: September. 3. 1631.

By NEHEMIAH ROGERS, Pastor of Messing in Essex.

O Vtinam omnes qui alacres currunt ad Cathedram, tam vigiles reperirentur ad
curam: Bern. Ser. 77. in Cant. LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Edward
Brewster, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Bible, at the
great North door of Paul's. 1632.

Recensui hunc librum cui titulus est ( A Sermon Preached at the second
Trienniall Visitation of the R.H. R.R. Father in God, William L.B. of London,
holden at Keluedon etc.) (vna cum Epistola Dedicatoria ad Venerabilem virum
Arthurum Duck Legum D. etc.) qui quidem liber continet quatuordecim folia, in
quibus nihil reperio bonis moribus, aut sanae doctrinae contrarium, quo minus
cum vtilitate imprimatur, modo intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis
mandetur.

GVLIELM. BRAY Episcopo Londinensi Capellanus Domesticus.
Ex aedibus Londinens. December. 17. 1631.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL ARTHVR DVCKE, Dr. of the Civil Laws, Chancellor to
the Right Honorable and Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of London,
and one of the Masters of his Majesty's high Court of Chancery.
Right Worshipful and most worthy Sir;
I Make no other Apology for my self in respect of the Publication, and
Dedication of the ensuing Sermon, then that which David made to his brother
Eliab (who rashly judged his forwardness in coming to the battle to proceed
from the pride and naughtiness of his heart) Is there not a cause? 1 Samuel
17.29.
Might it have dyed the common death of other Sermons, it had been dead and
buried out of sight, but loath I was that it should suffer a violent, and an
ignominious death through the false calumnies, and ignorant censures of some
ill affected spirits, and therefore I have sought life for it, that it may live
to the world, and speak for it self.

I present it to your Worship; Protection I desire not, if it be truth
delivered, it is Gods, and able to defend it self; if error, it were an
insufferable wrong to abase so worthy a Patronage for the Defense of it;
Acceptance I crave; and this your wonted and native courtesy, together with
the great respect you bear to the meanest of our Tribe, assures me of.

In which confident expectation I bind my self,

Your Worships in my best Observance, NEHEMIAH ROGERS.

A SERMON PREACHED At the second Trienniall Visitation of THE RIGHT HONORABLE
AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of London, holden at
Keluedon in ESSEX: September. 3. 1631.
TEXT. NEH. 8.4. And Ezra the Scribe stood upon a Pulpit of Wood, which they
had made for the purpose.
THere needs not a Seer to discover the mystery, and meaning of a Text so
plain, especially to such an Auditorie, where are so many, Job 39.29.
whose eyes, like those of Eagles, see things a far off. The Sum and
Substance, with the Connection, and Coherence, are so obuious, that who so runs
may read.

Worthy Nehemiah having repaired the walls, and broken buildings of Jerusalem,
begins the Repair of Religion (which was much decayed) and of Manners (which
was much corrupted) amongst that people. This he sets upon in this Chapter;
Matthew. 7.
First, (like a wise builder) laying a good foundation, and after, building
thereupon. He begins this work with reading, and expounding of the Law, the
better to convince the Jews of their aberrations, and failings, which he does
effectually. Take we notice of Particulars.

First, the Meeting of the Congregation, and assembling of the people, i. e.
simul vel concorditer Lanat. in loc.
both men, and women, and all that could hear with understanding, even as one
man, verse 1. They were no Schismatickes.

Secondly, the Place, in the street before the water gate, verse 3. openly, and
publicly, not in a secret corner. It was no Conuenticle.

Thirdly, the Priest who he was, together with his behavior and carriage,
verse 4. which well became himself, and place;

1. He Opened his book in the sight of all the people (being fitly seated to
be seen) upon the opening whereof, the people show much reverence, verse 5.

2. He makes a Prayer before the Sermon, and begins with blessing the great God
of heaven, whereat the people are zealously devout, with lifted-vp hands, and
bowed heads and bodies answering thereto, Amen, Amen, verse 6.

3. He Reads his Text, gives the sense of the words, and causes the people to
understand the meaning, verse 7, 8. The like method with this under the Law, is
observed by us the Preachers of the Gospel and may hence have warrant.

One of these branches (as you see) I have chose for my Text, which sets forth
unto us the Preacher with some principal Circumstantialls.

The Preacher is described by his Name, and by his Office. His Name [Ezra.] His
Office [the Scribe.]

The Circumstantialls are two: Situs; Locus: His Site, Or the Gesture used [hee
stood] The Vbi or Place Where [Vpon a Pulpit] which is set forth or described
further by the Materiale: the Matter whereof it was made [of wood] and by the
Finale; the End why it was made [for the purpose.] Thus you have the Priest in
his proper Predicaments. As you have heard the Logical Resolution, be pleased
with like patience to attend to the Theological Exposition.

Ezra the Scribe] Who this Ezra was; Text.
of what Kindred he came; what was his Learning; what his Religion, etc. we
read Ezra 7. at large; here only he is described by his name [Ezra] and by
his Learning [the Scribe.]

Of Scribes there were two sorts: some Laics; Others Clergy men.

Of the first sort, there were two ranks: Some attended the King as his
Secretaries, these were termed (...) the Kings Scribes, 2 Kings 12.10. 2 Chro.
24 11. Such were Sheia; 2 Samuel 20.25. and Shaphan, 2 King. 22.3.

Others attended Public Courts, and Consistories, and were like our Public
Notaries, or our Clerks of Assizes: These were termed (...); the Scribes of
the People, Matthew. 2.4.

The second sort of Scribes, were Gods, and belonged to the Clergy, they were
called (...), Scribes of the Law. These were Doctors and Expositors of the Law,
being by Office to write, read, and expound the Law, unto the people, Luke
7.30. and 5.17. Ezra. 7.6.
Such a one was this Ezra called, elsewhere Sophir Mahir, a prompt Scribe; and
here (...) that Scribe; by way of excellency, the Hebrew article P like the
Greek O noting always some eminency, or specialtie, in the party spoken of.

Stood] A Gesture noting Subjection, and Service; used by the Priests, and
Leuits in all their ministration, Deuteronomy. 10.8. and 17.12. and 18.5.7. Judge.
20.28. And by the Prophets, who are in this respect said to stand before the
Lord, 1 King. 17.1. and 18.15. 2 Kings 3.14. and 5.16. And by the Angels, 2 Chronicles. 18.18. Luke 1.19. So then, Gods Ministers with great reverence, are to
do service to God, and to his Church, 2 Chronicles. 35.3. The Holiness of the
Place; Weightinesse of the Work; Presence of the People; Worthiness of the
Person, whom we represent, require it.

Upon a Pulpit] The word Migdal, in the Hebrew, signifies a Turret; In the
Greek, (...); which signifies a Tribunal High-seate, or Place. Suggestum in
the Latin, has the like signification. Such a Seat was erected and set up
for Ezra; therein he stood, and so was above the people, verse 5. (As Solomon
was, who made him such a kind of brazen scaffold and set it in the midst of
the Court of the Temple, when he blessed the Lord, and the people, 2 Chronicles.
6.13.) This kind of Chair or Pulpit, did afterward grow more Common and in
use, whence (I conceive) that phrase arose, of sitting at the feet of another,
as Saint Paul is said to have sat at Gamaliels; And sitting in Moses chair;
that is, preaching Moses Law, sitting in the Chair or Pulpit.

The Reasons for the erecting of it were especially two; First, that he might
be heard, and understood. The Minister of God is so to preach, and in such a
manner to deliver his Message wherewith he is sent, as that (so much as in him
lies) the knowledge of salvation, may from him be derived to all that hear
him, Luke 1.77 1 Cor. 14.

Secondly, that he might the better see, and be seen of all, 2 Chronicles. 6.13.
God has placed the Stars high, the more commodiously to shine unto us: So
his Ministers in an eminent place, Matthew. 5.
that their light might be more conspicuous. We are (as it were) set upon a
stage, and made a gazing, stock (setting aside contempt) even in respect of
observation to Men and Angels.

But whereof was this Pulpit made? [of Wood] says the Text. Wood] not Gold,
nor Silver, nor such like costly matter; but of Wood. The dignity of the
Clergy stands not in outward pomp and glory, nor does the worship of God
consist in rich ornaments or glorious furniture. Idolatry and falsehood (says a
Reverend Prelate of our Church) is commonly more gaudie and plausible then
Truth, Dr. Hall B. of Exceter.
which hates either bought, or borrowed beauty, and will abide none but native
colors: That heart therefore which can for the outward homeliness despise the
ordinances of God, is already aliened from true religion, and lies open to the
grossest Superstition. You may remember what was said of old by Boniface the
Martyr, when the Church had wooden Chalices she had Golden Priests, but after,
when she came to have Golden Chalices (as in time of Popery) she had Wodden
Priests. But why touch I this? For if Superstition made our Adversaries too
Careful, and Bountiful; Profaneness and Atheism has made us too
Careless. The ruins of Gods house; the Dust, and Cobwebs, wherewith our
Churches were be hung, before Authority (like the good huswife in the Parable)
sent a broom, Luke 15.
sufficiently confirmed this. God holds himself contemned, when his Churches
are defaced, and his Vtensils not decently preserved; see Psalm. 74. verse 8.10.

Made for the purpose] And yet no Command for it, nor for any other of those
Solemnities used after, verse 6. in Moses Law. So then; Mere humane inventions
in the Circumstantialls of Gods worship, are not therefore unlawful (though
appropriated thereunto and (afterward) superstitiously abused) unless in some
other respect some sinfulness be found in them. But this you will say is not
for the purpose.

For the purpose] Then, or for Speech it was (for both ways the words may be
read, and rendered) i. e. to read and expound the Word of God, the Law of
Moses in; So that the Pulpit is not for show but use. Nor yet for any use, but
this use; not for a Stage to play our own parts or prizes: Nor for a-
Fence-schoole or Pasquill, in show to be zealous against sin, and intend
little else thereby, but revenge of private wrong. This is not the Purpose I
dare say it was made for.

Thus you see the Text, is as Full as Plain: Variety of Observation it would
afford, if a skillful workman had the handling of it, but I must do as I
may: Being to pass through the Straits of Time, I resolve to pitch my thoughts
upon one general Thesis which I thus lay down:

An Ezra well becomes a Pulpit, and a Pulpit him.

From the Thesis I shall descend to the Hypothesis, and thus infer:

It is pity that an Ezra should want it, or it want an Ezra.

Matthew 5.15.
To prove the former; Our Savior by that comparison of lighting a Candle, and
putting it in the Candlestick makes it good: Whereto serves the Candlestick,
but for the Candle lighted? And where should a lighted Candle be placed, but in
the Candlestick? Elders must be ordained (...) in every Church, Acts 14.23.
not Lay Elders, but Preaching Elders. And such was Titus enjoined by Saint
Paul, to constitute (...) in every City, Tit. 1.5.

Again, the Minister is the Watchman, Isay 21.11. His Charge, and Pulpit, is
his Watchtower, Hab. 2.1. He is a Planter, and a Waterer, 1 Cor. 3 6. His
Congregation an Orchard, and Pleasant Garden, Cant. 4 12 13. He is a Labourer,
1 Cor. 3.9. and a Seeds-man, Mar. 4.14. His People are the Field, 1 Cor 3.9.
He is a Mason or Carpenter, 1 Cor. 3.10. They are the House and Temple, 2 Cor.
6.16. Quam been conueniunt?

This also is the judgment of our Church, which takes order by her Canons, not
only for the Examination of those who are to be admitted into sacred orders,
that they be Ezra's, Apt Scribes; but likewise that every one so admitted be
provided of some Place and Pulpit, either Benefice or Curatship, wherein he may
employ his gifts, and attend the Cure of soul, Can. 33.34.35. So then, It is
great pity (and men are never worse then when they are pitied) that either
should be wanting to the other.

I would direct the Application of this to three sorts of men of highest
quality, and sort; Patrons, Prelates, Priests, Application.
and derive Instruction hence of a Threefold lesson. To the one Care and
Conscience in Presenting, To the Second, in Ordaining, To the last, in
Executing and Officiating that where with they are betrusted.

If you ask me the reason, why in many Churches, 1. To Patrons.
where are fair Pulpits, there are no better Pulpit-men? I must tell you,
Corrupt Patrons are in greatest fault. It is an easy matter for a man in a
Corrupt age (though his gifts and endowments are so mean, as that no Calling
in the World will afford him Bread) to be well beneficed, aut errore Hominis,
aut aere Simonis; while men give upon dishonest terms, what man of parts dare
accept thereof? These refusing, such must be sought for as will, Micha's Priest
is welcome, so he will accept of Micha's Wages: If he have Learning enough to
understand, Quid dabis? and make an answer to it; And will be contented with
the like usage which David's Ambassadors found from Hanuns Princes, to have
their Garments cut off by the buttocks, and their Beards half shaven away by
unjust Compositions, he is a Priest for the purpose. No wonder such go in Short
Cloakes, how can they go in long? All the while they stay at the borders of
Jericho, they cannot recover their shame: The In-com was so great at their
first entrance.

If any such be present as have to do with Presentations to Church-liuings,
let me beseech them, even as if Christ himself did beseech them, not to betray
his Church into the hands of such Blind guides; When you Present, Present not
to God and Mother Church a Prometheus sacrifice, skin and bone, without flesh.
Let your Question be, as theirs in the Gospel, Who is worthy? Present not
Wooden Priests, Matthew. 10.11.
to make your selves Golden Patrons. Respect not Gifts of Gold, for the
furnishing of your Cup-boards, but Gifts of Grace for the furnishing of the
Pulpit. Beware of Cropping the poor Ministers maintenance; Let not out that
Blood your Forefathers put into the Churches veins, under pretense of her
falling into a Plurifie. Think not with William Rufus any longer, that
Church-Bread is only Sweetbread. Take not away their maintenance with Julian
the Apostata, under pretense of Conscience, that so much living is a Burden to
them, and a Hinderance of their Ministry. Deal not with your Clerks, as
Dionysius with his Gods to take away their Gold, and put upon them
Linesy-wolsey, as being Cooler for the Summer, and Hotter for the Winter, and
then (which is worst) having their Livings, flout at them for their Poverty;
like the Jews who having spoiled Christ of his Vestments, then mocked him with
Baseness. Forget not those Woes, denounced by our Savior against the
Pharisees, for devouring up of widows houses, (much more for devouring up his
Fathers) And let that Whip be thought upon, used against Buyers and Sellers in
the Temple, much more of the Temple, for if those were whipped with Rods, then
these with Scorpions. In brief; remember, if the Nurse wants Bread, the Child
wants Milk; both Cry, both are Heard, woe to that man that has the Cry of
souls against him.

But if no such Ministers were made, how could they be presented?

2. To Prelates. 1 Timothy 5.22.
True; therefore the Charge is great which is laid upon Prelates in Ordaining,
(...), etc. but to Prove first, and to use a very precise Examination, before
they separate any man to the Office of a Minister: And yet in the Choysest
Elections, 2 Samuel 18.19.20.21.
they may be deceived. Sometimes it fares with our Governors, as it did with
Ioab in the Camp, Verse 22.
2 Samuel 18. Ahimaaz offers himself to be the caryer of tidings, but is put
back, and Cushi taken, as fitter for the service; Still Ahimaaz importunes
Ioab, and through importunity preuailes to run after, and (taking the way of
the Plain) outruns Cushi, 23.
and comes first to David, as if he had great matters to impart unto the King,
but being examined on particulars, he could give no other answer but this, he
saw a great tumult, 29.
but knew not what it meant. So it may be some (such is the rashness of youth)
stepping in, and putting themselves forward, may through importunity, obtain
that which their deserts could never, and so (taking the way of the Plain)
(the beaten path of Simony) ouergoes the Worthyer, but when he comes to deliver
his message, like him in the Gospel he is speechless, 30.
and his entertainment like that of Ahimaaz, Turn aside, stand thou by. This
(I say) may be an oversight: But for the most part, the fault is amongst our
selves: A Bishop may examine a man as concerning Learning, but can any Bishop
know the Life and Conversation of every one that is to be admitted into holy
orders, otherwise then by the the testimony of those that know them? Now if
the first Concoction be bad, can the Second, or Third be good? Ministers,
Gentlemen, and Others, should not for favor, nor by-respects, be too liberal
of their hands, in giving testimonial of any, whom they either know not, or
else not to be well deserving. The setting to a rash hand here, is as the rash
laying on of hands, and (though we be no Prelates) a transgression of the
Apostles precept. If then thou know thy Friend be fit, or thy Child be
fit, and can give a testimony as Saint John did of Demetrius, Epist 3.12.
send him unto Iairus the Ruler of the Synagogue; Otherwise let him follow that
Calling he is fittest for. And answer him (be he friend or kinsman or any
other) that desires thy testimony for his preferme^t, as that famous Bishop of
Lincoln, Robert Grosthead did one, who earnestly solicited him, in the behalf
of his poor kinsman, that he would prefer him, and thereupon enquiring what
condition of life he followed, and understanding that he had been brought up
to husbandry, answered; Then if his plough be broken I will repair it, or
rather then fail bestow a new upon him, but so to dignifie him as to hinder
him in that course and calling wherein he was brought up, and whereto he is
fitted, I mean not to do.

But I hasten to the Third and last Sort, 3. To Priests.
whom this doctrine does especially concern, You my Brethren; of mine own
Coat and Calling; the Select Subject of this days meeting, and discourse, who
are (as I conceive) all Pulpit-men. And therefore I shall not need to call upon
you to get you Pulpits (as Chrysostom of old did upon his hearers: to get them
Bibles.) It is not wanting unto you. The force of my Exhortation must bend this
way, that you be not wanting unto it, which you shall not be, if you be Ezra's
Prompt and Ready Scribes.

And seeing I am to speak to those who are (...), Wisemen, and Understanding,
it will do well enough, though Omnia in figura (as Saint Paul speaks in
another case) and I keep my self unto the Metaphor: Commending those Rules
unto you, which Good Penmen give in the Art of writing, applying them to our
purpose as we pass along.

These Rules are either (...), Preparatorie, or (...), such as Concern the
Work it self.

The former sort, respects the Pen; Or the Site and Carriage of the Body; Both
are of use to us.

First, for the Pen; the Care of a Good Scribe must be to provide one Fitting,
both for his Hand and Paper. Next to the Holding of his Pen, lest he discover
himself a Botcher.

That his Pen may be Good and Fitting every way, there is a double Care
required; 1. In Choosing of the Quill, that it be not too Hard nor Full of
teeth. 2. In the Cutting, Riuing, or Nibbing of the Penn, that it may write
hard, or soft, as Occasion requires. Thus if we would write Well, and Fair,
let us not affect to be dealing with those Scriptures that are Obscure and
Dark, Of Ambiguous, and Doubtful meaning; 2 Pet. 3.16.
Of which kind, there are not a few in holy Writ, and none more subject to be
wrested and perverted. ( Wits making such places, the Palaestra to prove
masteries in) You know the Ancient Fathers did scarce touch the Book of the
Revelation in all their writings, thinking it far safer with silence, to
admire, then to adventure to expound it. Such then as fasten (to choose) upon
such dark Texts (except they have the better parts and helps) seem to write
with the Ganders quill, and while men seek to get the praise of a nimble head,
and sharp wit by tying knots to untie again, they do with the dog leave soft
meat, to knawe upon the bones.

But say in our ordinary lot and course, Quest.
we meet with such a Scripture, what must then be done?

In such a Case, Resp.
(to keep me still unto the Metaphor) do as good Penmen do with such a
Quill, scrape it, and pare it, till you get away the Teeth what may be; I mean
that you would Distinguish aptly that which is Confused; And Illustrate
plainly that which is Obscure: You know the Helps, the Use of Tongues, and
Authors, etc. And Prayer in such a Case, is the Best Book in the Study:
Enquire of him who is both the Author and Interpreter of Scripture. The noise
of Axe and Hammer would not be heard (ouer-loud) within the Temple; the work
would be framed in Lebanon. To reckon up all that we have read, with their
several opinions upon such a Text, is (in my poor conceit) with David A spice
of Pride in numbering of the people: As on the other side at no time to Quote
an Author, may be thought with Rhehoboam to despise the judgment of the wise.

To be brief, if after all our pains such places remain to us ambiguous,
and doubtful, it is enough if we acknowledge, confess, and religiously
admire: Not peremptorily determining on either part, shutting up our discourse
as the Jews were wont, every doubtful place they met withal with this, Elias
cum venerit soluet dubia.

Or if in Case, we do determine, it shall be our wisdom, to walk in the
beaten road of the Church, and not to run out into any single Paradoxes of our
own, to trouble the common peace: Better is it to be last in the drove of
good Expositors (says our Reverend Archbishop in his Exposition upon Jonah)
then to be foremost inventing our own Conceits.

This is not all, for after we have Chose our Quill, With the good Penman, we
must be Careful in Cutting of our Pen. This requires Skill, that it may be
neither too Soft nor over Hard: Therefore the Apostle, speaks thus to
Timothy, Show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. Gods Minister, must
(...) Divide and cut: A speech borrowed from the Cutting up of the Sacrifice,
in which there was great skill required, the Liver must be left hanging on the
Right side; the Heart and Lungs, upon the Channel bone, the Milt upon the left
side; and the Kidneys, upon the Rump. Each Bungler can Chop a Text into
Gobbets; but so to Cut the word, as to give every one their Portion, and
therein approve ones self to God, is the property Of a Workman that needs
not to be ashamed.

Of this, there are two parts; Resolution and Application.

The Former is as the Slitting or Riuing of the Pen; the Latter as the Nibbing
of it.

Si Logica absit, rationalis homo, praeter rationem in linguae sono versatur.
Our Text must be untwisted, and unloosed, or as it were vnbowelled, which
cannot be done without the help of Logic (the hand of Philosophy) This
would not be Ouer-slight, nor Ouer-curious; for Aeque confusa est diuisio and
nimia and nulla (says Fulgentius) To make a long Analysis, to a Short Text, is
with the Citizens of Mindus to build Great Gates to a Little City, (who were
well flouted for their pains) Or like the Boasting Traveler, who coming to
his Inn, plucks out great store of coin, and spends but twopence. And on the
other side not to observe Parts and Order is as bad. A Burden well wrapped, and
pack't up together, we carry with greater ease: both Minister and Hearer is
much helped by Method.

As for the Applying part, respect must be had unto the Auditory, as the good
Penman has in nibbing of his Pen unto the kind of Paper he writes upon, that
it agree with it. Some has a hard and cross grain, which soon takes off the
edge of a Tender Penn; here too much of the nib would not be left: The Penn
would be Hard and Dry. Some paper again has a more fine, and tender grain,
with which the Smaller Penn does best agree: Your Ordinary Paper is Pot-paper
of a middle nature, and requires, that the nib be neither too soft, nor too
hard, but brought unto a mean.

Gods Prophets, must fit themselves to the Persons they have to deal withal,
becoming all to all that they may save some. A Nathans tongue suits well with
a Dauid's heart; A Huldahs, with Iosiah's; And an Elijah's and Michajah's with
Ahab's; A John Baptist with Herod's does best of all.

It is worth our taking notice of, how God in all ages has proportioned men to
the occasions: A Mild Moses was for the low estate of Afflicted Jsrael: mild in
spirit (says one) but mighty in wonders: mild because he had to do with a
persecuted and yet a techie people; mighty because he had to do with a
Pharaoh. A Grave and a holy Samuel was for the quiet consistence of Israel; And
a fierie-spirited Elijah, for the desperatest declinations of it. If in later
times of the depraved Condition of his Church, God has raised up some spirits,
which have been more warm, and stirring, then those of common mould, we
cannot censure the choice, when we see the service. (As a Reverend Prelate of
our Church speaks worthily.)

One thing more (before I pass this) be pleased to take notice of; that
how-euer you may seem in the Nibbing of your Penn (through the sloape holding
of your knife in cutting it half way, to make it thin, and then strait
ouer-thwart) to make Two-cuttings, yet if it be not done at once,, it will not
write Fair and Currantly; So in all our Uses and Applications derived, and
deducted, from our Doctrines (how ever they may seem yet) let them not be Two,
but One Syllogism and ordinarily a Connexe; Look how many Uses we deduce from
the Doctrine delivered, if they will make a Syllogism (the Doctrine being the
Argument) we miss not our Rule. And then will our Application be more
effectual.

Nothing else remains to be said concerning the Making of our Pen. Only this
(before I come to the Rules which concern our Holding of it) we may do well,
to Try our pen having made it; See how our notes affect our selves: If our own
spirits are not moved with what we have studied, there is but little hope that
those who hear us should be affected with them.

Our Pen thus fitted, our next Care is, that we look to the Holding of it:
Which may not be with the Fist too Slouenly, nor yet betwixt One Finger and
the Thumb too Daintily, or Nicely, but

1. With a Light and easy touch, not griped too hard; For thence arises these
two benefits; The Command of the hand; And Quick dispatch of matter. Both
Extremes would be avoided in the handling of holy things. It is not necessary
we should have All we speak in Print; and Weigh every word as in a Balance,
for weight, and tuneable measure; Smooth Elocution, Fine Pronunciation, and the
like, will soon bring us into that vein of preaching, which Bishop Latimer
once blamed, under the witty term of Straw-berry preaching; and which S.
Jerome does so much deride in his Epistle to Nepotianus, telling him, that the
Spirit of God came down in the likeness of an Innocent Dove, not Painted
butterfly. Assure we our selves brethren, that as the rare and absolute
quality of the Pen, consists not in Painting, Pricking forth, and tedious
writing of six lines in a study, no more does the Excellency of Preaching in
the like exactnes. See 1 Cor. 14.15. Had the Fathers took this course, their
works had never been in so many large volumes as now we have them.

I grant ye; Accurate Sermons are fit for Learned Auditories: At such a time
as this, it will do well, if they smell somewhat more of the lamp then
ordinary; and in such a case I could desire with Demosthenes to speak, non
modo scripta sed etiam sculpta; But in our Common and Ordinary Auditories,
Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 10. In Psalm. 139.
there is (to use Saint Austins phrase) Quaedam diligens negligentia and such
might be seen in him by his frequent using the barbarous word Ossum for a
Bone, rather then the word Os, for (says he) Mallem vt reprehendant
grammatici, quam vt non intelligant populi: He stood not so much on his Own
Credit as his Peoples profit. When we have spent our time, and pains in knots,
and flourishes, studying rather after Fine phrase, Confess. 1. 14.
then Matter, it may be said of us, as the same Father says of Homer, that he
was dulcissime vanus, Yea we shall say in the end as one does of his own
labors, quod ad vsum lusi, Ausonius in monosyl.
quod ad molestiam laboraui: In respect of the profit comes by them, they are
but Sport; in respect of the pains in making and gathering, they are sore
Labor and Sweat.

As this Extreme; so that otherwise, in dealing with the Word of God too
Loosely and Superficially, must carefully be avoided. Though we may not
Slauishly tie our selves to words, yet we may not neglect to speak Wisely and
as becomes the Oracles of God. Our phrase it must be apta (says Saint
Bernard) though not alta. Many men's labors are despised through neglect of
this; whose pains for the Matter might be well approved of, but the
Slouen-like handling of it, turns the stomach. Do we not loath the meat
(though otherwise good and wholesome) that is served in, in a sluttish dish?

Be not too base; use no foolish terms, nor ridiculous. Those Knots which are
performed with the Celerity of the Hand, are Commendable in Clearkely writing:
Many Speak well by Nature; Many by Industry and Art attain unto it: as
Demosthenes who came to that excellent faculty of speaking as that he could
lead his Auditory, to what part he pleased, by spending more Oil then Wine
(as himself tells one who asked him how he attained thereto.) Scripture it
self approues of a godly Eloquence, let not us despise it, but bless God for
such an excellent gift, where it is bestowed.

Beloved, I am far from being a Patron for Idleness, give me leave to speak
the truth; There are some of good hopes, who upon their first entry into the
Ministry, to avoid the imputation of Dumb-dogs, so far break silence, as
that if they preach not twice every Sabbath, presently conceit they are as no
body, and shall loose respect; which is a cause of venting many raw, and
undigested meditations. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it, and
honor that day with Two young Pigeons, or Two young Turtle doves; Let him
follow that Council the Wiseman gives, In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening withhold not thine hand, for thou know not whether shall
prosper, either this or that, i. e. Nuper plantatus and ecclesia insitus,
quales, erant Catechumeni.
or whether they both shall be alike good, Eccl. 11.6. But as for him who is
(...) a young scholar and new entered into the work, let them not take too
much upon them, but remember the Council the people of Rome gave, who hearing
that some of their Colonies waxed barren, willed that the husbandmen should
melius arare and and minus serere; So take me rightly, and I am sure you cannot
count the Council to be ungodly: Let such as cannot preach Often, and Well
too, spend more time in their Studies, and less time in their Pulpits: And for
a while be content to gather herbs to make pottage for Gods household, wherein
also they had need be very circumspect that they gather not wild-gourds in
stead of wholesome herbs.

Secondly, we must hold our Pen upon the Full for that is, most proper. Fasten
not upon Scripture any other sense, then the nature of the place will bear.
You know the Council that the Priests and Diuiners gave unto the Princes of
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 6 9.
concerning the Arc: If it go by the way of its own coast to Bethshemesh
then it is from God, but if it go another way (if it be urged and goaded on)
it is but a matter of Chance, Of man's wit and invention. Beware we, I beseech
you, how we dare to wrest the Scriptures, and (as Chymickes with Natural
bodies) by torturing them, endeavor to extract that out, which neither God nor
Nature has put into them. This I rather beseech you, to be wary of, by how
much we are the more apt to fall into it, especially for the Countenancing of
our own Rotten fancies. He that is wedded to an Opinion, and has Wit to
maintain it, shall never want some Scripture, which (with a little woing) may
seem to Countenance it. It was (you know) the boast of one Chrysippus, of whom
Laertius makes mention, that he often wanted opinions to advance, but once
having an opinion, he never wanted Arguments to defend it. It is a miserable
praise to be a witty disturber of the Churches peace; And yet, this is the
only praise that many do affect, who having once fastened upon some Assertion
(though never so absurd) think it their glory to defend it, Conceiting all that
they see, or hear, or read, Antiphorus Orietes.
makes for it: Like him in Aristotle, who where ever he went, he thought he saw
the picture of himself. Thus we read of Adrian the Pope, who when the
Contentions were betwixt the services of Saint Ambrose and Saint Gregory,
Jacob. de Vorag. in vita Greg.
which should take place, by common consent both the masse-bookes were laid
upon Saint Peter's Altar, expecting the decision of that doubt by Revelation:
The Church doors being opened in the morning, Saint Gregory's masse-booke was
rent, and torn in many pieces, and lay scattered about the Church, but Saint
Ambrose's lay whole and open upon the Altar: which event, one would have
thought, should have signified thus much; that the Mass of Gregory should be
Cancelled and abolished, and that of Ambrose authentical, and allowed: But now
Pope Adrian (who was for Gregory) expounds it thus: that the renting and
scattering of Gregory's missal, intended the dispersing of it over all the
Christian world, and that it should be only received as Canonical. Such
another was that Friar, who finding out Maria in the Scripture used plurally
for Seas, cried out, that he had found in the Old Testament the name of Maria
for the Virgin Mary. What is this, but with the wicked sons of Eli, to strike
our flesh-hooke with iron teeth into the pot of Gods Sacrifice; and to account
all ours, that it brings up? And if in case the Scripture has not for us, so
soon as we desire, to take by force, as they did from the Sacrificers? Yea
what is this any other, then with the Harlot in the Kings, to lay the dead
child of our own heads, and brains, in the bosom of the true mother the
Holy Scriptures, and say it is hers? A sin in the judgment of some of the
Ancient so foul, as that (in their esteem) it deserved to be ranged in the
same rank with the sin against the Holy Ghost. Other sins seem to be of
weakness, but this of wit and strength. Besides he that seeks to fasten a
new sense on Scripture, indites another Scripture, (as it were) and so after a
sort makes himself a God. A rule of special use; forget it not.

And yet, while I speak of holding our Pen directly upon the Full, mistake me
not, For it is requisite sometimes (as in the fetching of a Compass) that it
should bear a little on the left side, that it may the better give full where
it should, and small also where it is required. Thus did Nathan in propounding
of the Parable of the poor man with his little Ewe: Our Savior often by
things feyned did set forth, and express unfeigned truths: Thus Saint Paul
likewise fetch a compass, the better to take his keeper, holding his pen a
little on the left side (as it were) Beleeuest thou Agrippa? I know that thou
beleeuest. If ever any knew (...) to change his voice and to attemper his style
that he might profit, he was the man: Yet many esteem this practice, no
better then flattery and lying; but I hasten.

We have done with those Rules which Concern the Ordering of our Pen; Now for
those which respect the Carriage of the Body, which if it be seemly, is a great
grace to writing. The Particulars are these: 1. The Head must be held upright,
and look strait forward. 2. The Arm laid right forth upon the Paper. 3. The
Paper lie as near to the midst of the Body, as the strait holding forth of the
Arm will permit, and suffer. For the First.

Be thou an ensample (says Saint Paul to Timothy) in life, in doctrine, in
holy Conversation. 1 Timothy 4.12.
Exemplaris vita est concio optima
It is the Example wherein the force of the Rule does lie: This our people
especially look upon, and accordingly conceive, as Labans Cattle did among
the Rods that Jacob laid in the Gutters before their eyes, Genesis 30. In which
respect it was that God thus complained: From the Prophets of Jerusalem,
wickedness is gone forth into all the land, Ier. 23.15. The sins of Teachers
are the Teachers of sins, and therefore no marvel if they be more odious
unto God, then the sins of any of the people, which appears by this, in that
the Lord required in the old Law, Leuit. 4.3.14.
as much sacrifice for the Priests sin alone, as he did for the sins of all the
Congregation besides. The best Schooleman seems to give the reason; for when
we sin we do peccare in quid essentialiter, but others, in quale
accidentaliter, therefore ours greater.

Be ye holy therefore, Isay 52.11.
you that do bear the vessels of the Lord, have Feet to walk withal, Psalm.
115.7.
as well as Mouths to speak withal, least you be found in the end, Idols as
well as dumb ones. You are here present with the ensigns of gravity upon your
backs; Seeing these bushes hung forth, see there be good wine within. In a
word, let us so live, as that we be Walking Sermons, Epistles, and Gospels to
those amongst whom we live.

Secondly, the Arm must be laid right-forth upon the Paper on which we write.
We may not have respect of persons in the delivering of our message. The
Preacher sought to find out acceptable words and that which was written was
upright, even words of truth, Eccles. 12.10. For Manner, it would do well, to
take up such words as may give lawful content, and be best accepted; But for
Matter let them be words of truth, and that which is written let it be upright,
without favoring of any man's Corruptions or Vices. The Poor may not be
neglected, seeing Christ's blood was shed as well for the Belfry as for the
Chancell; Nor may the Great be spared, much less poisoned by Flattery. It was
said of old, Few great men's Confessors will get to heaven: For how great soever
the sins of great men are, still they go away with Absolution, and it would
do well now, if we would be faithful, and if at any time A Lord should ask
his Chaplain, as Christ did his, whom do men say that I am? Matthew. 16.13.
let the answer be according to the truth; Some say you are thus my Lord, and
some say thus, etc. that if in Case they hear ill, they may labor to cut off
all just occasions of such report; If well, endeavor to preserve, and deserve
the same to Gods and his Gospels honor.

But this I must tell you withal, that Good manners must be observed in
speaking to our Betters, 1 Timothy 5.1, 2. Acts 26. (notwithstanding that civil,
and well nurtured language be esteemed by some that are ouer-sowre, and rigid,
to be a daubing with untempered mortar, and nothing thought to be zealously
spoken, but what is uncivil and rude.) David (as Bernard observes) could
brook it well enough, that Nathan should tell him of his sin, but he could not
endure Shemei's rebukes, though it was for the same offense (And he saw God in
it too) The Reason he renders to be this; Nathan did do it with reverence, and
respect unto the person of the King; But Shemei behaved himself irreverently,
and fell to down right railing.

Thirdly, the Paper we write upon, must be laid as nigh the breast, as may be.
Those we Admonish, Reprove, Instruct, etc. must be near our hearts; All we do
must be done in Love. Thus Saint Paul with the same breath calls the
Galatians foolish and yet Brethren, Gal. 4.
and little children; giving signs of the greatest love unto them that could
be: the like was his manner of dealing with the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 3.2.
A good conceit of the Physician, we say, is half the cure: When our people
are persuaded of our Affection toward them, then it is likely our pains will
be available. I perceive I must hasten; I come now to those Rules which
concern the work it self.

And here three things are observed by good Penmen; Ratio, Modus Species; the
former does concern the Speculatiue part, And the two later the Practique
parts of Writing.

The Reason must be found out, and rendered why the letter is made thus, not
thus; and being made this way, is more graceful, then being made that way, or
that; And so for the Conjunction, knitting and joining together of them,
without the understanding whereof, hardly shall a man ever write well.

Thus, must Gods Scribes be able to show Grounds for what they do and teach.
1. Ratio.
I do not mean that a Minister should be strictly tied, to render the Reason
of every Doctrine he does deliver: A Course though Profitable, and Useful, yet
not ever Necessary. True it is, there is Reason for all Gods Commandments, if
we could see it, but we cannot always conceive that Reason; And if we should
believe no more then we can give Reason for, we shall not believe half that
which a Christian is bound to believe to his souls salvation. The Council
that Saint Austin gives to his Scholar Licentius concerning those things he
heard of him, would be remembered, Nolo te causas rationesque rimari, quae
etiamsi reddi possint fidej tamen qua mihi credis non eas debeo: If thus,
concerning those things he taught him, then much more concerning those things,
which God teaches us. The Reasons and Grounds of them though they might be
given (which yet as I say concerning diverse Articles of our Faith cannot) yet
it suits not well with that credit and trust which we owe unto God, too
curiously to search into, or call into question: But my meaning is, we should
be Grounded and Judicious Textmen, And be able to say as John 3.11. we speak
that we know, And with Saint Paul, 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel comes unto you not
in word only, but in power, and in much assurance. We are first, exactly to
know the truth, and then deliver it unto Gods people. The Sermons of the
Prophet Nahum are called, Nah. 1.1. Prooem. in Nahu^
the book of Visions: the Reason Hierome gives (and me thinks it is a passing
good one) because says he, he well understood, and saw, whatsoever he said.
Hence it is that Saint Paul cries Shame on them who desire to be Teachers of
the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy
1.7.

A great fault therefore it is in young Divines, to scorn the Catechism
affecting a profounder kind of learning, (as they conceive) plodding in
Postills and Controversies, and raw in Principles; Taking the greatest
mysteries of Religion fittest Arguments for the exercising of their wits, In
his Chryso. passus.
As Eckius who discussing the question of Predestination, in the very entrance
of his discourse, gives his Reason why he undertook that Argument, for that he
thought it to be the fittest question, in which he might Iuueniles calores
exercere; When we know a wise man will choose to deal with Wooden wasters,
before he plays at Sharp. An error in the Foundation, puts the whole building
in apparent hazard. Therefore it shall be your wisdom, who are sons of the
Prophets, first to ask Council of Caluins (or some others) learned
Institutions: to peruse well the book of the Articles of our Religion, and the
Books of Homilies, as our Church enioyneth; that what you deliver for Doctrine
may be comprehended in Essence, Substance, Effect, or Natural inference with
some one of them. But of all the Sheaues let the Bible have pre-eminence, and
let the rest of the Shocke do obeisance unto it. Nor let young Cockerills
which newly begin to Crow, be setting upon the great Cocks of Game, billing at
that Sophistical Bellarmine, or at that Judicious Interpreter Calvin,
audaciously controuling him, foolishly despising their great skill, and
learning: Nor run rashly upon the point of Discipline, before they know (it may
be) what the name means. Better by many degrees it is, to let these things
alone, till they be grown in Judgment, and able to speak of them to purpose,
2. Modus.
without wronging either themselves, or the Cause.

The Manner of making every letter, would be known, as well as the Ground or
Reason. Let a Scribe begin to frame his letters, after a Corrupt, and Contrary
way, (as to begin at the heel when he should begin at the head) will he ever
prove good Penman?

Would we be the Ornaments of our Pulpets, and have the praise of being good
Ezra's apt and ready Scribes? begin we then methodically. The wise Preacher
taught the people knowledge, yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
order many Proverbs, Eccles. 12.9. God has divided his Word into fit parts,
and ordered it to our Capacity, and Understanding; It belongs (therefore)
unto Gods Ministers to gather out of this treasure things both New and Old, and
like good Stewards set them forth before Gods family in the best order that
they can, beginning first with milk and spoone-meate, after the Apostles
practice, 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.13. It is a preposterous course for any (be they
themselves never so learned) coming to an ignorant people, and superstitious,
(for they are seldom severed) to begin with Controversy: Let us first teach
the Principles plainly, and diligently, and after a familiar manner by
Question and Answer, and spend one part of the Lord's Day (Commonly called
Sunday) in this Course, for as much as there is still need; New-commers on. You
know it was the practice of the Primitive times, the Apostles had their
Catechism, Heb. 6. Where you have the Name how it was called (...), prima
Christianismi principia (as Beza renders it) The Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, as our Translation (truly) has it. And the Heads or Principles
themselves therein contained, and handled: In number six after the ordinary
account.

1. Repentance from dead workes] i. e. the doctrine of man's misery, the
knowledge whereof comes by the Law, Romans 7.

2. Faith toward God] The doctrine of man's delivery; the sum whereof is
contained in the Apostles Creed.

3. The Doctrine of Baptismes] That is of the Sacraments: Baptismes (by a
trope) being but for both; And (besides the trope) both the Inward baptism of
Christ, and the Outward of John, i. e. Christ's Ministers, being thereby noted.

4. Laying on of hands] An ancient Ceremony used both in the time of Law and
Gospel, in sundry Cases: 1. In healing of the sick, Luke 4.40. Mark 16.18.
2. In ordaining of Ministers, Acts 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. 3. In
Conferring the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.17. and 19.5. 4. In Blessing of
Children, Genesis 48.14. Matthew. 19.13. Luke 18.15. The Manner was: The Children of
the Faithful being Catechized, were to make open and public Confession of the
former Principles, viz. of their Repentance; Of their Faith; Of the Sacraments,
and after this they had hands laid upon them, and were Confirmed to be of the
Covenant of God, and of the visible Church. A Ceremony which (through the long
neglect thereof) is much excepted against and carped at, but may be wished
that it were used oftener then it is and more respected, which (the due
cautions being observed, and it freed (as with us it is) from superstitious
abuse) it well deserves. Now under this Head the Ministry and Discipline of
the Church may be Comprehended.

5. Resurrection from the dead] Albeit they should die, and their bodies be
laid in the earth, yet that at the last day their bodies should be raised up
to life again.

6. Eternal Iudgement] And that every one should receive in their bodies, that
which they have done, be it good or evil, Eccles. 12.14. These two last Heads,
being made distinct, and howeuer (happily) handled under the second Principle
the Doctrine of Faith, yet here beaten particularly upon by the Apostles, for
these two reasons: 1. For that they were derided by the Gentiles: 2. For that
they were the hope of Christians.

As the Apostles, so had the Ancient Fathers, after them, their Introductions
to Religion. Clemens Alexadrinus his Pedagogus; Lactantius his Institutions;
Cyrill his Catechismes; Augustine his Enchyridion; and book de catechizandis
rudibus. And so has every Church in Christendom: Master Yates his Model of
Divinity, in his Epist. ded. to the Church of England.
And ours amongst the rest, which (to use the words of a Reverend and Judicious
Divine) is like Sampsons hair fair and strong; Strong in precepts; beautiful
in method; And therein carry's away, the honor from other forms. For whereas
some teach the Commandments before the Creed (as if they would teach a man to
go before he live) Others put the Seals in the midst of their writings (as if
that which seals all, should not hang at the bottom of the bill or bond) Our
method is to begin with Faith, by which we live, then to come to the Law of
life, by which we walk; After this it leads us to Prayer, least we should
faint in faith or wax weary of works: And lastly finding faith but weak,
obedience imperfect, and prayers not as they should be, it brings us to Gods
seals as the safety and security of all our estate. Thus far he.

Now then, Good Fathers and Brethren, pity the miscarrying of many a soul,
under your Charges, for want of Method. And give ear to that Counsel which
that Reuered Father, Bishop Babington, in Leuit. 7. does give unto you; Art
thou a Minister called of God? etc. submit your self to the profit of your
people, hunt not after your own glory that you are so learned, eloquent, and
profound: If your people profit not, because you fly too high a pitch for
them, and scorn to lay a foundation of the Catechism amongst them, you will
be found at the reckoning day, an unprofitable servant, and one that has
gained nothing to his Lord, but has hid his talent in the foul napkin of
fruitless matter, and idle figures of affected speech. Think of that Charge
given by the Archbishop of our souls, Feed my Lambs; Feed my Sheep: His
Lambs first, and why so? Surely for that the increase and welfare of the
Flock depends on them; If they be surfeted, or starued, the Flock shall never
thrive nor prosper.

The Papists, in their preface to the Catechism of the Council of Trent,
confess, that all the ground which we have got of them, has been by
Cetechizing, and shall we again loose that ground through our neglect? Julian
himself could not devise a readier way to overthrow Christian Religion then by
pulling down Schools, and overthrowing those Places where Children were
religiously educated, and catechized. Let us effectually consider of these
things, and be no longer like to some indiscreet, and foolish master, who to
please a fond and ouerweening parent, marres the progress of a child, in
raising him up to a higher Form and Author before he has learned his first
Rules of Grammar: What follows upon this?

But, first a loss of our own pains and labors. Look on him that preaches
twice or thrice a week, and so has continued for many years together,
omitting Catechizing of his People, and tell me, if he has reaped so much
fruit of his long labors, as some one has done of one years pains, who has
joined both together.

Secondly, An empty ostentation in the Hearer; A rash censuring of
Church-Gouernement and Discipline, through heat of Affection and want of
Judgment. Censorious professors, are ignorant professors; try it when you
please, this you shall find, that those who spend their zeal this way, have
not wherewith to answer you if you question with them about Fundamental
Points. For as the Philosopher teaches of mad, and fantastical men, they are
very apprehensiue of all outward accidents, because their souls are inwardly
empty, and unfurnished of any thing of worth, which might hold the inward
attention of their minds, and might balance it, and keep it upright against
all outward occurrents whatsoever. I hasten to a Conclusion, and come to the
Third and last thing obseruable in Writing, wherein indeed the Substance of it
does Consist, and that is the Species.

Should a man be able to give the Reason; Show the Manner of making every
letter; yet unless he give it its full Proportion and Shape, he does loose his
praise: For that gives life, and spirit to his writing. Here the Particulars
considerable are many, I will content my self with some few.

1. The Sizing of the letter would be looked unto, that the Depth and Fullness
be Proportionable. To be ever preaching Law, and harping upon the sad string
of Judgment, is not well. We bear the name of Spiritual men, if then we be
wanting in the Comforting part of our office, where is the Spirit, that we have
our denomination from? The Spirit is the Comforter, if then a Minister can, or
do say little to the Comfort of distressed consciences, may it not be
questioned where this spirit is? Look upon the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ
himself, and you shall see what great care they had always, that the fullness
of joy might be answerable to the depth of sorrow, in those they had to deal
withal, Exodus 14.13. 2 Kings 19.6. Isay 50.4. Matthew. 5.12. Luke 4.18. John
14.1. Romans 5.1. and 8.32. Phil. 4.4.

2. Whites must be observed; this does grace our writing much. Discern we
betwixt Sheep and Wolves: In our Sheep, betwixt the wholesome, and unsound:
In the Unsound, betwixt the Weak and Tainted: In the Tainted betwixt the
Natures, Qualities, and Degrees of the infection. God much complains of the
want of this in the Shepherds of Israel, Ezekiel. 34. they did not discern
betwixt the weak and strong, the clean and unclean to proceed accordingly:
Let us have a special regard herein, that we break not bruised reeds, nor
make the hearts of the Righteous sad within them. Some are ignorantly misled,
as those who went with Absalom from Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15.
and were unwittingly made Simple Rebels, their hearts being free from any plot
against their Sovereign: The simplicity of such is as worthy of pity, as
their misguidance of indignation.; Reduce we them. Some are entangled with
doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1.
and have their consciences ensnared with conceits and subtilties, who are
docible and tractable of themselves, not obstinate and wilful; Receive we
them, Romans 14.1. While there appears a true desire, and godly endeavor to be
better informed, let them not be too hardly dealt withal, nor punishment and
compulsion hastened. But as for those that sin of malicious wickedness be
not merciful unto those men.

But how will you distinguish? Quest.


How know you a Hunger-bitten Beggar from a Canting Rogue? one speaks with
Supplications, Resp.
and is thankful for the least favors; the other you may know by his
Rhetorical style. In the one hand he has his Petition, in the other hand a
Stone. These things may the Church likewise, as well as Churchmen, be pleased
to take notice of in her Censures, for this is a third Rule given, which you
see I am fallen upon.

3. Press not too much on that part of the letter, which requires a favorable
touch, nor be sparing in that part, which requires the contrary. There is one
course in our Ministry to be held with nouices, and another to be held with
those who are of riper years, toward the one sort mother-like indulgence,
toward the other, father-like gravity. Thus much is taught us in that
Allegory used by our Savior, of Wine and Vessels, by way of Apology for his
more Mildness in his Injunctions, then John used to his Disciples, Matthew.
9.17. Impose we not too heavy taskes upon new comers on, nor discourage we
them with over great austerity: In Romans 14. Verse 4.
It is a good speech of Calvin, Semper been speremus de eo in quo ceruimus
aliquid Dej. So Bucer resolved to refuse none in whom he saw aliquid Christi.
Who so is wise, let him consider these things.

4. Keeepe your distances, betwixt letter and letter, word and word. There is a
time for all things under the Sun (says Solomon, Eccles. 3.1.) So a time for
Hearing, A time for Reading; Another for Praying, etc. All are Gods Ordinances,
one may not iustle out the other, but each is to have its time and turn, Neh.
9.3. and served in its Course, by Gods Stewards, for the feasting of his
Family, who ever have good stomachs, and like hungry men feed upon every dish
that is before them. Serve in Gods Commandments; set before them which you
will, they are for it. If the First Commandment, they will feed, Lord have
mercy on me incline my heart to this Law. If the Second, or the Third, their
stomach stands alike good to all. Or if you commend unto them Prayer with the
several Requests to be made; If for themselves, For Love, Faith, Fear,
Repentance, etc. you shall have them at it, we beseech thee to hear us good
Lord. Or if such like graces are to be begged for others, they continue alike
zealous, and devout, calling to God for Audience: Pity it is then to withhold
any of Gods allowance from his household. We condemn the Papists (and that
justly) of a kind of Sacrilege, in withholding the Cup from Gods people, and
can we be innocent if we detain any part of that which is allowed; The laying
of our people so much to one Breast without an orderly giving of the other, I
am persuaded, is a cause that God in many Congregations dries up that Breast
that was so (in a manner) altogether drawn at, that the other may not grow
dry; He closes up the womb of her who was fruitful, that she who was barren
may rejoice and no more be called Barren. Only one thing more is wanting to
make us absolute Penmen, And that is

Join and unite your letters together in an orderly and comely manner, First,
Christ and Man, Colos. 2.19. Secondly, God and Man, John 17.21. 1 John 1.3.
Thirdly, Man and Angels, Colos. 1.20. Fourthly, Man and Man, Isay 11.6, 7, 8.
As the Hearts of Husbands, and Wives; Parents and Children; Neighbor and
Neighbor; Maiestrates and Subjects; Prince and People, etc.

These Rules observed, we shall be Complete Scribes indeed; And when as other
shall stand in need of Letters Testimonial to others, and from others, as did
those false Apostles, 2 Cor. 3.1. we shall need to go no further then to our
Flocks and People, saying of them, as Saint Paul did of the Church of Corinth,
1 Cor. 3.2.
(...) You are our Epistle; yea better then any letters Commendatory wrote with
Ink and Paper can be; for they run here, and there, and may soon be lost; but
our Praise is written, (...) wherein we do inwardly rejoice; or rather (...)
in cordibus vestris, never to be blotted out. And whereas other Epistles in
Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, are read of none but such as understand the
Languages. This Epistle is understood and read, (...), Of all men, Of what
Nation soever. I have done, and now descend the Mount, to take my standing at
the bottom of the Hill amongst my Brethren. But first let us Commend all to
Gods good blessing, as our mother Church has taught us. Grant we beseech thee
Almighty God, that the words which we have heard this day, etc.

FINIS.

